 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
Colchester Borough Local  Plan 2013 -2033  
 
 
Section 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Essex Authorities’ Shared  
Strategic Section 1 Pl an 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                             Adopted February  2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan || North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan   
  
 
 
 
In accordance with Regulations 26 and 35 of the Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) 
(England)  Regulations  2012  (as amended),  Colchester  Borough  Council,  by decision  at the meeting 
of Full Council on Monday 1 February 2021, has formally adopted the Colchester Borough Council 
Local  Plan 2013 -2033:  North  Essex  Authorities’  Shared  Strategic  Section  1 Plan (hereafter  the 
‘Section 1 Plan).  
 
The ‘Section  1 Plan’  was prepared  jointly  by Colchester  Borough  Council,  Braintree  District  Council 
and Tendring  District  Council,  – the ‘local  planning  authorities’  (LPAs) collectively  known  as the ‘North 
Essex Authorities’  (NEAs) to form the first part of each of the authorities’  respective Local Plans.  
 
Following  examination  by an independent  Planning  Inspector,  a ‘Final  Report  on the Examination  of 
the North  Essex  Authorities’ Shared  Strategic  Section  1 Plan’ under  section  21(9)  of the Act, was 
received  by  Colchester  Borough  Council  and  the  other  NEAs  on  10th    December  2020.  The 
above -mentioned  report  confirmed  that,  subject  the  Inspector’s  recommended  ‘main 
modifications’  (pursuant to section 23(3) of the Act) (which have been agreed by the Council and 
incorporated into this  document),  the Section  1 Plan meets  legal  requirements  of the national 
planning  system  and  the ‘tests  of  soundness’  contained  within  national  planning  policy  –  as 
necessary  for it to proceed  to formal adoption.  
 
The formal adoption of the Section 1 Local Plan by Colchester Borough Council has the effect of 
replacing, in part, a number of the strategic policies contained within the Colchester Borough Core 
Strateg y, adopted  in 2008  and subject  to a Focused  Review  in 2014.  The Colchester  Borough  Local 
Plan will be replaced,  in full, on the formal  adoption  of Section  2 of Local  Plan which  contains  further 
specific local policies and proposals applicable to the Colchester Borough onl y. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan || North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan   
  
 
 
 
1 Introduction    6 
 The Need for a St rategic Approach    6 
 Spatial Portrait    8 
 Key Strategic Issues:  Oppo rtunities and Challenges    9 
 Vision for the St rategic Area    10 
 Strategic Objecti ves    11 
 Strategic Issues and Policies    12 
2 Presumption in Favour of Sustaina ble Development    14 
3 Spatial Cont ext    18 
4 Meeting the need for New Homes    22 
5 Providing for Empl oyment    26 
6 Infrastructure and Connectivity    30 
7 Creating Quality Places    40 
8 Cross Bounda ry Ga rden Com munity    44 
9 Delive ry, Implementation & Monitoring    54 
11 Appendices & Maps    60 
 
 
 
 
Policy SP 1 Presumption in Favour of Sustaina ble Development                                            14 
Policy SP 2 Recreational disturbance Avoidance and Mitigation St rategy (RAMS)                 15 
Policy SP 3 Spatial St rategy for No rth Ess ex                                                                           19 
Policy SP 4 Meeting Housing Needs                                                                                        23 
Policy SP 5 Empl oyment                                                                                                          28 
Policy SP 6 Inf rastructure & Connectivity                                                                                 35 
Policy SP 7 Place Shaping P rinciples                                                                                      41 
Policy SP 8 D evelopment & Deli very of a N ew Garden Com munity in No rth Ess ex                46 
Policy SP 9  Tendring/Colchester Borders Garden Com munity                                                48 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Introduction  
 
Shared Strategic Plan  
 
1.1 North Essex is a vibrant and attractive place to live and work. It has a rich archaeological , natural 
and built he ritage that conti nues to influence local cha racter, which is distinguished by its 
extensi ve legac y of huma n habitatio n from Palaeolithi c times onwards. The area has experienced 
significant population, housing and empl oyment growth in recent years and this is forecast to 
conti nue. The local autho rities and their partners  wish to respond  to this oppo rtunity  by planning 
positi vely for the area as a whole. Working together  to address  some  of the key strategic  issues 
in North Essex will get the best outcomes  for current  and future  communitie s. In particula r, it 
will deliver sustaina ble development that respects local e nvironments and pr ovides  new jobs 
and essential inf rastructur e. 
 
1.2 For these  reasons  Braintree  District Council,  Colchester  Borough  Council  and Tendring District 
Council  have agreed to work together  to address  strategic  planning  matters  across  their areas. 
Collecti vely th ey are kn own as the No rth Ess ex Authorities. 
 
1.3 The North Essex local Authorities border  a large  number  of other  local autho rities who will 
conti nue to be engaged  and involved on an active and ongoing  basis  on strategic  cross  border 
issue s. These  autho rities include  Babergh,  Chelms ford, Maldon,  Mid Suffolk, West Suffolk, 
South Camb ridgeshir e, Uttles ford, and Suf folk and Camb ridgeshire County Council s. 
 
1.4 Essex County  Council  (ECC)  is a key partner in its strategic  role for infrastructure  and service 
provision and as the Highway Authority, Lead Local Flood Authority, Local Education Authority 
and Mine rals and  Waste Planning Authority. 
 
1.5 An initial  outcome  of this collabo ration  is this strategic  planning  chapte r, which  each  of the local 
planning  autho rities have included  in their Publication  Local  Plan. The  Local  Plans  together 
with the Essex Mine rals Local  Plan and the Essex and Southend -on-Sea Waste Local  Plan 
(prepare d by ECC ) and any Neighbourhoo d Plans, form the Developmen t Plan for the respecti ve 
areas. 
 
The Need for a Strategic App roach 
 
1.6 In Essex, as elsewher e, the influences  of population  and economic  growth do not stop at 
administ rative bounda ries. Settlement  patte rns,  migration  fl ows,  com muting  and  st rategic 
infrastructure needs all h ave significant influences within and bet ween local autho rity area s. 
 
1.7 Local  Plans  are the main  vehicle  for conveying an area’s growth requirements  and how these 
will be accommodated.  However, individual  local autho rity bounda ries cannot  encapsulate  the 
geographies  of issues  that transcend  those  bounda ries. Through  active and on-going 
collabo ration the autho rities can jointly plan, manage and r eview strategic objecti ves and 
requirements for the ef fective implementation of sustaina ble development (including mine rals 
and waste) and enhanced e nvironment s. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
  
7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.8 The geographic  and functional  relationship  between the autho rities’ areas  is demonst rated by 
the fact that, with Chelms ford City Council, th ey form a single Housing Ma rket Area (HMA) for 
planning  purposes;  and they are a major  part of the Haven Gateway, an established  economic 
partnershi p. Within  this context, the forecast  levels of future  population  growth together  with 
the geo graphy of No rth Ess ex means that conside rations for future growth will include options 
that have clear  cross -bounda ry implication s. These  include  both the expansion  of existing  towns 
and villages as well as possi ble new com munitie s. 
 
1.9 Consequentl y, Braintre e, Colchester  and Tendring, together  referred  to in this plan as the North 
Essex Authorities, have agreed to come  together  and prepare  a common  Section  1 Local  Plan 
because of their shared desire to promote a sustaina ble growth st rategy for the longer te rm; 
and the particular  need  to articulate  the strategic  priorities within  the wider  area and how these 
priorities will be addressed.  Cent ral to this is the ef fective deli very of planned st rategic growth, 
particula rly housin g and empl oymen t development , with the necessa ry suppo rting infrastructur e. 
 
1.10 Uttles ford District Council,  Maldon  District Council  as well as other  neighbou ring autho rities, sit 
within  sepa rate housing  market areas. However the autho rities are actively and conti nuously 
engaged to ensure that cross -bounda ry and st rategic issues are dealt with.  
 
1.11 The Localism Act 2011 places a Duty to Co -operate on local planning autho rities and other 
public bodie s. This requires  them  to engage  const ructively, actively and on an on-going  basis 
in the prepa ration  of plans  where  this involves strategic  matter s. The National  Planning  Policy 
Framework (NPPF) adds to this statuto ry duty as it expects local planning autho rities to 
demonst rate evidence  of having co-operated effectively to plan for issues  with cross -bounda ry 
impact s. 
 
1.12 This strategic  Section  1 of the autho rities’ Local  Plans  reflects  the Duty to Co-operate as it 
conce rns strategic  matters  with cross -bounda ry impacts  in North Essex. Section  2 of each  plan 
contains policies and allocations addressing autho rity-specific issue s. 
 
1.13 Against this ba ckground, the main pu rposes of this st rategic chapter of the Local Plan are to:  
 
Articulate  a spatial  portrait of the area,  including  its main  settlements  and strategic 
infrastructur e, as a f ramework for accommodating future planned growth; 
 
Provide a strategic  vision  for how planned  growth in North Essex will be realised;  set 
strategic objecti ves and policies for key growth topics;  
 
Set out the numbers of additional homes and jobs across the area that will be needed 
covering the pe riod to 2033.  The choices mad e, particula rly in relation to the location of 
garden com munitie s, will also set the f ramework for development well beyond the plan 
period; and 
 
Highlight  the key strategic  growth locations  across  the area and the necessa ry new or 
upgraded inf rastructure to suppo rt this growth. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Spatial Portrait 
 
1.14 Braintre e, Colchester  and Tendring districts are located  to the north of Essex between the east 
coast  ports and London  Stansted  airport. The principal  towns are Braintre e, Colchester  and 
Clacton -on-Sea and a number  of seconda ry settlements:  Witham,  Halstead,  Wivenho e, Tiptre e, 
Brightlingsea,  Manningtre e, Harwich,  Walton  and Frinton.  The Key Diagram at 10.1 identifies 
the settlements that link with the main roads and/or rail inf rastructur e. 
 
1.15 Beyond these settlements much of the area has a rural cha racter. 
 
1.16 The area c overed by this st rategic planning approach comp rises a large pa rt of the H aven 
Gateway, an established  partnership  area which  is identified  in a range  of existing  strategy  and 
investmen t document s.The Haven Gateway include s the Essex administ rative areas of Braintre e, 
Colcheste r, Maldon and  Tendring Councils and extends no rthwards into pa rts of Suf folk. 
 
1.17 The area ’s strategic road and rail net work is he avily used, pa rticula rly given the pr oximity to and  
connectivity  with London.  The principal  roads  are the A12 and A120,  while  the A130,  A131, A133 
and A414 also form impo rtant pa rts of the st rategic road net work. 
 
1.18 The Great Easte rn Main Line pr ovides rail se rvices bet ween London Li verpool Street and the 
East of England,  including  Witham,  Chelms ford, Colchester  and Clacton -on-Sea. It also carries 
freight t raffic to and from the H aven Ports including Harwich Inte rnational Port, which handles 
container ships and freight t ranspo rt to and from the rest of the UK.  Harwich is also one of the 
major UK po rts for ferry and c ruise depa rtures. 
 
1.19 Cross rail is expected  to start operating  in the first part of this plan period with services 
commencing  just south  of Chelms ford in Shenfield.  The oppo rtunities  that Cross rail will bring 
in terms of additional capacity and qui cker jou rneys to a wider choice of destinations will be a 
contributor to the conti nued attractiveness  of north Essex as a place  to live and to do busines s. 
 
1.20 The growing demand for the use of ai rports, including London Stansted, will create additional 
associated  pressures  on road and rail infrastructur e. The  County  Council,  along  with South 
East Local Ente rprise Partnershi p, local and national agencies and other organisation s, will also 
need to work collabo ratively with the Local Planning Authorities to ensure inf rastructure meets 
demand for enhanced economic growth. 
 
1.21 Braintree and Colchester are the major centres of empl oyment within the st rategic area.  While 
there are high l evels of com muting to London, ma ny residents work and li ve within the area with 
significant com muting across borough and dist rict bounda ries, reflecting a functional economic 
geography. 
 
1.22 The area has a mixed econo my focused on the se rvice secto r, including wholesale and retail, 
business se rvices, tou rism, health and education, alongside ma nufacturing, logistics and 
const ruction. Due  to the extensi ve rural area outside  urban  settlement s, agriculture  and its 
related indust ries pl ay an impo rtant pa rt in the overall econo my. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
  
9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.23 This rurality also means that there are large areas of open count ryside, including protected 
natural and histo ric landscape s. Areas  of impo rtance  for nature  conse rvation  are to be found 
particula rly along  the coast  and river estua ries, while  the villages  and towns include  many built 
heritage asset s. 
 
1.24 A more detailed assessment of the cha racteristics of each area is pr ovided in the second pa rt 
of this Local Plan.  
 
Key Strategic Issues:  Oppo rtunities and Challen ges 
 
1.25 Due to its strong  economic  base, proximity  to London  and attractiveness  as a place  to live and 
work, North Essex has seen  significant  growth over recent  years. The area is well-placed  and 
connected  to key growth points  in the wider  region  including  London,  Camb ridge and Stansted 
Airport and as a result is li kely to conti nue to be a successful location for growth. In pa rticular 
Braintree and Colchester h ave regula rly exceeded planned house building targets and this is 
expecte d to continue. Plannin g for and managin g future populatio n growth require s an approp riate 
response  from the local autho rities to ensure  that sufficient  home s, empl oyment  premises  and 
land, and suppo rting social and other inf rastructure are pr ovided in a sustaina ble way. 
 
1.26 Notwithstanding its strong economic base and steady growth, the No rth Ess ex area faces a 
range of challenge s, nota bly the need to impr ove economic and social conditions across the 
area and reduce  health  inequalitie s, pockets of deprivation,  infrastructure  deficits  and low skills; 
the need  to ensure  that the infrastructure  needed  to suppo rt conti nued housing  and jobs growth 
is in place  at the right time;  and the need  to ensure  that conti nued growth conti nues to conse rve 
and where possi ble enhance the histo ric and natu ral environment including landscape and 
habitat creation, and will also seek net e nvironmental gain s, possi bly making use of the Def ra 
biodi versity accounting met ric 2.0 to account for possi ble effects. 
 
1.27 The education, health and other se rvice needs of a growing population must be addressed, 
requi ring careful planning to assess future needs such as pupil numbers and fu rther adult 
educatio n need s. The assesse d need must in turn be translate d into new or expande d education, 
health and other facilities which are available to meet the needs of n ew com munities at the 
approp riate time. The ageing  profile  of residents  also requires  a proacti ve response  to provide 
the right type of home s, includin g independen t living and suppo rting services ; as well as sufficient 
healthcare facilities to suppo rt both older residents and the population as a whol e. 
 
1.28 New development should be located and designed so that d ay-to-day needs of residents can 
be met locall y and be accessi ble by sustaina ble forms of transpo rt, includin g walking and cycling, 
and wher ever possi ble reduce  the number  of car based  trips. Growth will create  demand  for 
additional road and rail use with the associated need for new and up graded inf rastructur e. 
Future  planned  growth provides  the oppo rtunity  to address  some  of these  infrastructure  need s, 
although  growth locations  and sites need  to be considered  carefully  with regard  to the balance 
of providing necessa ry infrastructure and the viability and deli verability of d evelopment.  
 
1.29 The NPPF expects local autho rities to set out the st rategic p riorities for the area in the Local 
Plan.  Of those  listed  in the Framework and based  on the above key issue s, this strategic  plan 
chapter addresses:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the homes and jobs needed in the area  
the pr ovision of inf rastructure for transpo rt and telecom munications 
the pr ovision of education, health, and com munity inf rastructur e, and  
conse rvation and enhancemen t of the natural and historic environment , includin g landscap e. 
 
Vision for the Strategic Area  
 
1.30 It is impo rtant that addressing growth at a ny spatial scale is founded on a clear vision of h ow 
and where  change  should  occu r. The vision  for North Essex sets this out at a strategic  level 
and provides  a context for the more  detailed  vision  for the growth of each  individual  autho rity’s 
area.The joint vision set out below should be read in conjunction with the vision for each local 
autho rity set out in Section  2 of each  Local  Plan.  The high housing  need  identified  for North 
Essex, const raints in ma ny existing urban areas and the desire to suppo rt a sustaina ble form 
of development  in the long term, as part of the strategy  for the development  has led to the Local 
Plans proposing standalone n ew settlements that follow the p rinciples of Garden Citie s. 
 
 
 
Vision for No rth Ess ex 
 
North Essex will be an area of significant  growth over the period to 2033  and beyond, embracing 
positi vely the  need  to build well-designed  new home s, create  jobs and improve and develop 
infrastructure for the benefit of existing and n ew com munitie s. 
 
It will conti nue to be an attractive and vibrant area in which  to live and work, making  the most  of 
its rich heritage, town centre s, natural environment , coasta l resorts, excellen t educationa l facilities 
and st rategic t ranspo rt links which pr ovide access to the po rts, Stansted Ai rport, London and 
beyond. Ru ral and urban  communities  will be encou raged  to thrive and prosper  and will be 
suppo rted by adequate com munity inf rastructur e. 
 
Sustaina ble development p rinciples will be at the core of the st rategic area ’s response to its 
growth need s, balancin g social , economi c and environmenta l issue s. Gree n and blue infrastructure 
and new and expanded  education  and health  care facilities  enabling healt hy and active lifestyles 
will be planned  and provided  along  with other  facilities  to suppo rt the development  of substantial 
new growth; while  the undeveloped  count ryside  and the natural and histo ric environment  will be 
conse rved and enhanced.  Key to delivering sustaina ble development  is that new development 
will address the requirement to protect and enhance  the histo ric environment and settlement 
character.  
 
At the heart of our strategic  vision  for North Essex is a new garden  community, to be sensiti vely 
integrated within the existing histo ric built and natu ral environment, and based on Garden City 
principle s. 
 
The garden  community  provides  an oppo rtunity  to create  the right balance  of jobs, housing  and 
infrastructur e in the right location s and will attract resident s and businesse s who value innovation, 
community  cohesion  and a high quality  environment,  and who will be provided  with oppo rtunities 
to take an acti ve role in managing the garden com munity to ensure its conti nuing succes s. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
  
11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Residents will li ve in high qualit y, innovatively designed, home s, accommodating a variety of 
needs and aspi ration s, located in well-designed neighbourhoods where th ey can meet their d ay-
to-day need s. There  will be a network of tree-lined  streets  and green space s, incorporating and 
enhancing existing landscape features and also accommodating sa fe and att ractive routes and  
space  for sustaina ble drainage  solutions;  and  leisure  and recreation  oppo rtunities  for both 
residents and visitors of the garden com munity. 
 
Suita ble models for the long te rm stewardship of com munity assets will be esta blished and 
funded  to provide long term management  and governance  of asset s. All Garden  City principles 
as specifie d in the North Essex Garde n Communitie s Charter will be positi vely embraced including 
where approp riate, new approaches to deli very and pa rtnership working for the benefit of the 
new community. Cent ral to this will be the comprehensi ve planning  and development  of the 
garden com munity, and the aligned deli very of homes and suppo rting inf rastructur e. 
 
 
 
 
Strategic Objectives  
 
1.31 The following strategic  objecti ves are designed  to suppo rt the vision  for the area and provide 
a basis for the developmen t of strategi c topic -base d policie s that will help in achieving the vision.  
 
1.32 Providing Sufficient N ew Homes – to provide for a l evel and quality of n ew homes to meet the 
needs  of a growing and ageing  population  in North Essex; to achieve this by ensu ring the 
availability of d evelopa ble land in approp riate locations and that the ma rket deli vers a suita ble 
mix of housing types and te nures. 
 
1.33 Fostering Economic D evelopment – to strengthen and di versify local economies to pr ovide more  
jobs; and  to achieve a better  balance  between the location  of jobs and housing,  which will 
reduce the need to t ravel and promote sustaina ble growth. 
 
1.34 Providing  New and Improved Transpo rt & Com munication  Infrastructure  – to make efficient  use 
of existin g transpo rt infrastructur e and to ensur e sustaina ble transpo rt oppo rtunitie s are promoted 
to suppo rt new and existing  communitie s. Where  additional  capacity  is required  in the form of 
new or up graded t ranspo rt infrastructure to suppo rt new development, ensu ring that this is 
delivered in a phased  & timely  way to minimise  the impact  of new development.  To ensure  that 
enabled communication  is provided as pa rt of n ew developments as ena bled com munication 
is essentia l for mode rn living and broadban d infrastructur e and relate d services will be essential 
for busines s, education and residential prope rties. 
 
1.35 Addressin g Educatio n and Healthcar e Need s – to provide good qualit y educationa l oppo rtunities 
as pa rt of a sustaina ble growth st rategy, including p ractical vocational t raining and 
apprenticeship s linked to local job oppo rtunitie s. To work with partners in the NHS, Public Health 
and local health pa rtnerships to ensure adequate pr ovision of healthcare facilities to suppo rt 
new and growing com munitie s. 
 
1.36 Ensu ring High Quality  Outcomes  – to promote  greater  ambition  in planning  and delivering high-
qualit y sustaina ble new communitie s. Overall, new developmen t must secur e high standards of 
urban  design  and green infrastructure  which  creates  attractive and sustaina ble places  where  
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
peopl e want to live and spen d time. New developmen t need s to be informed by an understanding 
of the histo ric environment resource gained through the prepa ration of Histo ric Impact 
Assessment s, and to conse rve and enhance the significance of he ritage assets including a ny 
contribution made to their significance by their setting s. 
 
Strategic Issues and Policies  
 
1.37 This section  includes  the Councils’ response  to the oppo rtunities  and challenges  facing  the 
wider area, in the form of st rategic policies that will help to deli ver the vision and objecti ves. 
These policies only c over those matters that are of st rategic rel evance to all three autho rities. 
Policies  that address  local matters  are included  in the following section  of the plan.  The Plan 
as a whol e, including both Sections 1 and 2, will supersede pr evious Local Plan Policies and 
allocations  upon  its adoption.  A list of the policies  superseded  by Section  1 and Section  2 of 
the Plan respecti vely is included as an appendix to each section.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
 13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presumption in Favour of Sustaina ble Development  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Presumption in Favour of Sustaina ble 
Development  
 
Presumption in Favour of Sustaina ble Development  
 
2.1 The autho rities will apply  a presumption  in favour of sustaina ble development  in accordance 
with guidance in the National Planning Policy Framework. 
 
 
 
Policy SP 1  
 
Presumption in Favour of Sustaina ble Development  
 
When conside ring d evelopment proposals the Local Planning Authorities will ta ke a positi ve 
approach that reflects the presumption in favour of sustaina ble development contained in the 
National  Planning  Policy Framework. They will always work pro-actively with applicants  to find 
solutions which mean that proposals can be appr oved wher ever possi ble, and to secure 
development that impr oves the economi c, social and e nvironmental conditions in the area.  
 
Development that complies with the Plan will be appr oved without del ay, unless mate rial 
conside rations indicate otherwis e. 
 
 
 
2.2 A Habitats  Regulations  Assessment  (HRA)  was completed  for Section  1 of the Plan.  The loss 
of off-site habitat , water qualit y and increase d recreationa l disturbanc e were identifie d as issues 
with the potential to result in li kely significant ef fects on European Site s, without mitigation to 
address the ef fects. 
 
2.3 The Approp riate Assessment  (AA) identified  a number  of avoidance  and mitigation  measures 
to be implemented, to ensure that d evelopment proposals in the Plan will not result in ad verse 
effects on the integrity of any Special  Area  of Conse rvation,  Special  Protection  Area  or Ramsar 
site, and are HRA compliant.  
 
2.4 To mitigate  for the loss of off-site habitat,  the AA identified  the need  for winte ring bird surveys 
for the Tendring/Colcheste r Border s Garde n Com munity as part of any projec t level development 
proposals and maste rplanning (see also pa ragraph 8.3 and Policy SP8 pa ragraph F.20). 
 
2.5 To protect  water qualit y, the AA recommended  the inclusion  of policy  safeguards  to ensure  that 
adequate water and waste water treatment capacity or inf rastructure up grades are in place p rior 
to development proceeding.  
 
2.6 Recreation  activities  can potentially  harm Habitats  Sites. The AA identified  disturbance  of water 
birds from people and dog s, and impacts from water spo rts/waterc raft as the key recreational 
threats to Habitats Site s. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
  
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.7 To mitigate  for any increases  in recreational  disturbance  at Habitats  Sites, the AA identified  the 
need  for a mitigation  strategy. Natu ral England ’s West Anglian  Team identified  the Essex coast 
as a priority for a strategic  and proacti ve planning  approach  as it is rich and diverse ecologicall y, 
and ma ny of the coastal habitats are designated as Habitats Site s.  Consequentl y, 12 local 
plannin g autho rities in Essex have prepare d an Essex Coas t Recreationa l disturbanc e Avoidance 
and Mitigation St rategy (RAMS).  
 
2.8 The Essex Coast  RAMS  sets out specific  avoidance  and mitigation  measures  by which 
disturbance  from increased  recreation  can be avoided  and mitigated  thus enabling the delivery 
of growth without ad versely af fecting Habitats site s.These measures are deli verable, realisti c, 
unde rpinned  by robust up to date evidenc e, precautiona ry and provide certainty  for developers 
around  deliverability  and contribution s. The  Essex Coast  RAMS  Strategy  Document  was 
completed in 2019 and is suppo rted by a SP D. 
 
 
 
Policy SP 2  
 
Recreational disturbance Avoidance and Mitigation Strategy (RAMS)  
 
Cont ributions  will be secured  from development  towards mitigation  measures  in accordance  with 
the Essex Coas t Recreationa l disturbanc e Avoidanc e and Mitigatio n Strategy 2018 -2038 (RAMS).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Spatial Cont ext 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 Spatial Cont ext 
 
3.1 Future  growth will contribute to maintaining  and enhancing  a well-connected  network of 
sustaina ble settlements  across  North Essex. New home s, jobs, retail  and leisure  facilities 
serviced  by new and upgraded  inf rastructure  will  be  accommodated  as  pa rt  of  existing 
settlements according to their scal e, sustainability and rol e, and by the creation of a st rategic 
scale  n ew  settlement  emb racing  the  p rinciples  in  the  No rth  Ess ex  Garden  Com munity 
Charter. The count ryside will be protected and enhanced.  
 
3.2 For the majo rity of settlements  these  issues  are addressed  in the second  section  of the Local 
Plan dealing  with each  autho rity’s area.  However, it is relevant here to set out the spatial  context 
of the No rth Ess ex Area as it relates to the main settlements and st rategic -scale n ew 
development.  
 
3.3 In Braintree  District the growth will be mainly  addressed  via urban  extensions . Braintre e town, 
as the larges t service centr e in the District, will have a number of new urban  extension s. Over 
4,000  new homes  will be allocated  in this area.  The other  main focus for developmen t will be the 
A12 corridor with the main town of Witha m and service villages of Hatfield  Peverel, Kelvedon  and 
Feering with allocations  of over 2,000  new home s. Other pa rts of the Dist rict, including the 
town of Halstead, will h ave smaller allocations to reflect a more local need and ma ke the best 
use of br ownfield site s, recognising that these areas are not as sustaina ble. 
 
3.4 In Colchester  Borough,  the urban  area of Colchester  will conti nue to be a focus  for growth due 
to its pre -eminent role as a centre for job s, services and t ranspo rt, with 4,000 n ew homes 
expected  to be delivered over the Local  Plan period. The urban  area of Colcheste r, however, 
has a limite d and diminishin g suppl y of available brownfiel d sites, so a new community is included 
in the spatial  hierarchy as a sustaina ble option  for further growth of homes  and jobs, to the east 
of Colchester  on the border  with Tendring District. Appr oximately  1,050  new homes  will be 
allocate d in the Rural District Centre s of Tiptre e, West Merse a and Wivenho e. Smalle r sustaina ble 
settlements will recei ve limited allocations propo rtionate to their role in the spatial hie rarchy. 
 
3.5 In Tendring District the spatial  hierarchy promotes  growth in settlements  that are the most 
accessi ble to the strategic  road network, public transpo rt and offer a range  of services. Clacton 
and Harwic h with Dovercou rt are classifie d as strategi c urban settlement s and will accommodate 
around  5,000  new home s. A new cross -bounda ry garden  community  will be located  in the west 
of the district and to the east of Colcheste r. The smaller  urban  settlements  of Frinton  with Walton 
and Kirby Cros s, Manningtree  with Lawford and Mistley, Brightlingsea  and Weeley will 
accommodate  between 1,500  and 2,500  new home s. The rural service centres  and smaller 
rural settlements will accommodate around 1,500 n ew homes including a wind fall all owance. 
 
3.6 The new Garden  Com munity  is identified  as new a new settlement  in Colchester  and Tendring 
Section 2 settlement hie rarchie s. Over time the Garden Com munity will grow to influence the 
area’s spatial  hierarchy and will be included  in the tiers unde rneath  the sub-regional  centre  role 
played by Colcheste r.  Future r eviews of the plans will address this point, but the Garden 
Com munity  will not grow to a size that will affect the spatial  hierarchy within  the plan period to 
2033.  
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
  
19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Policy SP 3  
 
Spatial Strategy for No rth Ess ex 
 
Existing settlements will be the p rincipal focus for additional growth across the No rth Ess ex 
Authorities area within  the Local  Plan period. D evelopment  will be accommodated  within  or 
adjoining settlements according to their scal e, sustainability and existing role both within each 
individual dist rict and, where rel evant, across the wider st rategic area.  
 
Future  growth will be planned  to ensure  existing  settlements  maintain  their distincti ve character 
and role, to avoid coalescence  between them  and to conse rve their setting.  Re-use of previously 
developed  land within  settlements  is an impo rtant objecti ve, although  this will be assessed  within 
the broade r context of sustaina ble developmen t principle s, particula rly to ensur e that development 
locations are accessi ble by a choice of means of t ravel. 
 
In Section  2 of its Local  Plan each  local planning  autho rity will identify  a hierarchy of settlements 
where n ew development will be accommodated according to the role of the settlement, 
sustainabilit y, its p hysical capacity and local need s. 
 
Beyond the main  settlements  the autho rities will suppo rt diversification  of the rural econo my and 
conse rvation and enhancement of the natu ral environment.  
 
As part of the sustaina ble strategy  for growth, the Tendring / Colchester  Borders  Garden 
Com munity will be d eveloped and deli vered at the broad location sh own on Key Dia gram 10.2 
and on the Colchester  and Tendring Local  Plans  Policies  Maps. This new community  will provide 
a strategic  location  for homes  and empl oyment  within  the Plan period in North Essex. The 
expectation  is that substantial  additional  housing  and empl oyment  development  will be delivered 
in the Garden Com munity b eyond the current Local Plan pe riod. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
 21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meeting the need for New Homes  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 Meeting the need for New Homes  
 
4.1 Provision  of sufficient  housing  is critical to meet  the needs  of a growing population  and for the 
effective functioning of local economie s. 
 
4.2 The North Essex Authorities are committed  to plan positi vely for new homes  and to significantly 
boost the supply of housing to meet the needs of the area, including the need to pr ovide a 
workforce for forecast  jobs. To meet  the requirements  of national  policy  to establish the number 
and type of n ew home s, the autho rities commissioned Peter Brett Associates to produce an 
Objecti vely Assessed Housing Need Study building on ea rlier work. This was first pu blished in 
July 2015  and updated  in November  2016.  It meets  the requirements  of the NPPF  to prepare 
a Strategic Housing Ma rket Assessment (SHMA).  
 
4.3 Detailed  analysis  in the report suggests  that a Housing  Market Area  comp rising Braintre e, 
Colcheste r, Chelms ford and Tendring Council  areas  forms a sound  basis  for assessing  housing 
need.  
 
4.4 Demo graphic  projections  are the starting point  for assessing  how much housing  will be required 
across  an area. Based  on 2014  national  projections  covering the period 2013  to 2037,  the 
conclusion  reached  is that the objecti vely assessed  need  across  the Housing  Market Area  is 
2,999  new homes  a year over the period 2013  – 2037.  The total requirement  across  north 
Essex, excluding Chelms ford City Council ’s area, is 2,186 n ew homes per year. 
 
4.5 This figure  includes  a figure  of 550 new homes  per year for Tendring. Calculation  of housing 
need in the Dist rict is complicated by unce rtainty a rising from unatt ributed population change 
(UPC).  
 
4.6 Evidence  on overall levels of affordable housing  provision  elsewhere  in the Districts will be set 
out in more detail within the individual Local Plans and will ta ke account of identified need s. The 
Tendring Colchester  Garden  Com munity  needs  to be a mixed and balanced  community and 
will be expected to pr ovide 30% af fordable housing.  
 
4.7   The Garden  Com munity  will be expected  to provide suita ble sites for Gypsies  and Travellers. 
Additional  requirements  for sites to meet  District wide needs  will be set out in Section  Two of 
each District/Borough Local Plan.  
 
4.8 The North Essex Authorities will identify  and update  annually a supply  of specific  deliverable 
sites sufficient  to provide five years’ worth of housing  against  their individual  housing 
requirements  set out in Policy SP4 below. Each  autho rity will incorporate an additional  buffer 
as required by national planning policy to ensure choice and competition for land.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
  
23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Policy SP 4  
 
Meeting Housing Needs  
 
The local planning autho rities will identify sufficient deli verable site s, developa ble sites and/or 
broad locations for their respecti ve plan pe riod, to meet the housing requirements in the ta ble 
below, and will inco rporate additional pr ovision to ensure fl exibility and choice and competition 
for land.  
 
Each autho rity will maintain a sufficient supply of deli verable sites to pr ovide for at least fi ve 
years’  worth of housing,  plus an approp riate buffer in accordance  with national  policy, and will 
work proacti vely with applicants  to bring forward sites that accord  with the overall spatial  strategy 
and relevant policies  in the plan.  The annual housing  requirement  figures  set out below will be 
used as the basis for assessing each autho rity’s five-year housing land suppl y, subject to a ny 
adjustments in Section 2 of each plan to address a ny undersupply since 2013.  
 
The autho rities will review their housin g requirement s regula rly in accordanc e with nationa l policy 
requirement s, and in doing so will h ave regard to the housing needs of the wider area.  
 
Local  
Authority Housing requirement 
per an num Total minimum housing  requirement  for the plan period 
(2013 – 2033)  
Braintree  716 14,320  
Colchester  920 18,400  
Tendring 550 11,000  
Total 2,186  43,720  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
 25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Providing for Empl oyment  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 Providing for Empl oyment  
 
5.1 A key objecti ve for the area is to strengthen  and diversify  local economies  to provide more  jobs 
and to achi eve a better balance bet ween the location of jobs and housing, which will reduce the 
need to t ravel and promote sustaina ble growth. 
 
5.2 Braintree  District’s  empl oyment  is  relati vely  focused  on  indust rial-type  sector s,  including 
const ruction  and manufacturing. London  Stansted  airport, in neighbou ring Uttles ford, plays a 
significant  role in empl oying residents  of the District and through  the indirect  economic  benefits 
associated with pr oximity to such a large empl oyment hu b. 
 
5.3 Retail  is the second  largest  sector  by empl oyment  and plays an impo rtant role in sustaining  the 
District’s three  key town centre s. The financial  and insurance  secto r, where  Braintree  District 
traditionally has a relati vely small propo rtion of empl oyment, has seen some strong growth in 
recent years. This m ay be a growth sector in the futur e. 
 
5.4 Colchester  is the dominant  urban  centre  within  the Essex Haven Gateway. The Borough  has 
developed  a strong  econo my, linked to its “cent ral place” functions  and to the town’s histo ric 
character, cultu ral activities  and the university. Major  retail  and leisure  services  are also located 
both within and adjacent to Colchester t own. 
 
5.5   Health,  education  and retail  each  provide over 10% of empl oyee jobs and collecti vely contribute 
42% to the Borough ’s total empl oyment.  A further six major  Groups  each  account  for between 
5 – 10% of total jobs: Ma nufacturing; Const ruction; Accommodation  and Food Services; 
Professional,  Scientific  & Technical; Business  Administ ration  & Suppo rt Services; and  Arts, 
entertainment, recreation, etc.  
 
5.6   Tendring District has a diverse econo my with local empl oyment  across  a range  of activitie s. 
Health,  retail  and education  are the largest  sectors  in terms of the number  of jobs and together 
represent 45% of the Dist rict’s total empl oyment.  
 
5.7 Within  the western part of Tendring district, the econo my and labour  market of Manningtree  is 
influenced  by its relati ve proximity  to Colchester  and good  transpo rt links to London.  The interior 
of the Dist rict is largely rural and is cha racterised by a high -quality e nvironment, interspersed 
with small settlement s. 
 
5.8 Oppo rtunities  have been  identified  for Tendring to develop potential  future  strengths  in offshore 
wind and the care and assisted living secto r. 
 
5.9 As part of the work to assess  housing  requirement s, an analysis  of economic  forecasts  was 
unde rtaken together with demo graphic projections to esta blish the inter -relationship bet ween 
populatio n growth, forecast s of new jobs and the numbe r of new home s neede d to accommodate 
these  levels of growth. Empl oyment  forecasts  have been  developed  using  two standard  models 
(East  of England  Forecasting  Model  (EEFM)  and Expe rian 2016)  which  forecast  total job growth 
for each  of the local autho rities based  on past trend s. Each  local autho rity has been  advised 
on the most approp riate modelling figure to use in the cont ext of reconciling job and housing 
demand.  The forecast  growth figures  for the housing  area for the period 2013 -2037  are as set 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
  
27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
out in Policy SP5. Empl oyment  Land  Needs  Assessments  have been  carried out by each 
autho rity which set out the amount of empl oyment land that is required within the Plan pe riod. 
In terms of specific  B use land provision,  each  local autho rity has unde rtaken work to establish 
what quantu m of empl oymen t land would be require d within the Plan period to meet the demand 
identified  below for additional  B use empl oyment  land. These  B use empl oyment  areas  are 
distributed bet ween each local autho rity area and based on achi eving a sustaina ble balance 
between jobs and the available labour  force through  population  growth.   As  noted  above, 
calculations  of empl oyment  land required  are affected  by a range  of issues  that lead to different 
empl oyment land po rtfolios for each local autho rity area, resulting in a propo rtionately greater 
quantum  of new floorspace  per job in Braintree  and Tendring than in Colcheste r. This  is a 
functio n of the prominenc e of highe r densit y office requirement s in Colcheste r and lower density 
logistics  and indust rial uses  in Braintree  and Tendring. The table in Policy SP5 below sets out 
the three  autho rities’ empl oyment  land (B Class  uses)  requirements  for the period 2016  – 33 
for two plausi ble scena rios, baseline  and higher  growth These  two bookends  provide flexibility 
to allow for each  autho rity’s supply  trajecto ry to reflect  their differing requirement s. Site specific 
empl oyment allocations meeting the needs of dif ferent sectors in each local autho rity are set 
out in Section 2 of their Local Plan.  
 
5.10 Braintre e, Colcheste r and Tendring commissione d work to explor e the empl oymen t oppo rtunities 
associated with the d evelopment of inn ovative Garden Com munities based on the li kely 
demo graphic profile of these n ew com munities and to d evelop quantified scena rios for future 
empl oyment  growth.   The  consultants  concluded  that assuming  political  commitment  and 
proacti ve deli very on the pa rt of local autho rities, Garden Com munities had the potential to 
deliver one job per household, in line with the Garden Com munities cha rter, and to suppo rt 
empl oyment  growth in surrounding  areas. The Tendring Colchester  Border  Garden  Com munity 
is considered to per form well in empl oyment te rms gi ven the oppo rtunities pr ovided by its 
location adjacent to the Uni versity Ess ex. 
 
5.11 Empl oyment  forecasts  for the three  autho rities accordingly  factor  in the longer -term aspirations 
for empl oymen t growth arising from the positi ve spin-offs associate d with Garde n Com munitie s. 
It is impo rtant to note, however, that while  job numbers  can be expected  to grow at a consistent 
rate, curren t trend s point to overall lower requirement s for additiona l B1 floorspac e. This reflects 
the growth of home  working enabled by enhanced  digital  connectivity;  the conti nuing decline 
of manufacturing with its need  for large  floor areas;  and the prevalence  of ‘hot desking’  leading 
to lower requirements for office floorspac e. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Policy SP 5  
 
Empl oyment  
 
A strong, sustaina ble and di verse econo my will be promoted across No rth Ess ex with the local 
planning autho rities pursuing a fl exible approach to economic sectors sh owing growth potential 
across the Plan pe riod. 
 
In order to meet the requirements for  office, research & d evelopment, indust rial, sto rage and 
distribution  uses  and to maintain  approp riate flexibility  in provision  to meet  the needs  of different 
sector s, Section 2 of each plan will allocate empl oyment land to ensure that pr ovision is made 
within the ranges set out in the ta ble bel ow. 
 
Hectares  of empl oyment  land required  for office, research  & development,  indust rial, storage 
and dist ribution uses : 
 
 Baseline  Higher G rowth Scenario  
Braintree  20.9 43.3 
Colchester  22.0 30 
Tendring 12.0 20.0 
North Ess ex 54.9 93.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Essex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
 29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Infrastructure and Connectivity  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 Infrastructure and Connectivity  
 
6.1 A coordinated  and integrated approach  to infrastructure  planning  and delivery is required  to 
implement  the vision  for North Essex. Pr ovision  of approp riate and timely  infrastructure  to 
suppo rt growth will be central to the area’s continuing prospe rity, attractivenes s and sustainabilit y. 
Section 1 of the Local Plan highlights st rategic and cross -bounda ry infrastructur e, identifying 
the strategi c transpo rt infrastructur e project s require d to unde rpin delivery of the planne d growth 
in the area includin g the propose d Garde n Com munity, and sets priorities for other infrastructure 
requirements such as education, healthcar e, digital connectivit y, water supply and wastewater 
infrastructur e and treatment . Sectio n 2 of the Loca l Plan contain s the infrastructur e requirements 
for allocations  made  in that section  of the plan.  The Infrastructure  Delivery Plan (IDP)  provides 
the phasing and costing of inf rastructure requirements for the Garden Com munities and the 
Section 2 allocations required within the plan pe riod.The inf rastructure planning process will 
include the identification of funding source s, and m ay include using approp riate mechanisms of 
shared pu blic sector deli very financing mechanisms and the implementation of a st rategic 
infrastructure ta riff or other suita ble mechanisms to apply across No rth Ess ex. 
 
A    Garden Com munity  
 
6.2 The challenge  in the Garden  Com munity  will be to create  a community  in which  people  move 
around  in a different  way to most  of the existing  towns in North Essex . Networks need  to give 
priority to peopl e for short everyday trips to link peopl e to work, education , retail , leisur e, creating 
an independent sa fe environment.  
 
6.3 The new garde n community will seek to manag e travel demand , providing retailing , jobs, services 
and facilities within the site to help reduce the need to t ravel, and inte grate and connect with 
the rest of North Essex and beyond through  transpo rt infrastructure  and measures  that promote 
sustaina ble travel patte rns and reduce  adverse impacts  on the highway network. The North 
Essex Garden Com munities Cha rter seeks to ensure that land use planning of the n ew 
community maximises the pr ovision and use of sustaina ble transpo rt inte rnally and connects 
externally to key urban  centre s. Given the Charter's commitment  to the timely  delivery of 
infrastructur e, policies SP8 -9 will ensure that key transpo rt projects align with housing and 
empl oyment deli very. 
 
6.4 To maximise  the use of public transpo rt new forms of high quality  rapid transit  networks will be 
provided  to serve existing  urban  centres  such  as Colcheste r; key destinations  such  as the 
University  of Essex; and key transpo rt interchanges  in North Essex. To achieve the desired 
step change in sustaina ble transpo rt, policy will require that this inf rastructure will be funded 
and its deli very phased to align with the d evelopment phase s. 
 
B   Transpo rtation and  Travel 
 
6.5 North Essex is well placed  in the context of connections  by road,  rail, air and sea to the wider 
region and b eyond, and these connections will need to be strengthened as pa rt of d eveloping 
sustaina ble transpo rt networks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
  
31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.6 The challenge  is to provide North Essex with a sustaina ble transpo rt system  that provides  good 
access  to jobs and services, to suppo rt economic  growth. Growth promoted  through  the new 
Local Plan s, particula rly via large scale n ew developments where deli very will extend b eyond 
the plan period, provides  an oppo rtunity  to prioritise, facilitate  and deliver larger  scale  transpo rt 
infrastructure  projects  that can significantly  improve connectivity  across  and within  the area.  A 
focus  on  sustaina ble  transpo rt  in  and  around  urban  areas  and  the  Garden  Com munity 
will positi vely alter t ravel patte rns and beh aviour to reduce reliance on the p rivate ca r. 
 
6.7 The Local  Plans  seek  to improve transpo rt infrastructure  to enable the efficient  movement  of 
peopl e, goods and ensure that n ew development is accessi ble by sustaina ble forms of 
transpo rt. Measures designed to encou rage people to ma ke sustaina ble travel choices such as 
better pu blic transpo rt provision, car club s, elect ric vehicle charging points and pr ovision of 
cycle links and foot ways will also be required to achi eve such a chang e.  It will also help to 
enhance air quality and impr ove health and well-being.  
 
6.8 Braintre e, Colchester  and Tendring will conti nue to work closely  with government  depa rtment s, 
Highways England , Essex Count y Council , Network Rail, rail and bus operators, developer s and 
other pa rtners to better inte grate all forms of t ranspo rt and impr ove roads and pu blic transpo rt 
and to promote  cycling  and walking.  Key projects  during the plan period will see improvements 
to the A12, A120,  Great  Easte rn Main  Line including  rail services, and provision  of rapid transit 
connections  in the Garden  Com munity  and the adjacent  urban  areas. An integrated and 
sustaina ble transpo rt system  will be delivered that suppo rts economic  growth and helps  deliver 
the best quality of li fe. 
 
The Inte r-Urban Road Net work 
 
6.9 The A12 is set to have major  improvements  as part of the Government ’s Roads  Investment 
Strategy  (RIS1  and RIS),  with the aim of improving capacity  and relieving congestion.  The A12 
is being widened bet ween junction 19 (Chelms ford) and junction 25 (A120 interchange) to 
increase  safety, improve journey time reliabilit y, provide a benefit  to the local road network, and 
in doing  so suppo rt long term sustaina ble growth. Highways England  (HE) has announced  its 
preferred  route  between junction  19 and 23 (October  2019)  and between junction  23 and 25 in 
Augus t 2020 . The A12 J19 to J25 widenin g schem e will go ahea d as part of the Road Investment 
Strategy  2 (RIS2)  programm e, and is now a fully funded  schem e. It is expected  the route  will 
be open for traffic in 2027 – 2028.  RIS2 stated that the A12 scheme will need to ta ke account 
of the evolving  proposals  for the A120  Braintree  to A12 improvement s, and any potential  future 
road link to the impr ovements for the A120 will be inco rporated into the A12 schem e. 
 
6.10 The A120  is a key east-west corridor across  Essex providing  access  to London  Stansted  Airport 
in the west to the Harwich  ports in the east and serving the economies  of Braintre e, Colchester 
and Tendring, with links to Chelms ford via the A130.  
 
6.11 Consultation on A120 route impr ovement options bet ween B raintree and  the A12 ended in 
March  2017.  ECC  has identified  a favoured  route  which  has been  recommended  to Highways 
England  and the Depa rtment  of Transpo rt for inclusion  in Road  Investment  Strategy  2 (RIS2), 
which is the n ext funding pe riod for the st rategic road net work and will run from 2020 to 2025. 
In additio n a series of short term intervention s will be delivered along the route to improve safety 
and relieve congestion.  The A120  from the A12 to Harwich  is subject  to a Highways England  
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Route Based St rategy and impr ovements to this section of road are expected over the plan 
period. ECC  and Highways England  have progressed  work with regards  a new and improved 
A120 bet ween B raintree and the A12.  The n ew A120 is necessa ry to help address the volume 
of existin g A120 movement s which by far exceed s the curren t standar d of carriageway provision. 
The route  will be instrumental  in catering for growth in the corridor and will provide a better  route 
for freight t raffic, impr ove safety and reli eve existing com munities from a range of externalities 
such  as through  traffic, noise, severance  and poor air qualit y. ECC  has identified  its favoured 
Route  D which  would join the A12 south  of Kelvedon.  In March  2020  the government  announced 
its Road I nvestment St rategy (RIS2) which included a commitment to pro gressing fu rther 
development  work on the A120  dualling  to prepare  the scheme  for delivery. The A120  dualling 
scheme will be considered for inclusion in the RIS3 pro gramme (2025 – 2030), and is n ow 
considered a pipeline project to be pro gressed by High ways England.  
 
Rail 
 
6.12 The Anglia Route Study prepared by Net work Rail (March 2016) sh ows that while capacity 
varies along the Great Easte rn Main Lin e, capacity to accommodate growth is limited and is 
particula rly const rained in peak times from Chelms ford to London.  Improvements are required 
along the line to accommodate growth and pr ovide a faster more competiti ve service across 
the region.  
 
6.13 The Study identifie s a package of improvement s necessa ry to respon d to the need for increased 
capacit y, which  are seen  as priorities to enable growth, improve services  and journey reliabilit y. 
 
6.14 A franchise  was awarded  to Greater  Anglia  for passenger  services  in the region  which 
commenced in 2018 followed by the replacement of the entire fleet of t rains to add capacit y. 
 
Public Transpo rt, Walking and Cy cling 
 
6.15 Alternative forms of transpo rt to the private car (public transpo rt, walking,  and cycling)  to travel 
to work and other  trips are essential  in managing  congestion  and to accommodate  sustaina ble 
growth. The levels of growth proposed  in the Local  Plans  will require  that the consequent  need 
to travel is managed.  Travel planning  and smarter choices  initiati ves will be promoted  to ensure 
that all residents h ave good access to local job s, services and facilitie s, pre ferably by either 
walking  or cycling.  For longer  trips and in rural areas  where  there  are fewer local services  and 
empl oyment oppo rtunitie s, public transpo rt will be promoted.  
 
6.16 Essex County  Council  prioritises  passenger  transpo rt (bus, minibus, taxi and community 
transpo rt) according  to the ‘Getting  Around  in Essex Strategy’.  The County  Council  will work in 
partnership with sta keholders to impr ove bus se rvices and their suppo rting inf rastructure to 
provide a real alternative to the private car. This will be achieved by identifying  oppo rtunities 
for a better  bus network (route s, frequenc y, community  based  services);  integrating  school  and 
commercial  bus networks; the  implementation  of travel planning  (work, busines s, school  and 
health); pr ovision  of digital  information  measures; pr ovision  of park and ride; and  suppo rting 
the growth in key commuter and inter urban  route s. Conventional  local bus services, and in 
particular  improving existing  services, will be an impo rtant part of promoting  sustaina ble travel 
across No rth Ess ex, and will complement the n ew high quality rapid t ransit net work. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
  
33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.17 Through  implementation  of the Essex Cycling  Strategy  (2016),  Cycling  Action  Plans  have 
been  prepared  in all the NEAs  to increase  cycle  levels; identify  safety issues;  identify  gaps  on 
key routes ; identif y ways of closin g gaps ; and creat e bette r cycle connectivit y to key empl oyment 
areas, developmen t zones and school s. The provision of conti nuous cycle route s and a coherent 
cycle net work will encou rage people to ma ke sho rt trips by bicycle rather than by car. 
 
Policies and Delive ry Me chanisms for Sustaina ble Transpo rt 
 
6.18 Creating  development  that is accessi ble by different  modes  of transpo rt, especially  walking  and 
cycling and the use of pu blic transpo rt is essential to promoting sustaina ble development as it 
reduce s car dependenc y. An impo rtant policy tool to achieve this is a peopl e orientate d transpo rt 
hierarchy i.e. prioritising  walking  and providing  access  for people  with mobility  impai rment; 
cycling; pu blic transpo rt; cars  (for occupiers  on site and visitors); p owered two wheelers; and 
commercial  vehicles).  The modal  hierarchy will be used  to ensure  that if not all modes  can be 
satisfactorily accommodated, those t owards the top of the hie rarchy are considered first and 
given greater p riority. 
 
6.19 Sustaina ble  transpo rt  management  will  be  based  on  promoting  modes  which  minimise 
environmental  impact  and promote  social  inclusion.  It is impo rtant that developments  are well 
located in relation to existing walking, cycling and pu blic transpo rt net works, and where 
approp riate pr ovide enhanced facilitie s, as this will ensure that there is the maxi mum potential 
to use these modes as att ractive alte rnatives to car s. 
 
C    Social Infrastructure  
 
Education  
 
6.20 New development must pr ovide for the educational needs of n ew com munities and this is set 
out in more  detail  within  the Infrastructure  Delivery Plan. This  will involve the expansion  of 
existing schools where feasible and the const ruction of n ew school s, together with pr ovision for 
special  educational  need s, early years and childcare  place s. Education  requirements  will need  
to be based  on a strong  understanding  of future  pupil  number s, with co-operation  between 
count y, district and borough  council s. A range  of educational  oppo rtunities  will need  to be 
addressed as pa rt of a sustaina ble growth st rategy, including p ractical vocational t raining, 
apprenticeship s, and fu rther and higher education.  
 
6.21 New schools are an impo rtant place -making component of Garden Com munities where ea rly 
provision is usuall y critical in providing core socia l infrastructur e to help a new community thrive, 
improve social  integration  and suppo rt the creation  of sustaina ble travel patte rns and a healt hy 
environment.  
 
Healthcare  
 
6.22 Local  autho rities have a role in creating  a healt hy community. The North Essex Authorities will 
work closely with rel evant sta keholders such as the NH S, Public Health and local health 
partnership s, developers and com munities to ensure that future d evelopment in No rth Ess ex 
takes into account the need to impr ove health and wellbeing of local residents (and workers) 
including  access  to approp riate health  and care infrastructure  to suppo rt new and growing 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communitie s. Requirements  are set out in more  detail  within  the Infrastructure  Delivery Plan. 
This will be particula rly impo rtant given the ageing  profile  of existing  and future  resident s. There 
is already  a need  for more  and better  quality  health  care facilities  across  North Essex with some 
areas  having relati vely poor access  to health  care facilitie s. The Garden  Com munity  will provide 
the conditions  for a healt hy community  through  the patte rn of development,  good  urban  design, 
good  access  to local services  and facilities;  green open  space  and safe places  for active play 
and food growing,  and which  is accessi ble by walking  and cycling  and public transpo rt.Suppo rt 
will be gi ven to meet cross -bounda ry need for hospice facilitie s. 
 
D    Digital Connectivity  
 
6.23 The NPPF indicates h ow high quality com munications inf rastructure is essential for economic 
growth and social  well-being  The availability  of high speed  and reliable broadband,  particula rly 
in rural area s, is a key factor in unlo cking n ew development oppo rtunities and ensu ring that 
people  can access  services  online  and work from home. The  Government  is committed  to 
making  gigabit -enabling connectivity  available to all premises  in the UK by 2025  and the Local 
Plan can cont ribute t owards achi eving this goal by requi ring d evelopers to ensure such 
technology is in plac e. 
 
6.24 Fast broadban d connection s and telecom munication s are an increasingl y impo rtant requirement 
to serve all development . New developmen t shoul d contribute to the creatio n of a comprehensi ve 
and effective network in both urban  and rural areas  to promote  economic  competiti veness  and 
to reduce  the need  to travel. The priority is to secure  gigabit -enabling connectivity  to all existing 
and new development s. Developers  are encou raged  to engage  with communication  network 
providers  at the earliest oppo rtunity. Where  provision  is possi ble preference  is indicated  for 
open -access inf rastructur e, ena bling multiple se rvice pr oviders access to end user s. 
 
E   Water Supp ly and  Wastewater  
 
6.25 The autho rities will need  to work with Anglian Water, Affinity Water, Environment  Agency  and 
developers  to ensure  sufficient  capacity  and provision  of an adequate  water supply  and foul 
drainag e and wastewater treatmen t to suppo rt growing communitie s as outline d in the Integrated 
Water Management  Strategy  and Infrastructure  Delivery Plan.  This will be particula rly impo rtant 
as water supplies conti nue to be threatened by climate change and pressures from conti nuing 
growth and development.  Water provisions  need  to be protected  and it is essential  for adequate 
water and wastewater infrastructure  to be in place  to accommodate  the demands  of growth and 
development  in accordance  with the Water Framework Directi ve and the Habitats  Directi ve. 
The new Garde n Community has the oppo rtunity to minimis e deman d and wastewater gene ration, 
through exploring oppo rtunities at both the st rategic and local l evel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
  
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Policy SP 6  
 
Infrastructure & Connectivity  
 
All development must be suppo rted by the pr ovision of the inf rastructur e, services and facilities 
that are identified to se rve the needs a rising from the d evelopment.  
 
The requirements  in section  A of this policy  apply  only to the Tendring / Colchester  Borders 
Garden Com munity, whilst the remaining sections B, C, D and E apply to all allocations and 
development proposals in the No rth Ess ex Authorities area.  
 
A. Tendring / Col chester Bo rders Ga rden Com munity  
 
1. The Development  Plan Document  (DPD)  for the Tendring / Colchester  Borders  Garden  
Com munity will include:  
 
a) An inf rastructure deli very strategy and phasing plan that sets out h ow inf rastructur e, 
services and facilitie s will be provided . Infrastructur e delivery will align with each development 
phase and be suppo rted by suita ble mechanisms to deli ver the inf rastructure both on and 
off-site; 
 
b) Details  of the design  and delivery of Route  1 of the rapid transit  system,  and a programme 
for the inte gration of the garden com munity into the system.  The route will be designed to 
accommodate future route enhancements and technology impr ovements;  and 
 
c) Target moda l share s for each transpo rt mode and detail s of sustaina ble transpo rt measures 
to suppo rt their achi evement.  
 
2. Before any planning  approval is granted  for development  forming  part of the Tendring / 
Colchester Borders Garden Com munity, the following st rategic t ranspo rt infrastructure must h ave 
secured planning consent and funding appr oval: 
 
a) A120 -A133 link road:  and 
 
b) Route  1 of the rapid transit  system  as defined  in the North Essex Rapid  Transit  System: 
From Vision to Plan document ( July 2019).  
 
3. Sustaina ble transpo rt measures  will be provided  from first occupation  at the Tendring / 
Colchester Borders Garden Com munity to suppo rt the achi evement of the target modal shares 
as defined in the DPD for the garden com munity. 
 
4. Other  strategic  infrastructure  requirements  for the Tendring / Colchester  Borders  Garden 
Com munity are set out in sections D, E and F of Policy SP9, and will be fu rther defined in the 
DPD for the garden com munity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. Transpo rtation and  Travel 
 
The local planning  autho rities will work with government  depa rtment s, Highways England,  Essex 
County Council, Net work Rail, rail and bus ope rators, developers and other pa rtners to deliver 
the following;  
 
Changes in t ravel beh aviour by applying the modal hie rarchy and increasing oppo rtunities 
for sustaina ble modes of t ranspo rt that can compete ef fectively with p rivate vehicles;  
A comprehensi ve net work of se gregated walking and cycling routes linking key centres of 
activity;  
Improved urban  and inter-urban  public transpo rt, and new and innovative ways of providing 
public transpo rt, including:  
 
high quality  rapid transit  networks and connections  in and around  urban  areas  with links 
to the n ew garden com munity;  
maximising  the use of the local rail network to serve existing  communities  and locations 
for large -scale growth; 
a bus network providing  a high-frequenc y, reliable and efficient  service, integrated with 
other t ranspo rt modes se rving areas of n ew demand;  
promoting wider use of com munity t ranspo rt schemes;  
 
Increased  rail capacit y, reliability  and punctualit y, and reduced  overall journey times  by rail; 
New and impr oved road inf rastructure and st rategic high way connections to reduce 
congestion and pr ovide more relia ble jou rney times along the A12, A120 and  
A133, specifically:  
 
Improved access to and capacity of junctions on the A12 and other main roads; 
A dualled A120 from B raintree to the A12.  
 
Innovative strategies for the management of p rivate car use and pa rking including the 
promotion of car clubs and car sha ring, and pr ovision of elect ric car charging point s. 
 
C. Social Infrastructure  
 
The local planning autho rities will work with rel evant pr oviders and d evelopers to facilitate the 
delivery of a wide range of social inf rastructure required for healt hy, acti ve and inclusi ve 
communitie s, minimising negati ve health and social impact s, both in avoidance and mitigation, 
as far as is p ractica ble. 
 
Education  
 
Sufficient school places will be pr ovided in the form of expanded or n ew primary and 
seconda ry schools together with ea rly years and childcare facilities that are phased with 
new development, with larger d evelopments setting aside land and/or cont ributing to the 
cost of deli vering land for new schools where required.  
Practical vocational t raining, apprenticeship s, and fu rther and higher education will be 
provided and suppo rted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
  
37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Health and  Wellbeing  
 
Healthcare  infrastructure  will be provided  as part of new developments  of approp riate scale 
in the form of expanded or n ew facilities including p rimary and acute care;  pharmacies; 
dental surge ries; opticians;  suppo rting com munity se rvices including hospice s, treatment 
and counselling centre s. 
Require n ew development to maximise its positi ve cont ribution in creating healt hy 
communities and minimise its negati ve health impact s, both in avoidance and mitigation, 
as far as is p ractica ble. 
The conditions  for a healt hy community  will be provided  through  the patte rn of development, 
good urban design , acces s to local services and facilities ; green open spac e and safe places 
for active play and food growing,  and which  are all accessi ble by walking,  cycling  and public 
transpo rt. 
 
D. Digital Connectivity  
 
Comprehensi ve digital access to suppo rt business and com munity activity will be deli vered 
throug h the roll-out of ultrafast broadban d acros s North Essex to secur e the earliest availabilit y of 
full fibre connections for all existing and n ew developments (residential and non -residential).  All 
new prope rties will allow for the provision  for ultrafast broadband  in order  to allow connection  to 
that net work as and when it is made available. 
 
E. Water &  Waste water  
 
The local planning  autho rities will work with Anglian Water, Affinity Water, the Environment 
Agency  and developers  to ensure  that there  is sufficient  capacity  in the water supply  and waste 
water infrastructure  to serve new development.   Where  necessa ry, improvements  to water 
infrastructur e, waste water treatment and off -site d rainage should be made ahead of the 
occupation of d wellings to ensure compliance with e nvironmental legislation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
 39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Creating Quality Places  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 Creating Quality Places  
 
7.1 The North Essex area has a great variety of natural environment s, and wonderful  towns and 
village s. It is critical that new development  must incorporate high standards  of place -making 
along  with urban  and architectu ral design  to respect  the character  of these  environment s. Major 
new developments will be planned carefully with the use of maste rplans and design codes 
where approp riate. 
 
7.2 Networks of green and blue infrastructure  should  be provided  across  new development s, linking 
new developments  within  existing  networks of open  spac e. These  areas  can be multi use, 
providing space for natural specie s and habitat s as well as space for informal recreation , walking, 
cycling and equest rian link s. 
 
7.3 This requirement  for high design  standards  will apply  across  all scales  of new development  as 
well as to infrastructure  project s. Enhancements  to the public realm,  landscaping  measures 
and attention  to architectu ral detail  will be impo rtant features  that the autho rities will wish to see 
included  in new development s. Strategic  scale  and more  local green infrastructure  can make 
a vital cont ribution to quality of plac e, biodi versity gain s, alleviating recreational pressur e, and 
health  outcomes  if prope rly integrated into the design  and delivery of new development. The 
Defra biodi versity accounting met ric 2.0, or future ite rations of thi s, can be used to accu rately 
assess  habitat  impact s. Sustaina ble Drainage  Systems  (SuDS)  provide abundant  oppo rtunities 
to introduce  wildfl ower strips and soft landscaping  to a development  or urban  area.  This not 
only brings an attractive feature  to the area for people  but acts as a wildli fe corridor, connecting 
the rivers, ditche s, hedge s, verges and garden s, allowing m ovement of wildli fe throughout an 
area, connecting to the wider e nvironment and there fore greatly enhancing the biodi versity 
value of the sit e. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
  
41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Policy SP 7  
 
Place Shaping Principles  
 
All new development  must meet  high standards  of urban  and architectu ral design.  Development 
frameworks, maste rplans, design  code s, and other  design  guidance  documents  will be prepared 
in consultation with sta keholders where th ey are needed to suppo rt this objecti ve. 
 
All new development should reflect the following place shaping p rinciple s, where applica ble: 
 
Respond  positi vely to local character  and context to prese rve and enhance  the quality  of 
existing places and their e nvirons;  
 
Provide buildings  that exhibit  individual  architectu ral quality  within  well-considered  public 
and p rivate realms;  
 
Protect and enhance assets of histo rical or natu ral value;  
 
Incorporate biodi versity creation and enhancement measures;  
 
Create  well-connected  places  that prioritise the needs  of pedest rians, cyclists  and public 
transpo rt services ab ove use of the p rivate ca r; 
 
Provide a mix of land uses, services and densitie s with well-define d public and private spaces 
to create sustaina ble well-designed neighbourhoods;  
 
Enhanc e the public realm throug h additiona l landscaping , stree t furniture and other distincti ve 
features that help to create a sense of place;  
 
Provide streets and spaces that are overlooked and acti ve and promote inclusi ve access;  
 
Include  parking facilities  that are well integrated as part of the overall design  and are 
adapta ble if levels of p rivate car ownership fall; 
 
Provide an inte grated and connected net work of biodi verse pu blic open space and green 
and blue infrastructur e, there by helping to all eviate recreational pressure on designated 
sites;  
 
Include  measures  to promote  environmental  sustainability  including  addressing  energy  and 
water efficienc y, and pr ovision of approp riate water and wastewater and flood mitigation 
measure s includin g the use of open space to provide flora and fauna rich sustaina ble drainage 
solutions; and  
 
Protect  the amenity  of existing  and future  residents  and users  with regard  to noise, vibration, 
smell, loss of light, overbea ring and overlooking.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
 43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cross Bounda ry Garden Com munity  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
44 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 Cross Bounda ry Ga rden Com munity  
 
8.1 A key element  of the spatial  growth strategy  for North Essex is the development  of a new 
sustaina ble garden com munity. 
 
8.2 Garden  communities  were amongst  a range  of options  which  were considered  by the local 
autho rities to deliver their housing  and empl oyment  need s. A number  of sites of sufficient  scale 
to accommodate a garden com munity were identified through the Call for Site s, the St rategic 
Land Availability Assessment (SLAA) and wider evidence gathe ring processes by each of the 
local autho rities. All these  options  were evaluated  and the assessments  can be seen  as part 
of the Sustainability App raisal.  
 
8.3 An Approp riate Assessment  has also been  completed  to consider  the effects of proposals  in 
Section  1 on the integrity of the European  sites either  alone  or in combination  with other  plans 
and project s.  At the Screening Stage the li kely significant ef fects on European Site s, either 
alone or in combination with other plan and project s, were  loss of offsite habitat, recreational 
impacts  and water qualit y. These  issues  were further considered  through  the Approp riate 
Assessment.  
 
Loss  of off-site habitat  - To mitigate  for the loss of off-site habitat,  the Approp riate 
Assessment  identified  the need  for winte ring bird surveys for the Tendring Colchester 
Borders Garden Com munity as part of a ny project l evel development proposals and 
maste rplanning,  to determine  the sites individual  impo rtance  for golden  plover and lapwing 
and inform mitigation  proposal s. Depending  on the findings  of the winte ring bird surveys, 
development  may need  to be phased  to take into account  the cumulative numbers  of SPA 
birds. In the unli kely but possi ble event that cu mulative numbers of S PA birds af fected are 
likely to exceed the threshold of significance (i.e >1% of the associated European Site), 
approp riate mitigation  in the form of habitat  creation  and management  in perpetuit y, either 
on-site or through  provision  of strategic  sites for these  species  elsewher e, will be required. 
Where that mitigation requires the creation and management of suita bly located habitat, 
feeding productivity for these S PA species should be maximised, and such mitigato ry 
habitat would need to be pr ovided and fully functional p rior to d evelopment which would 
affect significant numbers of S PA bird s. 
 
Recreationa l Impact s - To mitigat e for any increas e in recreationa l pressure s at the European 
sites, the Approp riate Assessmen t recommende d the productio n of Recreationa l disturbance 
Avoidance  and Mitigation  Strategies  (RAMS)  for the Colne  & Blackwater, Stour  and Orwell 
SPAs/Ramsar sites and Ess ex Estua ries S AC. 
 
Water quality  – To ensure  that the water quality  of the European  Sites  are not adversely 
affected  by growth proposals  in Section  1, the Approp riate Assessment  recommended  the 
inclusion  of policy  safeguards  to ensure  that adequate  water treatment  capacity  exists prior 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
  
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to developments proceeding and a commitment that the phasing of d evelopment would not  
exceed  water and sewage infrastructure  capacity  and that the necessa ry infrastructure 
upgrades would be in place p rior to d evelopments coming forward. 
 
The three autho rities are committed to implementing the recommendations in the Section  
1  Approp riate Assessment  and these  will be further progressed  through  the Strategic  
Growth DPD s. 
 
 
8.4 Due to the scale of developmen t propose d acros s North Essex and the infrastructur e const raints 
which  exist in many of the existing  main  settlement s, new garden  communities  were considered 
the most  deliverable and sustaina ble option,  providing  a major  long-term supply  of new homes 
if they could be deli vered to the right standards at the right tim e. 
 
8.5 A new community  will address  housing  and empl oyment  growth planned  for North Essex within 
the plan period and beyond in a sustaina ble way that meets  the vision  and strategic  objecti ves, 
and provides  a quality  of development  and community  that would not occur  in the absence  of 
a holistic approach to planning and deli very.  In the absence of commitment and a policy 
framework that secures the p rinciples of garden com munities d evelopment in the identified 
location  would not be accepta ble. Other  options  for meeting  the growth would have to be 
considered.  
 
8.6 The Tendring/Colchester  Borders  Garden  Com munity  will be a planned  new settlement  that 
responds directly to the regional, local and individual site cont ext and oppo rtunities to create 
development  unde rpinned  by a series of interrelated  principles  which  are based  on the Town 
and Count ry Plannin g Associatio n (TCPA) Garde n City Principle s, adapte d for the specifi c North 
Essex cont ext as set out in the No rth Ess ex Garden Com munities Cha rter. 
 
8.7 The Garden Com munity is located within a Mine rals Sa feguarding Area.  In line with the Ess ex 
Mine rals Local  Plan,  the Mine ral Planning  Authority requires  a Mine rals Resource  Assessment 
to be unde rtaken to assess  if the sites contain  a mine rals resource  that would require  extraction 
prior to development.  Should  the viability  of extraction  be proven, the mine ral shall be worked 
in accordance with the phased deli very of the non -mine ral development.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Policy SP 8  
 
Development & Delive ry of a N ew Ga rden Com munity in No rth Ess ex 
The following n ew garden com munity is  proposed at the broad location sh own on Map 10.2. 
Tendring/Colchester  Border s, a new garden  community  which  will deliver between 2,200  and 
2,500  home s, 7 hectares  of empl oyment  land and provision  for Gypsies  and Travellers  within 
the Plan period (as part of an expected  overall total of between 7,000  and 9,000  homes  and 25 
hectares of empl oyment land to be deli vered b eyond 2033).  
 
The garden com munity will be holistically and comprehensi vely planned with a distinct identity 
that responds directly to its cont ext and is of sufficient scale to incorporate a range of home s, 
empl oyment, education & com munity facilitie s, green space and other uses to ena ble residents 
to meet  the majo rity of their day-to-day need s, reducing  the need  for outward commuting.  It will 
be comprehensi vely planned from the outset, with deli very phased to achi eve the whole 
development, and will be unde rpinned by a comprehensi ve package of inf rastructur e. 
 
A Development Plan Document (DPD) will be prepared for the garden com munity, containing 
policies  setting  out how the new community  will be designed,  developed  and delivered in phase s, 
in accordanc e with the principle s in paragraphs i-xiv below. No plannin g consen t for development 
forming pa rt of the garden com munity will be granted until the DPD has been adopted.  All 
development forming pa rt of the garden com munity will comply with these p rinciple s. 
 
i. Com munity and stakeholde r participatio n in the desig n and delivery of the garde n community 
from the outset and a long -term com munity engagement and acti vation st rategy. 
ii. The pu blic sector working pro -actively and collabo ratively with the p rivate sector to design, 
and b ring forward the garden com munity, depl oying n ew models of deli very where 
approp riate and ensu ring that the cost of achieving the following is bo rne by land owners 
and those promoting the d evelopments:  (a) secu ring a high -quality of place -making, (b) 
ensu ring the timely deli very of both on -site and off -site inf rastructure required to address 
the impact of the n ew com munity, and (c) pr oviding and funding a mechanism for future 
stewardshi p, management, maintenance and ren ewal of com munity inf rastructure and 
asset s. Wher e approp riate, developer s will be expecte d to contribute towards publicly-funded 
infrastructur e, including a cont ribution t owards the A120 -A133 link road.  Given the scale of 
and time pe riod for development of the n ew garden com munity, the approp riate model of 
delivery will need to secure a comprehensi ve approach to deli very in order to achi eve the 
outcomes outlined in points (a) - (c) in this pa ragraph, avoid a piecemeal approach to 
development,  provide the funding  and phasing  of both development  and infrastructur e, and 
be sustaina ble and accounta ble in the long te rm. 
iii. Promotion  and execution  of the highest  quality  of planning,  design  and management  of the 
built and pu blic realm so that the Garden Com munity is cha racterised as a distincti ve 
place that capitalise s on local asset s, respect s its context,an d establishes an environmen t that 
promotes health, happiness and well-being.  
iv.   Sequencing  of development  and infrastructure  provision  (both  on-site and off-site) to ensure 
that the latter  is provided  ahead  of or in tandem  with the development  it suppo rts to address  
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
  
47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the impacts of the n ew garden com munity,  meet the needs of its residents and esta blish 
sustaina ble travel patte rns. To ensure n ew development does not h ave an ad verse ef fect 
on any European Protected or nationally impo rtant sites and complies with e nvironmental 
legislation  (nota bly the Water Framework Directi ve and the Habitats  Directi ve), the required 
waste water treatment capacity must be available ahead of the occupation of d wellings.  
v.    Development that pr ovides for a t ruly balanced and inclusi ve com munity and meets the 
housing  needs  of local people  including  a mix of dwelling  sizes, tenures and types, provision 
for self- and custom -built home s, provision for the aging population ; and provision for Gypsies 
and Travellers ; and that meet s the requirement s of those most in need includin g the provision 
of 30% af fordable housing in the garden com munity. 
vi. Provide and promote oppo rtunities for empl oyment within the n ew com munity and within 
sustaina ble com muting distance of it.  
vii.  Plan the n ew com munity around a step change in inte grated and sustaina ble transpo rt 
systems  for the North Essex area that put walking,  cycling  and rapid public transit  networks 
and connections at the hea rt of growth in the area, encou raging and incentivising more 
sustaina ble acti ve travel patte rns. 
viii.  St ructure  the new community  to create  socia ble, vibrant and walkable neighbourhoods  with 
equality of access for all to a range of com munity se rvices and facilities including health, 
education, retail, cultur e, com munity meeting space s, multi-functional open spac e, spo rts 
and leisure facilitie s. 
ix. Develop specific garden com munity pa rking approaches and standards that help promote 
the use of sustaina ble transpo rt and ma ke efficient use of land.  
x. Create distincti ve environments which are based on comprehensi ve assessments of the 
surrounding  environment  and that celeb rate natural and histo ric environments  and system s, 
utilise  a multi-functional  green-grid to create  significant  networks of new green infrastructure 
including  a new count ry park at the garden  community, provide a high degree of connectivity 
to existing cor ridors and net works and enhance biodi versity. 
xi. Secure  a smart and sustaina ble approach  that fosters  climate  resilience  and a 21st centu ry 
environment  in the design  and const ruction  of the garden  community  to secure  net gains  in 
local biodi versity, highest standards of energy efficiency and inn ovation in technology to 
reduce  the impact  of climate  chang e, the incorporation  of innovative water efficiency/re -use 
measures (with the aim of being water neut ral in areas of se rious water stress), and 
sustaina ble waste and mine ral management.  
xii.  Ensure that the costs and benefits of d eveloping a garden com munity are shared by all 
landowner s, with approp riate measures being put in place to equalise the costs and land 
contribution s. 
xiii.  Conside ration of potentia l on-site mine ral resource s throug h a Mine rals Resourc e Assessment 
as required by the Mine rals Planning Authority. 
xiv.  Establishment  at an early stage  in the development  of the garden  community, of approp riate 
and sustaina ble long-term governanc e and stewardshi p arrangement s for community assets 
including  green spac e, public realm  areas  and community  and other  relevant facilities;  such 
arrangements to be funded by the d evelopment and include com munity representation to 
ensure  residents  have a stake in the long term development,  stewardship  and management 
of their com munity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Policy SP 9  
 
Tendring/Col chester Bo rders Ga rden Com munity  
 
The Development  Plan Document  (DPD)  required  for the Tendring / Colchester  Borders  Garden 
Com munity by Policy SP8 will define the bounda ry of the n ew com munity and the amount of 
development  it will contain.  The adoption  of the DPD  will be contingent  on the completion  of a 
Heritage  Impact  Assessment  carried out in accordance  with Histo ric England  guidanc e. The 
Heritage Impact Assessment will assess the impact of proposed allocations upon the histo ric 
environment, in form the approp riate extent  and capacity  of the development  and establish a ny 
mitigatio n measure s necessa ry.The DPD will be produce d in consultatio n with the local community 
and sta keholders and will include a concept plan sh owing the disposition and quantity of future 
land-uses, and give a three dimensiona l indicatio n of the urban desig n and landscap e parameters 
which  will be incorporated into any future  planning  applications; together  with a phasing  and 
implementatio n strategy which sets out how the rate of developmen t will be linked to the provision 
of the necessa ry social, p hysical and e nvironmental inf rastructure to ensure that the respecti ve 
phases of the d evelopment do not come forward until the necessa ry infrastructure has been 
secured.  The DPD  and any application  for planning  permission  for development  forming  part of 
the garden com munity must be consistent with the requirements set out in this polic y. 
 
For the Plan pe riod up to 2033, housing deli very from the garden com munity, irrespecti ve of its 
actual  location,  will be distributed equally  between Colchester  Borough  Council  and Tendring 
District Council. I f, after taking  into account  its share  of delivery from the garden  community, 
either  of those  autho rities has a shortfall in delivery against  the housing  requirement  for its area, 
it will need  to make up the shortfall within  its own area.  It may not use the other  autho rity’s share 
of deli very from the garden com munity to ma ke up the sho rtfall. 
 
The DPD  and any planning  application  will address  the following principles  and requirements  in 
the design, d evelopment and deli very of the n ew garden com munity:  
 
A.   Place -Making and Design Quality  
 
1. The developmen t of a new garde n community to high standard s of desig n and layout drawing 
on its context and the conside rable assets  within  its bounda ries such  as woodland,  streams 
and changes in topo graphy, as well as the oppo rtunities af forded by the pr oximity of the 
University of Essex campus to create a n ew garden com munity that is inn ovative, 
contempo rary and technologically ena bled, set within a strong green f ramework with n ew 
neighbourhood  centres  at its heart. It will be designed  and developed  to have its own identity 
and be as self-sustainin g as possi ble recognisin g its locatio n close to the edge of Colcheste r. 
It will secure approp riate inte gration with Colchester and the near by Uni versity of Ess ex 
campus by the pr ovision of suita ble walking and cycling links and rapid pu blic transpo rt 
systems and connections to ena ble residents of the n ew com munity to h ave convenient 
access  to town centre  services  and facilities  in Colchester  as well as Elmstead  Market. Clear 
sepa ration will be maintained bet ween the n ew garden com munity and the near by villages 
of Elmstead Ma rket and  Wivenho e. Safeguarding the impo rtant green edge to Colchester  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
  
49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will be essential with a n ew count ry park provided along the Sala ry Brook cor ridor and 
incorporating Chu rn Wood. 
2. Detailed maste rplans and design guidanc e, based on a ro bust assessment of histo ric and 
natural environmental const raints and oppo rtunities for enhancement, will be adopted to 
inform and guide developmen t proposal s and plannin g application s for the garde n community. 
 
B.   Housing  
 
3. A mix of housing  types  and tenures including  self- and custom -build and starter homes  will 
be pr ovided on the sit e, including a mini mum of 30% af fordable housing.  The af fordable 
housing will be phased through the d evelopment.  
4. New residential d evelopment will seek to achi eve approp riate densities which reflect both 
context, place -making aspi rations and oppo rtunities for increased l evels of d evelopment 
around neighbourhood centres and t ranspo rt hub s. 
 
C.   Empl oyment and Jobs  
 
5. The garden community will make provision for a wide range of jobs, skills and training 
opportunities.  The DPD  will allocate  about  25 hectares  of B use employment  land within  the 
garden communit y. This may include provision for office, research & development, light 
industria l and/o r other emplo yment generatin g uses toward s the south of the site in proximity 
to the existin g Universit y of Esse x and Knowledg e Gatewa y and provisio n for office , research  
& development, industrial, storage and distribution uses towards the north of the site close 
to the A120.  
6. High speed  and reliable  broadband  will be provided  and homes  will include  specific  spaces 
to enable working from home.  
 
D.   Transpo rtation  
 
7. A package of measures will be introduced to encou rage sma rter transpo rt choices to meet 
the needs of the n ew com munity and to maximise the oppo rtunities for sustaina ble 
travel. Policy SP6 requires planning consent and full funding appr oval for the A120 -A133 
link road and Route 1 of the rapid t ransit system to h ave been secured be fore planning 
approval is granted for any development at the garden com munity. Additional t ranspo rt 
priorities includ e the provision of a network of footpath s, cycleways and bridleways to enhance 
permeability within the site and to access and to access the adjoining areas;  park and ride 
facilities and other  effective inte grated measures to mitigate the t ranspo rt impacts of the 
proposed d evelopment on the st rategic and local road net work. Longer te rm transpo rt 
interventions  will need  to be carefully  designed  to minimise  the impacts  on the strategic  and 
local t ranspo rt network and fully mitigate a ny environmental or t raffic impacts a rising from 
the d evelopment.  
8. Foot and cycle  ways shall be provided  throughout  the development  and connecting  with the 
surrounding urban areas  and count ryside, including seamlessly linking key development 
areas to the Uni versity of Ess ex, Hythe station and Colchester  Town Centr e. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9. Primary vehicular  access  to the site will be provided  off the A120  and A133.  Any other  road 
improvements  required  to meet  needs  arising from the garden  community  will be set out in 
the DPD and fu rther defined as pa rt of the maste rplanning proces s. 
10.  Other specific t ranspo rt-related inf rastructure requirements identified through the St rategic 
Growth D evelopment Plan Document and maste rplans for this garden com munity will be 
delivered in a phased manne r. 
 
E.   Com munity Infrastructure  
 
11.  District and neighbourhood centres of an approp riate scale will be pr ovided to se rve the 
proposed d evelopment.  The centres will be located where th ey will be easily accessi ble by 
walking, cycling and pu blic transit to the majo rity of residents in the garden com munity. 
12.  Com munity meeting places will be provided within the local centre s. 
13.  Increased p rimary healthcare capacity will be pr ovided to se rve the n ew development as 
approp riate. This m ay be by means of n ew infrastructure or impr ovement, reconfigu ration, 
extension or relocation of existing medical facilitie s. 
14.  A seconda ry school,  primary schools  and early-years facilities  will be provided  to serve the 
new development.  
15.  A network of multi-functiona l green infrastructur e will be provided within the garde n community 
incorporating key elements of the existing green assets within the sit e. It will include 
community pa rks, allotment s, a new count ry park, the pr ovision of spo rts areas with 
associated facilities;  and pl ay facilitie s. 
16.  Indoo r leisur e and sports facilitie s will be provided within the new community, or contributions 
made to the impr ovement of off -site leisure facilities to se rve the n ew development.  
 
F.    Other Requirements  
 
17.  The deli very of sma rt, inn ovative and sustaina ble water efficiency/re -use solutions that 
fosters climate resilience and a 21st centu ry approach t owards water suppl y, water and 
waste water treatment  and flood  risk management.  Taking  a strategic  approach  to flood  risk 
through  the use of Strategic  Flood  Risk Assessments  and the updated  Climate  Projections  
2019 and identifying oppo rtunities for Natu ral Flood Risk Management.  Provision of 
improvements  to waste water treatment  plant  including  an upgrade to the Colchester  Waste 
Water Treatment Plan and off-site d rainage impr ovements aligned with the phasing of the 
development within the plan pe riod and that proposed post 2033.  To ensure n ew 
development does not h ave an ad verse ef fect on a ny European Protected or nationally 
impo rtant site and complies with e nvironmental legislation (nota bly the  Water Framework 
Directi ve and the Habitats Directi ve), the required waste water treatment capacity must be 
available ahead of the occupation of d welling s. 
18.  Landscape  buffers between the site and existing  development  in Colcheste r, Wivenhoe  and 
Elmstead Ma rket. 
19.  Conse rve and where  approp riate enhance  the significance  of heritage  assets  (including  any 
contribution made by their settings ) both within and surroundin g the site. Designate d heritage 
assets within the garden com munity area include G rade II listed Allen ’s Farmhous e, Ivy 
Cottag e, Lambe rts, and three building s at Hill farmhous e. Designate d heritage asset s nearby 
include the grade I listed Church of St Anne and St L awrenc e, grade II* listed  Wivenhoe  
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
  
51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hous e, Elmstead Hall and Sp ring Valley Mill and numerous grade II listed buildings as well 
as the grade II listed  Wivenhoe Registered Park and Garden.  Harm to the significance of a 
designated he ritage asset should be avoided in the first instanc e. 
20.  Avoidance,protection  and/or  enhancement  of biodiversity  assets  within  and surrounding  the 
site; including Bullock  Wood SSSI, Ardleigh Gravel Pits SSSI,  Wivenhoe Pits SSSI and 
Upper Colne Marshes SSSI and relevant European protected sites.  Contributions  will be 
secured towards mitigation measures in accordance with the Essex Coast Recreational 
disturbance Avoidance and Miti gation Strateg y. Wintering bird surveys will be undertaken  
at the appropriat e time of year as part of the DPD preparatio n to identif y any offsit e functional 
habitat.  Should any be identified, development must firstly avoid impacts.  Where this is not 
possible, development must be phased to deliver habitat creation and management either 
on- or off -site to mitigate any significant impacts.  Any such  habitat  must  be provided  and 
fully functional before any development takes place which would affect signifi cant numbers 
of SPA birds.  
21.  Provision of appropriate buffers along strategic road and rail infrastructure to protect new 
development.  
22.  Provision of appropriate design and infrastructure that incorporates the highest standards 
of innovation  in energy  efficiency  and technology  to reduce  impact  of climate  change,  water 
efficiency (with the aim of being water neutral in areas of serious water stress), and 
sustainable waste / recycling management facilities.  
23.  Measure s to suppor t the developmen t of the new communit y includin g provisio n of community 
development support workers (or other provision) for a minimum of ten years from initial 
occupation of the first homes and appropriate community governance structure s. 
24.  Establishment  at an early  stage  in the development  of the garden  communit y, of appropriate 
and sustainabl e long-term governanc e and stewardshi p arrangement s for communit y assets 
including  green  space,  public  realm  areas  and community  and other  relevant  facilities;  such 
arrangements to be funded by the development and include community representation to 
ensure  residents  have  a stake  in the long term development,  stewardship  and management 
of their communit y. 
25.  Allocation of additional land within the garden communit y, to accommodate University 
expansion, which is at least equivalent in size to the allocation in the Colchester Local 
Development Framework Site Allocations document October 2010.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
52 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
 53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Delivery, Implementation & Monito ring 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 Delive ry, Implementation & Monitoring  
 
9.1 The North Essex Authorities will work together  to deliver cross -autho rity strategic  proposals 
contained  in section  1 of their plans, including  the garden  community. This entails  conside ration 
of approp riate model s for the governanc e, fundin g and comprehensi ve delivery of this innovative 
large  scale  and long term growth project  in line with the principles  set out in policy  SP8.  In view 
of the scale and long te rm nature of the proposed garden com munity, the autho rities intend to 
have a significant role in h ow the com munity is phased and deli vered and to ensure that the 
infrastructure and other suppo rting measures to suppo rt the residents of the n ew com munity 
are delivered in advance  of or at the same  time as new home s. This should  also help ensure 
delivery throughout dif ferent economic cycle s. 
 
9.2 The North Essex Authorities will monito r these sectio n 1 policie s to ensur e that they are effective 
and deli vering the intended outcome s, including their collecti ve implications for the area as a 
whole. Monito ring of Section 1 objecti ves and outcomes as outlined in the ta ble bel ow will be 
assessed regula rly by the autho rities in their an nual Authority Monito ring Repo rts (AMR), in 
addition  to the monito ring of the individual  Section  2 of each  Local  Plan.  It should  be noted  that 
where  there is an unaccepta ble del ay in deli very of d evelopment and/or inf rastructure  occur s, 
the local autho rities will use mechanisms and p owers including esta blishing locally -led 
Development Co rporations and the use of Compulso ry Purchase Order s, to inte rvene. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
  
55 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.3   Table 1: Monitoring Requirements for Section 1  
 
Section One  
Objectives  Section One Policies  Targets Key Indicato rs in 
Authority Monitoring 
Repo rts 
Providing sufficien t new 
homes  SP1 Presumption in 
favour of Sustaina ble 
Development  Delivery of n ew 
development in 
accordance with the 
Development Plan  Record of planning 
decisions including 
appeals   
Fostering economic  
 
   Monitor l evels of 
mitigatio n contributions 
recei ved SP2 Recreational  Secure cont ributions  
Providing n ew and         disturbance  Avoidance  from d evelopment  
improved infrastructur e   and Mitigatio n Strategy  towards mitigation  
 
Addressing education  measures  
and healthcare needs    SP3 Spatial St rategy 
for No rth Ess ex 
Ensu ring high quality  
outcomes  Deliver a n ew Garden 
Community as the most 
sustaina ble options for 
large scal e, long te rm 
growth Local autho rity 
agreemen t and delivery 
of governanc e, 
community 
involvement, 
stewardship 
arrangements and 
funding ar rangements 
for the n ew Garden 
Com munity  
SP4 Meeting Housing  
Needs  Deliver new housing in 
line with spatial 
strategy and 
Objecti vely Assessed 
Need targets  Market and af fordable 
housing completions 
per an num (net)  
SP5 Empl oyment  Deliver new Amount of floorspace 
development for 
empl oyment and 
leisure by type  empl oymen t land in line 
with spatial st rategy 
and evidence base 
targets  
continued on next page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
 Section One  
Objectives  Section One Policies  Targets Key Indicato rs in 
Authority Monitoring 
Repo rts 
SP6 Inf rastructure and  
Connectivity  Delivery of identified 
infrastructure  schemes 
including t ranspo rt, Identify and monitor 
progress of st rategic 
infrastructure projects  
 
Monitor modal splits 
and self -containment 
via Census and 
measure t raffic l evels 
on key routes   
healthcar e, green/ blue 
infrastructure and 
environmental 
protection  
 
Increase modal share 
of non -moto rised 
transpo rt 
SP7 Place Shaping  
Principles  Appr oved DPD s, Monitor availability of 
DPDs and other 
planning guidance 
relati ve to the 
submission & 
determination of 
planning applications 
for the d evelopment it 
relates t o. Planning 
permissions granted 
without objection from 
relevant statuto ry 
consultees and local 
autho rity specialist 
advisors  maste rplans & other  
planning & design 
guidance p rior to the 
commencement of 
development of the 
new Garden 
Com munity. Deliver 
communities that are 
sensiti vely inte grated 
into the existin g historic 
built and natu ral 
environment  
SP8 D evelopment and 
Delivery of a N ew 
Garden Com munity in 
North Ess ex Development and  Local autho rity 
agreemen t and delivery 
of governanc e, 
community 
involvement, 
stewardship 
arrangements and 
funding ar rangements 
for new Garden 
Com munity  delivery of a n ew 
Garden Com munity  
  
56 
 
 
 
 
Table 1: Monitoring Requirements for Section 1 (continued)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
education, com munity, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Essex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
  
57 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section One  
Objectives  Section One Policies  Targets Key Indicato rs in 
Authority Monitoring 
Repo rts 
SP9 Deliver a sustaina ble 
new com munity in 
accordance with 
guidance as adopted  Delivery rates of all 
development including 
suppo rting 
infrastructure as 
documente d in housing 
trajecto ries and other 
monito ring data  Tendring/Colchester  
Borders Garden  
Com munity  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
58 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
 59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices & Maps  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 Appendices & Maps  
 
Appendix A:  List of policies supe rseded by Section 1 of the Plan  
 
Section 1 Local Plan Policy Policie s supe rsede d by the Sectio n 1 Loca l Plan Policy 
Policy 
Number  Policy Title Braintre e District  
Council 2011  
Core Strategy  Colchester 
Borough Council 
Adopted Core 
Strategy 2014  
Focused R eview Tendrin g District  
Counci l Adopted  
2007 Local Plan  
SP1 Presumption in Favour of  
Sustaina ble Development  - - - 
SP2 Recreational disturbance 
Avoidance and Mitigation 
Strategy (RAMS)  - - - 
SP3 Spatial St rategy for No rth 
Essex CS1 H1 QL1 
SP4 Meeting Housing Needs  CS3 H1 HG1 
SP5 Empl oyment  CS4 CE1 QL4 
SP6 Infrastructure and  
Connectivity  CS11  SD2 - 
SP7 Place Shaping P rinciples  CS9 - QL8 / QL9 / QL10  
/ QL11 (in pa rt) 
SP8 Developmen t and Delivery 
of a N ew Garden 
Community in North Essex - - - 
SP9 Tendring / Colchester 
Borders Garden 
Com munity  - - - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
  
61 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.1 Key Diagram  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
62 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.2 Tendring Colchester Borders Garden Community - Broad Location  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan | 
  
63 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
| North Ess ex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 