1 CRAVEN LOCAL PLAN 
2012 to 2032  
Adopted 12th November 2019 
2 3 Foreword 
The Craven Local Plan is an essential document to address some of the big issues 
facing the District over the coming years.    
Craven is a distinctive and attractive place to live, work and visit, offering a fulfilling 
and vibrant community life with a range of successful companies that are essential 
for our communities’  future prosperity.   The Local Plan will build on these factors to 
provide greater equality amongst our communities in terms of housing choice, better 
paid local job opportunities, more opportunities for pursuing a healthy and active 
lifestyle and access to services upon which residents, of all ages, depend.  In 
developing the Local Plan we have aimed to embrace all of these factors. 
The Plan sets the location, design and sustainable construction of these new 
homes, business premises and other commercial enterprises and so helps  reduce 
carbon emissions, fuel poverty and waste, and respects the distinctive character 
and heritage of their surroundings, reinforcing a ‘sense of place’.  We aim for new 
homes to have good access by walking, cycling, public transport and car to local 
facilities, employment areas, town centres and the countryside.   
I would like to thank everyone who has contributed to the preparation of the Craven 
Local Plan, including adjoining Local Authorities, the National Park, Government 
Agencies, the development industry and in particular our communities for their 
active involvement.   This Local Plan is the result of the Council working with 
communities and partners constructively and cooperatively and we believe that this 
journey has led to the creation of a Local Plan that successfully promotes necessary 
growth while protecting our important landscapes. 
Richard Foster 
Leader, C raven District Council 
4 Contents:  page  
SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION  8 
SECTION 2: CONTEXT  13 
SECTION 3: SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT  28 
VISION FOR CRAVEN IN 2032  28 
PLAN OBJECTIVES  31 
POLICY SD1: THE P RESUMPTION IN FAVOUR OF SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT  33 
POLICY SD2: MEETING THE CHALLENGE OF CLIMATE CHANGE  34 
SECTION 4: STRATEGIC POLICIES AND SPATIAL STRATEGY  37 
POLICY SP1: MEETING HOUSING NEED  37 
POLICY SP2: ECONOMIC ACTIVITY  AND BUSINESS GROWTH  41 
POLICY SP3: HOUSING MIX  AND DENSITY  45 
POLICY SP4: SPATIAL STRATEGY AND HOUSING GROWTH  48 
POLICY SP5: STRATEGY FOR SKIPTON –TIER 1  62 
POLICY SP6: STRATEGY FOR SETTLE – TIER 2  85 
POLICY SP7: STRATEGY FOR BENTHAM –TIER 2  97 
POLICY SP8: STRATEGY FOR GLUSB URN/CROSS  HILLS – TIER 3  103 
POLICY SP9: STRATEGY FOR INGLETON –TIER 3  106 
POLICY SP10: STRATEGY FOR GARGRAVE –TIER 3  111 5 
 
 
 POLICY SP11:STRATEGY FOR TIER 4A AND 4B VILLAGES WITH BASIC 
SERVICES AND BISECTED VILLAGES WITH BASIC SERVICES  114 
POLICY SP12: IN FRASTRUCTURE, STRATEGY AND DEVELOPMENT DELIVERY  118 
SECTION 5: ENVIRONMENT  121 
 
POLICY ENV1: COUNTRYSIDE AND LANDSCAPE  121 
 
POLICY ENV2: HERITAGE  126 
 
POLICY ENV3:  GOOD DESIGN  131 
 
POLICY ENV4:  BIODIVERSITY  137 
 
POLICY ENV5:  GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE  144 
 
POLICY ENV6:  FLOOD RISK  150 
 
POLICY ENV7:  LAND AND AIR QUALITY  153 
 
POLICY ENV8:  WATER RESOURCES, WATER QUALITY AND GROUNDWATER  155 
 
POLICY ENV9: RENEWABLE AND LOW CARBON ENERGY  157 
 
POLICY ENV10:  LOCAL GREEN SPACE  164 
 
POLICY ENV11: THE LEED S & LIVERPOOL CANAL  168 
 
POLICY ENV12: FOOTPATHS, BRIDLEWAYS, BYWAYS AND CYCLE ROUTES  171 
POLICY ENV13: GREEN WEDGES  174 
SECTION  6:  HOUSING  177 
 
POLICY H1: SPECIALIST HOUSING FOR OLDER PEOPLE  177 
 
POLICY H2: AFFORDABLE HOUSING  179 6 POLICY H3: GYPSI ES,TRAVELLERS,SHOWMEN AND ROMA  192 
SECTION 7: ECONOMY  196 
POLICY EC1: EMPLOYMENT AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT  196 
POLICY EC2: SAFEGUARDING EXISTING EMPLOYMENT AREAS  196 
POLICY EC3: RURAL ECONOMY  200 
POLICY EC4: TOURISM  203 
POLICY EC4A: TOURISM -LED D EVELOPMENT AT BOLTON ABBEY  203 
POLICY EC4B: TOURISM DEVELOPMENT COMMITMENT AT HELLIFIELD  203 
POLICY EC5: TOWN,  DISTRICT AND LOCAL CENTRES  217 
POLIC Y EC5A: RESIDENTIAL USE IN TOWN, DISTRICT AND LOCAL CENTRES  217 
SECTION 8: INFRASTRUCTURE, SERVICES AN D FACILITIES  228 
POLICY INF1: PLANNING OBLIGATIONS  228 
POLICY INF2: COMMUNITY FACILITES AND SOCIAL SPACES  232 
POLICY INF3: SPORT, OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION FACILITIES  235 
POLICY INF4: PARKING PROVISION  244 
POLICY INF5: COMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTU RE 247 
POLICY INF6: EDUCATION PROVISION  251 
POLICY INF7:SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS  254 
SECTION 9: MONITORING  260 7 APPENDIX A TO POLICY INF3: SPORT, OPEN SPACE AND BUILT SPORTS FACILITIES  1- 24 
APPENDIX B TO POLICY INF6: EDUCATION PROVISION  1- 12 
APPENDIX C TO POLICY  ENV6: FLOOD RISK  1- 2 
APPENDIX D: POLICIES SCHEDULE  1- 4 8 SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION 
1.1 This Local Plan sets out a spatial strategy and policies for change, 
development and conservation in Craven District outside the Yorkshire 
Dales National Park (YDNP) for the period 2012 to 2032.  It is used to 
decide planning applications and sets out how land is to be used for things 
like housing, business, recreation and conservation; how the right 
development is to be achieved in the right location at the right time; and how 
sustainable development can be achieved overall. A number of policies from 
the Craven Local Plan (1999) were saved in 2007.  The majority of these 
saved policies have been replaced in this Local Plan.  Appendix D details 
which saved policies have been replaced by those within this Local Plan. 
1.2 The Craven Local Plan, together with Neighbourhood Plans, and the Joint 
Minerals and Waste Local Plan (which sets out a strategy for minerals and 
waste planning in North Yorkshire outside YDNP and is prepared by North 
Yorkshire County Council (NYCC), the City of York Council (CYC) and the 
North York Moors National Park Authority (NYMNPA)) will form the 
development plan for Craven outside the YDNP.1  
1.3 The Craven Local Plan is required by law2 and has been tailor –made to suit 
Craven and its communities.  It is committed to our international obligations 
and mindful of our aspirations as a nation including the national planning 
priorities set out in the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) and the 
more detailed guidance provided in the National Planning Practice Guidance 
(NPPG) .  The NPPF provides a broad set of national planning priorities, 
which include housing growth, economic growth, social progress and 
environmental enhancement.  The Craven Local Plan pursues these national 
priorities in a way that makes sense for the local area, because it responds to 
1 The YDNP is a separate planning authority and is responsible for preparing both a local plan and a minerals 
and waste local plan for the Craven part of the National Park area. 
2 The legal basis for the requirement to produce a Local Plan was established by the Planning and Compulsory 
Purchase Act 2004.  The 2004 Act sets a context for how Local Development Frameworks were to be 
prepared. However, the Localism Act 2011 changed this context to prepare Local Plans, by revoking Regional 
Strategies and establishing the Duty to Cooperate in its place. 9 
 
 
 local circumstances and evidence and has been developed in consultation 
with local people and other stakeholders wi th an interest in Craven.  As a 
result, the Craven Local Plan is a plan for sustainable growth.  
Vision  
1.4 The plan begins with a vision of what we would like Craven to be  in 2032 . 
This vision gives the plan a focus and a goal to aim for.  
Objectives  
1.5 The plan objectives are broad achievements we need to make in order to 
make the vision a reality. There are ten objectives overall  (PO1 – PO10) . 
Strategy  
1.6 The strategy is the method for achieving our objectives  — or the tactics for 
securing each objective , on the way to realising our vision. These tactics take 
the form of strategic , site allocation  and development management policies . 
Proposals  
1.7 Where a policy earmarks an area of land for a specific purpose  - for example: 
building new homes or businesse s, recreation or conservation  -it’s shown on 
the local plan map, also known as the policies map.  
Plan Period  
1.8 The Craven Local Plan covers the period of time from 2012 up to 203 2. 
During this period, progress on achieving the objectives and towards our 
vision will be checked and announced each year in an annual report. If this 
monitoring reveals a hitch in the plan’s progress, policies can be adjusted to 
bring it back on track.  
Plan Area  
1.9 This is the geographical area  - all of the towns, villages and countryside  -
covered by the plan. The plan area doesn’t include any part of Craven within 
the Yorkshire Dales National Park, which has its own local plan prepared by 10 the National Park A uthority. So, when you read “Craven” or “Craven plan 
area” in this document, it means “Craven outside the National P ark”.  Where 
information or statistics referred to in the Local Plan relate to the whole of the 
District, i.e. the plan area and the national park, you will read – “Craven 
District”.  
Other Planning Documents 
1.10 The Craven Local Plan sets out a spatial strategy, that together with its 
strategic , site allocation and development management policies provide a 
coherent and comprehensive decision making framework for future planning 
applications.  However, further de tail and guidance on local plan policies can 
be a useful addition to the plan to help people when they are formulating their 
development proposals.  Supplementary Planning Documents (SPDs) have 
this role and may follow on from the local plan.   Any SPD that ’s in the 
pipeline will appear in the Local Development Scheme, which is a rolling 
programme for the preparation and review of local plan documents. The 
progress of SPDs will be monitored in the annual report.  Similarly, if the 
Council decides it wishes to introduce a Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) 
Charging Schedule to accompany the Local Plan, its timetable for 
preparation will be included in the Local Development Scheme. 
Duty to Cooperate 
1.11 The Craven Local Plan has been prepared in co-operation with neighbouring 
councils and agencies that work across council boundaries, to ensure that no 
opportunities are missed to work together on issues that are “bigger than 
local”, cross administrative boundaries and require a policy response .  More 
detail on the relevant cross boundary strategic priorities that have been 
identified for Craven’s Local Plan and how cooperation and collaborative 
working with neighbouring authorities and other bodies has influenced the 
preparation of the Local Plan can be found in the Council’s Duty to 
Cooperate Statement.  11 
 
 
 Engagement, Collaboration and Evidence  
1.12 This plan has been created in collaboration with local communities and other 
stakeholders  - people and organisations with an interest in the future 
planning of the ar ea. Early engagement with communities and stakeholders 
on shaping the local plan strategy and policies took place in 2012 and 2013 , 
and the Council consulted on three draft versions of the Local Plan in 2014, 
2016 and 2017 alongside its updated evidence ba se before publishing the 
Draft Publication Local Plan in January 2018 and submitting the plan to the 
Secretary of State for examination on 27th March 2018.  
1.13 Engagement with stakeholders is carried out according to the Statement of 
Community Involvemen t (SCI), which is a kind of customer charter for the 
creation of local planning documents.  
Sustainability Appraisal  
1.14 The plan has been developed and refined using Sustainability Appraisal 
(SA), and Habitats Regulation Assessment (HRA).  The SA tests id eas and 
options against a set of sustainability objectives to see how effectively they 
might achieve sustainable development.  The HRA highlights Likely 
Significant Effects (LSE) on European designated sites  for biodiversity i.e. 
RAMSAR sites, Special Area s of Conservation and Special Protection Areas 
and sets a framework for avoidance and/or mitigation. The SA Scoping 
Report has identified matters for the local plan to tackle and k ey issues are 
described in Section 2: Context . 
Neighbourhood Plans  
1.15 Parish councils within the Craven Local Plan area can produce 
neighbourhood plans which,  when  adopted, also form part of the 
development plan, together with the Craven Local Plan and the Joint 
Minerals and Waste Local Plan .  Neighbourhood plans must be in gene ral 
conformity with and reflect the strategic policies in the Craven Local Plan. 
Neighbourhood plans  should not promote less development than set out in 12 
 
 
 the Local  Plan, but can promote more development.  The Craven Local Plan 
has been prepared  with neighbou rhood plans in mind, as they’re likely to be 
an important part of Craven’s planning future.  
1.16 Craven’s parishes will be encouraged to adopt neighbourhood planning and 
will be guided and supported in their neighbourhood planning efforts. 
Neighbourhood pl ans and orders will help to achieve sustainable growth in 
Craven by bringing forward communities’ own initiatives and proposals, in 
line with the strategy established by this local plan, for such things as:  
 Growth in housing and business  
 Rural exception si tes 
 Conservation area appraisals  
 Local lists  
 Design guides  
 Local green space  
 Allotments  
 Green travel  
 Renewable and low -carbon energy  
 Community projects for sport, recreation, tourism and biodiversity.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 
 
 
 SECTION 2: CONTEXT  
2.1 This section provides s ome context for Craven, its people and places and 
identifies the key issues and challenges facing the area. More detailed facts 
and figures relating to Craven are contained in supporting Sustainability 
Appraisal documents.  
Location and Area  
 
2.2 The Crave n plan area  is situated at the western end of the county of North 
Yorkshire , England’s largest County  and is 8,654  square kilometres  in area .  
The total area of Craven District is 1,179 square kilometres. The area of 
Craven to which this local plan relates  is 370 square kilometres.  The 
remainder of the Craven District (808 square kilometres) is within the 
Yorkshire Dales National Park.  The Yorkshire Dales National Park Authority 
is a separate planning authority that produces a park -wide local plan, which 
encompasses parts of Craven, Richmondshire , South Lakeland  and Eden 
Districts  and a small part of the Lancaster City Council area . The boundary of 
14 
 
 
 the National Park in the Craven  District  generally follows the A65 to the north 
of Skipton and the A59  to the  east of Skipton .  At several locations the 
boundary of the National Park bisects settlements e.g. Embsay, Clapham, 
creating a ‘split’ in planning control between the National Park Authority and 
Craven District Council.   The Craven plan area is flanked by the County of 
Lancashire and the  Lancashire districts of City of Lancaster, Ribble Valley 
and Pendle immediately to its west and south, Bradford Metropolitan District 
to the south -east and the Yorkshire Dales National Park to the north and 
east. 
Sub- Regio nal/ Economic Context  and Transport Links  
2.3 Craven District Council is a partner in the Leeds City Region Local Enterprise 
Partnership (LEP) and the York, North Yorkshire and East Riding LEP. 
Craven‘s presence in these two LEPs reflects significant econo mic links with 
the Leeds -Bradford conurbation as well as extensive predominantly rural 
areas to the east and north of the district in the York, North Yorkshire and 
East Riding LEP . Craven also has economic links with East Lancashire, in 
particular with  nearby towns  in Pendle and the City of Lancaster.3  
2.4 Craven is predominan tly a ‘small business’ economy, it has a higher 
proportion of ‘micro’ firms employing fewer than 10 workers (89.7%) than 
both Yorkshire and the Humber (86.8%) and Great Britain more g enerally 
(88.3%). As a result, there are relatively few firms employing between 10 and 
49 workers (8.6% versus 10.9% in Yorkshire and the Humber and 9.6% in 
Great Britain), between 50 and 249 workers (1.4% versus 1.9% in Yorkshire 
and the Humber and 1.7% i n Great Britain) and large firms employing over 
250 workers (0.3% versus 0.4% in Yorkshire and the Humber and Great 
Britain overall)4. 
2.5 Nevertheless it is important to note that Craven is home to several large 
businesses of a national, and even internat ional scale, including several in 
                                                           
3Lichfields – Craven Employment Land Review and Future Requirements for Economic Growth 2017 Fig 2.10  
4 ONS, UK Business Statistics: Activity, Size and Location 2012  15 
 
 
 the Financial and Healthcare sectors (which have a strong presence in 
Craven as well as the wider Leeds City Region). A selection of these large 
companies located within Craven include s: 
  Angus Fire  (Bentham) : a manufactur er of fire protection products that 
has been in operation for over two hundred years, with customers in over 
a hundred countries and specialisms across a wide range of industrial 
sectors;  
 Dales Pharmaceuticals  (Skipton) : UK operation for the international 
pharmaceuticals company. Dales Pharmaceuticals hold licences for 
manufacture, assembly and importation of medicinal products for human 
and veterinary use, including investigational medicinal products and 
specialist services, such as Home Office Controlled Drug licences;  
 Computershare (formerly Homeloan Management Limited)  (Skipton) : a 
global financial administration company  employ ing over 16,000 peop le 
across 90 offices around the world .  
 Principle Healthcare International  (Skipton) : the UK’s leading produc ers of 
vitamins, minerals and food supplements. The company heads up a 
group which serves some of the major retailers in the UK, Europe and 
internationally;  
 Skipton Building Society  (Skipton) : the UK’s fourth largest building 
society, with £13.9 billion of  assets and a national presence represented 
by a network of around 100 branches across the country; and  
 Systagenix  (Gargrave) : world leader in the development and manufacture 
of advanced wound care products. The company distributes products and 
services to  more than 100 countries, and employs 800 people worldwide 
including an experienced team of R+D Scientists at the Centre of 
Excellence for Wound Healing in Gargrave5 
                                                           
5 York, North Yorkshire & East Riding Local Enterprise Partnership (2013) Strategic Economic Plan, Part 2, 
page 133  16 
 
 
 2.6 Craven has a lower level of business start -up relative to the national average, 
with j ust over 78 new business registrations per 10,000 working age 
population in Craven compared with 86 across Britain as a whole. However, 
Craven performs better in this measure relative to the regional rate, in which 
just 69 businesses are registered per 10,000 working age population6. 
2.7 In contrast, self -employment in Craven is well above the regional and 
national average, with 27.4% of the working -age population falling with in this 
category compared with just 8.7% regionally and 10.0% nationally in 20147 
(a fact partially explained by the rural nature of the District and the types of 
jobs that tend to flourish in such areas, such as leisure/recreation activities 
linked to tourism, hospitality and independent retail operations). Consultation 
with local busi nesses has shown that many of those who are self -employed 
and work from home (such as highly -educated private sector consultants) are 
drawn to the area in order to live and work in an attractive environment.8 
2.8 Craven’s employment space is dominated by i ndustrial (factory and 
warehousing) uses which account for over 60% of the total stock. Craven’s 
commercial office stock is also relatively significant at around 70,000 sq  m 
and has been growing in scale in recent years whilst the reverse is true for 
manuf acturing9. 
2.9 Between 1999/00 and 2004/05, Craven experienced a relatively large and 
steady rate of employment land development (with an average of 2.42 ha 
developed annually). Following this however, development reduced 
significantly to just 0.45 ha over  the period 2005/06 – 2013/14. It is thought 
that this was due to a combination of a perceived lack of available 
                                                           
6 ONS, Business Demography Statistics 2013  
7 ONS Annual Population Survey (Ju l 2013 -Jun 2014)  
8 Lichfields -Craven Employment Land Review and Future Requirements for Economic Growth 201 7  para 2.14 
page 9  
9 Lichfields -  Craven Employment Land Review and Future Requirements for Economic Growth 2017 para 
3.36 page 24  17 
 
 
 employment sites combined with a tightening of finances and a more 
challenging business environment following the financial crisis10. 
2.10 A rec ent survey of local businesses in Craven identified a number of barriers 
to their further expansion. By far the most common barrier to further 
expansion was identified as a lack of suitable land and premises (67% of 
respondents highlighted this concern), i n addition to the availability of a local 
workforce (33%) and a lack of affordable premises (26%)11. 
2.11 There is a diverse mix of business sectors within Craven, with concentrations 
scattered around the authority area12.  However, the principal employment 
area within Craven is the area in and around the south of the plan area  
(encompassing Skipton but also Cross Hills and Sutton -in-Craven, in addition 
to Gargrave).  Within Skipton itself, a large number of Public Services and 
Professional Services firms are  evident. Clusters of businesses are also 
evident in the smaller, yet significant, settlements of Settle, Bentham  and 
Ingleton . 
2.12 There is a close correlation between the number and frequency of 
businesses and the strategic road network, with large hubs  of firms visible to 
the east and west of Skipton via the A59  (providing a link to the  M6 to the 
west and to the A1(M) and the port of Hull to the east ); to the south of 
Skipton via the A629  (providing a link to the M606/M62 to the south -east) , 
and to the  north west and south east of Skipton along the A65  (a trans -
Pennine route linking the plan area with the M6 for Cumbria and the Lake 
District to the north -west and West Yorkshire (Leeds) and the M1 to the 
south east ). 
2.13 Whilst th e A56 and the A6068 in the south of the plan area provide important 
links from Skipton and Glusburn/Cross  Hills respectively  to the M65  at Colne  
                                                           
10 Lichfields  -  Craven Employment Land Review and Future Requirements for Economic Growth 2017 para 
3.37 page 24  
11  Lichfields  -  Craven Employment Land Review and Future Requirements for Economic Growth 2017 para 
5.51 page35  
12  Lichfields  -  Craven Employment Land Rev iew and Future Requirements for Economic Growth 2017  Figs 2.5 
and 2.6 page 10  18 
 
 
 to the west which connects to the M6 south of Preston and provides access 
to the M66 to Manchester , the quality of the road connection s between 
Craven and Colne  in Pendle  are currently poor . However, Lancashire County 
Council in its East Lancashire Highways and Transport Masterplan (2014 ) 
has identified the A56 Colne -Foulridge  bypass as a potential scheme which 
could be delivered within the lifetime of the Craven Local Plan, providing 
funding can be secured.  The scheme is also supported by the Lancashire 
Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP)  and in the adopted Pendle Core Strategy  
(2015) in view of the potential for the scheme to enhance ec onomic links and 
benefits between Lancashire and Yorkshire.  
2.14 The Craven Plan area is linked to the rail network via the Leeds -Skipton -
Carlisle route (incorporating the famous Settle -Carlisle railway)  and the 
Leeds -Skipton -Lancaster -Morecambe route.  Skipton is also the terminus for 
the electrified Airedale line from West Yorkshire (Leeds and Bradford) .  Rail 
services on the Airedale line connecting Skipton with Leeds and Bradford 
(and with other West Yorkshire towns  in between) are excellent and have 
experienced high levels of growth in usage in recent years.  Indeed Skipton 
Station is the second busiest railway station in North Yorkshire with over 
1,106,036 entries and exits recorded in 2014/1513. The HS2 Growth Strategy 
of the West Yorkshire Combined Au thority (WYCA) seeks to realise in full the 
potential benefits of HS2 to accelerate the transformation and growth of the 
sub- regional economy.  WYCA positions HS2 at the centre of a coherent 
strategy for improving the wider rail and transport network serv ing Leeds City 
Region (including  the Airedale line). It will be integrated with enhanced inter -
urban links across the north (Northern Rail), particularly a new fast east -west 
link between York, Leeds, Bradford and Manchester, and also between 
Leeds and She ffield.  A project inception report completed in February 2017 
(managed by the WYCA and sponsored by NYCC and CDC) investigated the 
viability and business case for a new Station at Cross Hills on the Airedale 
                                                           
13 Office of Rail and Road (ORR) –Estimates of Station Usage for 2014/15  19 
 
 
 line.  The report concluded that the scheme sho uld be taken forward for 
further work and more detailed consideration.  
2.15 North and west of Skipton, the rail links that connect Craven with Carlisle,  
Lancaster and Clitheroe, are on less populous routes than the Airedale line 
and patronage from touris m contributes to the level of services.  
Improvements to the train services between Skipton and Lancaster have 
recently been agreed and are included in the Council’s Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan (IDP) together with the need to make improvements to existing  railway 
stations along this route.  The rail connections to the west are particularly 
restricted with only Sunday services operat ing on the community rail line 
between Manchester –Clitheroe – Hellifield.  
2.16 There is no direct rail link between Skipton a nd towns in East Lancashire, 
although the track bed of the route of the former Skipton to Colne railway line 
presents an opportunity to enhance  the accessibility of employment, 
business and housing between Craven and East Lancashire  and improve 
connections  to Manchester and Manchester  Airport.  The adopted Pendle 
Core strategy (2015)  supports the reinstatement of the Colne to Skipton 
railway line  as a key strategic transport scheme in Pendle and protect s the 
route of the former Colne -Skipton railway for  future transport use .  North 
Yorkshire County Council in th eir recently published document:  A Strategic 
Transport Prospectus for North Yorkshire  sets out how it would like to work 
with the Government, Transport for the North and the Northern City Regions 
to ensure that improved transport connections allow England’s largest 
County to both contribute to and share in the economic benefits of the 
Northern Powerhouse and to this end three strategic transport have been 
identified : -- 
--improving east -west connectivi ty (including trans -Pennine links) , 
- improving access to High Speed and conventional rail , and  
- improving long distance connectivity to the north and south.  20 
 
 
 These strategic transport priorities are also reflected in the new North 
Yorkshire Local Transpor t Plan (LTP4) 2016 to 2045.  A number of key east -
west routes are within Craven such as the A59, A56 and the A6068.  In 
March 2017, North Yorkshire County Council with Lancashire Local 
Enterprise Partnerships and the West Yorkshire Combined Authority 
publi shed an East -West Connectivity Study focussed on a ‘Central’ Trans 
Pennine Corridor, including key road routes such as the M65/A59/A56/A65 
and rail routes such as the Calder Valley and the Skipton –Colne Lines. The 
study aim s to develop a strategic economi c narrative to the case for potential 
intervention in road/rail based connectivity. CDC is a key stakeholder in this 
study.  
2.17 The southern part of the Craven plan area  and the Aire Valley in particular  
has very good and frequent bus services/routes , con necting Skipton and 
settlements in south Craven to towns and cities in West Yorkshire and East 
Lancashire .  Bus services connecting Skipton to Settle and beyond along the 
A65 are good, although in the more remote rural areas of Craven bus 
services face an uncertain future related to social change (e.g. the growth in 
car ownership and demographic change).  
2.18 There are no airports within the plan area, but the nearest airports are Leeds -
Bradford Airport to the south east and Manchester Airport to the south  west.  
Settlements  
2.19 The Craven Plan area contains the four largest settlements within Craven 
District.  The market town of Skipton is the largest town in the District and 
plan area (by a considerable margin)  and is located in the south of the plan 
area in the strategic ‘Aire Gap’ through the Pennines  linking Yorkshire with 
Lancashire.  It contains the administrative functions of the District Council and 
is the base for a range of North Yorkshire County Council services. Skipton 
has the largest town centr e, offers the widest range of employment 
opportunities , goods and services in the District and plan area  and is well 
connected with the A road network and rail network.  The two smaller market 21 
 
 
 towns of Bentham and Settle are located in the north and mid ar eas of the 
Craven plan area  respectively  and both have a good range of services , 
provide employment opportunities  and are well connected to the A road 
network and rail network , although Bentham is located further away from the 
A65 than Settle .  Glusburn/Cr oss Hills, the largest village in the District , is 
located in the south of the plan area close to the boundary with Bradford 
Metropolitan District , and offers employment opportunities and a good range 
of services  for a village of its size .  
2.20 The remain der of the plan area is characterised by villages that function as 
local service centres or villages that have basic services and these are 
generally located either on or close to main transport routes (road and /or 
rail).  For example Ingleton, Clapham, Hellifield , Long Preston  and Gargrave 
are on /close to  the A65 and with the exception of Ingleton, have railway 
stations  on either the Leeds – Skipton - Lancaster – Morecambe  route and/or 
the Leeds – Skipton - Carlisle route.  The village  of Bolton Abbey in the south 
of the plan area is close to the A 59 and has a public transport connection to 
Ilkley and Grassington.   
2.21 A number of villages  also form clusters of settlements in relatively close 
proximity to one another  or to a market town where services may be shared 
and accessed via public transport , walking or cycling. For example in the 
north of the plan area Burton in Lonsdale and Ingleton are in relatively close 
proximity to and have good public transport connections with the market town 
of High  and Low Bentham .  
2.22 In the central part of the plan area the villages of Clapham, Giggleswick, 
Langcliffe  (which is located just over the plan area boundary in the National 
Park)  and Rathmell form a cluster of settlements that have good public 
transport connection s and are either within walking and /or cycling distance 
of the market town of Settle .   
2.23  In the south of the plan area the villages of Embsay, Carleton , Cononley and 
Low Bradley have good and frequent public transport connections  with 22 
 
 
 Skipton  (Cononl ey also has a railway station) and are within walking and/or 
cycling distance of the main market town of Skipton.  Similarly, t he villages of 
Farnhill, Kildwick , Sutton in Craven and Cowling form a cluster of settlements 
around the large r village of Glusbu rn/Cross  Hills with good and frequent 
public transport connections and are within walking and/or cycling distance of 
its wider range of services  and employment opportunities . 
2.24 Elsewhere in the plan area, there is a dispersed pattern of small villages a nd 
hamlets reflecting the rural nature of the District , which is within the top ten 
most sparsely populated local authority areas in England.14 
Natural and Built Environment  
2.25 Craven has a unique and outstanding natural and built environment, which is 
reflected in  local, national and international landscape  and biodiversity 
designations together with designated and non -designated heritage assets.  
2.26 The Craven plan area sits alongside the western boundary of the Yorkshire 
Dales National Park , and has it s own important, distinctive rural landscapes 
which provide a high quality landscape setting for the National Park , and for 
the Forest of Bowland Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) which 
covers an extensive part of the plan area. The underlying grit stone and 
limestone geologies  of the plan area , and the Aire Gap serves to effectively 
denote the change from limestone geology to the north to gritstone geology 
to the south and the effects of glaciation also serve to derive a rich and 
diverse landscape c haracter and quality in Craven.  
2.27 The market towns of Skipton and Settle and the larger villages of Ingleton, 
Giggleswick, Hellifield, Gargrave and Embsay  are situated within the setting 
of or bisected by the national park boundary . The village of Claph am is 
bisected by the boundary of both the national park and the Forest of Bowland 
AONB, thus forming a unique dual-gateway to these areas , making the 
village popular with photographers, birdwatchers, cyclists and walkers , 
                                                           
14 Craven SA/SEA Scoping Report 2018 para 4.1  23 
 
 
 providing potential leisure/touri sm opportunities.  The market town of 
Bentham is also situated within the setting of the Forest of Bowland AONB. 
The three market towns of Skipton, Settle and Bentham are located in river 
valleys bel ow steep sided Pennine uplands and moors.  These valleys have 
long been important transport routes across the Pennines and Craven’s 
central position in the north of England within the Pennines is integral to the 
past growth of its historic settlements.      
2.28 The Craven plan area has a built environment of exc eptional quality with 
many of its historic market towns and villages having a distinctive character 
derived from a blend of the agricultural  character of North Yorkshire with 
Pennine industrial heritage , associated with the building of the Leed s -
Liverpool  Canal, the railways,  early watermills, textile mills and mill workers 
housing.  The attractive historic market town of Settle for instance is notable 
for the survival of its many 17th and 18th century buildings, its steep lanes 
and narrow 'ginnels'  as well  as buildings and structures associated with the 
Settle -Carlisle Railway . The historic market town of Skipton has a unique 
character with its fine medieval buildings and street pattern juxtaposed with 
its textile mills, chimneys and terraced housing  and th e buildings, bridges, 
locks and other structures associated with the Leeds  & Liverpool Canal and 
Thanet Canal . 
2.29 What is also notable  about Craven, is that  there is very little, if any , derelict 
land or buildings within its settlements and many former h istoric mills have 
been conserved and converted for other uses, including housing and 
employment.  Many former contaminated industrial sites have also been 
remediated and redeveloped for housing .  
2.30 The rich heritage of Craven is reflected in the number  of heritage 
designations including  888 Listed Buildings, 31 Scheduled Monuments, 
including the Park Hill Earthwork (Civil War Battery in Skipton), 2 registered 
Parks and Gardens , including Broughton Hall , which is  considered to be the 
best surviving examp le of work by William Andrews Nesfield  and Gledstone 24 
 
 
 Hall, which features a planting scheme by Gertrude Jekyll , and 29 
Conservation Areas.15   
2.31 The plan area is also rich in biodiversity and has a number of biodiversity or 
geodiversity designations of European and national importan ce, including a 
small part of the South Pennine Moors Special Protection Area (SPA) and 
Special Area of Conservation  (SAC) in the south of the plan area and 12 
Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) spread across the whole  plan area.  
There are more than eighty Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation 
(SINC) located across the plan area  and Craven District also has extensive 
areas of Ancient Woodland (186 sites).  
2.32 With such a wealth of natural and built assets, it is  perhaps unsurprising that 
the Craven plan area  is a popular place for people to live, work and visit.  
Recreational opportunities abound with an extensive rights of way network, 
and the national long distance footpath, the Pennine Way passes through the 
area. There are good cycling opportunities  in the area with access to the 
National Cycle Network at Gargrave, Embsay, Giggleswick , Clapham and 
Ingleton .  The Way of the Roses and the Leeds  & Liverpool Canal towpath 
present additional potential for active rec reation and leisure . 
People and Demographics  
2.33 Craven District has a total population of 55, 80116.  About 82% of the total 
District population live in the Craven plan area.17  The population of Craven 
increased by 11% between 1991 and 2011, however when t his growth in 
population is examined in more detail by age group, it is clear that this growth 
in population was not balanced across different age groups.  Over this 
period, the proportion of the population aged 0 -15 increased by 4%  but the 
proportion of those aged 16 -39 reduced by 16.7%.  Older age groups 
                                                           
15 “Heritage Counts 2013” Historic England  
 
16 ONS 2015 Mid - Year Estimate  
17 Craven SA/SEA Scoping Report 2018 para 4.1  25 
 
 
 increased significantly, with those aged 40 -59 increasing by 29.2% and those 
aged 60 and over increasing by 30% .18 
2.34 Official population projections19 indicate that the resident population in 
Craven will  continue to age.  Whilst this may happen in many areas 
throughout the country as people continue to live longer, the projections 
indicate that this is likely to be particularly acute in Craven compared to the 
Yorkshire and Humber region or England as a wh ole.  The percentage of the 
population aged 65+ in Craven is expected to increase from 2 5% in 2014 to 
34% by 2032  (a 9% increase) , with the percentage aged 80+ expected to 
increase from 7% to over 12% (a 5% increase) . This is at a substantially 
higher rate than the expected change in both Yorkshire and Humber and in 
England, where the percentage aged 65+ is projected to increase by 5%, 
and the population aged 80+ by 3%. The 201 4-SNPP statistics  show  
Craven’s median age in 2014 is 49, which is significantly above  the 
Yorkshire and Humber and England’s median average age in 20 14 at 40.20 
2.35 The old age dependency (OAD) ratio measures the relationship between the 
size of the population aged 65+ and the population aged 16 –64. Craven has 
an OAD of 42 in 2014, c ompared to a national average for England of 27.  
This means that the 65+ population of Craven is equivalent to 42% of the 15 -
64 age group population, compared to just 27% across England in 
aggregate.21 In Craven, the OAD is expected to rise over the 2012 t o 203 2 
plan period  from 39 .2 to 66.4 (a change of 27.2).22  
2.36 The ageing of the resident population has important implications for the 
future prospects for Craven as a place to live, work and play and raises 
important issues that the Local Plan Strategy will need to address, including 
effects on the size and structure of the local labour force , the expected profile 
                                                           
18 SHMA 2015 para 4.11 and  Fig 4.1 page 49/50  
19 ONS 2014 - SNPP  
20 Edge Analytics –Craven Demographic Forecasting Update October 2016 Fig 6, page 8  
21 Edge Analytics –Craven Demographic Forecasting U pdate October 2016 Fig 6, and para 2.14, page 8  
22 Edge Analytics –Craven Demographic Forecasting Update October 2016 Fig 19, para 4.17, page 25  26 
 
 
 of future household formation , the balance and mix of Craven’s communities , 
issues of loneliness and isolation, fuel poverty  and effects on th e provision of 
services .  
Housing  
2.37 House prices in Craven  (as in many places elsewhere in the UK)  have 
increased significantly over the period 2000  to 201 5.  Median house prices in 
2000  were £ 70,000, but by 201 6 median house prices were £1 89,475, an 
increase of 1 70.7%.23 When compared to the seven other district authority 
areas  within North Yorkshire ,  Craven is the fifth least affordable district 
(after York) with a house price to median income ratio of 7. 7 . Similarly, the 
lower quartile income to low er quartile house prices ratio is 7.7.24 A recent 
study shows that there is an annual net imbalance of 1 26 affordable 
dwellings  in Craven  District as a whole, with most of this need (8 7.3%) for 1 
and 2 bedroomed dwellings.25 
2.38 There are a total of 2 7,800  dwellings in Craven District of which 938 are 
vacant, resulting in a total of 2 6,862 occupied dwellings . The overall vacancy 
rate is 3.4% which compares with a vacancy rate of 2. 6% across England26. 
2.39 The vast majority of the dwelling stock in Craven are houses (90.8%) with 
flats/apartments only making up 9.2% of the dwelling stock.  In terms of 
dwelling size, most dwellings (63.6%) are three bedrooms or more, 28.6% 
are two bedroomed and only 7.7% are one bedroomed.27 
2.40 With respect to tenure of propert ies, 73.1% of properties are owned, with 
17.4% of properties privately rented and 9.5% of properties as affordable rent 
or shared ownership.28    
 
 
                                                           
23 SHMA 2017 para 3.12, Fig 3.1, page 28/29  
24 SHMA Dec 2016 Tables 4.6 and 4.7, page 47  
25 SHMA 2017  para 7.9 pag e 87 and Table 7.2, page 88  
26 SHMA 2017 para 5.9 page 69 and Table 5.1b page 71  
27 SHMA 2017 paras 4.5 and 4.6 and Table 4.2,  page 38/39  
28 SHMA 2017 Fig 4.4 page 45  27 
 
 
 Key Issues – Craven Plan Area  
2.41 Arising from the context of the Craven plan area, the following key issues  
have been identified:  
 
 Falling resident workforce : The existing housing stock is increasingly 
occupied by one or two person older/retired households.  The area is also 
attractive to families, so new housing would help to enable younger 
households to move to Craven  and access the housing market which will 
help to rebalance the age profile of the area ; maintain mixed and 
balanced communities with access to services  and improve the supply of 
local labour for businesses.  The provision of smaller properties wi ll also 
enabl e older households to downsize and free up larger housing units.  
 
 Affordable housing need :  House prices and rents relative to local 
incomes are high .  In common with many parts of the UK, house prices 
have not readjusted relative to wages sin ce the price rises of the 2000s.  
This has resulted in considerable affordable housing need  
 
 Greenfield Development : The limited supply of brownfield land means 
that to meet o bjectively assessed  development needs, greenfield sites will 
be required for dev elopment . 
 
 High Quality Environment  : Meeting objectively assessed development 
needs will need to be reconciled with the appropriate protection of the 
plan area’s outstanding environment, including its natural and historic 
assets.  
 
 Employment land : Demand  from local business for space to grow and 
limited serviced employment land available . 
 
 Transport : There are opportunities for improved connectivity and 
economic links with Lancashire and West Yorkshire via road and rail 
networks.  
 
 
 
 
 28 
 
 
 SECTION 3: SUSTAINAB LE DEVELOPMENT  
VISION FOR C RAVEN IN 2032 
Following a  period of  sustaina ble growth and change  in Craven, there  is a 
greater  equali ty amongst its communiti es in terms of hou sing choice,  better 
paid lo cal job opp ortunities, mo re oppor tunities for pursuing  a healthy and 
active life style and acc ess to services upon which residen ts, of all a ges, 
depend. Cra ven is  a distincti ve and at tractive place to live, work and visit, 
offering a fulfilling and vibrant communi ty life. 
Most n ew homes  are situated  within  and around market towns and villages 
(on previously developed l and where it has been  possible and appro priate), 
between extensi ve public open  spaces, connecting people  to the 
coun tryside and cr eating corrido rs for  wildlife. The location, design  and 
sustainable co nstruction of  these new hom es, along  with busine ss 
premises and o ther commer cial enterpri ses has reduced carbon emis sions, 
fuel poverty and waste and r espects the distincti ve character and he ritage  
of their surroundings,  reinforcing a ‘sense of pl ace’.  The new homes have 
good access by  walking, cycling, public trans port and car to l ocal facilities, 
empl oyment  areas, town centres and the coun tryside.  
New well conn ected and ser viced emplo yment  locations  facilitate 
busin ess creation, gr owth and prod uctivity, and enab le residen ts to work 
locally and ob tain higher salaries. 
Craven’s high quali ty lands cape and tre asured en vironm ental assets  are 
cons erved and are  enjoyed by everyone.  
NOR TH AREA 
The mar ket town of Low and High Bent ham is thriving, f ollowing a peri od of 
sustainab le growth and change  and is  a focus for most n ew homes and 
jobs in the  north are a. New homes and emplo yment  areas in  the smaller 29 
 
 
 centre of Ingl eton are  also helping to  support the North Craven econo my. 
Residents in t he smal ler settlement of Burton-in-Lonsd ale enjoy a vibrant 
communi ty life with good  access to local services. 
In Bentham, new and proportionate development has brought 
environmental and economic improvements securing a sustainable future 
for the spirited working market town.  A n ew park provides recreation, 
cultural and social opportunities for residents and visitors.  The tourism 
economy continues to grow through promotion of Bentham’s location as a 
gateway to the Forest of Bowland Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, and 
the town  is capitalising on its’ rail links to the west coast main line, 
Lancaster, Leeds and Bradford.  
At Ingleton, regeneration opportunities encouraged by new development 
are boosting the tourism economy, based on the area’s rich heritage, 
cultural and environm ental assets, including Ingleton Viaduct, Riverside 
Park and Ingleton Waterfalls. The type and mix of new homes and jobs 
support a balanced local population and a range of facilities serving the 
local community and tourist economy. The village centre provi des a lively 
mix of shops, services, cafes, pubs and restaurants in a stunning setting 
with access to outdoor sports and recreation.  
MID AREA  
The market town of Settle is the focus of most new homes and jobs in the 
mid area supporting a balanced population  that includes working people 
and families. The growth of the town will have been achieved in a manner 
which has retained both its intimate feel and its distinctive character. The 
smaller villages of Clapham, Giggleswick, Rathmell and Hellifield are also 
thriving local communities.  
In Settle, the historic market place and railway station on the world famous 
Settle - Carlisle Railway are the focal points of this well -connected hub for 
the Yorkshire Dales that has a concentration of shops, services, cultural 
facilities, creative businesses and industry. Older residents in particular 30 
 
 
  
 are able to benefit from the town’s intimate feel and large amount of 
facilities for its size.  
SOUTH AREA  
Skipton, the surrounding villages of Gargrave, Carleton, Embsay, Bradley 
and Cononley and the settlements in south Craven of Glusburn, Cross 
Hills, Farnhill, Kildwick, Sutton -in-Craven and Cowling are an ever popular 
location with families due to the winning combination of a high quality local 
environment, good schools and good t ransport links to the Leeds -Bradford 
and Manchester conurbations.  
New, innovative and diversified employment development within high 
quality local environments at Skipton, Cononley and the established 
Broughton Hall Business Park, contribute to the prosper ity of the area and 
the wider city region economy of Leeds and the economy of the York, 
North Yorkshire and East Riding Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP) area. 
The tourism economy is flourishing, based on the area’s rich heritage, 
cultural and environment al assets, such as the Leeds & Liverpool Canal, 
the Embsay with Eastby – Bolton Abbey Steam Railway, Bolton Abbey, the 
Settle -Carlisle Railway, Broughton Hall Estate, Skipton Castle and Woods, 
the Craven Museum and Gallery and the Yorkshire Dales National Park.  
As the largest settlement in the district, Skipton is the main focus for 
growth in Craven. New public open spaces and family facilities mean that 
the town centre continues to thrive.  Residents, workers and visitors alike 
appreciate the blend of stre et markets, independent shops, national 
retailers and a wide range of other essential services in a historic setting of 
townscape and landscape.  Skipton also offers a broad range of 
employment opportunities, along with a diverse evening economy and 
cultur al offer.  31 
 
 
 PLAN OBJECTIVES  
PO1: Achieve patterns of development supported by adequate and 
appropriate infrastructure which:  
 Make best use of available resources  
 Promote sustainable travel movements  
 Nurture high quality environments and community life  
 Promote health, wellbeing and equality.  
  
PO2: Conserve and enhance the high quality local environment including 
reinforcing the distinctive character of Craven’s towns, villages, green 
infrastructure , biodiversity, ecological networks  and cultural heritage.  
 
 PO3: Conserve and enhance the character and settings of Craven’s 
landscapes and the special qualities of the protected landscapes of the Forest 
of Bowland AONB and the Yorkshire Dales National Park.  
 
PO4: Maintain a continuous supply of housing land to meet housing needs 
throughout the plan period.  
  
PO5: Improve housing choice in terms of house type, size, tenure, price and 
location.  
  
PO6: Enhance the vitality of market towns and larger village centres and 
improve the provision of local community servi ces and facilities in smaller 
settlements.  
  32 
 
 
 PO7: Provide sufficient and suitable employment land to enable businesses 
to grow and enhance their productivity and identify locations for new and 
diversified employment development related to a high quality lo cal 
environment, the tourism economy and cultural opportunities.  
  
PO8: Address and mitigate flood risk as a response to climate change and as 
a barrier to local economic growth.  
  
PO9: Encourage renewable forms of energy generation where appropriate to 
reduce carbon emissions, waste and water use arising from local 
development.  
  
PO10: Achieve the diversification and growth of the rural based and farming 
economy.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 33 
 
 
 Presumption in Fav our of Sustainable Development and Meeting 
the Challenge of Clim ate Change  
3.1 The principal aim of the Local Plan is to promote sustainable de velopment in 
Craven.   The purpose of the two policies SD1 and SD2 below is to embrace 
three  key planning principles and embed them in the Craven Local Plan:  
a) The presumption in favour of sustainable development as defined in the 
National Planning Policy Framework.  
b) The statutory requirement for decision taking in Section 38(6) of the 
Planning and Compulsory  Purchase Act 2004, which states that the statutory 
Development Plan must be the starting  point in the consideration of planning 
applications for the development or use of land.  
c) The statutory requirement of section 19 (1A) of the Planning and 
Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 which states that development plan 
documents must (taken as a whole) include policies designed to secure that 
the development and use of land in the local planning authority's area 
contribute to the mitigation of, and adaptation to, climate change.  
 
POLICY SD1: THE PRESUMPTION IN FAVOUR OF SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT  
The Craven local plan provides a positive planning framework for 
guiding development and change in Craven in line with national 
planning policy. At the heart of the local plan is the aim to deliver 
sustainable growth.  
The council will take a posit ive and proactive approach to the 
consideration of development proposals that reflects the 
presumption in favour of sustainable development that is contained 
in the national planning policy framework (NPPF).  
The council will take a proactive approach and w ill work co -34 
 
 
 operatively with people and organisations wishing to carry out 
development and applying for planning permission, to find solutions 
to secure sustainable development that meets relevant plan policies 
and can be approved wherever possible.  
Develo pment that accords with the provisions of the local plan (and 
neighbourhood plan where applicable) will be approved unless 
material considerations indicate otherwise.  
Where the local plan (or neighbourhood plan where applicable) is 
silent, or where relevan t policies have become out of date, proposals 
for development will be approved, unless there are sound planning 
reasons why development should not be approved, taking into 
account whether:  
a) any adverse impacts of development would outweigh the 
benefits, whe n assessed against the national planning policy 
framework (taken as a whole); or  
b) specific  policies in the national planning policy framework 
indicate that development should be restricted.  
 
 
 
POLICY SD2: MEETING THE CHALLENGE OF CLIMATE CHANGE  
The Craven local plan adopts proactive strategies to mitigate and 
adapt to climate change, when guiding developmental change in 
Craven in line with national planning policy. The local plan supports 
the move to a low carbon future, and in this regard the local plan: - 
1) proposes new development in locations which reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions, and adopts a spatial strategy which 
provides for such a spatial framework;  35 
 
 
 2) proposes new development in locations of low flood risk;  
3) actively supports energy efficiency improvement s to existing 
buildings, and  
4) supports renewable and low carbon technologies.  
The local plan takes account of climate change over the long term, 
including factors such as flood risk, water supply and changes to 
biodiversity and landscape. New development wi ll be planned to 
reduce vulnerability to the range of impacts arising from climate 
change. When new development is brought forward in areas which 
may be vulnerable, care will be taken to ensure that risks can be 
managed through suitable adaptation measures , including through 
the planning of green infrastructure.  
Inappropriate development in areas at risk of flooding will be 
avoided by directing development away from areas at highest risk. 
However, where development is necessary, the local plan provisions 
will accommodate the development safely without increasing flood 
risk elsewhere. The Local Plan is supported by a Strategic Flood 
Risk Assessment for Craven, and individual planning applications 
will be required to be accompanied by a Flood Risk Assessment f or 
the site and its surrounds where necessary. The assessment of 
planning applications will take account of advice from the 
Environment Agency and other relevant flood risk management 
bodies, such as lead local flood authorities and internal drainage 
board s. 
The Local Plan will apply a sequential, risk -based approach to the 
location of development, to reduce flood risk to people and property 
and manage any residual risk, taking account of the impacts of 
climate change, by:  
a) applying the Sequential Test;  36 
 
 
 b) if necessary, applying the Exception Test;  
c) safeguarding land from development that is required for current 
and future flood management;  
d) using opportunities offered by new development to reduce the 
causes and impacts of flooding;  
e) seeking opportunities to facil itate the relocation of development, 
including housing, in areas where climate change is expected to 
increase flood risk, to more sustainable locations.  
The local plan, through its policies, seeks mitigation of climate 
change by promoting the reduction of the need to travel, providing 
for more sustainable modes of transport and providing opportunities 
for renewable and low carbon energy technologies. It provides 
opportunities for decentralised energy and heating, and promotes 
low carbon design approaches to  reduce energy consumption in 
buildings.  
In terms of adapting to climate change, the local plan considers 
future climate risks when allocating development sites to ensure 
risks are understood over the development’s lifetime, in addition to 
considering the impact of and promoting design responses to flood 
risk. The local plan also considers the availability of water and water 
infrastructure for the lifetime of the development and design 
responses to promote water efficiency and protect water quality. The 
local plan promotes adaptation approaches in design policies for 
developments and the public realm.  
 
 
 
 
 37 
 
 
 SECTION 4: STRATEGIC POLICIES AND SPATIAL STRATEGY  
4.1 The local plan provides a policy framework that seeks to meet the policy 
objectives identified at PO1 – PO10. These objectives are informed by the 
context , background and issues for Craven which is presented at Section  2 
of the plan.  
MEETING HOUSING NEED  
4.2 The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) requires local planning 
authorities use their ev idence base to ensure that  (unless there are robust 
grounds why not ), when setting their local plan housing requirement it will 
meet the full objectively assessed needs for market and affordable housing in 
their area.  
4.3 In 2014, the Court of Appeal held that the provisions of the NPPF require a 
two stage approach to be followed by local planning authorities when 
identifying a housing requirement in a local plan (Solihull MBC v Gallagher 
Estates Ltd (2014) EWCA Civ 1610).  
4.4 The first stage involves esta blishing the full objectively assessed need for 
housing (FOAN) which disregards policy considerations and other matters 
such as planning constraints and land availability.  The second stage 
involves the consideration of policy and other considerations whic h may 
justify a housing requirement in a local plan which is lower or higher than the 
FOAN.  
4.5 In accordance with the NPPF and the National Planning Practice Guidance 
(NPPG) the Council has produced an evidence base which has established 
the full objectiv ely assessed need for housing in the Craven District from 
2012 to 2032.   
This is provided by the following documents:  
 Craven Local Plan Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) 
November 2017  Update  38 
 
 
  Craven Local Plan Demographic Forecasting Update  :Adden dum 
November 2017  
4.6 The changing demography of the District such as population and age 
structure impacts strongly on the housing market and the type and quantity of 
housing required.  The household change forecast scenarios produced in the 
demographic re search reports have been applied in the SHMA.  Economic 
forecasts were also used in these documents to identify what level of housing 
might be needed to support the estimated jobs growth in the District.   
4.7 Following an analysis of these scenarios, the SHMA has concluded that the 
full objectively assessed housing need for housing from 2012 to 2032:  
 for the Craven District as a whole , which includes part of the Yorkshire 
Dales National Park, is 242 dwellings per annum ( 4,840 dwellings), and  
 for the Craven  Local Plan Area , which excludes the Yorkshire Dales 
National Park, is  206 dwellings per annum ( 4,120 dwellings)  
4.8 Housing delivery in the area is complicated by the division of Craven District 
and the local housing market area (HMA) into two local plan ning authorities, 
Craven District Council and the Yorkshire Dales National Park Authority 
(YDNPA).    The YDNPA adopted its Local Plan in December 2016 and is 
seeking to more than meet its FOAN for the National Park as a whole.   
4.9 Hence for the purposes  of meeting the requirements of paragraph 47 of the 
NPPF, the FOAN for the preparation of the Craven Local Plan is the 
provision of 4,120 new dwellings between 2012 and 2032 equating to an 
annual average of 206 dwellings.  
4.10 The second stage of the proc ess of setting a housing requirement for the 
Craven Local Plan, as stated above, has been undertaken in the Craven 
Local Plan Housing Growth Options Paper.  This background paper 
comprises the original paper published alongside the Summer 2017 Pre - 
Publica tion Draft Plan and an addendum published alongside th e Publication 
Draft Plan.    39 
 
 
  4.11 The combination of these documents has meant that the plan preparation 
process has assessed 8 housing growth options in order to seek to establish 
the most appropriate  when considered against reasonable alternatives.  This 
is in accordance with paragraph 182 of  the NPPF.  Determined through this 
process, the most appropriate housing requirement for the Local Plan is 230 
dwellings per annum (dpa); 4,600 dwellings in tota l between 2012 and 2032.  
4.12 This housing requirement will more than meet the FOAN of the plan area of 
206 dpa.    
4.13 Based on the latest jobs growth forecasts for Craven District, the plan’s 
housing delivery requirement will provide a sufficient labour  force to support 
the latest economic forecasts.  The employment land requirement set out in 
Policy SP2 of this plan is in alignment with the demographic scenario used to 
derive the FOAN and the housing requirement.  
4.14 The SHMA 2017 Update identifies a need for 126 dpa affordable homes 
across the HMA (Craven District).  Plan preparation has considered whether 
the Local Plan could be expected to fully meet the need for affordable 
housing.   The viability of providing for a proportion of market housing, al ong 
with other planning obligations, for affordable housing has been assessed.  
The minimum proportion for affordable housing that should be required on 
greenfield sites has been assessed as 30%.  This is evidenced in the Craven 
Local Plan Viability Assess ment Addendum: (November 2017).   This 
proportion means that the 230 dpa housing requirement will not meet the full 
need for affordable housing.  However, the higher growth options assessed 
in the Local Plan Housing Growth Options Paper have been rejected 
because of their conflict with the plan’s spatial strategy and the significant 
uncertainty over their deliverability.  It is estimated that just less than 60% of 
the Craven District’s affordable housing need would be met from new 
housing provision in this plan and the Yorkshire Dales National Park Plan 
(2016).  In addition to this provision the Council seeks to increase the 
provision of affordable housing through its action plans and strategies and on 
all opportunity sites, including existing properties.  40 
 
 
 4.15 For example, Priority 4 of the Council’s Housing Action Plan 2015/16 seeks 
to return empty properties into use and promote opportunities to registered 
providers to acquire/lease and refurbish/renovate empty properties.   
4.16 Furthermore, the York, Nort h Yorkshire and East Riding Housing Action Plan 
2015/16 seeks to maximise delivery of affordable housing via planning 
obligations and other means.  This Action Plan proposes to achieve this 
objective through the establishment of a York, North Yorkshire and  East 
Riding Local Enterprise Partnership wide Registered Provider (RP) forum 
and identify and engage with RPs not active in the area to promote potential 
opportunities. This Action Plan also seeks to identify and use opportunities to 
re-develop or re -use existing residential or commercial property for new 
housing.  
4.17 Finally, the York, North Yorkshire and East Riding Housing Strategy 2015 - 
2021 provides the overall strategic basis for these action plans and at this 
strategic level seeks to continue to ma ke the best use of existing stock and 
increase the supply of good quality new homes across all tenures and 
locations in line with Local Plans.      
4.18 The delivery of an annual average of 230 dpa over the plan period will be a 
challenge.   However with t he Local Plan allocating land for more housing 
than the 4,600 housing requirement; with no proposed phasing for the 
development of these sites; and with a good proportion of these sites 
available for development in the first five years of the plan period, there is 
good reason to be optimistic on delivery.   Furthermore, the Council initiative 
‘Great Place’, to attract younger people into the District, and the recent 
development partnership the Council has agreed with Barnfield Property 
Investment Ltd to pro mote and facilitate housing development schemes 
across the plan area, will make  an important contribution to delivering the 
right number of dwellings in the right places for the right people.    
 
 41 
 
 
 POLICY SP1: MEETING HOUSING NEED  
To meet the housing needs of Craven, provision is made for 4,600 net 
additional dwellings in the plan area over the period 1 April 2012 to 31 
March 2032.  This is a minimum  provision and equates to an annual  
average housing requirement of 230 net additional dwellings per 
annum.   
The housing requirement will be provided through all of the following: - 
a) Net dwellings completed since 1 April 2012;  
b) Sites with planning permission or under construction;  
c) New site allocations identified in the local plan at Policies SP5, SP6,  
SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10 and SP11 in accordance with the distribution 
strategy set out at Policy SP4;  
d) Housing allowance for Tier 5 settlements, open countryside and 
small sites across the plan area identified in accordance with the 
distribution strategy set out a t Policy SP4.  
Housing Monitoring shows that 924 net dwellings have been 
completed between 1 April 2012 and 31 March 2018, the balance of the 
housing provision for the remainder of the plan period to be provided 
through b), c) and d) above is therefore 3676  net additional dwellings  
 
 
ECONOMIC GROWTH  
4.19 The delivery of new housing in Craven will also need to be balanced with the 
approach to facilitating economic growth and providing employment 
opportunities for residents and entrepreneurs.  
4.20 To assist the Council in reaching a determination of the appropriate level of 
employment land that may need to be allocated in the Local Plan to align 42 
 
 
 with the housing needs of the plan area, consultants Lichfields (formerly 
Nathaniel Lichfield & Partners ) were comm issioned to undertake a n 
Employment Land Review  (ELR March 2017  and ELR Addendum  November  
2017 .)   
4.21 Lichfields considered five different scenarios of future employment space 
requirements , based on a number of approaches which reflect economic 
growth (E xperian, REM); past development trends and potential labour 
supply scenarios (using three different dwelling requirements adapted from 
the SHMA  2017). 
4.22  In summary, the range of employment land requirements resulting from the 
five scenarios  (including an allowance for a margin of choice and the 
replacement of losses ) is between 27ha and 32ha.   
4.23 The SHMA 2017 indicates that the housing OAN for the Craven Local Plan 
area is 20 6 dwellings per annum, therefore a figure of 32ha at the top of the 
range i s likely to be required for housing needs and employment land needs 
to be reasonably aligned.    
4.24 The Employment Land Review (March 2017) compared the realistic range of 
employment land requirement against the existing supply of employment 
space in Crav en29  The Council has also assessed (using the assessment 
methodology of the ELR) an additional existing employment site at Ingleton, 
as being suitable for inclusion within the existing supply of employment 
space and is safeguarded under Policy EC2.  Table 1 below sets out the 
range of employment land requirement and the existing supply of 
employment space in Craven together with the surplus/shortfall that exists.  
 
 
                                                           
29 Lichfields – Craven Employment Land Review and Future Requirements for Economic Growth Ma rch 2017 
Table 8.2, para 8.19 page 64  43 
 
 
 Table 1 Demand/Supply Balance (ha)  
Requirement for B Class Space (ha)  27 - 32 
Existing Supp ly of Employment Space (net) (ha)  16.12 
Surplus (+) Shortfall ( -) (ha)  -10.88 to -15.88 
 
4.25 As Table 1 above shows, there is a shortfall of about 11 to 16 hectares of 
employment land to meet the realistic range of employment land requirement 
for the pl an period 2012 to 2032.  
4.26 The evidence suggests that the realistic range of employment land 
requirement is relatively narrow ( 5ha), but it is considered appropriate to 
indicate a minimum level of provision to ensure that the Local Plan strategies 
for housing and economic growth are aligned and complementary to deliver a 
balanced pattern of growth in Craven over the period 2012 to 2032 . To 
achieve this, Policy SP2 proposes that a minimum of 32ha of employment 
land for B Class Uses be provided in the plan  area in accordance with the 
overall growth strategy set out a t Policy SP4.  
4.27 This is not to say that economic growth should be confined to land 
allocations or  existing sites and commitments  identified in the plan. In line 
with Policy SD1 and the presum ption in favour of sustainable development, 
proposals for economic related development/employment generating uses on 
unidentified sites that accord with the spatial strategy will be supported 
subject to a number of criteria. See Policies SP 2, EC1 , EC2 and EC3.  
4.28 As well as identifying suitable employment land the local plan seeks to 
facilitate economic growth in the plan area by supporting measures to 
improve  the transport connectivity  of the plan area with the wider Leeds City 
Region , North Yorkshire,  Lancashire, Cumbria and Greater Manchester , 
including the potential re -instatement of the Skipton to Colne railway line to 
meet the strategic transport priorities of the North Yorkshire Local Transport 44 
 
 
 Plan ( LTP4) 2016 to 2045 ,  and the potential re-openi ng of Cross  Hills 
Railway Station to contribute to the aims of the HS2 Growth Strategy of the 
West Yorkshire Combined Authority  to improve the wider rail network serving 
the Leeds City Region.  
POLICY SP2: ECONOMIC ACTIVITY AND BUSINESS GROWTH  
The local eco nomy will grow, diversify and generate new employment 
and productivity opportunities. This will be achieved by:  
a) Making provision for a minimum of 32 hectares gross of 
employment land over the plan period for B1, B2 and B8 Uses 
through:  
i) Safeguarding existin g employment land  and existing 
employment land commitments for B1, B2 and B8 uses (in 
Policy EC2); and  
 
ii) Allocating 15.6 ha gross of additional employment land for B1, 
B2 and B8 Uses in Skipton (Policy SP5), Settle (Policy SP6) and 
Ingleton (Policy SP9)  
 
b) Supporting sustainable economic activity within towns, villages and 
the rural areas, including the sustainable growth of the existing 
employment cluster at Broughton Hall Business Park;  
 
c) Supporting enhanced transport connectivity with the wider Leeds 
City Re gion, North Yorkshire , Lancashire, Cumbria and Greater 
Manchester.  This includes :- 
i) capacity and congestion mitigation improvements ; 
ii) pedestrian and cycle links to enhan ced public transport 
facilities;  
iii) protection of the original double track route of the Sk ipton to  
Colne railway line for future rail transport use as  identified on 
the policies map, and  
iv)  support for the re -opening of former Cross  Hills Railway Station 
by safeguarding land at the former railway station from other 
forms of development, as ident ified on the policies map.   
Individual development proposals will be considered under Policy 
EC1: Employment & Economic Development  
 45 
 
 
 HOUSING MIX AND DENSITY  
4.29 The local plan seeks to create better places, meet housing requirements and 
the needs of a range of residents, ensure that the right housing is delivered, 
and land is used in an effective and efficient manner . A flexible policy to 
guide housing mix and density will help to achieve this by ensuring that the 
general thrust of housing provision mat ches identified needs as closely as 
possible, even though density and mix may vary from site to site.  
4.30 The NPPF (para 50), expects local authorities to identify the size, type, 
tenure and range of housing that is required in particular locations, refle cting 
local demand . In response, the Council’s latest Strategic Housing Market 
Assessment (SHMA)  Update  2017 provides the following general view on the 
overall housing mix the local population is likely to need over the plan period:  
SHMA Update 2017  
Sugges ted dwelling mix by market and affordable dwellings (Page 89, Table 7.3)  
Overall dwelling 
size mix  Market (%)  Affordable (%)  Overall (%)  
1/2 Beds  18.9 87.4 39.4 
3 Beds  57.3 11.8 43.7 
4 Beds  23.8 0.8 16.9 
This overall mix assumes a broad tenure split o f 70% market and 30% 
affordable.  
4.31 The mix of housing to be planned for is likely to influence the density  of 
housing to be planned for, because smaller homes tend to produce higher 
densities and larger homes lower densities.  This relationship between 
housing mix and housing density is explored in the Council’s background 
paper “Approaching Housing Density and Mix” (February 2017).  
4.32 Based on the SHMA’s general view on the overall mix of housing needed, 
the background paper would suggest that 32 dwel lings per hectare (dph) 46 
 
 
 (net)30 is an appropriate general guide to the overall density of housing that 
should be planned for. This guiding  density figure should be broadly 
applicable across the plan area, although proposals for brownfield 
development with a  significant element of conversion (which are likely to be 
in the minority) should be approached individually in terms of their housing 
mix and density.  
4.33 On sites allocated for development under Policies SP5 to SP11, proposals 
will be expected to accor d with Policy SP3, below, unless the policy is 
superseded by site -specific requirements  set out in the development  
principles. Schemes with lower or higher densities or mix proportions may be 
acceptable and justified where it is demonstrated that the propo sals meet 
local plan objectives or deliver sustainable forms of development.  
4.34 In determining planning applications, the council will have regard to the 
overall need to deliver a mix and range of house types and sizes and will 
have regard to the most u p to date evidence of need/demand from the SHMA 
and any other sources, such as the local Housing Register (which is a 
continually updated waiting list for rented affordable housing).  Where 
applicants propose a mix of housing that does not appear to take a ccount of 
identified needs, they will be expected to provide credible reasons and robust 
evidence to support their proposals.  
4.35 Policy SP3, which follows, will help to guide the mix and density of new 
homes provided in Craven, in order to promote balanc ed mixed communities 
and to ensure that overall provision matches overall needs as closely as 
possible, land resources are used effectively and efficiently, and proper 
account is taken of evidence, scheme viability and site -specific 
circumstances.  
                                                           
30 32dph (net) includes dwellings, garages, gardens and parking spaces; a nominal allowance for access roads; 
and public open space (POS) at a rate of 43 sqm per dwelling to cover all POS typologies, in line with 
recomm endations from the Council’s Assessment of Open Space, Playing Pitch and Sport Facilities (February 
2016).  47 
 
 
  
POLICY SP3: HOUSING MIX AND DENSITY  
 
The mix and density of new housing developments will ensure that 
land is used in an effective and efficient manner to address local 
housing needs. This will be achieved in the following ways:  
 
a) The local planning authority w ill require new housing developments 
to provide an appropriate mix of housing having regard to the 
dwelling size and mix recommended in the SHMA, its successor or 
other appropriate and up to date evidence of local housing need.  
 
b) The local planning autho rity will require new housing developments 
to be developed at appropriate densities, which make effective and 
efficient use of land and have regard to local and site -specific 
circumstances. In typical greenfield developments or in brownfield 
developments w ith no significant element of conversion, the 
appropriate housing density should be approximately 32 dwellings 
per hectare (net).  
 
c) The local planning authority will be flexible in its requirements for 
housing mix and density where this is necessary to e nsure scheme 
viability, to take account of local variations in housing need, to 
better promote balanced mixed communities or to achieve other 
local plan objectives.  
 
 
 
 
 
 48 
 
 
 SPATIAL STRATEGY AND HOUSING GROWTH  
4.36 In arriving at the preferred spatial strate gy, consideration has been given to 
the roles of settlements, their respective functions and level of services and 
consideration of their ability to accommodate growth and improve the mix of 
housing.  
Settlement Hierarchy  
4.37 The market town of Skipton is the largest town in the District and plan area 
(by a considerable margin) , located in the south of the plan area in the 
strategic ‘Aire Gap’ through the Pennines linking Yorkshire with Lancashire. It 
contains the administrative functions of the District Co uncil and is the base 
for a range of North Yorkshire County Council services. Skipton has the 
largest town centre, offers the widest range of employment opportunities, 
goods and services in the District and plan area and is well connected with 
the A road n etwork and rail network.  Skipton is therefore identified as a Tier 1 
Principal Town Service Centre in the settlement hierarchy.  
4.38 The market towns of Settle  and Bentham , and the villages of Glusburn/Cross  
Hills, Ingleton and Gargrave are all smaller set tlements than Skipton.  
However, the market towns of Settle and Bentham serve a wide rural 
hinterland in the mid and north sub areas  of Craven and this  elevate s their 
role and function in the settlement hierarchy to Tier 2 Key Service Centres.  
4.39 Glusbur n/Cross  Hills, Ingleton and Gargrave ,whilst acting as local service 
centres , do not have as substantial  or wide  a role in the plan area as Settle 
or Bentham , or as in the case of Glusburn/Cross  Hills, are not subject to the 
levels of constraint that limit s their development potential.  As such 
Glusburn/Cross  Hills, Ingleton and Gargrave perform a tertiary role in the 
settlement hierarchy as Tier 3 Local Service Centres .  
4.40 At the next level, are villages with basic services and some of these are 
bisecte d by the Yorkshire Dales National Park boundary.  They are Tier 4 
settlements and they provide a minor service role within the rural areas.  
Smaller villages and hamlets fall within Tier 5 of the settlement hierarchy.  49 
 
 
 Their service role is generally limit ed to the residents of the settlement itself 
and the local rural community.  Tier 5 settlements are all those villages and 
hamlets in the plan area which have 15 or more residential properties closely 
grouped together and not classified as a Tier 4 settlem ent and above. 
Villages and hamlets which do not have this level of closely grouped 
buildings relate more to the countryside than a built up area.   
4.41 The settlements included in the settlement hierarchy a re presented in Table 
2 below:  
Table 2 – Settlem ent Hierarchy  
Tier  Role and Function  Settlement  
1 Principal Town Service Centre  Skipton  
2 Key Service Centres  High and Low Bentham,  
 Settle  
3 Local Service Centres  Gargrave  
Glusburn and Cross  Hills 
Ingleton  
4a Villages with Basic Services  Burton -in –Lonsdale  
Carleton  
Cononley  
Cowling  
Farnhill and Kildwick  
Hellifield  
Low Bradley  
Sutton -in-Craven  
4b Villages with Basic Services 
Bisected by Yorkshire Dales 
National Park boundary  Bolton Abbey  
Clapham  
Embsay  
Giggleswick  
Long Preston  50 
 
 
 5 Small villages  and hamlets  Broughton, Bell Busk, Coniston Cold, 
Draughton, Eastby (bisected by 
Yorkshire Dales National Park 
boundary), East Marton, Halton East, 
Kildwick Grange, Lothersdale, Lower 
Westhouse, Newby, Rathmell, Stirton 
(bisected by Yorkshire Dales National 
Park boundary), Thornton -in-Craven, 
Tosside, West Marton and 
Wigglesworth.  
 
Distribution of Growth  
4.42 To meet the aims and objectives of th e local plan and to respond to the 
issues identified in it and in the underpinning evidence,  the following spatial 
strategy for the distribution of growth will deliver sustainable patterns of 
development in Craven. A number of alternatives have been considered and 
assessed in the Sustainability Appraisal (SA)  and were subject to 
consultation in April/May 2016  and June 2 017. The SA conclude d that the 
plan’s spatial strategy  is the most sustainable option to meet the aims and 
objectives identified  and there were no substantive objections to th is spatial 
strategy . 
4.43 Both the settlement hierarchy and growth distribution s trategy recognise the 
primacy of Skipton as the principal town in Craven and focus for growth, 
along with the settlements of Settle and High Bentham as second ary centres 
for growth as  key service centres in the mid and north sub areas.  
4.44 In recognition  of the relative function of settlements, whilst taking account of 
physical constraint s, a lower level of growth is directed towards 
Glusburn/Cross  Hills, Ingleton  and Gargrave, as Tier 3 local service centres .  
4.45 As set out above, Tier 4 settlements co mprise villages with basic services 
(4a) and villages with basic services that are bisected by the YDNP boundary 
(4b). Overall, a limited l evel of growth is directed towards Tier 4 settlements  
(the spatial strategy of the plan, accompanied by its sustainab ility appraisal, 51 
 
 
 supported up to 2.5% of the plan area’s growth for each Tier 4 settlement). 
Allocated growth is not directed to Bolton Abbey and Long Preston as Tier 4b 
settlements  for the following reasons: - 
• The majority of the built settlement of Long  Preston is located within 
the Yorkshire Dales National Park  and no land has been made 
available to allocate growth in the very small part of the village located 
in the Craven Plan area ; 
• Bolton Abbey is not allocated a specific planned level of housing 
growth in the spatial strategy in view of its heritage assets.   Instead, 
limited housing growth is supported by Policy EC4A as part of a 
comprehensive masterplan for additional tourism -led, mixed use 
development at Bolton Abbey.  
4.46 The plan seeks to deli ver limited growth in the Tier 5 settlements which 
comprise small villages and hamlets, some of which have no shops or 
services.  To allow a limited, but proportionate amount of new residential 
development the plan therefore supports around 1.5% of the tot al housing 
growth in the lowest tier of the hierarchy.  About 4.5% of the plan’s total 
housing growth is supported in the countryside and on small sites across the 
plan area.  This reflects the rural nature of the plan area and the number of 
agricultural w orkers dwellings, residential conversions of redundant or 
disused rural buildings, rural affordable housing schemes and small self -build 
projects, as evidenced by past completions.  
4.47 In order to ensure that the plan’s balanced sustainable spatial strate gy is 
implemented, the focus of growth will be through the delivery of the plan’s 
land allocations for housing and employment, and any opportunities that 
come forward during the plan period on previously developed land or other 
appropriate land within Tier  1 to 5 settlements.  However, in the light of the 
spatial strategy’s low levels of growth planned for Tier 5 settlements as a 
whole and their relatively small size, housing proposals within their built up 52 
 
 
 area is to be limited to around 4 dwellings unless  special circumstances 
justify a higher figure.     
4.48 To assist the implementation of the spatial strategy, a sequential preference 
in this policy has been given to the delivery of the plan’s site allocations for 
housing and employment.  A plan led appr oach to town and country planning 
is one of the core principles of the Government’s National Planning Policy 
Framework (NPPF).  This sequential preference seeks to ensure that 
planning for housing in Craven is genuinely plan led.   
4.49 Nevertheless it may still be appropriate to support the release of land for 
housing on land outside a settlement’s main built up area in addition to the 
plan’s land allocations in Tier 1 to 4 settlements.  C ircumstances may change 
in relation to the availability of , and like ly yield from, the plan’s land 
allocations , and planning permissions may lapse due to changed 
circumstances.  If circumstances mean that land will not come forward during 
the plan period, and the planned growth for a settlement is clearly not being 
deliver ed, then other sustainable housing development on land adjoining that 
settlement will , in principle, be supported.  Set out below is how the Council 
will monitor the delivery of each settlements’ planned level of growth.  
4.50 The planned level of growth in  a particular settlement is the amount of 
dwellings which the plan estimates should be built in that settlement by the 
end of the plan period.  This figure is provided in the right hand column of the 
policy table below e.g. Skipton, Settle and Gargrave (2, 300, 501 and 160 
dwellings respectively).  The Council will assess, on a regular basis, usually 
quarterly, the performance of each relevant settlement in meeting its planned 
growth levels.  This assessment will be a ‘live’ document published on the 
Council ’s website.  For each settlement in the plan with a planned level of 
growth, (this excludes Bolton Abbey, Long Preston and Tier 5 settlements) 
the assessment will provide, in a simple tabular form, the latest data and a 
commentary on dwelling delivery.   53 
 
 
 4.51 This monitoring and management of housing growth seeks to ensure that 
each settlement’s sustainable growth is delivered and the plan’s housing 
requirement is met in the event of changed circumstances over the plan 
period.  Furthermore, as referenced in  Section 9: Monitoring, the plan’s 
housing trajectory will be updated on an annual basis in the Council’s 
Authority  Monitoring Report.  
4.52  Rural exception sites in accordance with Policy H2 will also be supported  on 
land outside and well related to the main built up area of Tier 2 to 5 
settlements.  Furthermore, for Tier 1 to 4 settlements, there may be special 
environmental, economic and/or social circumstances that mean the benefits 
of a proposal to the local environment, economy or community indicate land 
release for development on unallocated land  adjoining the main built up area 
should be supported.   Such circumstances might include where a proposal 
makes a significant contribution to addressing a particular housing need 
which cannot be met elsewhere , or where the proposal leads to substantial 
environmental benefits, for example through the re -use of previously 
developed land and buildings.     
4.53 All proposals on unallocated land for new homes on  land adjoining Tier 1  to 4 
settlements will need to accord with all relevant policies of this local plan and 
any ‘made’ neighbourhood plans.  In addition there are criteria that are 
particularly relevant to assess proposals on land adjoining settlements  
against (Policy SP4 I a) to c) and i) to vi)).  These seek to avoid a significant 
increase in the planned level of growth that could undermine the spatial 
strategy and the role of settlements in the settlement hierarchy , and ensure 
that the impact of the proposal on the character and appearance of the 
settlem ent and countryside is acceptable.  Impact on settlement form and 
size are also considered appropriate to assess.  
4.54 The plan does not allocate land for housing in the small Tier 5 settlements.  
These settlements only have access to few or no services an d sustainable 
growth is limited compared to the higher order settlements.  The majority of 54 
 
 
 suitable housing sites in these villages are likely to be below the plan’s 
threshold for allocation (less than 5  dwellings)  and within the settlement’s 
main built up  area.  However, h ousing adjoining the main built up area of 
these settlements is supported in principle where it is an affordable housing 
scheme on a rural exception site in accordance with Policy H2 of the plan.  
4.55 Land not adjoining a Tier 1  to 5 settlements’ main built up area (as defined in 
this policy) and not allocated for development in this plan, will be classified as 
open countryside.  In the open countryside, support for individual housing 
proposals will be limited to th ose which meet the speci al circumstances 
identified in the NPPF and the criteria in this policy.  Compliance with other 
relevant policies of this plan will ensure the local impact of these types of 
proposals will be acceptable.  
 
 
 55 
 
 
  
POLICY SP4: SPATIAL STRATEGY AND HOUSING GROWTH  
 
A sustainable pattern of growth will be promoted to deliver the spatial 
strategy of the plan over the plan period 2012 to 2032.  This will be 
achieved by: - 
 
A. Directing most growth towards Skipton as the Tier 1 settlement 
(Principal Town Service Centre);  
 
B. Directing a level of growth to Settle and Bentham to underpin and 
enhance their roles as Tier 2 settlements (Key Service Centres);  
 
C. Directing a proportionate level of growth to Glusburn/Cross  Hills, 
Gargrave and Ingleton to underpin their roles as Tier 3 se ttlements 
(Local Service Centres);  
 
D. Directing limited growth towards Tier 4a settlements (Villages with 
Basic Services) to sustain their vitality and function;  
 
E. Directing limited growth towards Tier 4b settlements (Villages with 
Basic Services Bisected by the National Park Boundary) to reflect their 
roles as tourism hubs or gateways on the edge of the Yorkshire Dales 
National Park;  
 
F. Directing a low level of growth to Tier 5 settlements and the open 
countryside to support a sustainable, vibrant and healthy r ural 
economy and communities;  
 
G. Delivering growth on sites that have planning permission and sites that 
are allocated for development under Policies SP5 to SP11;  
 
 56 
 
 
  
Tier 1 – 4 
 
H  Supporting proposals for additional housing growth on non - allocated 
land for housing within the main built up area s** of Tier 1, 2, 3, 4a and 
4b settlements provided they accord with all other relevant local plan 
and neighbourhood plan policies;  
 
I. Supporting the release of non -allocated sites for housing that adjoin 
the main bui lt up area** of Tier 1 to 4 settlements where: - 
 
a) it can be demonstrated that the planned growth in the spatial 
strategy for the settlement will not be delivered during the plan 
period, with the exception of  Bolton Abbey (where Policy EC4A of 
this plan p rovides for limited new housing) and Long Preston, or  
b) it is a rural exception site in accordance with Policy H2 of the local 
plan, or  
c) development is justified by special economic, environmental and /or  
social circumstances.  
Proposals justified  unde r a), b) or c) above, will be supported provided  
that they: - 
i)  are consistent with the role and function of the settlement in the   
spatial strategy;  
ii) are proportionate to the size of the settlement;  
iii) are complementary to the settlement’s form, c haracter and   
appearance;  
iv) would conserve the character and appearance of the countryside;  
v) would avoid contributing towards the coalescence of settlements; 
and 
vi) accord with all other relevant local plan policies or neighbourhood 
plan policies.  
 57 
 
 
 Tier 5 
 
J. Supporting proposals for housing within the main built up area** of Tier 
5 settlements which is necessary to maintain a sustainable, vibrant and 
healthy rural economy and communities, provided that the proposal is 
in accordance with criteria I i)  to vi) above and is: - 
 
a) small in scale compared to the size of the settlement and limited to 
around 4 dwellings, unless justified by special economic, 
environmental and/or social circumstances ; or  
b) for an affordable housing rural exception site in ac cordance with 
Policy H2; or  
c) required in order to secure significant improvements to the 
environment or conservation of designated heritage assets; or  
d) justified through the neighbourhood planning process,  and  
e) accords with all other relevant poli cies in the local plan.  
 
Residential Development in the Countryside  
 
K. Limiting proposals for new homes in the countryside away from 
existing  settlements.  Unless permitted by criteria G, I or J above, or 
allocated for alternative uses by other local plan  policies, land outside 
the main built up areas of Tier 1 - 5 settlements will be defined as open 
countryside.  Within the open countryside residential  development will 
be supported provided that : - 
 
a) the proposal would meet an essential n eed for a rural  worker to live 
permanently at or near their place of work in the countryside;  
 
b) the proposal is required in order to secure significant improvements 
to the environment or conservation of a designated heritage asset, 
and such development would represent the optimal viable use of a  58 
 
 
  
heritage asset or would be appropriate enabling development to 
secur e the future of heritage assets;  
 
c) the proposal is for the re -use of one or more redundant or disused 
buildings and would enhance the immediate setting; or  
 
d) the design is of exceptional quality and in accordance with the 
National Planning Policy Framework.  
 
 **The main built up area is defined as the settlement’s closely grouped and 
visually well related buildings and any associated spaces between 
these bu ildings, and excludes:  
 
1. Individual buildings or groups of dispersed buildings or ribbon 
developments which are clearly detached from the main built up 
area of the settlement, and ribbon developments attached to the 
main built up area but where the housing relates more to the 
surrounding countryside than to the main built up area of the 
settlement , and  
 
2. Gardens, paddocks and other undevelop ed land within the curtilage 
of buildings on the edge of the settlement where land relates more 
to surrounding countrys ide than to the main built up area of the 
settlement, and  
 
3.  Agricultural buildings and associated land on the edge of the   
settlement, and  
 
4. Outdoor sports and recreational facilities and other formal open 
spaces on the edge of the settlement.  
 
Guideli nes for the distribution of new dwellings to deliver the spatial 
strategy is set out in the table below: - 59 
 
 
 Tier Settlement  Proportion 
of housing 
growth (%) 
at 230 net 
dwellings 
pa Housing 
Provision 
(Approx 
number of 
NET 
dwellings)  
1 Skipton (Principal Town  Service C entre) 50% 2,300  
2 Settle  (Key Service Centre for mid sub area)  10.9%  501 
2 Low and High Bentham  (Key Service 
Centre for north sub area)  10.9%  501 
3 Glusburn/Cross  Hills (Local Service 
Centre)  3.5%  160 
3 Ingleton  (Local Service Centre)  3.5%  160 
3 Gargrave ( Local Service Centre)  3.5%  160 
 Villages with Basic Services  
4a Burton in Lonsdale  0.4%  18 
4a Carleton  1.2%  55 
4a Cononley  2.5%  115 
4a Cowling  0.8%  37 
4a Farnhill and Kildwick  0.4%  18 
4a Hellifield  0.8%  37 
4a Low Bradley  0.8%  37 
4a Sutton in Craven  1.2%  55 
4b Villages with Basic Services that are bisected by the National Park  
boundary  60 
 
 
  4b Bolton Abbey  0% 0 
4b Clapham  0.8%  37 
4b Embsay  2% 92 
4b Giggleswick  0.8%  37 
4b Long Preston  0% 0 
5 Villages and hamlets    
5 Tier 5 settleme nts: 
Broughton, Bell Busk, Coniston Cold, 
Draughton, Eastby, East Marton, 
Halton East, Kildwick Grange, 
Lothersdale, Lower Westhouse,  
Newby, Rathmell, Stirton (bisected by 
the Yorkshire Dales National Park 
boundary), Thornton -in-Craven, 
Tosside, West Mart on, and 
Wigglesworth.   1.5%  69 
 Open Countryside and Small Sites 
Allowance   4.5%  207 
Spatial Strategy for Housing and Economic Growth – Key Diagram and 
Allocated Sites  
4.56 The strategic policies SP1 to SP4 set out the overall spatial strategy of the  
local plan for housing and economic growth in terms of the scale and 
distribution of housing and employment development to meet objectively 
assessed needs over the plan period 2012 -2032.  The Key Diagram below 
provides a geographic representation of the b road locations of the plan’s 
spatial strategy and land uses identified in the plan policies.  To realise the 
spatial strategy of the local plan, specific allocated sites are identified in 
Policies SP5 to SP11 to deliver the sustainable development that is needed.  
 61 
 
 
  
 
 
62 
 
 
 POLICY SP5: STRATEGY FOR SKIPTON –TIER 1  
 
Skipton is the primary focus for growth and provision is made for the 
following development areas to meet the housing needs, commercial and 
employment space in the town:  
 
Housing Sites:  
 
Site R ef Location Approx. 
Area Approx. 
Yield  
SK013 Land east of Aldersley Avenue and south of Moorview 
Way, Skipton 5.7 100 
SK015 Cefn Glas, Shortbank Road, Skipton 0.4 14 
SK044  
Former allotments and garages,  Broughton Road, 
Skipton 0.6 19 
SK058 Whitakers Chocolate Factory Site, Skipton 0.3 10 
SK060 Business premises and land, west of Firth Street, 
Skipton 1.3 121 
 
SK061  
East of canal, west of Sharpaw Avenue, Skipton   
3.7  
89 
SK081, 
SK082 & 
SK108  
Land north of Gargrave  Road and west of Park Wood 
Drive and Stirtonber, Skipton C3 10.6 
D1 1.8 
  
339 
 
SK087 
  
Land to north of A6131 and south of A65, Skipton  
1.1  
35 
 
 
SK088  
Hawbank Fields north of Otley Road and south of 
A6131, Skipton 
  
8.6  
143 
 
SK089 & 
SK090   
Land to the north of Airedale Avenue & Elsey Cr oft 
and east of railway line, Skipton   
C3 6.8  
 
D1  1.8   
211 
 
 
SK094  
Land bounded by Carleton Road, railway line and 
A629, Skipton 
  
10.5  
99 
 
SK101  
East of Keighley Road and south of Cawder  Lane, 
Skipton  
4  
110 
 
SK114 & 
SK124  
Land to east of North  Parade & Cawder  Road garage 
site, Horse Close, Skipton  
4.6  
112 63 
 
 
  
Total  
 
 
 
  
C3 – 58.2 
 
D1 – 3.6 1402  
 
Mixed Use Regeneration Sites: 
 
 
Site R ef  
Location 
 
 Approx . Area 
(Ha) 
 
SK139  
East and west of Cave ndish Street, Skipton 
  
2 
 
SK140  
Skipton Station Areas A, and B, Carleton New Road, 
Sandylands Business Centre, Skipton 
  
5.6 
 
Total 
  
7.6 
 
Emplo yment  Sites 
 
 
Site R ef  
Location  
Use Class  
Approx . Area 
(Ha) 
 
SK049  
Land east of Skipton bypass, Skipton 
  
B1,B2 and B8  
6 
 
SK113  
Land south of Skipton Auction Mart, 
Skipton 
  
B1,B2 and B8  
3 
 
SK135  
Skipton Rock Quarry, Skipton 
  
B2 and B8  
1.1 
 
Total  
  
10.1 
 
 
Propos als for de velopment  on the sites  identified abo ve will be 
supported sub ject to complian ce with the following Development  
Principles for each site. 
 
 
 
 64 
 
 
 Development Principles for Housing Sites, Regeneration Sites and 
Employment Sites identified in Policy SP5  
Site Ref. Location Uses 
SK013 Land east of Aldersley Avenue and south of  
Moorview Way, Skipton C3 Residential 
Approx. Area : 5.7ha  (including approximately 2.6ha of green infrastructure)  
Approx. Number of Dwellings : 100  
Developme nt Principles: 
 
 An assessment of the site’s archaeological interest will be required with appropriate 
mitigation incorporated into development proposals wh ere necessary.  
 
 Deve lopment propos als for this site will incorporate an area of approximately 2.6ha of green 
infrastructure  in the west, south and south east of the site to provide a buffer to the open 
moorland to the south and east to enhance biodiversity; to provide recreation mitigation for the 
North Pennine Moors Special Protection Area (SPA) and Special Area of Conservation (SAC) and 
to provide a new PROW connection with the existing residential area at Aldersley Avenue 
and the play park to the north west of the site. 
 
 A surface water flood risk hazard has been identified within the western part of the site.  
Development proposals must therefore be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment and 
drainage strategy which has informed the design, layout and lands caping of the site.  
Proposals  will incorporate  Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS),  where  possible. 
 
 The site is in a prominent location on the edge of Skipton. Development proposals will be 
carefully and sensitively designed to minimise visual impact on the character and 
appearance of the area, and include measures to minimise impacts on air quality, noise and 
light pollution. 
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from Moorview Way. A traffic impact assessment will be 
required.  
 
 A Landscape Visual Impact A ssessment (LVIA) is required to assess the likely effects of 
change on the landscape as a result of the development, specifically on views into and out 
of the Yorkshire Dales National Park. The LVIA will help locate and design the 
development so that negat ive landscape effects are avoided, appropriately reduced or 
offset.  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education 
provision an d sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other relevant local plan 
policies.  
 65 
 
 
 Site Ref. Location Uses 
SK015  Cefn Gl as, Sho rtbank Road, Skipton C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 0.4 ha  
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings: 14  
 
Developme nt Principles: 
 An assessment of the site’s archaeological interest will be required with appropriate 
mitigation incorporated into development proposals where necessary.  
 
 The site is in a prominent position on the edge of Skipton. Development proposals will be 
carefully and sensitively designed to minimise visual impact on the character and 
appearance of the area, and include measures to minimise impacts on air quality, noise and 
light pollution.  
 
 A Landscape Visual Impact Assessment (LVIA) is required to assess the likel y effects of 
change on the landscape as a result of the development, specifically on views into and out 
of the Yorkshire Dales National Park. The LVIA will help locate and design the development 
so that negative landscape effects are avoided, appropriately  reduced or offset . 
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from Shortbank Road.  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2 and INF3 (which 
set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing and sport, open spac e and 
recreation facilities) and all other relevant local plan policies.  
 
 
Site Ref. Location Uses 
SK044  Former allotments and garages, Broughton Road, 
Skipton  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 0.6 ha 
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings: 19  
 
Developme nt Principles: 
 
 A fluvial and surface water flood risk hazard has been identified within the southern and 
eastern part of the site. Development proposals must therefore be supported by a Flood 
Risk Assessment and drainage strategy which has informed the design, layout  and 
landscaping of the site.  Proposals will incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (Su DS), 
where possible.  
 
 Air quality, noise pollution and/or light pollution measures to be included in the design and 
layout of the scheme on the site.  66 
 
 
  
 The site is a t own centre site with very good accessibility to key services and public 
transport. Proposals for development will therefore maximise the opportunities for future 
occupiers to walk or cycle to most key services rather than using a private vehicle . 
 
 Access t o the site is to be gained from Niffany Gardens & Station Road.  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education 
provision and sp ort, open space and recreation facilities) and all other relevant local plan 
policies.  
 
 
Site Ref. Location Uses 
SK058  Whitakers Chocolate Factory Site, Skipton  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 0.3 hectares  
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings: 10 
Developme nt Principles: 
 
 Proposals for the redevelopment of this site should preserve or enhance the character or 
appearance of the Skipton Conservation Area. Any redevelopment proposals will be 
required to retain the boundary walls on Upper Union Street.  
 
 An assessment o f the site’s archaeological interest will be required with appropriate 
mitigation incorporated into development proposals where necessary.  
 
 The site is a town centre site with very good accessibility to key services and public 
transport. Proposals for deve lopment will therefore maximise the opportunities for future 
occupiers to walk or cycle to most key services rather than using a private vehicle.  
 
 Air quality, noise pollution and/or light pollution measures to be included in the design and 
layout of the s cheme on the site.  
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from Keighley Road.  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education 
provi sion and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other relevant local plan 
policies.  
 
 
 
 67 
 
 
 Site Ref. Location Uses  
SK060  Business premises and land, west of Firth Street, 
Skipton  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 1.3 ha  
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings: 121 including approximately 23 units from building conversion + 98 
units from new build  
 
Developme nt Principles: 
 
 Proposals for the redevelopment of this site should preserve or enhance the character or 
appearance of the Skipton Conservation Area. The  historic Mill Buildings identified in the 
Heritage Impact Assessments will be retained and converted and the stone boundary wall 
along Firth Street shall also be retained.  
 
 An assessment of the site’s archaeological interest will be required with appropri ate 
mitigation incorporated into development proposals where necessary.  
 
 A surface water flood risk hazard has been identified along the western boundary of the 
site. Development proposals must therefore be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment and 
drainage  strategy which has informed the design, layout and landscaping of the site.  
Proposals will incorporate Sustainable Drainage  Systems (SuDS), where possible.  
 
 Air quality, noise pollution and/or light pollution measures to be included in the design and 
layout of the scheme on the site.  
 
 The site is a town centre site with very good accessibility to key services and public 
transport. Proposals for development will therefore maximise the opportunities for future 
occupiers to walk or cycle to most key services  rather than using a private vehicle.  
 
 Access to the site is  to be gained from Firth Street.  
 
 Measures to enhance the connectivity of the canal corridor for wildlife through the use of 
sensitive planting and low level lighting shall be de signed into any pr oposed scheme.  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education 
provision and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and al l other relevant local plan 
policies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 68 
 
 
 Site Ref. Location Uses 
SK061  East of canal, west of Sharpaw Avenue, Skipton  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 3.7 ha (including approximately 0.9ha of green infrastructure)  
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings: 89  
Developme nt Principles: 
 Siting and design of development on the site to conserve the setting of the conservation 
area, which adjoins the western boundary of the site and includes the Leeds & Liverpool 
Canal corridor.  
 
 An assessment of the site’s archaeological interest will be required with appropriate 
mitigation incorporated into development proposals where necessary.  
 
 Development on this site should be set back from the Leeds & Liverpool Canal to mirror 
the residential development located immediately to the no rth of the site and to create an 
area of green infrastructure of approximately 0.9ha.  A PROW will be created along the 
proposed green infrastructure corridor to promote urban short walks for exercise and 
recreation and to provide pedestrian links from the  site to t he surrounding footpath 
network.  
 
 The site is a town centre site with very good accessibility to key services and public 
transport. Proposals for development will therefore maximise the opportunities for future 
occupiers to walk or cycle to most key services rath er than using a private vehicle.  
 
 A fluvial and surface water flood risk hazard has been identified within the south and 
western part of the site. Development proposals must therefore be supported by a Flood 
Risk Assessment and drainage st rategy which has informed the design, layout and 
landscaping of the site.  Proposals will incorporate Sustainable Drainag e Systems (SuDS) 
where possible.  
 
 The site is in a prominent location. Development proposals will be carefully and 
sensitively designed  to minimise visual impact on the character and appearance of the 
area, and include measures to minimise impacts on air qua lity, noise and light pollution.  
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from Cawder Lane. Access to Cawder Lane from 
Keighley Road is cu rrently taken via the existing Horse Close Bridge, which is restricted 
by its width. Development proposals must therefore demonstrate how vehicular access to 
the site can be gained from a new crossing ov er the Leeds & Liverpool Canal.  
 
 Development proposal s will be required to contribute towards the provision of highway 
improvements, in accordance with Policy INF7, at the following locations:  
a) The A65/Gargrave Road/A629/A59 junction; and  
b) The A6131/A65 junction.  
 
 Measures to enhance connectivity of the canal corridor for wildlife through the use of 
sensitive planting and low level lighting shall be de signed into any proposed scheme.  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and 
INF6 (which set out requirements for contr ibutions towards affordable housing, education 
provision and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other relevant local plan 
policies.  69 
 
 
 Site Ref. Location Uses 
SK081, SK082  
& SK108  
(incorporating 
site SK080a)  Land north of Gargrave Road and  west of Park 
Wood Drive and Stirtonber, Skipton  C3 Residential  
D1 Education  
Approx. Area: 16 ha (including approximately 3.5ha of green infrastructure and 1.8 ha for the 
provision of a new school in Skipton)  
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings: 339  
 
Developm ent Principles: 
 An area of land (1.8ha) in the north east corner of the site is safeguarded for a new 
primary school, unless this identified educational need is met elsewhere in the town.  If 
this safeguarded area is no longer required for a primary school , as determined by the 
Local Education Authority and in accordance with Policy INF6, additional residential 
development will be acceptable in principle subject to meeting other local plan policies.   
 
 This is a greenfield site in a prominent position on th e edge of Skipton, in relatively close 
proximity to the Yorkshire Dales National Park and a SINC. Development proposals for 
this site will incorporate a green infrastructure corridor measuring approximately 3.5ha 
along the north and western boundary of the  site to provide landscape mitigation for the 
Yorkshire Dales National Park, the SINC and the adjoining Skipton Conservation Area.  It 
will also provide new PROW connections with the existing residential area at Rockwood, 
Aireville Park and the Railway Sta tion beyond to deliver recreational walking opportunities 
aimed at relieving pressure on the North Pennine s Special Protection Area (SPA) & 
Special Area of Conservation (SAC).  
 
 The existing tree copses in the south east of the site will be protected, retai ned and 
improved through suitable management in order to retain existing wooded areas within 
the site and along the Gargrave Road approach into Skipton.  
 
 Landscaping will be provided along the eastern boundary in order to lessen the impact of 
development o n existing residents on the Rockwood Estate, and to provide opportunities 
for pedestrian links to the existing PROW network.  
 
 Development proposals on this site will incorporate the maintenance and restoration of 
the existing stone boundary walls and tree copses on the site in order to retain the 
existing landscape character of the site.  
 
 An area of land to the south of the site adjacent to Gargrave Road is designated as a 
Local Green Space designation (LGS) in Policy ENV10, therefore any proposed 
developme nt scheme will be designed to ensure that this area of land is retained as open 
land and that development proposals comply with the provisions of Policy ENV10.  
 
 The siting and design of development on the site to conserve the setting of the Skipton 
Conserv ation Area, which adjoins the site to the south and south west of the site.  
 
 Proposals must demonstrate that development along the south west edge of the site 
would not have an urbanising effect on the setting of the Skipton Conservation Area by 
retaining the existing open aspect of the area proposed as LGS, immediately south of the 70 
 
 
 site. 
 
 An assessment of the site’s archaeological interest will be required with appropriate 
mitigation incorporated into development proposals where necessary.  
 
 The site is a g reenfield site in a prominent position on the edge of Skipton. Development 
proposals will be carefully and sensitively designed to minimise visual impact on the 
character and appearance of the area, and include measures to minimise impacts on air 
quality, noise and light pollution.  
 
 There are several access options for this site including Gargrave Road, Parkwood Way, 
Park Wood Drive and White Hills Lane. A Traffic Impact Assessment will be required.  
 
 A Landscape Visual Impact Assessment (LVIA) is required t o assess the likely effects of 
change on the landscape as a result of the development, specifically on views into and 
out of the Yorkshire Dales National Park.  The LVIA will help locate and design the 
development so that negative landscape effects are avo ided, appropriately reduced or 
offset.  
 
 There is a requirement for a Biodiversity Appraisal to assess the existing ecological 
conditions on the site, including biodiversity within the adjoining SINC. This is to be 
accompanied by a standardised Biodiversity  Mitigation Plan (BMP) which must cover 
matters of both habitat and protected species, with the aim that negative effects on 
biodiversity are avoided or suitably offset, and enhancement effects are implemented.  
 
 Before any development takes place, a compre hensive Masterplan for the site shall be 
produced in consultation with relevant stakeholders and to the satisfaction of the local 
planning authority, to ensure that development of the site comes forward in a coordinated 
way. The Masterplan will define area s of green infrastructure based on the second 
development principle set out above; show land safeguarded for a new primary school, if 
required; demonstrate connectivity of the  site with the surrounding area  and PROW 
network and will demonstrate how all the  development principles for this site area to be 
addressed.  
 
 Development proposals will be required to contribute towards the provision of highway 
improvements, in accordance with Policy INF7, at the following locations:  
a) The A65/Gargrave Road/A629/A59 junction; and  
b) the A6131/A65 junction.  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and 
INF6 (which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, 
education provision and sport, open space and rec reation facilities) and all other relevant 
local plan policies.  
 
 
 
 71 
 
 
 Site Ref. Location Uses 
SK087  Land to the north of A6131 and south of A65, 
Skipton  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 1.1 ha  
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings: 35  
 
Developme nt Principles: 
 A surf ace water flood risk hazard has been identified within the south of the site. 
Development proposals must therefore be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment and 
drainage strategy which has informed the design, layout and landscaping of the site.  
Proposals w ill incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS), where possible;  
 
 Development proposals will seek to maximise opportunities for links to be made to existing 
green infrastructure networks to the existing PROW which runs along the track located 
immediate ly to the north of the site. Landscaping along the northern boundary of the site to 
be provided to enhance the amenity of the PROW and to filter long distance views from the 
Yorkshire Dales National Park.  
 
 A Landscape Visual Impact Assessment (LVIA) is req uired to assess the likely effects of 
change on the landscape as a result of the development, specifically on views into and out 
of the Yorkshire Dales National Park. The LVIA will help locate and design the 
development so that negative landscape effects a re avoided, appropriately reduced or 
offset.  
 
 The site is a greenfield site in a prominent position on the edge of Skipton, in relatively 
close proximity to the Yorkshire Dales National Park boundary. Development proposals will 
be carefully and sensitively  designed to minimise visual impact on the character and 
appearance of the area, and include measures to minimise impacts on air quality, noise 
and light pollution.  
 
 Dwellings on the southern boundary will be front -facing, but set back from the A6131 to 
maintain an attractive entrance to this north eastern part of the town;  
 
 There is a requirement for a Biodiversity Appraisal to assess the existing ecological 
conditions on the site. This is to be accompanied by a standardised Biodiversity Mitigation 
Plan (B MP) which must cover matters of both habitat and protected species, with the aim 
that negative effects on biodiversity are avoided or suitably offset, and enhancement 
effects are implemented.  
 
 An assessment of the site’s archaeological interest will be req uired with appropriate 
mitigation incorporated into development proposals where necessary.  
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from Harrogate Road (A6131) and a footway link 
alongside the A6131 to the bus stop at Overdale Static Caravan Site shall be provi ded. 
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education 
provision and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other re levant local plan 
policies.  72 
 
 
 Site Ref. Location Uses 
SK088  Hawbank Fields north of Otley Road and south of 
A6131, Skipton  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 8.6 ha (including approximately 4.1 ha of green infrastructure)  
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings: 143  
 
Developme nt Principles: 
 A fluvial and surface water flood risk hazard has been identified within the south of the site. 
Development proposals must therefore be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment and 
drainage strategy which has informed the design, layout a nd landscaping of the site.  
Proposals wi ll incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (Su DS), where possible.  
 
 This is a greenfield site in a prominent position on the edge of Skipton, in relatively close 
proximity to the Yorkshire Dales National Park. Deve lopment proposals for this site will 
incorporate approximately 4.1 ha of green infrastructure in the north, south and east of the 
site to ensure that built development avoids areas of the site at risk of flooding; to provide 
landscape mitigation for the Yo rkshire Dales National Park and to deliver recreational 
walking opportunities aimed at relieving pressure on the North Pennine Moors Special 
Protection Area (SPA) and Special Area of Conservation (SAC).  
 
 Development proposals will seek to maximise opportu nities for links to be made to existing 
green infrastructure and PROW networks to the north, south and west of the site. The 
creation of a green corridor in the north of the site will continue the existing pattern of 
residential development on Green Acres where the dwellings are set back from Harrogate 
Road.  
 
 An assessment of the site’s archaeological interest will be required with appropriate 
mitigation incorporated into development proposals where necessary.  
 
 The site is a greenfield site in a prominent p osition on the edge of Skipton. Development 
proposals will be carefully and sensitively designed to minimise visual impact on the 
character and appearance of the area, and include measures to minimise impacts on air 
quality, noise and light pollution.  
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from Harrogate Road (A6131) with an opportunity for 
pedestrian access to be provided onto the site from Greenacres to the west.  
 
 A Landscape Visual Impact Assessment (LVIA) is required to assess the likely effects of 
change on the landscape as a result of the development, specifically on views into and out 
of the Yorkshire Dales National Park. The LVIA will help locate and design the development 
so that negative landscape effects are avoided, appropriately reduced or offset.  
 
 There is a requirement for a Biodiversity Appraisal to assess the existing ecological 
conditions on the site. This is to be accompanied by a standardised Biodiversity Mitigation 
Plan (BMP) which must cover matters of both habitat and protected species, wi th the aim 
that negative effects on biodiversity are avoided or suitably offset, and enhancement effects 
are implemented.  
 73 
 
 
  Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributi ons towards affordable housing, education 
provision and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other relevant local plan 
policies.  
 
 
Site Ref. Location Uses 
SK089 & 
SK090  Land to the north of Airedale Avenue & Elsey Croft 
and east of railwa y line, Skipton  C3 Residential  
D1 Education  
Approx. Area: 10.6 ha ( including approximately 2 ha of green infrastructure and 1.8 ha for the 
provision of a new school in Skipton)  
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings: 211  
 
Developme nt Principles: 
 A new primary sch ool will be provided on 1.8ha of the total site area of sites SK089 & 
SK090 to meet the educational requirements for Skipton over the plan period, unless this 
identified educational need is met elsewhere in the town.  If a new primary school is no 
longer r equired on this site, as determined by the Local Education Authority and in 
accordance with Policy INF6, residential development will be acceptable in principle 
subject to meeting other local plan policies.  
 
 A fluvial and surface water flood risk hazard ha s been identified within the west and south 
of the site. Development proposals must therefore be supported by a Flood Risk 
Assessment and drainage strategy which has informed the design, layout and landscaping 
of the site.  Proposals wi ll incorporate Susta inable Drainage Systems (Su DS), where 
possible.  
 
 The is a greenfield site in a prominent position on the edge of Skipton, in relatively close 
proximity to the Yorkshire Dales National Park. Development proposals for this site will 
incorporate a green infra structure corridor along the northern and western boundary of the 
site to maintain the existing open, rural feel of the Otley Road approach to Skipton up to 
the railway bridge. It will also incorporate an existing footpath running within the site 
adjacent to the south west boundary, providing links to the east of Skipton and beyond.  A 
further green infrastructure corridor will be provided adjacent to the southern boundary to 
provide a buffer between existing residential development at Elsey Croft and new 
residential development on sites SK089 & SK090. This area will also maintain an open feel 
to the existing PROW running along the southern boundary of the site, provide 
opportunities for safe walking routes to the new primary school and deliver recreational 
walking opportunities aimed at relieving pressure on the North Pennine Moors Special 
Protection Area (SPA) and Special Area of Conservation (SAC).  
 
 An assessment of the site’s archaeological interest will be required with appropriate 
mitigation incorporate d into development proposals where necessary.  
 
 Development proposals will be carefully and sensitively designed to minimise visual impact 
on the character and appearance of the area, and include measures to minimise impacts 
on air quality, noise and light pollution.  
 74 
 
 
  A Landscape Visual Impact Assessment (LVIA) is required to assess the likely effects of 
change on the landscape as a result of the development, specifically on views into and out 
of the Yorkshire Dales National Park. The LVIA will help locate a nd design the 
development so that negative landscape effects are avoided, appropriately reduced or 
offset.  
 
 There is a requirement for a Biodiversity Appraisal to assess the existing ecological 
conditions on the site. This is to be accompanied by a standar dised Biodiversity Mitigation 
Plan (BMP) which must cover matters of both habitat and protected species, with the aim 
that negative effects on biodiversity are avoided or suitably offset, and enhancement 
effects are implemented.  
 
 Access to site is to be ga ined from Wensleydale Avenue, Airedale Avenue and Elsey Croft . 
 
 Development proposals will be required to contribute towards the provision of highway 
improvements, in accordance with Policy INF7, at the following locations:  
a) The A65/Gargrave Road/A629/A59 j unction; and  
b) the A6131/A65 junction.  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education 
provision and sport, open space and recreat ion facilities) and all other relevant local plan 
policies.  
 
 
 
Site Ref. Location Uses 
SK094  Land bounded by Carleton Road, railway line and 
A629, Skipton  C3 Residential  
Appox. Area: 10.5 ha (including approximately 7.4 ha of green infrastructure)  
Appr ox. N umb er of Dwellings: 99  
 
Developme nt Principles: 
 
 A fluvial flood risk hazard has been identified within the south and east of the site. 
Development proposals must therefore be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment and 
drainage strategy which has info rmed the design, layout and landscaping of the site. 
Proposals wi ll incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (Su DS) where possible.  
 
 This is a greenfield site in a prominent location on the edge of Skipton. Development 
proposals for this site will incorpor ate an area of approximately 7.4 ha of green 
infrastructure in the east, west and south of the site, providing an opportunity for an area of 
open space/green infrastructure to be created, potentially incorporating a closed road cycle 
circuit track and to e nsure that built development avoids areas of the site at risk from 
flooding.  Green infrastructure on the site will incorporate the route of an existing PROW  75 along the southern boundary of the site  in order to maintain this existing link from the site 
to the wider area and deliver recreational walking opportunities aimed at relieving pressure 
on the North Pennine Moors Special Protection Area (SPA) and Special Area of 
Conservation (SAC).  
There is a requirement for a Biodiversity Appraisal to assess the ex isting ecological
conditions on the site. This is to be accompanied by a standardised Biodiversity Mitigation
Plan (BMP) which must cover matters of both habitat and protected species, with the aim
that negative effects on biodiversity are avoided or suita bly offset, and enhancement
effects are implemented.
Siting and design of development on the site to conserve the setting of the adjacent
Conservation Area.
An assessment of the site’s archaeological interest will be required with appropriate
mitigation incorporated into development proposals where necessary.
The site is in a prominent position on the edge of Skipton , development proposals will need
to be carefully and sensitively designed to minimise visual impact on the character and
appearance  of the area, and include measures to minimise impacts on air quality, noise
and light pollution.
Access to the site is to be gained from Carleton Road and Burnside Crescent.
Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and I NF6
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education
provision and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other relevant local plan
policies.
Site Ref. Location Uses 
SK101  East of Keighley Road and sout h of Cawder Lane, 
Skipton  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 4 ha (including approximately 0.6 ha of green infrastructure area)  
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings: 109 
Developme nt Principles: 
 An assessment of the site’s archaeological interest will be required wi th appropriate
mitigation incorporated into development proposals where necessary.
 Siting and design of development on the site to conserve the setting of the conservation
area, which adjoins the western boundary of the site and includes the Leeds & Liver pool
Canal corridor.76 
 
 
  Measures to enhance connectivity of the canal corridor for wildlife through the use of 
sensitive planting and low level lighting shall be designed into any proposed scheme.  
 
 Development on this site will be set back from the Leeds & L iverpool Canal to create an 
area of green infrastructure of approximately 0.6 ha.  A PROW will be created along the 
proposed green infrastructure corridor to promote urban short walks for exercise & 
recreation and to provide pedestrian links from the site to the surrounding footpath 
network.  
 
 The site is in a prominent location. Development proposals will be carefully and 
sensitively designed to minimise visual impact on the character and appearance of the 
area, and include measures to minimise impacts on a ir quality, noise and light pollution.  
 
 The site is a town centre site with very good accessibility to key services and public 
transport. Proposals for development will therefore maximise the opportunities for future 
occupiers to walk or cycle to most key services rath er than using a private vehicle.  
 
 A fluvial and surface water flood risk hazard has been identified within the south east of 
the site.  Development proposals must therefore be supported by a Flood Risk 
Assessment and drainage strategy which ha s informed the design, layout and 
landscaping of the site. Proposals wi ll incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (Su DS) 
where possible.  
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from Cawder Lane. Access to Cawder Lane from 
Keighley Road is currently taken via the existing Horse Close Bridge, which is restricted 
by its width. Development proposals must therefore demonstrate how vehicular access to 
the site can be gained from a new crossing over the Leeds & Liverpool Canal.  
 
 Development proposals will be require d to contribute towards the provision of highway 
improvements, in accordance with Policy INF7, at the following locations:  
a) The A65/Gargrave Road/A629/A59 junction; and  
b) the A6131/A65 junction.  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan  policies H2, INF3 and 
INF6 (which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education 
provision and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other relevant local plan 
policies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 77 
 
 
 Site Ref. Location Uses 
SK114 & 
SK124  Land to east of North Parade & Cawder Road 
garage site, Horse Close, Skipton  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 4.6 ha (including approximately  1.1 ha of green infrastructure)  
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings: 112  
Developme nt Principles: 
 
 An assessment of t he site’s archaeological interest will be required with appropriate 
mitigation incorporated into development proposals where necessary.  
 
 This is a greenfield site in a prominent location on the edge of Skipton. Development 
proposals for this site will inco rporate an area of approximately 1.1 ha of green 
infrastructure to recognise the two existing wooded ghylls on the site in the north and 
central part of the site and their role in providing links to the existing PROW network, and to 
provide a landscape buf fer to the north eastern part of the site which is steeply sloping and 
characterised by open moorland. The area of green infrastructure will also deliver 
recreational walking opportunities aimed at relieving pressure on the North Pennine Moors 
Special Prot ection Area (SPA) and Special Area of Conservation (SAC).  
 
 This site is in a prominent location, development proposals will need to be carefully and 
sensitively designed to minimise visual impact on the character and appearance of the 
area, and include me asures to minimise impacts on air quality, noise and light pollution.  
 
 A surface water flood risk hazard has been identified within the south east of the site.  
Development proposals must therefore be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment and 
drainage strat egy which has informed the design, layout and landscaping of the site. 
Proposals will incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (Su DS) where possible.  
 
 A Landscape Visual Impact Assessment (LVIA) is required to assess the likely effects of 
change on the lan dscape as a result of the development, specifically on views into and out 
of the Yorkshire Dales National Park.  The LVIA will help locate and design the  
development  so that negative landscape effects are avoided, appropriately reduced or 
offset.  
 
 There is a requirement for a Biodiversity Appraisal to assess the existing ecological 
conditions on the site. This is to be accompanied by a standardised Biodiversity Mitigation 
Plan (BMP) which must cover matters of both habitat and protected species, with the aim  
that negative effects on biodiversity are avoided or suitably offset, and enhancement 
effects are implemented.  
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from Cawder Road, such as the garage site located in 
the south west of the site. A possible additional acces s point is via the existing reservoir 
track from Whinny Gill Road, which provides access to a residential scheme with consent 
to the north of the site. Access to Cawder Road from Keighley Road is currently taken via 
the existing Horse Close Bridge, which i s restricted by its width. Development proposals 
must therefore demonstrate how vehicular access to the site can be gained from a new 
crossing over the Leeds & Liverpool Canal.  
 
 Development proposals will be required to contribute towards the provision of  highway 78 
 
 
 improvements, in accordance with Policy INF7, at the following locations:  
a) The A65/Gargrave Road/A629/A59 junction; and  
b) the A6131/A65 junction.  
  
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(whic h set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education 
provision and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other relevant local plan 
policies.  
 
 
 
Site Ref.  Location Uses 
SK139  East and west of Cavendish Street, Skip ton Retail (A1) and commercial 
led mixed use.  
Approx. Area: 2 ha 
Overall: A retail -led mixed use regeneration opportunity.   
 
Developme nt Principles: 
 
 This site is a retail -led mixed use regeneration opportunity area on land east and west of 
Cavendish St reet, Skipton offering potential to enhance this part of the town and meet the 
majority or all of the retail need for Skipton identified in Policy EC5. The site also provides 
opportunities to address leisure requirements in Skipton; provide improvements to  
environmental quality and enhance connections in the town. Proposals will also take account 
of the following development principles:  
Use(s)  
 The site will be redeveloped for retail and commercial uses that complement and underpin the 
role and function of this part of Skipton whilst supporting the town centre as a whole . 
 
 Proposals for retail -led floorspace will accord with the provisions of Policy EC5 . 
 
Flood risk mitigation  
 A Flood Risk Assessment is required and proposals will need to address and mitigat e flood risk 
including  making use of Sustainable Drainage Systems (Su DS) to mitigate run off and localised 
flood  risk, if possible and feasible.  
 
 Proposals will take account of the presence of Eller Beck and the related flood alleviation works 
that apply t o part of the opportunity area . 
 
Heritage significance considerations  
 A ground work assessment will be required as part of the on -site works to investigate areas of 79 potenti al archaeological significance.  
Proposals will take account of and understand the s ignificance of the Conservation Area
designation that applies to part of the regeneration opportunity area .
Regeneration proposals will take account of the setting and significance of surrounding Listed
Buildings.
The eastern boundary wall will be retai ned as part of the overall development but improved
permeability through it will be considered. Other stone boundary walls throug hout the site will be
conserved.
Important views over the site to Christ Church, Belle Vue Mills and the mill chimney will be
retained.
Leeds  & Liverpool Canal  
Proposals will take account of the setting and significance of the Leeds -Liverpool canal as a
community and tourism asset,  and a local transport corridor.
Proposals will take account of the potential for access and perme ability to and from th e Leeds
Liverpool canal towpath.
Ground Conditions  
A ground conditions assessment is required to consider the potential presence of ground
contaminants potentially arising from historical uses/activities in the opportunity area .
Mitigation is to be provided where it is necessary .
Access 
Principal vehicular access to be gained from C avendish Street, Broughton Road.
Pedestrian access to be gained from Leeds Liverpool Canal, Gallows Bridge and to link to the
bus station and town cent re.
Secondary access could be gained from Cross Street, and/or Gas Street.
Masterplanning 
A masterplan for the opportunity area, including the incorporation of the development and 
design principles above, will be produced in consultation  with key stakeh olders  and to the 
satisfaction of  the local planning authority. Development p roposals will be expected to 
accord with the principles of the Masterplan.  Regeneration  should not occur on a piecemeal 
basis and a comprehensive approach is expected.  
Developme nt proposals for this site must accord with relevant local plan policies.  
Site Assembly, Delivery  
The opportunity area is in a range of ownerships and assembling the site will influence delivery 
timescales. Site assembly powers will be considered for use  where it is expedient, appropriate and 
necessary for regeneration to succeed. Craven District Council is owner of part of the regeneration 
opportunity area.  80 
 
 
 Site Ref.  Location Uses 
SK140  Land at Skipton Station, Broughton Road, Carleton 
New Road, Sandy lands Business Centre, Skipton  Commercially led including 
employment and an 
element of retail and 
community uses.  
Approx. Area: 5.6 ha  
Overall : A commercially led regeneration opportunity, with a focus on commercial and employment 
led mixed uses, and an element of community use . 
Development Principles:  
 An employment/commercially led mixed use regeneration opportunity area on land at Skipton 
railway station, Carleton New Road, and Sandylands Business Centre. Proposals will take the 
opportunity to enhance  connections between the railway station and the wider town.  
 
Use  
 Proposals will enhance the role of Skipton Railway Station as a transport hub and gateway to 
Skipton and the Yorkshire Dales.  
 
 The site will be developed for commercial and employment -led m ix of uses which may include 
an element of ancillary retail, that complement and underpin the commercial, employment, 
transport, and community fu nctions of this part of Skipton.  
 
Access  
 Principal vehicular access to be gained from Carle ton New Road and Br oughton Road.  
  
 Pedestrian access to be gained from Gawflat Bridge and the Leeds & Liverpool Canal towpath.  
  
 Existing pedestrian connections to the town from the railway station will be enhanced and form 
a traffic free pedestrian gateway.  
 
 Pedestrian acce ss from Broughton Road and Carleton New Road via the Railway Station 
underpass will be enabled and enhanced.  
 
 This regeneration area provides an opportunity for Sandylands Business Centre to be 
remodelled to create/enhance pedestrian access and connection s to/from the railway station, 
Sandylands sports are a and the town.  
 
 
Flood risk mitigation  
 A Flood Risk Assessment is required and proposals will need to address and mitigate flood risk 
including  making use of Sustainable Drainage Systems (Su DS) to mitiga te run off and localised 
flood  risk, if possible and feasible.  
 
 Proposals will take account of the proximity of Eller Beck and the ass ociated flood alleviation 
works.  
 81 
 
 
 Heritage significance  
 A ground work assessment will be required as part of the on -site w orks to investigate areas of 
potent ial archaeological significance.  
 
 Regeneration proposals will take account of the setting and significance of designated heritage 
assets (Conservation Area and Listed Buildings) both within the regeneration opportunity ar ea 
and in the immediate surroundings.  Proposals will be also be taken to improve the setting of 
the Listed Railway Station.  
 
Leeds  & Liverpool Canal  
 Proposals will take account of the setting and significance of the adjacent Leeds & Liverpool 
canal and to wpath as a community asset and means to enhance the connections within  
Skipton.  
 
 Proposals will take account of the potential for access and permeability to and from the Leeds & 
Liverpool canal towpath.  
 
Other services  
 Proposals will account for the reloca tion or retention of emergency services provision in the 
opportunity ar ea. 
 
Ground Conditions/Contamination  
 A ground conditions assessment is required to consider the potential presence of ground 
contaminants arising f rom historical uses/activities.  
 
Exist ing Businesses  
 Business, commercial and leisure uses and activities are to be retai ned where possible and 
enhanced.  
 
Masterplan ning   
A masterplan for the regeneration opportunity area, including the incorporation of the 
development and design principles ab ove, will be produced in consultation with key 
stakeholders  and to the satisfaction of t he local planning authority. Development proposals 
will be expected to accord with the principles of the Masterplan.  Regeneration should not 
occur on a piecemeal basis  and a comprehensive approach to redevelopment is expected.  
 
The opportunity area is in a range of ownerships and assembling the site will influence delivery 
timescales. Site assembly powers will be considered for use where it is expedient, appropriate and  
necessary for regeneration to succeed.  
 
Development proposals for this site must accord with relevant local plan policies.  
 82 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 Site Ref.  Location Uses  
SK049  Land east of Skipton bypass, Skipton  B1, B2, B8 Employment  
Approx. Area: 6 ha 
Developme nt Principles: 
 
 Development proposals must be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment and drainage 
strategy which has informed the design, layout and landscaping of the site.  T he Flood Risk 
Assessment shall incorporate the findings of both the Environment Agency’s Sk ipton Flood 
Alleviation Post -Scheme Modelling Report for Eller Beck and Waller Hill Beck and the District 
Council’s Post Scheme Modelling Report for the Ings Beck and Gallow Syke Water 
Management Project , and demonstrate that the proposed B1, B2 and B8 use s can be 
accommodated on land falling outside Flood Zone 3b.  Should it become apparent that the 
Skipton Flood Alleviation Schemes have not taken the site out of Flood Zone 3b, the Council 
will work with relevant stakeholders to take appropriate action. Th is may include the 
preparation of a partial or full review of the Local Plan.  
 
 Access to the site will be gained via the Wyvern Park development scheme which has 
consent for business/employment floorspace and residential dwellings to the south east of 
the site, and/or from Ings Lane.  
 
 The site’s prominent location adjacent to the bypass on the town's south -east periphery and 
Waltonwrays Cemetery will be addressed in the design, layout and landscaping of the 
development to ensure that the character and appea rance of the local area and existing 
sensitive land uses is not adversely affected.  
 
 Connections, including pedestrian and cycle routes to/from the town, railway station and 
adjacent employment and residential areas shall be created/enhanced.  
  
 A ground c onditions assessment is required to consider the potential presence of ground 
contaminants potentially arising from historical uses/activities in the area.  Mitigation is to be 
provided where it is necessary.  
 
 Development proposals on this site must accord  with all relevant policies of the local plan.  
 
 83 
 
 
 Site Ref.  Location Uses 
SK113  Land south of Skipton Auction Mart, Skipton  Mixed employment 
development including 
B1, B2, B8 and/or 
expansion of Craven 
Cattle Mart Ltd and 
Craven College.  
Approx. Area: 3 ha 
Developme nt Principles: 
 
 A Flood Risk Assessment is required, as fluvial and surface water hazards have been identified 
within parts of the site.  Proposals for development on this site wi ll incorporate Sustainable 
Drainage Systems (Su DS), unless t his is not possible or feasible.  
 
 The site adjoins the Skipton Conservation Area and is in a prominent location on the Leeds & 
Liverpool Canal at an important gateway to the town. Therefore, the developer is required to carry 
out a detailed assessment of t he likely impact of development on the character and appearance 
of area, including the conservation area and its setting, and to incorporate any necessary 
mitigation measures into the proposals. Special attention will be paid to the proposed siting, 
design , layout and landscaping of development to ensure that the character and appearance of 
the area is not adversely affected and any buildings should be set back from the canal.  
 
 Development of this site will be a mix of employment and economic development in cluding  B1, 
B2 & B8 uses and potential for expansion of adjoining existing employment area to the north to 
accommodate the expansion of Craven Cattle Mart Ltd and Craven College.  
 
 Measu res to enhance connectivity of the canal corridor for wildlife through the use of sensitive 
plantin g and low level lighting shall be designed into any proposed scheme.  
 
 An existing PROW runs along the eastern boundary of the site. Proposals will incorporate the 
route of this PROW in order to maintain this link from the site t o the wider existing PROW 
network.  
 
 The developer is required to arrange an investigation and assessment of the site’s archaeological 
interest, which may necessitate the carrying out of ground works before and/or during 
development. The findings of the inv estigation and assessment will be taken into account in the 
proposals and any necessary mitigation measures will be incorporated into the development, in 
the interests of archaeological conservation.  
 
 Development proposals on this site must accord with all  relevant policies of the local plan  
 
 84 
 
 
 Site Ref.  Location Uses  
SK135  Skipton Rock Quarry, Skipton  B2, B8 Employment  
Approx. Area: 1.1 ha  
Developme nt Principles: 
 A surface water flood risk hazard has been identified with in the central part of the site. 
Development proposals must therefore be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment and 
drainage strategy which has informed the design, layout and landscaping of the site. 
Proposals wil l incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (Su DS), where  possible . 
 
 An existi ng PROW runs from east to west across the site in the north.  Proposals will 
incorporate the route of this PROW in order to maintain this link from the site to the wider 
existing PROW network.  
 
 There is a requirement for a Biodiversity Appraisal to assess the existing ecological conditions 
on the site, including biodiversity within the adjoining SINC . This is to be accompanied by a 
standardised Biodiversity Mitigation Plan (BMP) which must cover matters of both habitat and 
protected species, with the aim th at negative effects on biodiversity are avoided or suitably 
offset, and enhancement effects are implemented.  
 
 Development proposals on this site must accord with all relevant policies of the local plan.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 85 POLICY SP6: STRATEGY FOR SETTLE – TIER  2  
Settle is a secondary location for growth in the plan area, providing serviced 
employment land and housing growth to reflect the role of Settle as a rail 
connected key service centre  for the mid sub area. Development will provide 
housing to meet lo cal needs whilst employment development will ensure that 
a medium to long term supply of serviced employment land is delivered to 
provide opportunities for entrepreneurs and businesses to expand and locate 
in the mid sub area. Provision is made for the fol lowing sites and locations to 
meet these aims:  
Housing Sites:  
Site Ref  Location  Approx. 
Area (Ha)  Approx 
Yield  
SG021, SG066 , 
SG080  Land to the north -west and south -west of Penny Green, Settle  3.7 80 
SG025  Land to the south of Ingfield Lane, Settle  11.4 125 
SG027, SG068  Land to the south of Brockhole View and west of Brockhole 
Lane, Settle  2.6 57 
SG032  Car park, off Lower Greenfoot and Commercial Street, Settle  0.4 13 
SG035  F H Ellis Garage, Settle  0.2 32 
SG042  NYCC Depot, Kirkgate, Settle  0.3 10 
SG079 Land to the north of Town Head Way, Settle  1.7 26 
LA004  Land to north of Barrel Sykes, Settle  0.6 18 
Total  20.9 361 
Employment/Mixed Use Sites:  
Site Ref  Location  Approx. 
Area (Ha)  Approx  
Yield  
SG060  Northern part of Sowarth Industrial Estate, Set tle 1.7 N/A 
SG064  Land south of Runley Bridge Farm and west of B6480  5 
Minimum  
2.6ha for 
B1,B2 and 
B8 19 
Proposals for development on the sites identified above will be supported subject to  
compliance with the following Development Principles for each si te. 86 
 
 
 Development Principles for Housing and Employment/Mixed Use Sites 
identified in Policy SP6  
Site Ref.  Location Uses 
SG021, SG066, 
SG080  Land to the north -west and south -west of Penny 
Green, Settle  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 3.7 ha (including appro x. 1.2 ha of additional green infrastructure)  
Approx. Number of Dwellings: 80 
Developme nt Principles: 
 
 This is a greenfield site in a prominent location on the edge of Settle. Development proposals 
for this site will incorporate biodiversity and landscap e mitigation(s) including a green 
infrastructure area of approximately 1.2 ha along the south -eastern border of the site, to mitigate 
impact on the Settle -Carlisle Railway Conservation Area to the east, and wider views of the site 
from the National Park. T he area of green infrastructure will also deliver recreational walking 
opportunities aimed at relieving pressure on the Ingleborough Complex Special Area of 
Conservation (SAC). Existing dry stone boundary walls to be retained on site.  
 
 A Landscape Visual I mpact Assessment (LVIA) is required to assess the likely effects of change 
on the landscape as a result of the development, specifically on views into and out of the 
Yorkshire Dales National Park. The LVIA will help locate and design the development so tha t 
negative landscape effects are avoided, appropriately reduced or offset.  
 
 There is a requirement for a Biodiversity Appraisal to assess the existing ecological conditions 
on the site.  This is to be accompanied by a standardised Biodiversity Mitigation P lan (BMP) 
which must cover matters of both habitat and protected species, with the aim that negative 
effects on biodiversity are avoided or suitably offset, and enhancement effects are implemented.  
 
 A hydrological investigation and bird survey in relation to impacts on River Ribble (Long Preston 
Deeps SSSI) is required.  
 
 Siting and design of development on the site to conserve the significance of the Settle -Carlisle 
Railway Conservation Area.  
 
 The site is in a prominent location, development proposals will  be carefully and sensitively 
designed to minimise visual impact on the character and appearance of the area, and include 
measures to minimise impacts on air quality, noise and light pollution.  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local p lan policies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education provision 
and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other  relevant local plan policies.  
 
 
 
 
 87 
 
 
 Site Ref.  Location Uses  
SG025  Land to the south of Ingfield Lane, Settle  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 11.4 ha (including approx. 7.5 ha of additional green infrastructure, which 
incorporates an approved surface water management scheme in the south -east section of the 
site).  
Approx. Nu mber of Dwellings : 125  
Developme nt Principles: 
 
 This is a greenfield site in a prominent location on the edge of Settle. Development 
proposals will be carefully and sensitively designed to minimise visual impact on the 
character and appearance of the area . Development proposals for this site will incorporate 
landscape and recreation mitigation(s) including green infrastructure areas of 
approximately 7.5 ha through the centre of the site; the western edge of the site and 
connecting to the approved ‘water me adows’ surface water management scheme to the 
south and east of the site. Mitigation along the south -eastern boundary will include a 
softening of the built form with gaps and planting of tree blocks between clusters of 
dwellings which will be front facing towards the YDNP. Dwelling heights will be restricted to 
two storeys in height. Mitigation measures are to mitigate impact on the special qualities of 
the YDNP, the Settle -Carlisle Railway Conservation Area and the heritage assets of the 
Falcon Manor Hotel  and Ingfield Lodge. The areas of green infrastructure will also deliver 
recreational walking opportunities aimed at relieving pressure on the Ingleborough 
Complex Special Area of Conservation (SAC) and Craven Limestone Complex Special 
Area of Conservation  (SAC).  
 
 A Landscape Visual Impact Assessment (LVIA) is required to assess the likely effects of 
change on the landscape as a result of the development, specifically on views into and out of 
the Yorkshire Dales National Park. The LVIA will help locate and design the development so 
that negative landscape effects are avoided, appropriately reduced or offset.  
 
 There is a requirement for a Biodiversity Appraisal to assess the existing ecological conditions 
on the site.  This is to be accompanied by a standardi sed Biodiversity Mitigation Plan (BMP) 
which must cover matters of both habitat and protected species, with the aim that negative 
effects on biodiversity are avoided or suitably offset, and enhancement effects are 
implemented.  
 
 A hydrological investigation  and bird survey in relation to impacts on River Ribble (Long 
Preston Deeps SSSI) is required.  
 
 Development proposals will minimise impacts on air quality, noise and light pollution.  
 
 Siting and design of development on the site to conserve the significanc e of heritage assets 
(Grade II listed building of Falcon Manor Hotel, the undesignated heritage asset of Ingfield 
Lodge, and the Settle -Carlisle Railway Conservation Area) surrounding the site and their 
settings.  A comprehensive landscaping scheme is requ ired to detail how views of the 
development from the west will be filtered.  
 
 A surface water flood risk hazard has been identified to the southern and western parts of the 
site.  Development proposals must therefore be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment  and 
drainage strategy which has informed the design, layout and landscaping of the site. Proposals  
will incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS), where possible.  
 
 An assessment of the site’s archaeological interest will be required with appropriate  mitigation 88 
 
 
 incorporated into development proposals where necessary.  
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from Austwick Close and Skipton Road (B6480).  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set ou t requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education provision  
and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other  relevant local plan policies.  
 
 
 
Site Ref.  Location Uses 
SG027, SG068  Land to the south of Brockhole View and  west of 
Brockhole Lane, Settle  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 2.6 ha (including approx. 0.8 ha of additional green infrastructure)  
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings:  57 
 
Developme nt Principles: 
 This is a greenfield site in a prominent location on the edge of Settle. Development proposals 
for this site will incorporate landscape and recreation mitigation(s) including areas of green 
infrastructure of approximately 0.8 ha in the southern, western and eastern parts of the site 
and connecting to the approved ‘water  meadows’ surface water management scheme to the 
west of the site. The provision of green infrastructure along the southern and eastern 
boundaries will protect the rural nature of Brockhole Lane and provide landscape mitigation for 
the Yorkshire Dales Nati onal Park by softening the built form including the planting of tree 
blocks of native species, and providing gaps between clusters of dwellings which will be front 
facing towards the YDNP. Dwelling heights will be restricted to two storeys in height. Exist ing 
dry stone boundary walls to be retained on site and new dry stone boundary walls to be 
created to enclose the southern and eastern boundaries of the site to respect the character of 
Brockhole Lane and surrounding fields.  The areas of green infrastruct ure will also deliver 
recreational walking opportunities aimed at relieving pressure on the Ingleborough Complex 
Special Area of Conservation (SAC) and Craven Limestone Complex Special Area of 
Conservation (SAC).  
 
 A Landscape Visual Impact Assessment (LVIA ) is required to assess the likely effects of 
change on the landscape as a result of the development, specifically on views into and out of 
the Yorkshire Dales National Park. The LVIA will help locate and design the development so 
that negative landscape e ffects are avoided, appropriately reduced or offset.  
 
 There is a requirement for a Biodiversity Appraisal to assess the existing ecological conditions 
on the site.  This is to be accompanied by a standardised Biodiversity Mitigation Plan (BMP) 
which must c over matters of both habitat and protected species, with the aim that negative 
effects on biodiversity are avoided or suitably offset, and enhancement effects are 
implemented.  
 
 A hydrological investigation and bird survey in relation to impacts on River Ri bble (Long 
Preston Deeps SSSI) is required.  
 
 As the site is in a prominent location, development proposals will be carefully and sensitively 89 
 
 
 designed to minimise visual impact on the character and appearance of the area, and include 
measures to minimise im pacts on air quality, noise and light pollution.  
 
 An assessment of the site’s archaeological interest will be required with appropriate mitigation 
incorporated into development proposals where necessary.  
 
 A surface water flood risk hazard has been identif ied within the southern part of the site.  
Development proposals must therefore be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment and 
drainage strategy which has informed the design, layout and landscaping of the site. 
Proposals  will incorporate Sustainable Drainage  Systems (SuDS), where possible.  
 
 Development to protect the rural nature of the PROW along the western and eastern 
boundaries of the site.  
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from Brockhole View and Brockhole Lane.  
 
 Development proposals for this site mus t accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education provision 
and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other  relevant local plan policies.  
 
 
Site Ref.  Location Uses 
SG032  Car park, off Lower Greenfoot and Commercial 
Street, Settle  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 0.4 ha  
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings:  13 
 
Developme nt Principles: 
 Siting and design of development on the site to conserve the significance of herit age assets 
(listed buildings and conservation areas) on the site and their settings.  
 
 Opportunities for further intensification of use within this accessible, town centre site in terms 
of housing density should be maximised, subject to specific analysis.  
 
 The site is a town centre site with very good accessibility to key services and public transport. 
Proposals for development will therefore maximise the opportunities for future occupiers to 
walk or cycle to most key services rather than using a private v ehicle.  
 
 Air quality, noise pollution and/or light pollution measures to be addressed as far as possible in 
the design and layout of the scheme on the site.  
 
 A surface water flood risk hazard has been identified within the western part of the site.   
Deve lopment proposals must therefore be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment and 
drainage strategy which has informed the design, layout and landscaping of the site. 
Proposals will incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS), where possible.  
 
 Access to the  site is to be gained from Lower Greenfoot.  
 90 
 
 
  Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2 and INF3 (which 
set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing and sport, open space and 
recreation facilities) and all other  relevant local plan policies.  
 
 
Site Ref.  Location Uses 
SG035  F H Ellis Garage, Settle  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 0.2 ha  
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings:  32 (specialist accommodation for older people)  
 
Developme nt Principles: 
 Siting and desig n of development on the site to conserve the significance of heritage 
assets on and adjacent to the site and their settings (the grade II listed buildings to the 
north west of the site: The Terrace, No. 3 Windyridge and The Croft; and Settle 
Conservation A rea). 
 
 Opportunities for further intensification of use within this accessible, town centre site in terms 
of housing density should be maximised, subject to specific analysis.  
 
 The site is a town centre site with very good accessibility to key services an d public transport.  
Proposals for development will therefore maximise the opportunities for future occupiers to 
walk or cycle to most key services rather than using a private vehicle.  
    
 Air quality, noise pollution and/or light pollution measures to be addressed as far as possible in 
the design and layout of the scheme on the site.  
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from High Hill Grove Street to the rear.  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2 and INF3 (which 
set o ut requirements for contributions towards affordable housing and sport, open space and 
recreation facilities) and all other  relevant local plan policies.  
 
 
Site Ref.  Location Uses 
SG079  Land to the north of Town Head Way, Settle  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 1.7 ha (including approx. 0.9 ha of additional green infrastructure)  
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings: 26 
 
Developme nt Principles: 
 This is a greenfield site in a prominent location on the edge of Settle. Development proposals 
for this site will incorpora te landscape and recreation mitigation(s) including a green 91 
 
 
 infrastructure area of approximately 0.9 ha along the eastern and northern boundaries of the 
site to provide landscape mitigation for the Yorkshire Dales National Park and the adjacent 
grade II li sted building, Barrel Sykes Farm.  The areas of green infrastructure will also deliver 
recreational walking opportunities aimed at relieving pressure on the Ingleborough Complex 
Special Area of Conservation (SAC) and Craven Limestone Complex Special Area o f 
Conservation (SAC) by providing footpath links to the railway tunnel footpath to the north and 
the National Park highway/footpath and PROW to the east. The layout of the site will be 
designed to leave gaps through the site to retain views from the Nation al Park to the Grade II 
listed Barrel Sykes Farm and the undesignated heritage asset of Watershed Mill chimney 
beyond. The layout of the site will also ensure that views from Town Head Way north towards 
Barrel Sykes Farm and the Watershed Mill chimney are retained.  
 
 Siting and design of development on the site to conserve the  significance of the adjacent 
Settle -Carlisle Railway Conservation Area to the west and the grade II listed Barrel Sykes 
Farm to the north.  
 
 The existing dry stone boundary walls will  be retained. A new dry stone boundary wall will be 
created east to west across the site to enclose the northern area of green infrastructure in 
order to maintain the setting of the adjacent heritage asset of the grade II listed Barrel Sykes 
Farm and to pr ovide a clear definable edge to the development.  
 
 Development proposals on site will include an improved and enhanced pedestrian link from 
the site via the adjacent tunnel through the railway embankment.  
 
 A Landscape Visual Impact Assessment (LVIA) is requ ired to assess the likely effects of 
change on the landscape as a result of the development, specifically on views into and out of 
the Yorkshire Dales National Park. The LVIA will help locate and design the development so 
that negative landscape effects ar e avoided, appropriately reduced or offset.  
 
 There is a requirement for a Biodiversity Appraisal to assess the existing ecological conditions 
on the site.  This is to be accompanied by a standardised Biodiversity Mitigation Plan (BMP) 
which must cover matt ers of both habitat and protected species, with the aim that negative 
effects on biodiversity are avoided or suitably offset, and enhancement effects are 
implemented.  
 
 As the site is in a prominent location, development proposals will be carefully and sens itively 
designed to minimise visual impact on the character and appearance of the area, and include 
measures to minimise impacts on air quality, noise and light pollution.  
 
 A surface water flood risk hazard has been identified within the northern part of t he site.   
Development proposals must therefore be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment and 
drainage strategy which has informed the design, layout and landscaping of the site. 
Proposals will incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS), where possible.  
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from Town Head Way.  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education provision 
and sport, op en space and recreation facilities) and all other relevant local plan policies.  
  
 
 
 92 
 
 
 Site Ref.  Location Uses 
SG042  NYCC Depot, Kirkgate, Settle  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 0.3 ha  
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings:  10 
 
Developme nt Principles: 
 
 Siting and d esign of development on the site to conserve the significance of heritage assets 
on and adjacent to the site and their settings (the grade II listed buildings to the south of the 
site: Victoria Hall, Kirkgate; Bond End, Kirkgate; the grade II* listed build ing to the south of the 
site: Friends Meeting House, Kirkgate; and Settle Conservation Area and the Settle Carlisle 
Railway Conservation Area).  
 Opportunities for further intensification of use within this accessible, town centre site in terms 
of housing de nsity should be maximised, subject to specific analysis.  
 
 The site is a town centre site with very good accessibility to key services and public transport. 
Proposals for development will therefore maximise the opportunities for future occupiers to 
walk or cycle to most key services rather than using a private vehicle.  
 
 Air quality, noise pollution and/or light pollution measures to be addressed as far as possible in 
the design and layout of the scheme on the site.  
 
 An assessment of the site’s archaeologica l interest will be required with appropriate mitigation 
incorporated into development proposals where necessary.  
 
 Development to protect the PROW running through the site.  
 
 A surface water flood risk hazard has been identified within the central part of th e site.   
Development proposals must therefore be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment and 
drainage strategy which has informed the design, layout and landscaping of the site. 
Proposals will incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS), where possible.  
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from and Church Street car park and Kirkgate.  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2 and INF3 (which 
set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing and sport, open  space and 
recreation facilities) and all other  relevant local plan policies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 93 
 
 
 Site Ref.  Location Uses 
LA004  Land to the north of Barrel Sykes, Settle  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 0.6 ha  
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings: 19 
 
Developme nt Principles: 
 
 There is a requirement for a Biodiversity Appraisal to assess the existing ecological 
conditions on the site.  This is to be accompanied by a standardised Biodiversity Mitigation 
Plan (BMP) which must cover matters of both habitat and protected species, wi th the aim that 
negative effects on biodiversity are avoided or suitably offset, and enhancement effects are 
implemented.  
  
 Siting and design of development on the site will conserve the significance of the heritage 
assets (Settle Carlisle Railway Conserva tion Area and Watershed Mill, Chimney and Shed 
Mill Cottages) adjacent to the site and their settings. Proposals will retain the views across 
this site from the Settle Carlisle Conservation Area towards Watershed Mill;  
 
 As the site is in a prominent locat ion, development proposals will be carefully and sensitively 
designed to minimise visual impact on the character and appearance of the area, and include 
measures to minimise impacts on air quality, noise and light pollution. Dwelling heights will be 
restri cted to two storeys to protect views from the Settle Carlisle Railway Conservation Area 
towards Watershed Mill.  Dwellings on the western boundary will be front -facing, but set back 
from Langcliffe Road to ensure an attractive entrance to this northern par t of the town;  
 
 The existing dry stone boundary walls will be retained. A new dry stone boundary wall will be 
created east to west across the northern boundary of the site to enclose the field to the north 
of the site opposite Watershed Mill and to help es tablish a definitive new urban edge to the 
town;  
 
 A surface water flood risk hazard has been identified within the southern part of the site.   
Development proposals must therefore be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment and 
drainage strategy which has inf ormed the design, layout and landscaping of the site. 
Proposals will incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS), where possible.  
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from Barrel Sykes;  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan po licies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education provision 
and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other relevant local plan policies.  
 
 
 
 
 94 
 
 
 Site Ref.  Location Uses 
SG060  Norther n part of Sowarth Industrial Estate, Settle  Commercial mixed use 
including employment, 
retail and leisure uses  
Approx. Area: 1.7 ha  
Overall   A commercially led mixed use regeneration opportunity on the northern part of Sowarth 
Industrial Estate, Settle o ffering potential to enhance this part of town.  Site to include a mix of 
employment, retail, and leisure uses, with an element of residential. Regeneration of the site 
provides opportunities for improvements to environmental quality and enhanced connectio ns in this 
part of the town. Proposals should take account of the following development principles:  
 
Developme nt Principles: 
Use  
•    Proposals will enhance the role of Sowarth Industrial Estate as a multi -use town centre 
business park, including a mix o f employment, retail and leisure uses that complement and 
underpin the regeneration of this town centre business park;  
•    Existing business, commercial and retail uses and activities are to be retained where possible 
and enhanced.  
Access  
•    Principal  vehicular accesses to be gained from Kirkgate and Kings Mill Lane.  
Flood risk mitigation  
•    A Flood Risk Assessment is required and proposals will need to address and mitigate flood 
risk including making use of Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) to mit igate run off and 
localised flood risk.  
Heritage significance  
•    A ground work assessment will be required as part of the on -site works to investigate areas of 
potential archaeological significance;  
•    Regeneration proposals will take account of the se tting and significance of designated 
heritage assets (Conservation Area and listed buildings) in the immediate surroundings of the  
regeneration opportunity.  
Ground Conditions/Contamination  
•    Given the current industrial use on site a ground conditions a ssessment is required to 
consider the potential presence of ground contaminants arising from historical uses/activities.  
Masterplan  
A Masterplan for the regeneration opportunity area, including the incorporation of the development 
and design principles d etailed above, shall be produced in consultation with key stakeholders, and 
to the satisfaction of, the local planning authority. Development proposals will be expected to 
accord with the principles of the Masterplan. Regeneration should not occur on a pie cemeal basis 
and a comprehensive approach to redevelopment is expected.  95 
 
 
 Site Assembly  
The opportunity area is in a range of ownerships and assembling the site will influence delivery 
timescales. Site assembly powers will be considered for use where it is e xpedient, appropriate and 
necessary for regeneration to succeed.  
Development proposals on this site must accord with all relevant policies of the local plan.  
 
 
 
Site Ref.  Location Uses 
SG064  Land south of Runley Bridge Farm and west of 
B6480  Employment led mixed 
use development  
Approx. Area: 5 ha (minimum 2.6 ha for B1, B2 and B8 and approx. 1.6 ha of additional green 
infrastructure)  
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings: 19 
 
Developme nt Principles:  
 The site is allocated as employment led mixed use site with an element of residential. A 
minimum of 2.6 ha shall be for B1, B2 and B8 uses, with approximately 1.6ha of green 
infrastructure.  Low density residential development will be permitted on the northern part of 
the site to limit views from the Yorkshire Dale s National Park.  
 The site is a greenfield site in a prominent location on the edge of Settle. Development 
proposals for this site will incorporate biodiversity and landscape mitigation(s).  
 
 There is a requirement for a Biodiversity Appraisal to assess the existing ecological conditions 
on the site.  This is to be accompanied by a standardised Biodiversity Mitigation Plan (BMP) 
which must cover matters of both habitat and protected species, with the aim that negative 
effects on biodiversity are avoided or su itably offset, and enhancement effects are 
implemented.  
 
 A hydrological investigation and bird survey in relation to impacts on River Ribble (Long 
Preston Deeps SSSI) is required.  
 
 Siting and design of high quality development on the site to conserve the s ignificance of 
heritage assets near the site (the grade II listed building to the north of the site: Anley House; 
and Settle -Carlisle Railway Conservation Area) and their settings . 
 
 An assessment of the site’s archaeological interest will be required with appropriate mitigation 
incorporated into development proposals where necessary.  
 
 As the site is in a prominent location, development proposals will be carefully and sensitively 
designed to minimise visual impact on the character and appearance of the area,  and include 
measures to minimise impacts on air quality, noise and light pollution.  New proposals will 
include green infrastructure areas of approximately 1.6 ha which will incorporate a 
comprehensive landscaping scheme to filter views of the development  from the south, east 
and west.  Semi mature trees will be planted for immediate effect.  The residential element in 
the northern part of the site will be a low density, landscape -led scheme, and dwelling heights 
will be restricted to two storeys to protec t views from the Settle Carlisle Railway Conservation 
Area and the Yorkshire Dales National Park to the east. The areas of green infrastructure will 96 
 
 
 also deliver recreational walking opportunities aimed at relieving pressure on the Ingleborough 
Complex Spe cial Area of Conservation (SAC).   
 The existing stone boundary walls will be retained.  
 
 A Landscape Visual Impact Assessment (LVIA) is required to assess the likely effects of 
change on the landscape as a result of the development, specifically on views int o and  out of 
the Yorkshire Dales National Park. The LVIA will help locate and design the development so 
that negative landscape effects are avoided, appropriately reduced or offset.  
 
 A fluvial and surface water flood risk hazard has been identified within the southern part of the 
site.  Development proposals must therefore be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment and 
drainage strategy which has informed the design, layout and landscaping of the site. 
Proposals will incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (S uDS), where possible.  
 Development proposals must be accompanied by a phasing and delivery schedule to ensure 
that the proposed employment uses come forward prior to the commencement of any 
residential development.  
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from t he B6480.  
 
 Development proposals on this site must accord with all relevant policies of the local plan.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 97 
 
 
 POLICY SP7: STRATEGY FOR BENTHAM –TIER 2  
Bentham is a secondary location for growth in the plan area, reflecting its 
role as a key servi ce centre  in the north sub area and providing serviced 
employment land and housing growth to underpin growing prosperity in the 
town; capitalise  on linkages with the rail connected university city of 
Lancaster, and the tourism potential of the Forest of Bo wland AONB. 
Provision is made for the following development areas to meet housing 
needs and bolster prosperity and resilience in the town:  
Housing Sites:  
Site Ref  Location  Approx.  Area 
(Ha) Approx. 
Yield  
HB011  Primary school, east of Robin Lane, west of  
Lowcroft, High Bentham  1.0 72 
HB023  North of Low Bentham Road, High Bentham  1.7 53 
HB024  North of Lakeber Drive, High Bentham  0.9 29 
HB025  East of Butts Lane, High Bentham  1.0 32 
HB026  North of Springfield Crescent and east of Butts 
Lane, High Bentham  2.6 82 
HB038  Land south of Low Bentham Road, High Bentham  C3 0. 6 
D1 0.3  19 
HB044  Land to west of Goodenber Road, High Bentham  1.9 61 
HB052  Land to north west of Bank Head Farm and south of 
Ghyllhead Farm, High Bentham  5.7 118 
LB012  Wenning View, Low B entham Road, Low Bentham  0.6 18 
Approx. Total  14.2 484 
Proposals for development on the sites identified above will be supported 
subject to compliance with the following Development Principles for each 
site.  
 98 
 
 
 Development Principles for Housing Sites identified in Policy SP7  
Site Ref.  Location Uses 
HB011  Primary school, east of Robin Lane, west of 
Lowcroft, High Bentham  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area:  1.0ha  
Approx. Numb er of Dwellings: 72 extra care  
 
Developme nt Principles: 
 The site will provide approxi mately 72 units of extra c are or other specialist housing for 
older people or people with disabilities  to meet identified local needs.  
 
 Development will have regard to the character and appearance of the area and the 
characteristics identified in the Asses sment of High Bentham for Conservation  Area 
designation (August 2016).  
 
 The design of proposals shall conserve the landscape and scenic beauty of  the Forest 
of Bowland AONB.  
 
 Access to the site will be gained from Robin Lane and/or  Low Croft.  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2 and INF3 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing and sport, 
open space and recreation facilities) and all other relevant local plan policies.  
 
 
Site Ref.  
 Location Uses  
 
HB023  
 North of Low Bentham Road, High Bentham  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area:  1.7ha  
 
Approx. Number of Dwellings : 54 
 
Developme nt Principles: 
 A surface water hazard has been identified within the southwest corner of the site. 
Development prop osals must therefore be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment and 
drainage strategy which has informed the design, layout and landscaping of the site. 
Proposals will incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS), where possible.  
 
 The site’s prominent loca tion will be addressed in the design, layout and landscaping of the 
development to ensure that the character and appearance of the local area is not 
adversely affected and will include measures to minimise impacts on air qua lity, noise and 
light pollution.  
 
 The design of proposals shall conserve the landscape and scenic beauty of the Forest of 
Bowland AONB.  
 
 Access to the site will be gaine d from Low Bentham Road (B6480).  99 
 
 
  
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and  INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education 
provision and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other relevant local plan 
policies.  
 
Site Ref.  
 Location Uses  
 
HB024  
  
North of Lakeber Drive, Hi gh Bentham  
 C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 0.9 ha  
 
Approx. Numb er of Dwellings: 29 
 
Developme nt Principles: 
 Access to the site will be provided via the adjoining allocated site HB052 unless access 
can be provided from Lakeber Drive. In either circumstance , development of the site will 
provide emergency access between Lakeber Drive and the adjoining allocated site, 
HB052 . 
 
 The public right of way (PROW) through the site will be protected and will not form part of 
the vehicular access. Measures will be taken  to provide a separate route for pedestrians. 
The PROW will form a framework for the design of on -site public open space to provide 
enhanced green infrastructure, a connection to open countryside to the north and 
associated well -being benefits. Development  of this site and adjoining allocated sites 
HB052 and HB044 will take the opportunity to secure additional benefits by creating green 
infrastructure linkages across all three sites.  
 
 The site is in a prominent location. Development proposals will be carefu lly and sensitively 
designed to minimise visual impact on the character and appearance of the area, and 
include measures to minimise impacts on air qua lity, noise and light pollution.  
 
 The design of proposals shall conserve the landscape and scenic beauty of the Forest of 
Bowland AONB.  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education 
provision and sport, open space and recreation fa cilities) and all other relevant local plan 
policies.  
 
 
Site Ref.  
 Location Uses  
HB025  East of Butts Lane, High Bentham  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 1.0 ha 
Approx. Numb er of Dwellings: 32 
Developme nt Principles: 
 A surface water flood risk hazard has b een identified along the eastern site boundary. 
Development proposals must therefore be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment and 100 
 
 
 drainage strategy which has informed the design, layout and landscaping of the site. 
Proposals will incorporate Sustainable Dra inage Systems (SuDS), where possible.  
 
 The site’s prominent location will be addressed in the design, layout and landscaping of the 
development to ensure that the character and appearance of the local area is not 
adversely affected and will include measure s to minimise impacts on air qua lity, noise and 
light pollution.  
 
 The design of proposals shall conserve the landscape and scenic beauty of  the Forest of 
Bowland AONB.  
 
 Access to the site  will be gained from Butts Lane.  
 
 Development proposals for this site  must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education 
provision and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other relevant local plan 
policies.  
 
Site Ref.  Location Uses 
HB026  North of Springfield Crescent and east of Butts 
Lane, High Bentham  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 2.6 ha  
Approx. Number of Dwellings: 82 
 
Developme nt Principles: 
 A surface water flood risk hazard adjoins the northwest corner of the sit e. Development 
proposals must therefore be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment and drainage strategy 
which has informed the design, layout and landscaping of the site. Proposals will 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage  Systems (SuDS), where possible.  
 
 The si te’s prominent location will be addressed in the design, layout and landscaping of 
the development to ensure that the character and appearance of the local area is not 
adversely affected and will include measures to minimise impacts on air qua lity, noise a nd 
light pollution.  
 
 The design of proposals shall conserve the landscape and scenic beauty of the Forest of 
Bowl and AONB.  
 
 Access to the site will be gained from Springfield Crescent . 
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan polici es H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education 
provision and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other relevant local plan 
policies.  
 
 
 101 
 
 
 Site Ref  
 Location  Uses  
 
HB038  
  
Land south  of Low Bentham Road, High Bentham   
C3 Residential  
D1 Education  
Approx. Area : 0.9ha  
 
Approx. Number of Dwellings : 19 
 
Development Principles:  
 The eastern part of the site (0.3ha of land) is safeguarded for the provision of an extension to 
Bentham Primar y School.  In the event that the eastern part of the site (0.3ha of land) is not 
required for such provision, additional residential development will be acceptable in principle.  
 
 The site’s prominent location will be addressed in the design, layout and lan dscaping of the 
development to ensure that the character and appearance of the local area is not adversely 
affected and will include measures to minimise impacts on air quality, noise and light 
pollution.  
 
 The design of proposals shall conserve the landsca pe and scenic beauty of the Forest of 
Bowland AONB.  
 
 Access to the site will be gained from the B6480.  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards afforda ble housing, education provision 
and sport ,open space and recreation facilities) and all other relevant local plan policies . 
 
Site Ref  
 Location  Uses  
 
HB052  
  
Land to north west of Bank Head Farm and south of 
Ghyllhead Farm, High Bentham   
C3 Residential  
 
Approx. Area : 5.7ha (including approx. 2ha of additional green infrastructure)  
 
Approx. Number of Dwellings : 118  
 
Development Principles:  
 
 Development will provide access to the adjoining allocated sites HB024 and HB044, unless 
access can be taken from  Lakeber Drive and Barghs Meadow respectively . 
 
 Public rights of way thr ough the site will be protected.  
 
 Development of the site will contribute to the improvement and growth of green infrastructure 
and to achieving net gains in biodiversity. Substantial areas of additional on -site public green 
space, totalling approximately 2 ha, will be provided in order to mitigate landscape impact, 
enhance local green infrastructure, achieve a net gain in biodiversity, provide a connection to 
the open countryside and s ecure well -being benefits. The areas of green infrastructure will 
also deliver recreational walking opportunities aimed at relieving pressure on the 
Ingleborough Complex Special Area of Conservation (SAC) and Bowland Fells Special 102 
 
 
 Protection Area (SPA). Su ch green space will be designed to take account of existing public 
rights of way that cross the site and to maintain a natural or semi -natural setting to those 
public rights of way. Development of this site and adjoining allocated sites HB024 and HB044 
will take the opportunity to secure additional benefits by creating green infrastructure linkages 
across all three sites.  
 
 A surface water flood risk hazard has been identified in the western part of the site. 
Development proposals must therefore be supported  by a Flood Risk Assessment and 
drainage strategy which has informed the design, layout and landscaping of the site. 
Proposals will incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS), w here possible.  
 
 The site’s size and prominent location on the town's north ern periphery will be addressed in 
the design, layout and landscaping of the development to ensure that the character and 
appearance of the local area is not adversely affected and will include measures to minimise 
impacts on air qua lity, noise and light p ollution.  
 
 The design of proposals shall conserve the landscape and scenic beaut y of the Forest of 
Bowland AONB.  
 
 Access to the site will be gained from Robin Lane and an emergency access will be provided 
from Lakeber Drive via the  adjoining allocated site  HB024.  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education provision 
and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other  relevant local plan policies.  
 
 
 
Site Ref  
 Location  Uses  
 
LB012  
  
Wenning View, Low Bentham Road, Low Bentham   
C3 Residential  
 
Approx. Area : 0.6ha  
 
Approx. Number of Dwellings : 18 
 
Development Principles:  
 An assessment of the site’s archaeological in terest will be required with appropriate 
mitigation incorporated into development proposals where necessary;  
 
 Access to the site will be gained from the B6480;  
 
 The design of proposals shall conserve the landscape and scenic beauty of the Forest of 
Bowland  AONB;  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education provision 
and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other relevant local plan policies.  
 
 
 Site Ref.  Location Uses 
HB044  Land to west of Goodenber Road, High Bentham  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 1.9 ha  
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings: 61 
 
Developme nt Principles: 
- Access to the site will be provided via the adjoining allocated site HB052 unless 
access can be provided from Barghs Meadow;  
- The adjacent public right of way, which runs along the southwest boundary of the 
site, will be protected;  
- A new public footpath lin k will be created across the site and will be combined with 
on-site public open space, in order to enhance the public rights of way network, the 
site’s accessibility to local services (including the town centre and primary school) 
and local green infrastru cture provision. Development of this site and adjoining 
allocated sites HB052 and HB024 will take the opportunity to secure additional 
benefits by creating green infrastructure linkages across all three sites;  
- The design of proposals shall conserve the lan dscape and scenic beauty of the 
Forest of Bowland AONB;  
- Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 
and INF6 (which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, 
education provision and sport, open  space and recreation facilities) and all other 
relevant local plan policies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
102a   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
102b  103 
 
 
 POLICY SP8: STRATEGY FOR GLUSBURN/CROS S HILLS – TIER 3  
Located between Skipton and Steeton/Silsden in Bradford district, 
Glusburn/Cross Hills is a substantial centre of population in Craven and is a 
service centre. There a re however physical constraints to growth that 
influence future growth and direction. A proportionate level of growth is 
directed towards to Glusburn/Cross Hills which takes account of this role, 
recognises associated infrastructure constraints and account s for 
development opportunities. Provision is made for the following sites to 
secure growth that underpins the role and function of Glusburn/Cross Hills:  
 
Housing Sites:  
Site R ef Location  Approx.  Area 
(Ha) Approx. Yield  
SC085  Land at Malsis, Glusburn  12.7 67 
SC037(a)  Land at Ashfield Farm, Skipton Road, 
Cross Hills  0.8 25 
Approx. Total  13.5 92 
Proposals for development on the sites identified above will be supported 
subject to compliance with the following Development Principles for each 
site. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 104 
 
 
 Development Principles for Housing Sites identified in Policy SP8  
Site Ref.  Location Uses 
SC085  Land at Malsis, Glusburn  Heritage -led 
conversion and  new 
build development to  
include an element of 
C2 institutional and  
C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 12.7 ha (including approximately 8.6 ha of additional green infrastructure area)  
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings:  67 
Developme nt Principles:  
 The primary purpose of the allocation is to conserve the Grade II Listed Buildings on site: 
Malsis Hall, Lodge to Malsis Hall, Gate  Piers and Railings. Heritage-led development 
through the conversion of Malsis School and the siting and design of development on the 
site will conserve the significance of heritage assets and their historic landscape settings. 
 
 Ground work  assessment will be required as part of the on-site works to investigate areas 
thought to be of archaeological significance. 
 
 A Heritage Impact Assessment will be carried out to the satisfaction of Historic England. 
 
 An Ecological Impact Asses sment will be carried out to the satisfaction of Natural 
England. Any necessary biodiversity mitigation is to be designed into the scheme. 
 
 The site is within the 2.5km buffer zone of the South Pennine Moors SPA/SAC. To relieve 
recreational pre ssure on the SPA/SAC and to protect the parkland setting of the Grade II 
Listed Building, the site will include extensive areas  of green infrastructure of 
approximately 8.6 ha.  A PROW will be created through the site to link to existing PROWs 
on Malsis Lane to the south and High Corn Mill to the north-east. 
 
 Trees on the site to be retained under Area Tree Preservation  Order reference  (2343) 209 
2013, to respect the existing setting of the listed building, and the attractive appearance  of 
the site. New build housing will be well screened by planting  of native tree species to 
retain the visual integrity of the parkland as far as possible. 
 
 A fluvial and surface water flood risk hazard has been identified within the northern part of 
the site.  Development pro posals must therefore be suppor ted by a Flood Risk 
Assessment and drainage strategy which has informed the design, layout and 
landscaping of the site.  Proposals will incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS),  
where  possible. 
 
 The site is in a prominent location. Development proposals should be carefully and 
sensitively designed to minimise visual impact on the character  and appearance of the 
area, and include measures to minimise impacts on air quality, noise and light pollution. 
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from Colne Road. 
 
 Deve lopment proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and 105 
 
 
 INF6  (which set out requirements for contributions towards  affordab le housing, education 
provision and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other relev ant local plan 
policies. 
 
 
Site Ref.  Location Uses 
SC037(a)  Land at Ashfield Farm, Skipton Road, Cross Hills  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 0.8 ha  
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings:  25  
Developme nt Principles:  
 The site is in a prominent location. Developmen t proposals will be carefully and 
sensitively designed to minimise visual impact on the character and appearance of the 
area, and include measures to minimise impacts on air quality, noise and light pollution.  
 
 The site has very good accessibility to key s ervices and public transport. Proposals for 
development will therefore maximise the opportunities for future occupiers to walk or 
cycle to most key services rath er than using a private vehicle.  
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from Skipton Road.  
 
 Develo pment proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and 
INF6 (which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education 
provision and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other relevant local  plan 
policies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 106 
 
 
 POLICY SP9: STRATEGY FOR INGLETON –TIER 3  
Located to the north of Low and High Bentham and adjacent to the A65, Ingleton is a 
tourist and employment centre, with a village centre that is struggling for vitality. A 
proportionate  level of growth is directed towards Ingleton to bolster its’ role and 
function as a local service centre, and provision is made for the following sites to 
achieve this:  
Housing Sites:  
Site Ref  Location  Approx. Area 
(Ha) Approx. Yield  
IN006  CDC car park , Backgate, Ingleton  0.2 6 
IN010  Caravan Park, north of River Greta, 
Ingleton  0.4 13 
IN028  Between Ingleborough Park Drive and 
Low Demesne, Ingleton.  0.9 29 
IN029  East of New Village and south of Low 
Demense, Ingleton.  1.2 36 
IN049  Former playing fie lds, Ingleton Middle 
School, Ingleton.  0.7 21 
Total   3.4 105 
Employment Sites:  
Site Ref  Location  Net Dev Area 
(Ha) Uses  
IN022 and  
IN035  Land adjacent to southern edge of 
industrial estate, off New Road and west 
of Tatterthorn Lane (Extensions to 
existing employment area)  2.9 B1, B2 and B8  
Total   2.9  
Proposals for development on the sites identified above will be supported 
subject to compliance with the following Development Principles for each 
site. 
 107 
 
 
 Development Principles for Housing and Employmen t Sites identified in Policy 
SP9 
Site Ref.  Location Uses 
IN006  CDC carpark, Backgate, Ingleton  C3 Residential  
 
Approx. Area : 0.2ha  
Approx. Number of Dwellings : 6 
Developme nt Principles:  
 
 Siting and design of development on the site to conserve the sig nificance of heritage assets 
on and adjacent to the site and their settings (the grade II listed building to the west of the 
site: Panwell Cottage, Backgate, and Ingleton Conservation Area).  
 
 The site is in a prominent location. Development proposals shoul d be carefully and 
sensitively designed to minimise visual impact on the character and appearance of the 
area, and include measures to minimise impacts on air quality, noise and light pollutio n. 
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from Backgate.  
 
 Developme nt proposals on this site must accord with all relevant policies of the local 
plan.  
 
Site Ref.  Location Uses 
 
IN010   
Caravan Park, north of River Greta, Ingleton  
  
C3 Residential  
Approx. Area : 0.4ha  
Approx. Number of Dwellings : 13 
Developme nt Principles:  
 Siting and design of development on the site to conserve the significance of heritage assets 
on and adjacent to the site and their settings (the grade II listed bridges to the south and 
north of the site: Ingleton Viaduct and Bridge to the north east of Broadwood Cottage, 
Bridge End respectively; and Ingleton Conservation Area).  
 
 A fluvial flood risk hazard has been identified within the western part of the site. 
Development proposals must therefore be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment and 
drainage strategy which has informed the design, layout and landscaping of the site. 
Proposals will incorporate Sustainable Drainage  Systems (SuDS), where possible.  
 
 The site is in a prominent location. Development proposals should be carefully and 
sensitively desi gned to minimise visual impact on the character and appearance of the area, 
and include measures to minimise impacts on air quality, noise and light pollution;  
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from the B6255;  
 
 Development proposals for this site must ac cord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and INF6 108 
 
 
 (which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education 
provision and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other  relevant local plan 
policies.  
 
 Site Ref.  Location Uses 
IN028  Between Ingleborough Park Drive and Low 
Demesne, Ingleton.  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area : 0.9ha  
Approx. Number of Dwellings : 29 
Developme nt Principles:  
 Siting and design of development on the site to conserve the significance of heritage asse ts 
near and adjacent to the site and their settings (the grade II listed buildings to the north -
west and west of the site: Police Station, High Street and Panwell Cottage, Back Gate 
respectively; and Ingleton Conservation Area).  
 
 There is a requirement for  a Biodiversity Appraisal to assess the existing ecological 
conditions on the site. This is to be accompanied by a standardised Biodiversity Mitigation 
Plan (BMP) which must cover matters of both habitat and protected species, with the aim 
that negative ef fects on biodiversity are avoided or suitably offset, and enha ncement effects 
are implemented.  
 
 The site is in a prominent location and in close proximity to the National Park boundary. 
Development proposals should be carefully and sensitively designed to minimise visual 
impact on the character and appearance of the area, and include measures to minimise 
impacts on air quality, noise and light pollution . 
 
 Access to the site is to be gain ed from Ingleborough Park Drive.  
 
 Development proposals for this site m ust accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 
and INF6 (which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, 
education provision and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other  
relevant local plan policies.  
Site Ref.  Location Uses 
IN029  East of New Village and south of Low Demense, 
Ingleton.  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area : 1.2ha  
Approx. Number of Dwellings : 36 
Developme nt Principles:  
 Development proposals are required to maintain the existing PROW or provide an altern ative 
PROW connection through the site to connect with the PROW network to the south of the site 
in the open countryside and shall be designed to have a natural or semi -natural setting to 
deliver recreational walking opportunities aimed at relieving pressu re on the Ingleborough 
Complex Special Area of Conservation (SAC) and Bowland Fell s Special Protection Area 
(SPA).  109 
 
 
  
Site Ref.  Location Uses 
IN049  Former playing fields, Ingleton Middle School, 
Ingleton.  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 0.7 ha  
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings:  21 
 
Developme nt Principles:  
 
 Siting  and design of development on the site to conserve the significance of heritage assets 
near the site and their settings (the grade II listed building to the west of the s ite: The Laurels, 
Laundry Lane).  
 
 A surface water hazard has been identified to the so uthern and western parts of the site. 
Development proposals must therefore be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment and 
drainage strategy which has informed the design, layout and landscaping of the site. 
Proposals will incorporate Sustainable Drainage Syst ems (Su DS), where possible.  
 
 The site is in a prominent location. Development proposals should be carefully and sensitively 
designed to minimise visual impact on the character and appearance of the area, and include 
measures to minimise impacts on air qual ity, noise and light pollution . 
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from Laundry Lane.  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, edu cation provision 
and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other  relevant local plan policies . 
 
  
 There is a requirement for a Biodiversity Appraisal to assess the existing ecological conditions 
on the site. This is to be accompanied by a  standardised Biodiversity Mitigation Plan (BMP) 
which must cover matters of both habitat and protected species, with the aim that negative 
effects on biodiversity are avoided or suitably offset, and enha ncement effects are 
implemented.  
 
 The site is in a p rominent location. Development proposals should be carefully and sensitively 
designed to minimise visual impact on the character and appearance of the area, and include 
measures to minimise impacts on air qua lity, noise and light pollution.  
 
 Access to the site is to be gained Low Demesne.  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education provision 
and sport, open space and recreation  facilities) and all other  relevant local plan policies . 
  
 110 
 
 
 Site Ref.  Location Uses 
IN022 and 
IN035  Land adjacent to southern edge of industrial estate, 
off New Road and west of Tatterthorn Lane.  
(Exte nsions to existing employment area)  B1, B2 & B8  
Approx. Area: 2.9 ha  
Developme nt Principles:  
 
 The sites are allocated as an extension to the existing industrial estate to the south of New 
Road, Ingleton.  
 
 A surface water hazard has been identified withi n the eastern and western parts of site IN035 
and a small area  adjacent to the western boundary of site IN022.   Development proposals 
must therefore be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment and drainage strategy which has 
informed the design, layout and la ndscaping of the site. Proposals will incorporate Sustainable 
Drainage Systems (Su DS), where possible.  
 
 Development proposals will be carefully and sensitively designed to minimise visual impact on 
the character and appearance of the area, and include meas ures to minimise impacts on air 
quality, noise and light pollution.  This is particularly important in terms of mitigating impact on 
public v iewpoints from Tatterthorn Lane.  
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from Tatterthorn Lane and from the A65 via the  existing 
industrial estate road.  
 
 Development proposals on this site must accord with all relevant policies of the local plan.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 111 
 
 
 POLICY SP10: STRATEGY FOR GARGRAVE –TIER 3  
Located astride the A65 and benefitting from rail connections with Skip ton, Settle, 
Lancaster and beyond, Gargrave provides employment opportunities and has an 
active community set within a high quality built environment. A neighbourhood plan 
is in preparation. A proportionate level of growth is directed towards Gargrave to 
underpin and bolster its’ role and function as a local service centre as follows:  
Housing Sites:  
Site Ref  Location  Approx. 
Area(Ha)  Approx. 
Yield  
 
GA004  Neville House, Neville Crescent, Gargrave  0.4 14 
GA009  Land off Eshton Road, north of Canal,  Gargrav e 3.8 60 
GA031  Land to the west of Walton Close , Gargrave  1.4 44 
Total  5.6 118 
Proposals for development on the sites identified above will be supported subject to 
compliance with the following Development Principles for each site.  
Development Princip les for Housing Sites identified in Policy SP10  
Site Ref.  Location Uses 
GA004  Neville House, Neville Crescent, Gargrave  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 0.4 ha  
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings:  14 
 
Developme nt Principles:  
 The site is in a prominent location. Development proposals should be carefully and sensitively 
designed to minimise visual impact on the character and appearance of the area, and include 
measures to minimise impacts on air qua lity, noise and light pollution.  
 
 Ground work assessment will be re quired as part of the on -site works to investigate areas 
thought to be  of archaeological significance.  
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from the existing access onto Neville Crescent.  
 112 
 
 
  Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan poli cies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education provision 
and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other  relevant local plan policies.  
 
 
Site Ref.  Location Uses 
GA009  Land off Esh ton Road, north of Canal, Gargrave  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 3.8 ha (including approx. 1.2 ha of additional green infrastructure)  
Approx. Numb er of Dwellings:  60 extra care  
 
Developme nt Principles:  
 
 Siting and design of development on the site to c onserve the significance of heritage assets on 
the site and their settings (the grade II listed bridge to the east of the site: Ray Bridge No. 173, 
Leeds and Liverpool Canal; and Gargrave Conservation Area).  
 
 Development proposals for this site will incorp orate an area of green infrastructure measuring 
approximately 1.2 ha to the south and east of the site to provide a landscape  buffer to the 
Yorkshire Dales N ational Park and improve access to the Leeds & Liverpool Canal, including 
for people with limited mobility.  
 
 A fluvial flood risk hazard has been identified within the southern part of the site. Development 
proposals must therefore be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment and drainage strategy 
which has informed the design, layout and landscaping of the site. Proposals will incorporate 
Sustainable Drainage Systems (Su DS), where possible;  
 
 There is a requirement for a Biodiversity Appraisal to assess the existing ecological conditions 
on the site. This is to be accompanied by a standardised Biodiversity Mi tigation Plan (BMP) 
which must cover matters of both habitat and protected species, with the aim that negative 
effects on biodiversity are avoided or suitably offset, and enhancements effects are 
implemented;  
 
 The site is in a prominent location. Developme nt proposals should be carefully and sensitively 
designed to minimise visual impact on the character and appearance of the area, and include 
measures to minimise impacts on air quality, noise and light pollution;  
 
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from E shton Road.  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and  (which 
set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, and sport, open space and 
recreation facilities) and all other relevant local plan  policies.  
  
 
 
 113 
 
 
 Site Ref.  Location Uses 
GA031  Land to the west of Walton Close , Gargrave  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: 1.4 ha  
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings:  44 
 
Developme nt Principles:  
 
 Siting and design of development on the site to conserve the signi ficance of heritage assets 
near the site and their settings (the scheduled ancient monument to the west of the site: 
Moated site west of Paget Hall; the grade II listed building to the north -west of the site: Milton 
House, Marton Road; and Gargrave Co nserv ation Area).  
 
 Proposals for development on this site will incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS), 
where possible.  
 
 The site is in a prominent location. Development proposals should be carefully and sensitively 
designed to minimise visual impact o n the character and appearance of the area, and include 
measures to minimise impacts on air quality, noise and light pollution;  
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from Marton Road.  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education provision 
and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other  relevant local plan policies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 114 
 
 
 POLICY SP11: STRATEGY FOR TIER 4A AND  4B VILLAGES WITH BASIC 
SERVICES AND BISECTED VILLAGES WITH BASIC SERVICES   
Tier 4 settlements will receive a limited amount of growth that underpins their 
role and function as settlements with basic services and to ensure ongoing 
sustainability. Villages with basic services and/or tourism function which are 
bisected by the National Park boundary also receive an appropriate level of 
growth on the following sites:  
Housing Sites:  
Site Ref  Location  Approx.  Area 
(Ha) Approx. Yield  
BU012  Richard Thornton’s CE  Primary 
School, Burton in Lonsdale  0.7 15 
BR016  Land to west of Gilders, Langholme 
Skipton Road, Low Bradley.  0.8 25 
SG014  Land at Lord’s Close, Giggleswick  1.1 35 
 
Mixed Use Housing and Employment Site  
Site Ref  Location  Net Dev Area  
(Ha) Approx.Yie ld 
CN006  Station Works, north of Cononley 
Lane, Cononley  2.2 C3 – 94 
B1 – 0.15 ha  
Approx.  Total  4.8 169 
Proposals for development on the sites identified above will be supported subject to 
compliance with the following Development Principles for each si te. 
 
 
 115 
 
 
 Development Principles for Housing and Mixed Use Sites identified in Policy 
SP11  
 
Site Ref.  Location Uses 
BU012  Richard Thornton’s CE Primary School, Burton in 
Lonsdale  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area: Approx. Area: 0.7 ha (including approximately 0 .3 ha of additional green 
infrastructure)  
Approx. N umb er of Dwellings:  15 
 
Developme nt Principles:  
 
 Conversion of the school and siting and design of development on the site to conserve the 
significance of heritage assets on and adjacent to the site an d their settings (Burton -in-
Lonsdale Conservation Area, Grade II Listed Burton Endowed First School, Schoolmasters 
House, garden wall and gatepiers, Scheduled Ancient Monument Castle Hill Motte an d Bailey 
castle, Tranquil Vale).  
 
 Any development proposal s hould include an Arboricultural survey to ascertain the exact 
location, species and condition of all trees on site. All healthy trees should be retained and 
work undertaken to maint ain them in a healthy condition.  
 
 Front terraces and all stone boundary wal ls should be retained a s far as possible and 
restored.  
 
 New build development is restricted to land at the rear (West) of the site.  
 
 Approximately 0.3ha of green infrastructure shall be provided on the site to protect the setting 
of the Grade II Listed Bui lding.  
 
 Ground work assessment may be required as part of the on -site works to investigate areas 
thought to be  of archaeological significance.  
 
 The site is in a prominent location. Development proposals should be carefully and sensitively 
designed to minim ise visual impact on the character and appearance of the area, and include 
measures to minimise impacts on air qua lity, noise and light pollution.  
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from the A687.  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education provision 
and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other  relevant local plan policies.  
 
 
 
 116 
 
 
 Site Ref.  Location Uses 
BR016  Land to west of Gilders, Langholme, Skipton Road, 
Low Bradley.  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area : 0.8ha  
Approx. Number of Dwellings : 25 
Developme nt Principles:  
 Siting and design of development on the site to conserve the setting of the Bradley Conservation 
Area. 
 
 The site is in a prominent location. Development proposals should be carefully and sensitively 
designed to minimise visual impact on the character and appearance of the area, and include 
measures to minimise impacts on air quality, noise and light p ollution .  
 
 An assessment of the site’s archaeological interest will be required with appropriate mitigation 
incorporated into development proposals where necessary . 
 
 The existing dry stone boundary walls will be retained. New dry stone boundary walls will  be 
created along the northern and western boundaries of the site to help establish a definitiv e new 
urban edge to the village.  
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from Skipton Road.  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies  H2, INF3 and 
INF6 (which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education 
provision and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other  relevant local plan 
policies.  
 
Site Ref.  Location Uses 
SG014  Land at Lords Clo se, Giggleswick.  C3 Residential  
Approx. Area : 1.1ha  
Approx. Number of Dwellings : 35 
Developme nt Principles:  
 The site is a village centre site with good accessibility to key services and public transport. 
Proposals for development should therefore maxim ise the opportunities for future occupiers to 
walk or cycle to most key services rather than using a private veh icle.   
 
 A fluvial flood risk hazard has been identified along the eastern boundary of the site.  
Development proposals must therefore be suppor ted by a Flood Risk Assessment and drainage 
strategy which has informed the design, layout and landscaping of the site. Proposals will 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (Su DS), where possible.  
 
 The site is in a prominent location. Development propos als should be carefully and sensitively 
designed to minimise visual impact on the character and appearance of the area, and include 
measures to minimise impacts on air quality, noise and light pollution . 
 
 An assessment of the site’s archaeological interest  will be required with appropriate mitigation 
incorporated into development proposals  where necessary.  117 
 
 
  
 The site is currently in use a playing field and any development proposals on this site must 
accord with the requirements of Policy INF3, criterion (d) . 
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from Lord’s Close . 
 
 Development proposals for this site must accord with local plan policies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education provision 
and sport, ope n space and recreation facilities) and all other  relevant local plan policies.  
 
 
Site Ref.  Location Uses 
CN006  Station Works, north of Cononley Lane, Cononley  C3 Residential and B1 
uses  
Approx. Area: 2.2 ha (including approx. 0.15ha for B1 Use)  
Approx.  Numb er of Dwellings:  94 
 
Developme nt Principles:  
 
 The site is promoted as partly ‘employment led’ to ensure the delivery of the socio -economic 
objectives of the plan.  
 
 Conversion of the Mill and siting and design of development on the site to conserve the 
significance of heritage assets on and adjacent to the site and their settings (Undesignated 
heritage asset of Cononley Mill , Mill House and Mill Chimney and Cononley Conservation 
Area).  
 
 An assessment of the site’s archaeological interest will be req uired with appropriate mitigation 
incorporated into development proposals where nec essary.  
 
 A fluvial flood risk hazard has been identified within the north -eastern part of the site.  
Development proposals must therefore be supported by a Flood Risk Assess ment and 
drainage strategy which has informed the design, layout and landscaping of the site. 
Proposals will incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (Su DS), where possible.  
 
 The site is in a prominent location. Development proposals should be carefully an d sensitively 
designed to minimise visual impact on the character and appearance of the area, and include 
measures to minimise impacts on air quality, noise and light pollution . 
 
 The site has very good accessibility to key services and public transport; pr oposals for 
development shall maximise the opportunities for future occupiers to walk or cycle to most key 
services rather than using a private vehicle.  
 
 Access to the site is to be gained from Cononley Lane.  
 
 Development proposals for this site must accor d with local plan policies H2, INF3 and INF6 
(which set out requirements for contributions towards affordable housing, education provision 
and sport, open space and recreation facilities) and all other  relevant local plan policies.  
  118 
 
 
 Infrastructure requir ements and delivery  
 
4.57 The delivery of new or improved infrastructure and services to support new 
development in a timely manner will be an important element in ensuring the 
appropriate and sustainable delivery of new growth in Craven.  It is important  
to ensure that certain infrastructure is provided before development begins, 
to safeguard against adverse impacts that may arise.  To facilitate this, it is 
important that infrastructure needs are understood, and costed early on as 
part of the plan making  process.   
4.58 Planning for infrastructure provision has  been, and continues to be, an 
ongoing process through the development of an Infrastructure Delivery Plan 
(IDP)  which sits alongside the Local Plan, as part of the evidence base .  The 
IDP has been p roduced in collaboration with infrastructure providers and 
examines provision of the following broad types of infrastructure:  
 Physical: transport, energy, water and drainage, waste  
 Social: education, health care, leisure and recreation, community and 
socia l and emergency services  
 Green: open space  
4.59 The IDP is a living document and will be updated regularly, providing an 
overview of the infrastructure required to  support new development. It also 
provides an overview of who is responsible for delivery, an d a broad 
indication of costs and funding mechanisms.  Moreover, the IDP will act as a 
focus for delivery, but should not be seen as a detailed investment 
programme.   
Funding Infrastructure and Services  
4.60 Planned infrastructure provision will be funded  through a number of sources.  
Mainstream funding sources, such as the District and County Council’s 
capital programmes, service providers’ investment programmes, and 
government grants, will continue to fund the bulk of infrastructure spending 
required to deliver the planned growth.  However, other initiatives such as 119 
 
 
 planning obligations and the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) can also 
provide a substantial resource for locally -determined priorities and other 
proposals that come forward.   
Other propos als 
4.61 In addition to the planned growth set out in the plan, it is likely that other 
proposals will come forward that have infrastructure requirements arising, 
that have not been accounted for.  The Council will seek contributions from 
developers when c onsidering such proposals to contribute towards a range 
of infrastructure arising in line with the provisions of Policy INF1: Planning 
Obligations . Policy SP12 makes provision for this and sets out a policy 
requirement for infrastructure provision, and mec hanisms available for 
delivery, provided as part of additional proposals.  
4.62 As part of the planning for infrastructure provision, the Council needs to 
consider the role that developers can play in helping to provide the physical, 
social and green infras tructure that is required and is arising from new 
growth.  When planning permission is granted for new development, the 
Council will seek contributions from developers towards a range of 
infrastructure in line with the provisions of Policy INF1: Planning 
Obligations . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 120 
 
 
  
POLICY SP12: INFRASTRUCTURE, STRATEGY AND DEVELOPMENT 
DELIVERY  
 
Planned Infrastructure  
 
The infrastructure required arising from the delivery of the planned growth in 
the local plan is set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) w hich is part 
of the evidence base of the local plan.   
 
Decisions on the timing of infrastructure delivery identified in the IDP are kept 
under review but will be tied to the timing of growth delivery over the plan  
period. The Council will work to mitigat e and minimise adverse impacts that 
may arise from the delivery of the local plan in terms of infrastructure 
provision.  
 
Development proposals are expected to either provide, or enable the 
provision of, infrastructure which is directly related to, or made necessary by 
that development. Where infrastructure cannot be provided directly, the 
Council will seek developer contributions through planning obligations in 
accordance with Policy INF1 or Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) if and 
when a CIL charge has b een adopted under the relevant Regulations.  
 
The Council expects infrastructure improvements and investments to be 
delivered by development, or through developer contributions secured by 
legal agreement or CIL. Delivery of infrastructure should be timely and to an 
adoptable standard, as specified by the relevant responsible statutory 
undertaker, organisation or authority.  
 
Proposals for the necessary maintenance, upgrading and expansion of 
utilities infrastructure will be supported in principle.  
 121 
 
 
 SECTION 5: ENVIRONMENT  
COUNTRYSIDE AND LANDSCAPE  
5.1 Craven's countryside – its land and scenery – and the quality of its 
landscapes are the area's defining feature and the jewel in its crown. 
People's appreciation and enjoyment of Craven, and the area's vitality and 
success, depend, in many ways, on its outstanding countryside and 
landscape. This policy is therefore of central importance to the Craven Local 
Plan.  
5.2 Local landscapes have been influenced and defined by natural and human 
activity, including a long tradition of farming and small -scale urban 
development. Because human and natural activity evolves over time, 
landscape character will also change over time. Positive and beneficial 
management of that change, including restoration and protection where 
nece ssary, is essential to maintaining the quality, distinctiveness and vitality 
of the local environment.  
Landscape Character   
5.3 Within Craven there are areas of different landscape character. Many of 
these are rural and agricultural, but there are urban en vironments, too, 
including the settings of our historic villages and market towns. Landscape 
appraisal helps to describe the important characteristics of different areas of 
landscape (called landscape characterisation), grouping areas according to 
shared f eatures. This helps to make recommendations for future 
conservation and management. The most up to date landscape appraisal for 
Craven at the time will be an important tool in drawing -up and determining 
proposals for new development.  
5.4 Currently, the Cra ven Landscape Appraisal (2002) and the Forest of 
Bowland Landscape Character Assessment (2009) are the relevant 
Landscape Character Appraisals used in decision making. These appraisals 122 
 
 
 may be updated during the plan period in which case successor documents  
will used in decision making.  
5.5 Other sources of information and guidance on landscape management 
include Natural England‘s work on National Character Areas. Character 
areas have been profiled into landscapes which share similar characteristics 
and do n ot follow administrative boundaries. Each profile establishes 
guidance which can be important to decision making. In Craven the following 
five areas have been identified:  
• 21 Yorkshire Dales  
• 33 Bowland Fringe and Pendle Hill  
• 34 Bowland Fells  
• 35 Lanc ashire Valleys  
• 36 Southern Pennines  
5.6 The North Yorkshire and York Landscape Character Assessment  (2011)  tells 
us how historic processes have contributed to landscapes over time. This 
kind of information and guidance is helpful in the conservation of f eatures 
that give places their unique character, in identifying opportunities for 
enhancement and positive change, and in providing evidence to support local 
action.  
Designated Landscapes  
5.7 Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty and National Parks are natio nal 
landscape designations afforded the highest protection for their landscape 
and scenic quality.  The protection of these areas relates not only to the land 
within them, but also to their settings.  
5.8 The Forest of Bowland Area of Outstanding Natural Be auty (AONB) covers 
around a third of the Craven plan area. Designated in 1964, the AONB is 
recognised for its exceptional landscape value and special qualities including 123 
 
 
 its heather moorland, blanket bog and rare birds and is also important for its 
upland hay meadows, ancient semi -natural woodlands and tranquillity. The 
landscape setting of the Yorkshire Dales National Park is also an important 
influence within the plan area, stretching along most of the eastern boundary.  
5.9 The Council has a legal duty31 to work with the AONB and national park 
management bodies in the conservation and enhancement of the natural 
beauty of the Forest of Bowland AONB and the Yorkshire Dales National 
Park. The Council will also work with these bodies in achieving their other 
aims. Where development proposals could affect either of these 
designations, the Council and developers will need to consider the objectives 
of the management plans for these locations.  
5.10 Craven has two Registered Historic Parks and Gardens (Broughton Hal l and 
Gledstone Hall). These Parks and Gardens are designated under the 
‘Register of Historic Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest in 
England.’ Proposals which affect these heritage assets will be considered 
under Policy ENV2  (Heritage).  
Partners hip Working  
5.11 The Council makes a positive commitment towards implementing the Rights 
of Way Improvement Plan in seeking to deliver benefits to general health 
including obesity. The Council will work with the Local Access Forums of the 
Yorkshire Dales N ational Park and the North Yorkshire Local Access Forum.  
Dark Skies  
5.12 Craven is a sparse rural area w here large gaps exist between settlements, 
and there are large expanses of land with relatively little artificial light helping 
to keep the sky dark at night. Light in the wrong place (where it is not 
intended or wanted), or at the wrong time, is a form of pollution as it spoils 
the environment and can impact on health and wellbeing of people, the 
                                                           
31 Duty of Regard under the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000  124 
 
 
 migration and feeding behaviour of bird and other animal s pecies (including 
in particular nocturnal species such as owls and bats ), and the opportunity to 
view constellations. Light pollution can be caused through glare, trespass, 
scenic intrusion or sky glow all resulting in different effects.  
 
5.13 Developers s hould have regard to the Forest of Bowland AONB Obtrusive 
Lighting Position Statement which will be used in decision making, this sets 
the position that within the AONB or in locations affecting its boundaries, 
exterior lighting proposed as part of any new  development should be the 
minimum required and only appropriate to its purpose, so as to protect the 
area's natural surroundings and intrinsic darkness.  
5.14 However, it is also important outside these designated areas, where there 
are significant areas o f remote open countryside that also have intrinsically 
dark skies, that these locations are not adversely affected by lighting arising 
from new development proposals.  Therefore  other non -designated areas of 
remote open countryside, and areas identified a s being sensitive to light 
pollution within the relevant landscape character appraisal in the local plan 
area are categorised as being within Environmental Zone E1 under the ILP 
Guidance (guidance Notes for the Reduction of Obtrusive Lighting) and shall 
be subject to the requirements for light levels in that document (or successor 
documents) unless otherwise agreed with the Local Authority.’  
5.15 Guidance on lighting is contained within the Institute of Lighting Professionals 
Guidance Notes for the Reductio n of Obtrusive Light GN01:2011.  
5.16 Where significant lighting is proposed for example through the installation of 
floodlights, developers will be required to submit a lighting assessment and 
strategy demonstrating how impacts will be minimised and approp riate 
mitigation incorporated.  
 
 125 
 
 
 POLICY ENV1: COUNTRYSIDE AND LANDSCAPE  
Sustainab le growth will ensure that t he quality of Cr aven’s countryside 
and landscape is conserved for future ge nerations to  enjoy; and that 
opportunities to res tore and en hance  the landscape are taken wherever 
possible. To achieve this, t he Cou ncil will: 
a) Expe ct new development  proposal s, in those areas not sub ject to 
national l andscape  designations,  to res pect, safeguard,  and where ver 
possible, restore or enhance the  landscape character of the area. 
Propos als should h ave regard to the rel evant Lands cape Char acter 
Appraisal/Assessment, and specifically to the dif ferent  lands cape 
character types t hat are pr esent in the plan area. Regard  should al so be 
had to  the relevant profiled Natural England C haracter Areas (listed at 
para 5.5) and t he North Yorkshire  and York Lands cape Characte risation  
Project (2011) (or successor  docum ents).  Propo sals will show how they 
respond  to the parti cular character  area and type they are loc ated 
within.  
b) Supp ort prop osals that secure the restoration of degr aded landscap es, 
in ways that al so help to achie ve biodi versity and heritage ob jectives. 
c) Supp ort prop osals which s ecure the  preservation and a ppropriate 
restoration or en hancement  of nat ural and hist oric man-made  features. 
d) In determining prop osals which affect the Forest of  Bowland Area of 
Outstanding Natural  Beauty (AONB)  and its setting or t he setting of the 
Yorkshire  Dales Nat ional Pa rk, the Cou ncil will give great weight to 
cons ervation of  their  special qu alities, including t heir landscape, scenic 
beauty and intrinsi cally dark lands capes  (for the en joyment  and 
exper ience  of dark  skies).  In addition, pr oposals will be considered on a 
needs basis, shou ld be in scale with, and have respect for their 
surroundi ngs and be  in line  with the AONB or National Park 
Manag ement  Plan objectives. 
e) Supp ort prop osals that secure the restoration, pre servation and  where 126 
 
 
 possible enhan cement of the public rights  of way network, including t he 
impro vement  of exi sting pu blic rights of way, the creation of new public 
rights of way and the promotion of  disabled  access to t he coun tryside.  
f) Exterior lighting proposed as part of any new development should be 
the minimum required and only appropriate to its purpose, so as to 
protect the a rea’s natural surroundings and intrinsic darkness. 
Proposals for exterior lights shall demonstrate there is no significant 
adverse effect, individually or cumulatively, on; the character of the 
area; the visibility of the night sky; biodiversity (including  bats and light 
sensitive species); and residents, pedestrians or drivers.  
g) Enable  settlements to gr ow in ways that respe ct their form,  
distribu tion and l andscape  setting. Impor tant considerations  will 
inclu de; allowing t he countryside to perm eate buil t-up areas; 
maintaining ga ps between set tlements in order to preser ve their 
separate identiti es; and pre serving and creat ing connections between 
built-up ar eas and the coun tryside, including existing and n ew public  
rights of way. 
 
HERITAGE  
5.17 Heritage is wh at we’ve inherited from the past and place special value upon. 
It’s a broad term and can be applied to a wide range of things from 
landscapes and buildings to customs and knowledge. As well as being a 
record of our development through history, it creates l ocal identity, is weaved 
into our modern way of life and can be an inspiration for positive change into 
the future. Heritage is irreplaceable and heritage conservation is therefore 
essential to the achievement of sustainable development.  
5.18 Craven’s heri tage includes a rich historic environment, which underpins the 
area’s character, appeal and success. Within this historic environment, a 127 
 
 
 number of heritage assets have been designated in recognition of their 
special significance32. The NPPF makes it clear t hat great weight should be 
given to the conservation of these assets when considering development 
proposals:  
 Listed buildings —of which there are 888 within the plan area  
 Scheduled ancient monuments —31 in the plan area  
 Registered parks and gardens — 2 in the  plan area  
 Conservation areas —29 in the plan area  
5.19 However, the designated heritage assets represent only a fraction of the 
heritage resource of Craven . Indeed, it is the wealth of non -designated 
elements which help to give Craven’s towns, villages and  countryside their 
distinct identity. These non -designated heritage assets are a vital part of the 
social and cultural identity of the District helping to provide distinctiveness, 
meaning and quality to the places in which its communities live, providing a  
sense of continuity and a source of identity and are valued by local people as 
part of the familiar and cherished local scene. Many non -designated assets 
are known about and already identified, but others may be undiscovered or 
unrecognised, or their exis tence may only be suspected —archaeological 
remains are a good example33. 
5.20 This plan needs to maintain and manage change to these heritage assets in 
a way which sustains and, where appropriate, enhances their significance. 
This can be achieved through en abling positive change that follows principles 
of good conservation and design; and by ensuring that any development 
proposal affecting a heritage asset is based on knowledge, understanding  
and appreciation of the asset’s significance.   In cases where arch aeological 
significance is not fully understood, or where archaeological potential has 
                                                           
32Significance is defined as “the value of a heritage asset to this and future gener ations because of its heritage 
interest” (NPPF).  
33 Non - designated heritage assets are identified in the Historic Environment Record, which is maintained by 
North Yorkshire County Council and in conservation area appraisals undertaken by Craven District Co uncil, 
which are available online.  128 
 
 
 been identified, developers will need to provide information to support their 
proposals in the form of archaeological field evaluations.  
5.21 Change to heritage assets c an also have an impact on biodiversity.  Canal 
and river -side buildings, bridges and barns, in particular, provide valuable 
roosting and nesting sites for protected species – such as barn owls, bats, 
swallows, swifts and house martins – and support the use  of canal and river 
corridors as green infrastructure.  Conserving heritage assets in a manner 
which sustains their significance and promotes biodiversity will be supported.  
5.22 In order to sustain the long -term future of a heritage asset, it may be 
neces sary for it to be put to a use for which it was not originally designed. 
This can help reduce the threat of neglect and decay and the number of 
assets being identified as being at risk34. However, this should always be to 
the optimum viable use for that ass et (i.e. the one that will cause least harm 
to its significance).  
5.23 Any harm to or loss of a heritage asset - through destruction, alteration or 
development within its setting – will require clear and convincing justification. 
Decisions will need to be based on informed, balanced judgements and the 
merits of each case.  Proposals which would result in harm to the 
significance of a designated heritage asset will be weighed against the public 
benefits of that proposal. Where substantial harm or total loss is likely to 
occur, it would have to be demonstrated that the harm is necessary to 
achieve substantial public benefits or:  
 the nature of the heritage asset prevents all reasonable uses of the site; 
and   
 no viable use of the heritage asset itself can be fo und in the medium term 
through appropriate marketing that will enable its conservation; and    
                                                           
34 The Heritage at Risk Register is maintained by Historic England and is available online  129 
 
 
  conservation by grant -funding or some form of charitable or public 
ownership is demonstrably not possible; and  
 the harm or loss is outweighed by the benefit of br inging the site back  into 
use. 
Where any heritage assets or parts of heritage assets are likely to be lost, the 
assets should be properly surveyed and recorded beforehand. Requiring 
such records to be made, kept safe and open to the public is therefore an 
important element of heritage conservation.  
5.24 Local communities and amenity groups have an important role to play in 
helping to identify those non -designated heritage assets in their area which 
they consider important to the character of their area. The  impact of a 
development upon such assets will be taken into account in determining the 
appropriateness of any proposals. Neighbourhood plans can help to reveal 
the significance of heritage assets and especially non -designated assets. 
Communities can use t heir plans to identify buildings and places which are 
appreciated locally for their historic, cultural or townscape value —ensuring 
that the significance of those buildings and places can be properly and fully 
appreciated by all.  
POLICY ENV2: HERITAGE  
Crave n’s historic environment will be conserved and, where appropriate, 
enhanced and its potential to contribute towards the economic regeneration, 
tourism and education of the area fully exploited.  This will be achieved 
through: - 
 
a) Paying particular attenti on to the conservation of those elements which 
contribute most to the District’s distinctive character and sense of place.  
These include: - 
i)      The legacy of mills, chimneys, and terraced housing associated with  
the textile industry;  
ii)     The bridg es and structures associated with the Settle -Carlisle 
Railway;  130 
 
 
  
iii)    The buildings, bridges, locks and other and structures associated 
with the Leeds -Liverpool Canal and Thanet Canal;  
iv)    The historic market towns of Skipton and Settle;  
v)     Skipto n Castle, the castle grounds and the castle’s extensive   
landscape setting, including the medieval hunting park, Skipton  
Woods and Civil War Battery;  
vi)   The legacy of traditional barns and other buildings and structures  
associated with the farming ind ustry and historic land estates.  
 
 
b) Ensuring that  proposals affecting a designated heritage asset (or an 
archaeological site of national importance) conserve those elements 
which contribute to its significance. The more important the asset, the 
greater t he weight that will be given to its conservation. Harm to such 
elements will be permitted only where this is outweighed by the public 
benefits of the proposal. Substantial harm to the significance of a 
designated heritage asset (or an archaeological site o f national 
importance) will be permitted only in exceptional circumstances where it 
can be demonstrated that there are substantial public benefits that 
outweigh that harm or loss.  
 
c) Supporting proposals that would preserve or enhance the character or 
appearance of a Conservation Area, especially those elements which have 
been identified in a Conservation Area Appraisal as  making a positive 
contribution to its significance.  
 
d) Ensuring that proposals affecting an archaeological site of less than 
national importance conserve those elements which contribute to its 
significance in line with the importance of the remains. In those cases 
where development affecting such sites is acceptable in principle, 
mitigation of damage will be ensured through preservation of the remains 
in situ as a preferred solution. When in situ preservation is not justified, 
the developer will be required to make adequate provision for excavation 
and recording before or during development.  
 131 
 
 
 e) Supporting proposals which conserve Craven’ s non -designated heritage 
assets. Developments which would remove, harm or undermine the 
significance of such assets, or their contribution to the character of a 
place will only be permitted where the benefits of the development would  
outweigh the harm hav ing regard to the scale of the harm and the 
significance of the heritage asset.  
 
f) Supporting proposals which will help to secure a sustainable future for 
Craven’s heritage assets, especially those identified as being at greatest 
risk of loss or decay.  
 
GOOD DESIGN  
5.25 Good design may be more difficult to define than it is to recognise, but 
usually results in buildings and in places that look and feel better , function 
better and contribute more to the achievement of sustainable development. 
This means th at well -designed environments are often more enjoyable, 
healthier, easier to move around, less conducive to crime and anti -social 
behaviour, and more durable and adaptable to change.  
5.26 Craven‘s attractive environment, which includes historic market town s, 
villages and landscapes of individual character and distinctiveness, is the 
perfect inspiration for good design in all aspects of future growth . It is 
important to highlight the importance of receiving good design proposals 
where  the special qualities o r setting of the Yorkshire Dales National Park 
and Forest of Bowland AONB  would be affected . Designers and their clients 
should make the most of this opportunity to achieve good design in all of their 
projects —whatever the scale or location.  
5.27 The Counc il promotes community involvement in new development 
proposals and members of the community may wish to identify important 
characteristics of their local environment, including locally valued elements of 
the built and natural environment  to be incorporated  into a development 132 
 
 
 scheme e.g. through public realm improvements or art installations . Such 
elements form part of the local context and need to be understood and 
appreciated when designs are being drawn up. Community participation in 
design —such as in the  design of neighbourhood open space —can help to 
ensure that designs work well for end -users.  
5.28 Communities also have the option of setting out their own policies, in support 
of good design, within a Neighbourhood Plan. National guidance on good 
design i s available from the government, its advisors and agencies. A 
number of recognised guidance documents establish principles that help to 
achieve good design, for example Building for Life.    
5.29 Discussions about good design, between designers, their clie nts and the 
council, can be very helpful and are always encouraged. The best time for 
this is at the early stage of a project, so that things agreed during the 
discussion can form the basis of the final design without any great difficulty or 
delay.  
5.30 Light pollution can be a form of nuisance, impacting on health and wellbeing 
as well as natural habitats and species. When considering lighting in new 
development, developers and decision makers should have regard to 
guidance prepared by the Institute of Lig hting Professionals Guidance Notes 
for the Reduction of Obtrusive Light GN01:2011  (or its successor 
document) . 
5.31 People’s well -being and quality of life can be greatly affected by crime, the 
fear of crime and road safety. In the case of most planning a pplications, 
community safety issues will need to be addressed in terms of the layout and 
design of the development. Well -conceived and designed developments can 
help to prevent damage  to community cohesion and prevent increase d 
opportunities for criminal activity both of which can be perceived as 
‘threatening’ by the people who use them . However, there may be rare 
occasions where evidence is clear that a proposed  development is 
intrinsically likely to increase crime or disorder’s effect upon the community.  133 
 
 
 In such circumstances,   where unacceptable community safety impacts 
cannot be ‘designed out’, planning permission should be refused. Generally, 
negotiation with applicants is encouraged to ensure their proposals maximise 
security for their users and for t he community in general.   
5.32 Supplementary Planning Documents may be brought forward where 
necessary to aid developers and decision makers in bringing forward new 
development proposals founded on good design principles.  
5.33 To help with the reading of the following policy on good design, some terms 
used in the policy are explained below:  
Context  
5.34 Context is local circumstances, which form the background to a design idea 
and help the design make sense in its surroundings.  
Distinctiveness  
5.35 The pos itive features that help to contribute towards creating a ‘sense of 
place,’ and individual identity.     
Permeable  
5.36 Permeable developments have ways through  them , which allow people to 
walk and move freely in an enjoyable and easy way.  
Legible, Sense o f Place  
5.37 Legible developments with a sense of place are clear enough to read, so you 
can tell where you are and where things are around you.  
Backcloths and Landmarks  
5.38 The majority of buildings provide a backcloth for occasional landmark 
buildings – it's important to have both in the right proportions and locations.  
Public Realm  134 
 
 
 5.39 The public realm is where we can wander without entering any strictly private 
space – it adds to the look, feel and enjoyment of places.  
Residential Amenity  
5.40 Residen tial amenity concerns the benefit enjoyed by the external space 
around the private home. This benefit depends on the quality of space, 
location, size, orientation, accessibility, enclosure, noise and smell.   
POLICY ENV3:  GOOD DESIGN  
 
Good design will hel p to ensure that growth in Craven results in positive 
change, which benefits the local economy, environment and quality of life, 
including health and wellbeing. This will be achieved by following the 
general design principles set out in broad terms below:  
 
Context  
a) Development should respond to the context and proposals should be 
based on a proper understanding and appreciation of environmental 
features, including both natural and built elements such as landscape, 
topography, vegetation, open space, micro climate, tranquillity, light and 
darkness;  
 
b) Designs should respect the form of existing and surrounding buildings 
including density, scale, height, massing and use of high quality materials 
which should be locally sourced wherever possible;  
 
c) Developm ent should be legible and create a sense of place by 
maintaining, enhancing and creating good townscapes with beneficial 
elements like views, vistas, enclosures, focal points, public art, 
backcloths and landmarks;  
 
d) Development should seek to enhance loc al distinctiveness through 
maintaining good aspects of the local environment, improving poorer 135 
 
 
 aspects and adding new aspects that benefit the local environment;  
 
e) Development should protect the amenity of existing residents and 
business occupiers as wel l as create acceptable amenity conditions for 
future occupiers;  
 
f)  Development proposals should be able to demonstrate that they will 
secure a good standard of amenity for all existing and future occupants of 
land and buildings;  
 
Infrastructure  
g) Desig ns should anticipate the need for external storage space within new 
developments, including space for the storage and collection of non -
recyclable and recyclable waste;  
 
h) Necessary services and infrastructure should be able to be 
accommodated without cau sing harm to retained features, or result in 
visual clutter;  
 
Ensuring Development is Accessible  
i)  Reasonable provision should be made to ensure that buildings and  
spaces are accessible and usable and that individuals, regardless of their 
age, gender or  disability are able to gain access to buildings and to gain 
access within buildings and use their facilities, both as visitors and as 
people who live and work in them ; 
 
j)  Development should be permeable and should make getting around 
easier —especially f or pedestrians, cyclists and people with disabilities — 
by improving existing routes, adding new ones and creating connections 
to enhance the local network;  
 
k) Access roads should be designed as streets —they should form part of the 
public realm, be people -friendly, safe and active, allow natural 
surveillance and help to create a network of easy -to-use routes;  136 
 
 
  
l)  Schemes should seek to incorporate secure storage for bicycles to 
encourage sustainable modes of travel;  
 
Art And Culture  
m) Development should promote socialising, recreation, art, health and 
wellbeing, by maintaining and improving existing public spaces and by 
creating new public spaces, such as parks, squares and other areas of 
public realm;  
 
n) The provision of public art will be encouraged fr om the outset for all major 
development schemes;  
 
Designing Out Crime  
o) The design of all new developments will be required to promote safe living 
environments, reduce opportunities for crime and the fear of crime, 
disorder and anti -social behaviour.  
 
Shop Fronts/Advertisements  
p) Traditional shop fronts which make a valuable contribution to the 
distinctive character of their local area should be, wherever practicable,  
refurbished and retained in development proposals;  
 
q) New/alterations to shop fronts w ill only be permitted if the design is 
consistent with the character and scale of the existing building, if it is of 
high quality and uses materials that are deemed acceptable to the area.  
The shop fascia must be designed in scale, in its depth and width,  with 
the façade and the street scene of which it forms part;  
 
r) Proposals for advertisements will be assessed having regard to issues of 
highway/transport safety and the characteristics of the locality, including 
features of scenic, historic, architectur al, cultural or other special interest;  
 137 
 
 
 Sustainable Design and Construction  
s) To require non -residential developments of 1,000 or more square metres 
where feasible to meet at least the BREEAM standard ‘Very Good’ for non -
residential buildings requirement .  Non -residential development should 
seek to achieve BREEAM ‘Very Good’ or better unless it has been 
demonstrated through an economic viability assessment that it is not 
viable to do so;  
 
t) Sustainability should be designed in, so that development takes all 
reasonable opportunities to reduce energy use, water use and carbon 
emissions and to minimise waste, ensure future resilience to a changing 
climate and wherever possible to generate power through solar or other 
means, in accordance with Building Regula tions. This should include 
residential, industrial and commercial developments.  
 
 
BIODIVERSITY  
5.41 Biodiversity means biological diversity, or the number and variety of plants 
and animals living in a specific area. Whilst words like nature, wildlife and  
habitat may be more common, biodiversity is a good all -encompassing term. 
In order to achieve sustainable development, this plan needs to ensure that 
Craven's growth includes growth in biodiversity. This means preserving the 
biodiversity we have and secur ing enhanced biodiversity for the future.  
5.42 Craven‘s biodiversity is sensitive to change, but can continue to flourish and 
adapt, if given the necessary opportunities and support. Well -managed 
change can not only avoid the destruction and fragmentation of habitats and 
species, but can help them to recover and expand. In order to achieve this, 
it‘s important to safeguard habitats and species protected by law under the 
following national and international designations:  
• Special Areas of Conservation (SAC)  138 
 
 
 • Special Protection Areas (SPA)  
• Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI);  
and habitats and species identified under the following local 
designations:  
• Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation (SINC),  
• Ancient woodland /pasture  or individual veteran trees.  
5.43 The above internationally, nationally and locally designated sites are mapped 
on the Policies Map. However, safeguarding these (relatively few) designated 
sites, which are often isolated pockets of rich biodiversity, will not be 
sufficient to preserve and enhance biodiversity overall. In order to do this, we 
need to make the best of all opportunities, wherever they arise, to safeguard 
native habitats and species and to help their recovery, expansion, adaptation 
to climate change and movement  across the plan area. The NPPF states that 
the planning system should minimise impacts on biodiversity and provide net 
gains in biodiversity where possible. As such green infrastructure 
routes/areas have been incorporated into greenfield site allocations where 
possible and these are identified under Policy ENV4 to provide opportunities 
for a net gain in biodiversity to be achieved and maintained on these sites. 
Future reviews of the Local Plan will include the safeguarding of Local 
Geodiversity Sites which , at present, are at candidate stage and not formally 
designated. Geological features in the district are currently safeguarded 
where they form part of internationally designated SSSI.  
5.44 The vast majority of the plan area lies within 7km of at least on e 
internationally designated site. These include the North Pennine Moors SPA 
and SAC, the South Pennine Moors Phase 2 SPA and SAC, the 
Ingleborough Complex SAC, the Craven Limestone Complex SAC and the 
Bowland Fells SPA. As identified in the Habitats Regul ation Assessment – 
Appropriate Assessment Report, the close proximity of SPAs and SACs 
means that the designated sites can be vulnerable to recreational pressures 139 
 
 
 emanating from the potential future occupants of new residential 
development. Other forms of development, such as intensive leisure or 
tourism proposals may also give rise to additional recreational pressure. 
Where new developments are within 2.5km of designated sites they (the SPA 
and/or SAC) can be particularly vulnerable to disturbance, and the  
development site itself could affect the foraging habitat for qualifying bird 
species.  
5.45 Development proposals likely to have a significant effect on a European site, 
when considered alone and in combination with other plans and projects, will 
therefo re need to be subject to an Appropriate Assessment. Where the 
Appropriate Assessment cannot rule out adverse impacts on a site’s integrity 
(having considered any suitable mitigation), and there are no alternative 
solutions, permission will be refused unles s there are imperative reasons of 
overriding public interest (the ‘IROPI test’)35. In the event that a development 
proposal passes the IROPI test, compensatory measures must still be 
provided, for instance the re -creation of a comparable habitat.  
5.46 The n ational and local Biodiversity Action Plans are good sources of 
information and help to identify threats and opportunities relating to the 
preservation and enhancement of biodiversity. In addition, Natural England 
has defined National Character Areas based  on unique combinations of 
landscape, biodiversity, geodiversity and cultural and economic activity. 
Information like this shows that there are good opportunities, locally, for the 
preservation and enhancement of biodiversity, including specific assets lik e 
native woodland, hedgerows, agricultural habitats, semi natural hay meadow, 
blanket bog, moorland, ponds and other water bodies.  
5.47 Would -be developers should assess, early on, the likely effect of their 
proposals on biodiversity within the site, on wi der ecological networks and on 
biodiversity beyond the site, so that designs can be drawn up to achieve 
                                                           
35 IROPI – Imperative Reasons of Overriding Public Interest  140 
 
 
 improvements in biodiversity and stronger ecological networks. Part of this 
assessment should be how people may access, use and impact upon any 
biodiver sity or geodiversity features within the development site, and any 
designated biodiversity sites nearby. Attention should be paid to all aspects 
of biodiversity, but especially to priority habitats and species identified in the 
national and local Biodivers ity Action Plans .  Local Nature Partnerships can 
provide developers with useful advice and access to local organisations, 
businesses and individuals who are working towards improving the local 
natural environment, as a way of linking development proposals in with 
existing biodiversity improvement projects in the locality.  
5.48 Development proposals which are likely to adversely affect international 
designation s will be subject to a specific  IROPI test under (Article 6 (4) of the 
EU Directive on the Conserva tion of Habitats and of Wild Flora and Fauna 
(The Habitats Directive). To pass the IROPI test development proposals 
must demonstrate that mitigation measures have been explored and that 
residual effects remain and  that when mitigation measures have been 
exhausted ,alternative solutions have been be sought.  If, and only after, 
alternative solutions are shown not to be possible, then the development 
must be able to demonstrate ‘imperative reasons of overriding public interest’ 
(relating for example to human  health, public safety or beneficial 
consequences of primary importance to the environment) to proceed.  In the 
event that a development proposal passes the IROPI test, compensatory 
measures must still be provided, for instance the recreation of a comparab le 
habitat.  
5.49 Information about the location, characteristics and significance of Craven‘s 
designated biodiversity and geodiversity sites is available from databases 
maintained by the district and county councils  and the North and East 
Yorkshire Local B iological Records Centre .  Enquiries and discussions are 
welcomed and encouraged.  
 141 
 
 
 POLICY ENV4: BIODIVERSITY  
 
Growth in housing, business and other land uses on allocated and non -
allocated sites will be accompanied by improvements in biodiversity. This 
means that:  
a)   Wherever possible, development will make a positive contribution  
towards achieving a net gain in biodiversity and in particular will:  
i)      Ensure that there is no adverse effect on any international 
designated site’s integrity, either a lone or in combination with other 
plans and projects, which is to be demonstrated through 
Appropriate Assessment. In cases where Appropriate Assessment 
concludes that adverse effects cannot be avoided or adequately 
mitigated, development proposals will not  be acceptable unless the 
IROPI test under Article 6(4) of the EU Directive on the Conservation 
of Natural Habitats and of Wild Flora and Fauna (The Habitats 
Directive) has been passed and appropriate and suitable 
compensatory measures are provided;  
ii) Ensure that there is no adverse impact on any national or local 
designated sites and their settings, unless it has been 
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the local planning authority that 
the benefit of, and need for the development clearly outweighs the 
impact on the importance of the designation;  
iii) Avoid the loss of, and encourage the recovery or enhancement of 
ecological networks, habitats and species populations (especially 
priority habitats and species as identified in the Craven Biodiversity 
Action  Plan, 2008 or any subsequent update) by incorporating 
beneficial biodiversity features in the design (i.e. through 
landscaping or SuDS);  
iv) Conserve and manage the biodiversity and/or geodiversity value of 
land and   buildings within the site;  
v)  Increa se trees and woodlands by incorporating appropriate 
planting, using  native and locally characteristic tree and plant 142 
 
 
 species where possible, and retaining and integrating existing 
mature and healthy trees and hedgerows that make a positive 
contribution to  the character, appearance and setting of an area;    
vi) Ensure there is no deterioration in the Water Framework Directive 
ecological status of surface or ground waterbodies as a result of 
the development;  
vii)  Enable wildlife to move more freely and eas ily throughout the local 
environment, including both the natural and built elements.  
 
b)   Development proposals should achieve benefits in biodiversity that are 
equal to, or where possible exceed the biodiversity value of the site prior 
to development.  W here improvements in biodiversity are achievable 
these should be on site; however if this is not possible or practical, an 
equivalent) improvement should be provided off -site by way of 
mitigation; ideally, this should be as close to the site as possible.  
 
c)   Development proposals that result in a significant loss in, or harm to, 
biodiversity on site, and where no compensatory measures are 
proposed, will be resisted.  
 
d)   Would -be developers should be aware that compensation through 
replacement of biodive rsity assets may not be practical or realistic in 
every case (e.g. recreating ancient woodland or ancient wood pastures) 
and that any development scheme based on such impractical or 
unrealistic proposals will not be acceptable.  
 
e) The loss or deterioratio n of irreplaceable habitats, including ancient 
woodland and the loss of aged or veteran trees found outside ancient 
woodland would be wholly exceptional.  
 
f)    The following allocated sites are accompanied by guiding development 
principles which identify indicative areas of green infrastructure within 143 
 
 
 each site where an overall net gain in biodiversity will be expected:  
Site 
Reference  Site Address  Approx Area of 
Green  
Infrastructure 
(Ha) Inset 
Map 
SP5: SKIPTON  
SK013  Land east of Aldersley Avenue 
and sou th of Moorview Way, 
Skipton  2.6 1 
SK061  East of canal, west of Sharphaw 
Avenue, Skipton  0.9 1 
SK081, 
SK082, 
SK108  Land north of Gargrave Road and 
west of Park Wood Drive and 
Stirtonber, Skipton  3.5 1 
SK088  Hawbank Fields, north of Otley 
Road and south o f A6131, Skipton  4.1 1 
SK089, 
SK090  Land to the north of Airedale 
Avenue and Elsey Croft, east of 
railway line, Skipton  2 1 
SK094  Land bounded by Carleton Road, 
railway line and A629, Skipton  7.4 1 
SK101  East of Keighley Road and south 
of Cawder Lane, S kipton  0.6 1 
SK114, 
SK124  Land to east of North Parade and 
Cawder Road garage site, Horse 
Close, Skipton  1.1 1 
SK049  Land east of Skipton Bypass, 
Skipton (Employment)   1 
SP6: SETTLE  
SG021, 
SG066, 
SG080  Land to the north -west and south -
west of Penny Gre en, Settle  1.2 4 144 
 
 
 SG025  Land to the south of Ingfield Lane, 
Settle  7.5 4 
SG027, 
SG068  Land to the south of Brockhole 
View and west of Brockhole Lane, 
Settle  0.8 4 
SG079  Land to the north of Town Head 
Way, Settle  0.9 4 
SG064  Land to south of Runley Bridg e 
Farm and west of B6480 
(Employment -Led Mixed Use)  1.6 4 
SP7: BENTHAM  
HB052  Land to north west of Bank Head 
Farm and south of Ghyllhead 
Farm, High Bentham  2 5 
SP8: GLUSBURN / CROSS  HILLS  
SC085  Land at Malsis, Glusburn  8.6 2 
SP10: GARGRAVE  
GA009  Land  off Eshton Road, north of 
canal, Gargrave  1.2 14 
SP11: BURTON IN LONSDALE  
BU012  Richard Thornton’s CE Primary 
School, Burton in Lonsdale  0.3 7 
 
 
 
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE  
5.50 Infrastructure is a term typically applied to things like roads, sewers, and 
telecommunications , which are necessary to support our way of life. The 
term “green infrastructure ” has been introduced to raise the profile of other 
things considered necessary to support our way of life, especially one that is 145 
 
 
 sustainable, healthy and enjo yable. These include all sorts of natural and 
semi -natural features, which form a network across rural and urban areas —
things like woodland, watercourses, ponds, wetland, hedgerows, verges, 
Public Rights of Way (PR OWs ), National Trails, footpaths, cycle -paths, street 
trees, parks, gardens, playing fields, green roofs and walls, allotments and 
cemeteries.  
5.51 These green infrastructure assets are often multi -functional and make 
valuable contributions to biodiversity, landscape, townscape, education, 
active recreation, relaxation and tackling climate change (by absorbing 
carbon dioxide, assisting the water cycle and alleviating flood risk). Good 
quality green infrastructure can also boost local economic activity.  
5.52 Growth in green infrastructure will benef it Craven‘s environment and 
economy and the people who live in, work in and visit the area; it will also 
contribute towards green infrastructure networks that extend beyond 
Craven‘s boundaries. This growth will need to happen at the same time as 
growth in housing, employment and other forms of development, and will 
need to contribute towards the achievement of sustainable development. The 
following policy (and other relevant local plan policies) will help to create a 
comprehensive and expanded network of gr een infrastructure assets. This 
will involve preserving and enhancing existing assets, creating new assets 
and strengthening connections between assets. For example, development 
will need to avoid potential disruption to biodiversity corridors —through 
fragmentation or isolation —and will need to provide new green spaces, using 
locally indigenous species, that benefit both wildlife and people.  
5.53 The council will support initiatives that enhance or create green infrastructure 
links within or beyond the plan  area, which promote district, sub -regional or 
regional green infrastructure corridors and projects; green infrastructure links 
to the Yorkshire Dales National Park and Forest of Bowland Area of 
Outstanding Natural Beauty, which promote sustainable tourism  and 
recreation.  146 
 
 
 5.54 Natural England, North Yorkshire County Council, district authorities and 
voluntary organisations have collaborated on the Yorkshire and Humber 
Green Infrastructure Mapping Project, which maps green infrastructure 
corridors and areas of importance outside urban areas. The project has 
identified a number of corridors within the plan area, including corridors of 
regional, sub -regional and district importance, and is a useful source of 
information for planning the preservation, enhancemen t and expansion of 
Craven‘s green infrastructure network.  
5.55 In addition, the Leeds City Region has developed a Green and Blue 
Infrastructure Strategy (2017 - 2036), which includes priority projects and 
investment programmes of sub -regional scale. One s uch project is Fresh 
Aire—a flagship project for the enhancement of green infrastructure assets 
along the Aire and Calder river valleys, linking Craven‘s south sub -area to 
the Yorkshire Dales National Park upstream and Bradford, Leeds and other 
Yorkshire a uthorities downstream.  The Leeds and Liverpool Canal Towpath 
Access Development Plan is a current project with the aim of capitalising on 
the value of the Leeds & Liverpool Canal as a strategic waterway and 
sustainable transport corridor by providing oppo rtunities for East Lancashire 
and West Yorkshire’s residents and visitors to move around more by foot and 
by bike.   This project recognises the Leeds Liverpool Canal as an important 
green infrastructure corridor which provides greater opportunities for ac cess 
to nature and the wider countryside, including connections with the National 
Park.  The Council is committed to supporting these projects through Policy 
ENV5 and Policy ENV11.   
5.56 Local work also provides a useful source of information for green 
infrastructure planning —for example the Skipton Natural Links Project, which 
promotes the enhancement of publically owned sites across Skipton (i.e. 
Aireville Park which is a visitor destination and an important green 
infrastructure corridor through Skipton) , and the council‘s own open space 
assessment and Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP).  147 
 
 
 5.57 Local patterns of growth must help to achieve sustainable development and 
should avoid town -cramming and concentric urban sprawl, which pushes 
green space and the count ryside further and further away from people living 
in built up areas. In somewhere like Skipton, for example, urban growth 
should be interspersed with green corridors that link people with the wider 
rural hinterland. Improvements to the canal towpath in Sk ipton will allow 
easier, more sustainable passage from existing and planned housing to the 
town centre and beyond.  Future developments can also link in and help to 
maintain existing pedestrian and cycle routes, thus enhancing the green 
infrastructure netw ork in an area. In addition to existing and currently planned 
green corridors and areas of open space, neighbourhood planning and the 
Local Green Space designation process provides communities with further 
opportunities to identify important green spaces a nd to bring forward their 
own green infrastructure projects.  
5.58 Policy ENV5 below aims to plan for better green infrastructure from the 
outset and looks to all new development to make a reasonable contribution 
wherever possible, including linking up to e xisting green infrastructure in the 
area. This also ties -in with other policy aims, including improvements in 
biodiversity, tackling climate change, protecting landscape, reducing 
recreational impact on SPAs/SACs and ensuring a high -quality local 
environme nt and an enhanced quality of life. Local plan sites, in particular, 
will help to create better green infrastructure routes which are multi -functional 
and mitigate constraints on site, as well as provide better links between built -
up areas, green space and  the countryside. Site specific development 
principles within Policies SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP10 and SP11 provide clear 
detail about the location, purpose and functional use of green infrastructure 
on each site.  
 
 
 148 
 
 
 POLICY ENV5:  GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE  
 
Growth i n housing, business and other land uses will be accompanied by an 
improved and expanded green infrastructure network. This will be achieved 
in the following ways.  
 
a) Wherever possible, development proposals will:  
i) Avoid the significant loss of, or harm to , existing green infrastructure  
assets and the disruption or fragmentation of the green 
infrastructure network;  
ii) Enhance existing or create new green infrastructure and secure its  
long -term management and maintenance;  
iii) Enhance existing or create  new links in the green infrastructure 
network, including habitat corridors that help wildlife to move more 
freely through the local environment.  
 
b) Development proposals should achieve improvements to the green 
infrastructure network where possible.  Whe re improvements are viable 
these should be achieved on site, however if this is not possible or 
practical, contributions for off -site enhancements should be made for 
projects as close to the site as possible in order to promote linkages and 
stepping stones  across the green infrastructure network.   
 
c) Development proposals that result in a significant fragmentation or loss 
to the green infrastructure network, and where no compensatory 
measures are proposed, will be resisted.  
 
d) The following allocated sit es are accompanied by guiding development 
principles which set out more specifically how improvements and growth 
to the green infrastructure network can be achieved on each site:  
 
 149 
 
 
  
Site 
Reference  Site Address  Approx Area 
of Green  
Infrastructure 
(Ha) Inset 
Map 
SP5: SKIPTON  
SK013  Land east of Aldersley Avenue and 
south of Moorview Way, Skipton  2.6 1 
SK061  East of canal, west of Sharphaw 
Avenue, Skipton  0.9 1 
SK081, 
SK082, 
SK108  Land north of Gargrave Road and 
west of Park Wood Drive and 
Stirtonber, Skip ton 3.5 1 
SK088  Hawbank Fields, north of Otley Road 
and south of A6131, Skipton  4.1 1 
SK089, 
SK090  Land to the north of Airedale Avenue 
and Elsey Croft, east of railway line, 
Skipton  2 1 
SK094  Land bounded by Carleton Road, 
railway line and A629, Skipto n 7.4 1 
SK101  East of Keighley Road and south of 
Cawder Lane, Skipton  0.6 1 
SK114, 
SK124  Land to east of North Parade and 
Cawder Road garage site, Horse 
Close, Skipton  1.1 1 
SK049  Land east of Skipton Bypass, Skipton 
(Employment)   1 
SP6: SETTLE  
SG021,  
SG066, 
SG080  Land to the north -west and south -
west of Penny Green, Settle  1.2 4 
SG025  Land to the south of Ingfield Lane, 
Settle  7.5 4 
SG027, 
SG068  Land to the south of Brockhole View 
and west of Brockhole Lane, Settle  0.8 4 150 
 
 
 SG079  Land to the north of Town Head Way, 
Settle  0.9 4 
SG064  Land to south of Runley Bridge Farm 
and west of B6480 (Employment -Led 
Mixed Use)  1.6 4 
SP7: BENTHAM  
HB052  Land to north west of Bank Head 
Farm and south of Ghyllhead Farm, 
High Bentham  2 5 
SP8: GLUSBURN / CROSS  HILLS  
SC085  Land at Malsis, Glusburn  8.6 2 
SP10: GARGRAVE  
GA009  Land off Eshton Road, north of canal, 
Gargrave  1.2 14 
SP11: BURTON IN LONSDALE  
BU012  Richard Thornton’s CE Primary 
School, Burton in Lonsdale  0.3 7 
 
 
FLOOD RISK  
5.59 Flood risk continues to be  a growing issue nationally and internationally and 
is closely linked to climate change. In Craven, flood risk is mainly associated 
with rivers, becks, surface water and drains, but the canal and reservoirs are 
also potential sources of flooding. Some actu al flood events have been 
significant in recent years and have caused damage and disruption to 
homes, community facilities, business and travel. Information about flood risk 
is available from the Environment Agency, the council‘s strategic flood risk 
asses sment and site -specific flood risk assessments that may be carried out 
for individual parcels of land; and national policy on flood risk is contained in 
the NPPF.  
5.60 Flood risk can be avoided or reduced in a number of ways. Ideally, new 
development shoul d be located in areas with the lowest risk of flooding (flood 
zone 1). Development in areas of medium or high risk (flood zone 2 or 3) 
requires additional scrutiny and justification through the application of the 151 
 
 
 Sequential Test and, if necessary, the Exce ption Test, which are explained in 
the NPPF. Development that incorporates Sustainable Drainage Systems 
(SuDS) can help to reduce the risk from surface water run -off; and areas of 
the site designed to accommodate surface water (such as swales, ponds and 
meadows) can provide attractive green space for people and wildlife.  
Guidance on the design of SuDs is available from North Yorkshire County 
Council.  
5.61 Natural mechanisms to reduce flood risk can also be used on a wider, 
landscape scale. Peat moorland i n the uplands and woodland on valley 
slopes can help to retain rainwater and slow down drainage into becks and 
rivers. Care must be taken to ensure that development does not degrade 
peat soils and upland habitats, as their capacity to store water helps to 
alleviate downstream flooding and protect water quality. Wetlands, floodplain 
grasslands, ponds and wet woodlands can offer similar benefits on the valley 
floor. Keeping, restoring and adding to these features can therefore offer 
multiple benefits for the landscape, biodiversity and flood risk —including 
flood risk downstream, in large urban areas.  
POLICY ENV6:  FLOOD RISK  
 
Growth in Craven will help to avoid and alleviate flood risk in the following 
ways:  
a) Development will take place in areas of low floo d risk wherever possible 
and always in areas with the lowest acceptable flood risk, by taking into 
account the development‘s vulnerability to flooding and by applying any 
necessary sequential and exception test.  
 
b) Development will safeguard waterways and  benefit the local environment 
(aesthetically and ecologically) by incorporating sustainable drainage 
systems (SuDS); where the use of SuDS is not possible, feasible or 
appropriate other means of flood prevention and water management 152 
 
 
 should be used.  All s urface water drainage systems (SuDS or other) 
should be economically maintained for the lifetime of the development.   
 
c) Development will maintain adequate and easy access to watercourses 
and flood defences, so that they may be managed and maintained by the 
relevant authority.  
 
d) Development will avoid areas with the potential to increase flood 
resilience, and seek to enhance as far as possible the natural capacity of 
soils, vegetation, river floodplains, wetland and upland habitats to 
reduce flood risk .       
                                                                         
e) Development will minimise the risk of surface water flooding by ensuring 
adequate provision for foul and surface water disposal in advance of 
occupation (as per standards s et out by the Environment Agency and 
subsequent updates to the standards, see Appendix C).  Surface water 
should be managed at the source and not transferred, and every option 
should be investigated before discharging surface water into a public 
sewerage n etwork.  
 
f)  Development will maximise opportunities to help reduce the causes and 
impacts of flooding by ensuring adequate sufficient attenuation and long 
term storage is provided to accommodate storm water on site without 
risk to people or property and w ithout overflowing into a watercourse (as 
per standards set out by the Environment Agency and subsequent 
updates to the standards, see Appendix C).  
 
In all of the above, it will be important to refer to the latest and best flood risk 
information from Crave n‘s strategic flood risk assessment and any relevant 
site-specific flood risk assessment, plus advice from the Environment 
Agency and the contents of the NPPF.  
 153 
 
 
 LAND AND AIR QUALITY  
Land Quality  
5.62 Whilst most of the land that has been put forward by la ndowners for inclusion 
in the Council‘s Strategic Housing L and Availability Assessment (SHLAA) is 
greenfield, there is also some brownfield land that is available and it is 
possible that additional brownfield land may become available in the future in 
the form of windfall sites. The re -use of brownfield land is often seen as 
having a number of benefits —it‘s a form of recycling, it can regenerate and 
decontaminate an area, and it reduces the need for greenfield development. 
Therefore, the re -use of brownfiel d land should be preferred wherever 
possible, bearing in mind the viability of development and the potential for 
land to acquire biodiversity value.  
5.63 Craven’s agricultural land is considered not to be best and most versatile 
(BMV) for the majority of the plan area, but there is potential for areas of 
BMV agricultural land in several parishes .  Grade 3 land can provide high 
yields of grass that can be grazed or harvested over most of the year and is 
therefore particularly important to Craven‘s livestock  farming and local food 
production. Wherever possible, grade 3 land should be safeguarded and 
development should be located on lower -graded land. Development on grade 
3 land will require justification, on grounds that the need for development 
outweighs the  loss of agricultural value.  
5.64 Over many years, the re -use of brownfield land has enabled contamination to 
be addressed where necessary. There are still numerous sites throughout 
the plan area where some contamination is a possibility, so the 
decontamin ation and re -use of land is likely to continue for some time. In 
order for development to go ahead, the possibility, nature and extent of any 
contamination will need to be investigated; any disturbance of contaminants 
will need to avoid environmental damag e and unacceptable health risks, both 
during and after development; and remediation measures will need to be 
introduced, as necessary.  154 
 
 
 5.65 As the mining legacy in Craven is a sizable and locally distinctive issue, 
unstable land is an important factor that  requires consideration as part of any 
development proposal, and land remediation schemes may be necessary to 
ensure that the land is remediated to a standard which provides a safe 
environment for occupants and users.  Due consideration should also be 
afforded to the prior extraction of any remnant shallow coal as part of any 
mitigation strategy, in line with the requirements of the NPPF.  Prior 
extraction of remnant shallow coal can prove to be a more economically 
viable method of site remediation than gro ut filling of voids.  
Air Quality   
5.66 Whilst Craven generally enjoys low levels of air pollution, growth will need to 
help maintain good air quality and reduce harmful vehicle emissions. 
Therefore, new development should be accessible by walking, cycling and 
public transport and green travel plans should be used to encourage less 
reliance on cars for local journeys. The layout and design of buildings should 
be adjusted and modified to reduce emissions and their cumulative impact on 
air quality into the fut ure. 
POLICY ENV7:  LAND AND AIR QUALITY  
 
Land Quality  
Growth in Craven will help to safeguard and improve land quality in the 
following ways:  
 
a) Ensuring significant development avoids the plan area’s best and most   
versatile agricultural land (grade 3) wh erever possible, unless the need for 
and benefit of development justifies the scale and nature of the loss.  
 
b) The re -use of previously developed (brownfield) land of low environmental 
value will be encouraged and supported.  
 155 
 
 
 c) The remediation of contaminated and unstable land will be encouraged and 
supported, taking into account what may be necessary, possible, safe and 
viable.  
 
Air Quality  
Growth in Craven will help to safeguard and improve air quality in the 
following ways:  
 
d)  Development will avoid severe  residual cumulative impacts of traffic 
congestion and wherever possible, will help to ease existing traffic 
congestion.  
 
e) The location, layout and design of development will encourage walking, 
cycling and the use of public transport and electric vehicle s. Green travel 
plans will promote reductions in car use.  
 
f)  The location, layout and design of development will avoid or reduce 
harmful or unpleasant emissions from buildings, and mitigation measures 
will be introduced where necessary.  
 
 
WATER RESOURCE S, WATER QUALITY AND GROUNDWATER  
5.67 Water is an important and essential resource that needs to be managed in a 
sustainable way, so that it may continue to support Craven‘s homes, farms, 
industry, recreation, biodiversity and so on. The mains supply provi des most 
of Craven‘s drinking water, but private water supplies are a significant feature 
of some remoter rural areas. These private supplies are sourced from ground 
water and surface water, with ground water being the most common 
including wells, borehole s and springs.  Surface and ground water are 
important to people and the wider natural environment, so their use needs to 
be sustainable, sources need to be safeguarded from pollution and over -156 
 
 
 abstraction (as specified in the Aire and Calder Valley Catchme nt 
Management Strategy), and development needs to avoid contamination or 
obstruction.  The phasing of new sewerage and waste water treatment 
infrastructure, which may be required to serve new development, will need to 
avoid overburdening water resources.  Given the capacity issues with 
sewerage infrastructure in areas such as in the Aire Valley, new development 
may be dependent upon upgrading and enlarging the existing sewerage 
infrastructure.  
5.68 In England and Wales development is required to comply wit h the Water 
Framework Directive, through meeting the relevant River Basin Management 
Plans’ requirements. Specifically, the Humber River Basin Management Plan 
requires the restoration and enhancement of water bodies to prevent 
deterioration and promote rec overy of water bodies. Any development should 
safeguard these important water resources and protect and improve water 
quality with an overall aim of getting water bodies to ‘good’ status as defined 
by the Water Framework Directive.  
 
POLICY ENV8:  WATER RES OURCES, WATER QUALITY AND 
GROUNDWATER  
 
Growth in Craven will help to safeguard and improve water resources in the 
following ways:  
 
Water Resources  
a) Development will be served by adequate sewerage and waste water 
treatment infrastructure, which matches t he type, scale, location and 
phasing of the development, and which safeguards surface and ground 
water resources.  
 
b) Development will maximise opportunities for the incorporation of water 
conservation into its design, including the collection and re -use of water on 157 
 
 
 site.     
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Water Quality  
c) Development will red uce the risk of pollution and deterioration of water 
resources by anticipating any likely impact and incorporating adequate 
mitigation measures into the design.   
 
d) Development will not lead to pollution of controlled waters in line with the 
requirements  of the Water Framework Directive.   
 
Groundwater  
e) Developers will protect surface and groundwater from potentially polluting 
development and activity, by carrying out preliminary site investigations 
prior to permission being granted to ensure that land is suitable for the 
intended use.  
 
f) Developers will ensure that sources of groundwater supply are protected 
by guiding development away from identified Source Protection Zones 
(SPZ), i.e. areas close to drinking water sources where the risk associated 
with groundwater contamination is greatest. The Source Protection Zones 
in the Craven plan area are shown on the Proposals Map.  
 
 
 
RENEWABLE AND LOW CARBON ENERGY  
5.69 Climate change is bringing increased average temperatures and rainfall and 
is resulting in more frequent extreme weather events, including floods. 
Scientific evidence shows that climate change is partly caused by increased 
carbon emissions resulting from the way we live.  
5.70 Craven‘s total carbon emissions are low, but when the relatively sp arse 
population is taken into account, emissions per head are higher than the 158 
 
 
 regional and national averages. Whilst the explanation for this may be 
complex, the fact that Craven is a sparsely populated and expansive rural 
area will play a part —for example , people in Craven may rely more on their 
cars, because public transport is limited, and may live in older housing stock 
that is less fuel -efficient. Whilst technological advances and more stringent 
standards will make cars and homes less and less pollutin g, this local plan 
can also help to minimise  Craven‘s carbon emissions and achieve national 
targets36. 
5.71 Generating heat and electricity from renewable and low -carbon technologies 
is a good way of reducing carbon emissions, but the infrastructure require d 
needs to be located and designed to avoid other negative and unsustainable 
environmental impacts —on landscape, heritage, biodiversity and people‘s 
homes. Whilst there is potential in Craven for generating renewable and low -
carbon energy, particularly fro m wind, biomass and anaerobic digestion, this 
potential is comparatively limited as a result of other considerations .37  
5.72 The local plan does not, therefore, identify areas of opportunity for larger 
scale generation projects of a strategic nature. Inste ad, the following policy 
establishes a positive stance on renewable and low -carbon energy and 
encourages well -conceived proposals for sustainable generation projects and 
infrastructure.  
5.73 Whilst there may be limited opportunities for larger scale projec ts, 
microgeneration can play an important role in the growth of renewable and 
low-carbon energy generation in Craven. Where planning permission is 
required individuals, farms, businesses and communities will be encouraged 
to bring forward their microgenera tion projects, such as solar panels or hydro 
plants and will be supported wherever possible. Communities in particular 
                                                           
36 Under the Climate Change Act 2008, the Secretary of State must ensure  that the net UK carbon account for 
the year 2050 is at least 80% lower than the 1990 baseline.  
37 Low carbon and renewable energy capacity in Yorkshire and Humber Final Report March 2011 (AECOM) 
and Managing Landscape Change: Renewable & Low Carbon Energy Developments – a Landscape Sensitivity 
framework for North Yorkshire and York  February 2012 (AECOM)  159 
 
 
 may wish to use neighbourhood planning to bring forward renewable and low 
carbon energy projects within and for their parishes.  
5.74 Wher e waste materials are required to be imported on site for example in the 
case of anaerobic digestion, North Yorkshire County Council is the relevant 
Local Planning Authority under their remit for Minerals and Waste.  
5.75 Craven is renowned for its landscap e quality and renewable energy projects 
will need to ensure that proposals do not result in unacceptable impacts. 
Great weight will be given to conserving the landscape and scenic beauty of 
the Forest of Bowland AONB and its setting and the setting of the Yorkshire 
Dales National Park. In drawing up and in determining applications for 
renewable energy projects concerning the Forest of Bowland AONB regard 
should be given to the Forest of Bowland Energy Position Statement 2011 
(Revised), or its future success or. In managing landscape sensitivity and 
visual impacts developers and decision makers should have regard to 
'Managing Landscape Change: Renewable & Low Carbon Energy 
Developments - a Landscape Sensitivity Framework for North Yorkshire and 
York (2012)' wh ich establishes a coherent decision -making framework for 
renewable and low carbon energy developments.  
5.76 To reduce visual impact grid connections to and from any renewable energy 
facility or plant should be provided underground. Developers will need to 
demonstrate that historical or archaeological features will  not be adversely 
impacted upon. The environmental impact of access tracks to access or 
maintain facilities and the appropriateness of the local highway network 
should also be carefully considered.  
5.77 Infrastructure developments may have cumulative or combined effects where 
similar developments exist or are planned in the area —for example, installing 
a wind turbine where one or more already exist may raise concerns about 
visual clutter and conflic t caused by their placement, disruption of the skyline 
or fragmentation of the landscape. Such cumulative or combined effects can 160 
 
 
 stretch beyond plan area boundaries and may call for co -operation between 
neighbouring authorities.  
5.78 Potential effects on designated biodiversity sites may be indirect, such as the 
effect of rotating turbine blades on the migration patterns of birds.   However, 
effects can also be direct and can include collision of blades with birds and 
bats species and barotrauma affecting b at species. Therefore, whilst Policy 
ENV9 promotes the sustainable growth of renewable and low -carbon energy, 
proposals will need to consider carefully ecological effects  and accord with 
other local plan policies and help to achieve sustainable development  overall.  
5.79 There is potential for wind turbines to have an impact on aircraft, radar and 
telecommunications systems. Therefore it is advised that developers enter 
into pre -application discussions with the Ministry of Defence, Government 
Communication H eadquarters (GCHQ) or any other relevant body. The 
Council will also seek advice from these bodies through the decision -making 
process as a means of understanding the potential impact of wind turbine 
development.  
5.80 Developers, particularly where larger scale projects are proposed should 
engage with the community at an early stage in the planning process and 
where feasible actively seek to deliver wider community benefits.  
5.81 In some instances, renewable energy projects may be subject to an 
Environmenta l Impact Assessment (EIA). This may be the case where 
significant environmental implications are identified for the surrounding area 
during its development/or operation.   
5.82 On 18th June 2015 the Government released a Written Ministerial Statement 
which  brought into force new considerations for wind energy development. 
Local people now have the final say on wind farm applications. The NPPG 
has since been subsequently amended. Furthermore, there is now a 
requirement for ‘suitable areas’ of potential where  they exist to be identified 
on the Local Plan policies map.  161 
 
 
 5.83 The statement does not differentiate between commercial wind turbines 
where the intention is to feed electricity into the grid and those of a small 
scale nature where the primary purpose may  be to meet the operational 
needs of a farmstead or rural business. Requiring all sites including small 
scale turbines to be identified is considered somewhat over -restrictive.  
5.84 Evidence prepared as part of the plan making process has focused on 
turbin es of 100m or over which would be strategic in nature and make a 
significant contribution towards energy generation. The NPPF states 
that evidence prepared for the Local Plan should be proportionate , and 
requiring evidence to identify the suitability of al l potential areas for wind 
energy across the various scales is considered disproportionate. 
Impacts of small scale individual turbines, defined as turbines under 
50m in height to the tip are likely to be different from those of 
commercial wind turbines of 100m or more.  
5.85 Therefore in order to support the needs of a farmstead or other rural 
business and to enable the development of community led schemes 
benefiting local communities including those where a neighbourhood 
plan has not yet been prepared, smal l scale turbines will be deemed 
acceptable in accordance with the criteria set out in Policy ENV9 
notwithstanding the content of the written ministerial statement.  
 
POLICY ENV9 : RENEWABLE AND LOW CARBON ENERGY  
 
Renewable and low carbon energy development will help to reduce carbon 
emissions and support sustainable development.  This will be achieved by;  
 
a) Supporting projects and infrastructure proposals that offer a good balance 
of economic, environmental and social benefits, and are not outweighed 
on ba lance by one or more negative impacts.  
 162 
 
 
 b) Ensuring that there are no significant adverse impacts on natural, built 
and historic assets, and developments harmonise with the local 
environment and respect the character of the immediate setting and wider 
landscape.  
 
c) Avoiding developments that may detract from the landscape and scenic 
beauty of the Forest of Bowland Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty or its 
setting and the setting of the Yorkshire Dales National Park.  
 
d) Safeguarding the amenity of local re sidents and communities, and 
ensuring that satisfactory mitigation can be achieved to minimise impacts 
such as noise, smell or other pollutants.  
 
e) Developers engaging with the community at the earliest stages of the 
planning process and seeking to achiev e community benefits wherever 
possible.  
 
f)  Ensuring there are no unacceptable impacts on civil, military aviation, 
radar and telecommunications installations.  
 
g) Supporting proposals which demonstrate that the natural environment  
 
including designated sites will not be adversely affected without 
satisfactory mitigation.  Enhancements should be achieved wherever 
possible.  
 
 h)Supporting proposals where the potential cumulative impacts are not 
found to be significantly adverse.  
 
i) Ensuring operational re quirements can be met including accessibility  and 
suitability of the local road network, ability to connect to the grid and where 163 
 
 
 relevant, proximity of feedstock.  
 
j) Grid connections being provided underground, wherever feasible without 
adversely impacti ng upon historical or archaeological assets.  
 
k) Ensuring measures are in place to secure the removal of infrastructure 
should it become redundant or no longer operational and that satisfactory 
site restoration can be achieved.  
 
Commercial Scale Wind Turbi nes/Farms  
 
The Council has not identified suitable areas for commercial scale wind 
turbines or farms for the purpose of providing power into the National Grid 
within Craven.  The development of commercial scale wind turbines or wind 
farms for the purposes of inputting power into the National Grid will 
therefore only be permitted where criteria a) to k) listed above are met and ;  
 
i)  the site is located within an area defined as being suitable for such use 
within an adopted Neighbourhood Plan; and  
 
ii) fol lowing consultation, it can be demonstrated that the planning 
impacts identified by affected communities have been fully addressed 
and therefore the proposal has their backing.  
 
Small Scale Wind Turbines  
 
In the case of small scale turbines, defined as tur bines under 50m in height 
to the tip, proposals will be supported where they meet the criteria a) to k) 
listed abov e and;  
 
iii)  they are directly related to, and generate power principally for the 164 
 
 
 operation of a farmstead or other rural business or a loca l settlement; 
or  
 
iv)  the site is identified as being suitable for the development of wind 
turbines within an adopted Neighbourhood Plan.  
 
LOCAL GREEN SPACE  
5.86 Paragraphs 77 & 78 of the NPPF introduced the Local Green Space (LGS) 
Designation.  This de signation allows local communities to identify areas of 
local green space which are important to them and which should be provided 
special protection.  LGS can only be designated when a Local Plan or 
Neighbourhood Plan is prepared or reviewed .  The Gargrav e Neighbourhood 
Plan was formally ‘made’ in July 2019  and designates land as LGS . 
Neighbourhood Plans are currently being prepared in Bradley, Clapham & 
Cononley.  An assessment of potential LGS sites will be made during the 
preparation of these Neighbourh ood Plans and any other Neighbourhood 
Plans prepared by parishes in the future.   
5.87 Sites have been identified for assessment via a “call for sites” process.  The 
community, including residents, interest groups and Parish Councils were 
invited to submit  applications for sites to be considered for LGS designation 
and to identify the reasons why the site/s holds a particular importance for 
the local community.  Sites have been assessed against a robust 
methodology (which was developed following consultatio n with stakeholders) 
to determine their suitability for designation.   In addition, sites designated in 
the 1999 Local Plan as open space, existing recreation/amenity space, and 
protected road approaches have been assessed for LGS designation. These 
sites were identified through consultation for the preparation of the 1999 
Local Plan as being valued by local communities.  The LGS process for the 
new Craven Local Plan has reassessed these sites in the same way as sites 165 
 
 
 submitted through the “call for sites” process to consider their suitability for 
LGS designation.    
5.88 The Craven Local Plan identifies a total of 3 4 sites for LGS designation 
through the Local Plan.  The sites identified on the Policies Map and listed in 
the policy have been assessed in acc ordance with the criteria for Local 
Green Space as set out in the NPPF and are therefore considered to be in 
reasonably close proximity to the community they serve; local in character 
and not an extensive tract of land; and are demonstrably special to the local 
community, holding particular local significance  
5.89 The purpose of LGS is to protect green areas of particular importance to 
local communities and to provide special protection.  Local Green Space will 
be protected from development that is incompat ible with this specific 
designation and will only be allowed in very special circumstances. 
Development on land designated as LGS should be compatible with the 
designation, should preserve the open character of the LGS and the local 
significance placed on such green areas which make them valued by their 
local community.   
5.90 The NPPF is clear that designation of Local Green Space should be 
consistent with the wider planning policy for the area and should look to 
complement investment in the provision of n ew homes and employment 
services and other essential services. Designation of land as Local Green 
Space should therefore not be seen as a means to stop wider development 
needs throughout the plan area or be used as a way that undermines the 
aims of plan ma king.  As such, the consideration of designating  Local Green 
Space has been taken alongside consideration of potential allocations of land 
for development (e.g. for housing, employment or other commercial needs)  
as a balanced approach, considering all rele vant criteria and needs within the 
plan area.  
5.91 Some sites proposed for designation as Local Green Space in Policy 
ENV10  are also safeguarded from unneces sary or avoidable loss under 166 
 
 
 Policy INF3: Sport,  Open Space  and Rec reation Faci lities. Where s ites are 
safeguarded under Policy INF3 and are also designated as Local G reen 
Spac e, proposals  for development will need to me et the requirements of 
both pol icies. The aim of Policy ENV10 is to  protect Lo cal Gre en Space 
from de velopment that is in compatible  with the  Local Green  Space 
designation.  
 
POLICY ENV10: LOCAL GREEN SPACE  
The sites  identified  in the table  below, and as identified on t he Policies 
Map, are des ignated as Lo cal Green Spa ce: 
 
High and Low Bentham  
 
HB-LGS3  East of Station Rd and south west of Pye Busk, High 
Bentham 
Bradleys Both  
LGS sites assessed as  part of Neighbourhood Plan pre paration. 
Carleton in Craven  
 
CA – LGS2  Heslaker Lane, Carleton 
CA – LGS6  North of Vicars Row, Carleton  
CA – LGS8  The Pine Trees,  Westwood, Carleton  
CA – LGS9  St. Mary’s Green, Carleton 
Cononley 
LGS sites assessed as  part of Neighbourhood Plan pre paration. 
Embsay with Eastby 
 
EM – LGS2  Between Main Street  & Shires Croft 
EM – LGS3  South of  Village Hall, Main Street, Embsay 
EM – LGS6  East side of West Lane, Embsay 
EM- LGS11 Fields  adjacent to Kirk Lane, Embsay 
Gargra ve 
LGS sites assessed as  part of Neighbourhood Plan pre paration. 
Glusburn 
 
GLUS-LGS1 Glusburn Park 
Hellifield 
 
HE-LGS5  Field  adjacent St. Aidan’s Church 
HE-LGS7  Gallaber Pond, Hellifield  
Ingleton 
 
IN-LGS2  Ingleton Park o ff Thacking L ane, Ingleton 
Kildwick 167 
 
 
  
KL-LGS2  Fields  by Kildwick Bridge, Main  Road, Kildwick, BD20 9BD 
KL-LGS4  Parson's W alk and Glebe Fi eld 
KL-LGS5  Banks Field  (Lower section), Priest Bank Road 
KL-LGS6  Field  south of the Recreation Ground, Priest Bank Road 
Settle & Giggleswick 
 
SG-LGS4 The Gree n, Comm ercial Street, Settle 
SG-LGS15 Bowling gre en off Station Road, Settle 
SG-LGS22 Glebe Field, Giggleswick 
Skipton  
 
SK-LGS1  Massa Flatts Wood  
SK-LGS2  Land b etween Shortbank Road & allotments 
SK-LGS11 South Side  of The Bailey, Skipton  
SK-LGS28 Bowling Green  Rope Walk 
SK-LGS33 Aireville Park  
SK-LGS46 Road approach, north side of Gargra ve Road, between 
roundabout & Aireville Gran ge 
SK-LGS47 Land to the north of Gargrave Road, between Aireville 
Gran ge and Park View 
SK-LGS48 Road approach, south side of Gargra ve Road, west of entrance 
to Auction Ma rt 
SK-LGS49 Road approach, south side of Gargra ve Road, east of entrance to 
Auction Ma rt 
SK-LGS51 Road approach, between Harrog ate Road &  Overdale Grange 
SK-LGS55 Gawflat Meadow 
SK-LGS60 Burnside House 
SK-LGS66 Land to the north of Skipton up to and including the 
PROW at Short Lee Lane, west of Skipton Castle 
Woods SINC, and east of Grassington Road, 
Skipton.  
Sutton in Craven 
 
SC-LGS5  Sutton Park, Main Street, Sutton-in-Craven 
 
Sites  designated  as Local Green Space and identified on t he Policies Map  
will be pro tected from i ncompatible de velopment  that would ad versely 
impact on  their open ch aracter  and t he particu lar local signif icance placed 
on such green a reas which make th em valued by their lo cal co mmuni ty. 
Incompatib le development  is har mful to areas designated as Local Green 
Space and should not  be appro ved except in very special circumstance s.  
The construction of n ew buildings  or str uctures on land de signated as 
Local Green Spa ce will be regarded  as incomp atible de velopment  with the  168 
 
 
 following exceptions:  
 
a) Buildings for  agriculture and f orestry; 
 
b) Appro priate facil ities for ou tdoor spor t, outdoor recr eation  and 
cemet eries, pro vided openne ss of the Local Gr een Space is 
preserved and t here is no conflict with the purpose of designating 
the site as Local Gr een S pace; 
 
c) The extension  or alteration of  a building on t he site, pro vided it does 
not result in d isprop ortionate a dditions o ver and abo ve the size  of the 
original building;  
 
d) The repl acement of a building, pro vided the n ew building  is in the 
same use  and not  materially larger than t he one  it replaces; 
 
e) Other forms of d evelopmen t, including, engin eering ope rations, lo cal 
transport  infrastruct ure, and t he re-use of buildings, pro viding they 
preser ve the open c haracter  of the Local  Green S pace and the local 
significa nce placed  on such gr een areas which m ake them valued by 
their local  communi ty. 
 
 
THE LEEDS &  LIVERPOOL CAN AL 
5.92 The Leeds &  Liverpool Canal is the longest canal in Britain built as a single 
waterway at 127 miles in length. The canal is a significant built and natural 
asset within Craven passing through the south of the plan area for a distance 
of approximate ly 17 miles.  
5.93 The Thanet Canal (also known as the Springs Branch) is a short branch 
(approximately a third of a mile long) of the Leeds &  Liverpool Canal running 
to Skipton Castle constructed in the late eighteenth century to serve 
limestone quarries n ear the castle owned by Lord Thanet.  169 
 
 
 5.94 The Canal provides a resource as a wildlife and habitat corridor; a 
recreational route for walking, canoeing, cycling and running ; a route for 
commuters w ho walk  or cycl e along the towpath  to get to work or school ; and 
as a tourism asset for those pursuing holidays on narrow boats as well as 
day-trippers  seeking a place for peace and reflection. The indu strial heritage 
of the Leeds &  Liverpool Canal is one of the defining elements of the area 
and provides a rich his toric environment for current and future generations to 
enjoy.   
5.95 The setting and the character of the Canal varies from a highly rural 
environment outside settlements, through villages such as Gargrave, 
Bradley, Farnhill and Kildwick, to the more urban  environment through 
Skipton.  Many new developments including the re -use and conversion of 
existing buildings have taken place along or in proximity of the canal 
benefiting from the waterside setting and environment; this has particularly 
been the case wi thin Skipton. There are further opportunities for  development 
in appropriate locations during the lifetime of the Local Plan.  
5.96 Development opportunities will need to recognise the waterside potential 
whilst maintaining and reinstating the characterist ics of local canal 
architecture and waterscape.   
5.97 New waterside developments place extra liabilities and burdens on waterway 
infrastructure and also provide an opportunity for infrastructure to be 
improved. When considering proposals for new developme nt along the canal 
the Council will work with the Canal & River Trust to ensure that any 
necessary improvements to the canal infrastructure arising directly from  
needs generated by  new developments are met by developer  contributions 
secur ed through Plannin g Obligations.   
5.98 The Water Framework Directive applies to the Canal, so developments that 
could impact on the water quality would need to meet the provisions of Policy 
ENV8.  A number of sites identified in the local plan as housing and 
employment sites for allocat ion are within reasonable proximity of the Leeds 170 
 
 
 & Liverpool Canal and new development at these locations will  also be 
required to have regard to this policy and the requirements of Policy INF3 , 
ENV8  and Appendix A.   
POLICY  ENV11 : THE LEEDS & LIVERPOOL CANAL  
Development adjacent to , adjoining or which is likely to impact upon the 
character of the Leeds & Liverpool Canal including the Thanet Canal (Springs 
Branch) in Skipton will be expected to:  
a) Be of a high quality design that  safeguards its  historic character and 
integrates the canal into the development proposal in a way that treats the 
waterway as an area of usable space;  
b) Integrate the waterway, towing path and canal environment into the public 
realm in terms of the design and managemen t of the development;  
c) Improve access to, along and from the waterway ,  including  for wheelchair -
users, people with limited mobility and people with other disabilities  and 
improve the environmental quality of the waterway corridor .  This will 
include sup porting the wildlife that uses the Canal with appropriate 
plantings, provision of features such as bat and bird boxes, and 
connectivity of habitat, and maintaining the water quality of the Canal  in 
line with the requirements of the Water Framework Directiv e; 
d) Optimise views of water and generate natural surveillance of water space 
through the siting, configuration and orientation of buildings, recognising 
that  appropriate boundary treatment and access issues may differ between 
the towing path and offside of the canal, and;  
e)  Improve the amenity of the canal. Development that would have an adverse    
impact on the amenity of the canal by virtue of noise, odour or visual 
impact will not be supported.  
 
 171 
 
 
 FOOTPATHS, BRIDLEWAYS, BYWAYS AND CYCLE ROUTES  
5.99  Most of Craven’s footpaths, bridleways, byways and cycle routes are public 
rights of way (PROWs), but a notable exception is the towpath of the Leeds & 
Liverpool Canal, which is a ‘permissive path’. The council recognises the 
value placed upon these public assets, by residents, visitors and businesses, 
for the recreational, health, well -being and economic benefits they provide. 
Therefore, through local plan Policy ENV12, the council will work for the 
protection and enhancement of footpaths, bridleways , byway s and cycle 
routes and will ensure that Craven’s growth includes growth in their extent, 
quality and accessibility.  
 Public rights of way – PROWs  
5.100 Craven’s public rights of way have a range of uses and benefits. They can 
provide shortcuts within settl ement s; connect settlements with the 
countryside and take people away from traffic, crowds and noise. They can 
be practical, by simply getting us from A to B without having to drive, or they 
can be inspirational, by leading us through great and romantic la ndscapes. 
Therefore, the local plan’s aim of protecting and enhancing Craven’s public 
rights of way network will help to secure benefits for the local environment, 
quality of life and economy by reducing car -dependence, improving health 
and well -being and promoting tourism and recreation.  
National Trails  
5.101  National Trails are long distance walking, cycling and horse riding routes 
through the best landscapes in England and Wales. There are 16 in total and 
two of them pass through Craven:  the Pennine Way  and the Pennine 
Bridleway. These are particularly important and beneficial PROWs.  
Leeds & Liverpool Canal  
5.102 The Canal and Rivers Trust provides a permissive path for walking and 
cycling along the towpath of the Leeds & Liverpool Canal. This is a valua ble 
addition to the local PROWs network and an important link with neighbouring 172 
 
 
 areas of Lancashire, to the southwest, and West Yorkshire, to the southeast. 
Local plan  Policy ENV11 is devoted specifically to the Leeds & Liverpool 
Canal.  
 Access  
5.103 North  Yorkshire County Council is responsible for the Rights of Way 
Improvement Plan (RoWIP), which is currently under review, and hosts the 
Local Access Forum (LAF), which advises on how to make the countryside 
more accessible. The local plan supports the RoWI P and LAF and will work 
in partnership to achieve common aims, including making the countryside 
more accessible for wheelchair -users, people with limited mobility and people 
with other disabilities.  
New development  
5.104 Proposals to build new homes, busin esses or other types of development will 
need to ensure that no harm is caused to any existing footpaths, bridleways 
or cycle routes within or near the site. This would include harm arising from a 
reduction in usability or amenity value or from an obstruct ion, blockage38 or 
diversion. Development should avoid confining footpaths, bridleways, byways 
and cycles routes between buildings, fences and other structures, particularly 
where they previously had an open aspect. Instead, they should be 
incorporated into  the design of green open space to be created within the 
site. 
5.105 If continuing economic, environmental and social benefits are to be enjoyed, 
Craven’s growth will need to secure ongoing improvement and expansion of 
the local PROWs network, as well as i ts protection. Therefore, wherever 
possible, new  development should include measures for  improvement and 
expansion of the network. This could include better infrastructure, disabled 
access and signage; enhanced usability, functionality and amenity value; a nd 
                                                           
38Anyone obstructing or blocking a PROW can be prosecuted under the Highways Act 1980.  173 
 
 
 new PROWs, links between PROWs and links from new developments to the 
local network.  
 Town and village loops  
5.106 The council will be particularly keen to support proposals that help to create 
local trails for walking, cycling and horse riding within a nd around local towns 
and villages. In particular, the council will look for opportunities to create town 
and village loops by joining up existing PROWs,  securing new links across 
development sites and working in partnership with relevant stakeholders.  
Countryside, green infrastructure and tourism  
5.107  The importance of protecting and enhancing footpaths, bridleways,  
byways and cycle routes is further reinforced in local plan policies ENV1: 
Countryside and Landscape, ENV5: Green Infrastructure and EC4: To urism.  
POLICY ENV12: FOOTPATHS, BRIDLEWAYS, BYWAYS AND CYCLE ROUTES  
 
Craven’s growth will safeguard and improve the quality, extent and 
accessibility of local footpaths, bridleways, byways and cycle routes and the 
network they form. To that end, the local planning authority will support 
proposals that preserve and, wherever possible, enhance footpaths, 
bridleways, byways and cycle routes and their settings. Specific support will 
be given to proposals which:  
 
a) Avoid obstruction, diversion or confinement of  existing footpaths, 
bridleways, byways and cy cle routes.  
b) Enhance the route, usability and amenity value of existing footpaths, 
bridleways, byways and cycle routes.  
c) Accommodate existing footpaths, bridleways, byways and cycle  
routes within green open  space.  
d) Create new footpaths, bridleways, byways and cycle routes, 
particularly where they would provide new lin ks to enhance the local 174 
 
 
 network.  
e) Improve access by creating links between new development and the 
local network; and  
f) Improve access for  disabled people.  
 
The local planning authority will also give specific support to:  
 
g) The creation, enhancement and extension of National Trails.  
h) The enhancement of green infrastructure corridors, at regional, sub -
regional and district level, through the improvement of existing and 
the creation of new footpaths, bridleways, byways and cycle routes.  
i) Proposals that contribute to the creation of town or village loops.  
j) Proposals that include short, well -surfaced, stile -free circuits suitable 
for whee lchair -users and people with limited mobility.  
 
GREEN WEDGES  
5.108 Green Wedges (originally designated in the Council’s 1999 local plan39) 
comprise open areas around and between settlements, which help to 
maintain the distinction between the countryside an d built up areas, prevent 
the coalescence of separate towns and villages and provide or have the 
potential to provide recreational opportunities. Following a review40, the 
Council is carrying forward a modified Green Wedge designation in the form 
of Policy ENV13.  
5.109 The Green Wedge designation has the objective of maintaining and 
reinforcing the individual character and identity of settlements in close 
proximity by restricting any development that would cause their physical 
                                                           
39 Green wedges were designated by Policy BE3 and shown on the Proposa ls Map of the Craven District 
(outside the Yorkshire Dales National Park) Local Plan, 1999.   
40The background paper ‘Review of Green Wedge Designations in Craven’ (June 2017) includes an assessment 
of how effective green wedge policy has been in maintainin g distinct gaps between  settlements, reassesses 
the appropriateness of original green wedge boundaries and considers policy wording. The background paper 
accompanies the local plan.  175 
 
 
 coalescence. In addition, Green  Wedges may provide or have the potential to 
provide a valuable recreational resource, which should also be afforded 
protection. Policy ENV13 therefore seeks to resist new development that 
would compromise the spatial gaps and recreational value provided b y 
designated Green Wedges, unless material considerations indicate 
otherwise . Whilst it  is important to note that the designation is not intended to 
represent landscape value, which is addressed in other local plan policies 
(primarily Policy ENV1: Countrys ide and Landscape) , maintaining gaps  
between settlements  is likely to be consistent with protecting landscape 
character . This is particularly true with respect to  Bentham , where the Green 
Wedge may also help to protect  the setting and special qualities of the Forest 
of Bowland AONB . 
Bentham  
5.110 The Green Wedge between High Bentham and Low Bentham is intended to 
counter historic patterns of suburban ‘ribbon development’ between the two 
settlements and consists mainly of agricultural fields on both sides of  Low 
Bentham Road (B6480).  
Glusburn, Cross Hills and Sutton -in-Craven  
5.111 This Green Wedge is particularly thin between Cross Hills and Sutton, at the 
intersection of Holme Lane and Holme Beck, but continues to be highly 
effective in maintaining an impor tant spatial gap between the two 
settlements. Similarly, the Green Wedge maintains effective separation 
between the village of Sutton -in-Craven, the district and county boundary to 
the east and the built -up area of Eastburn beyond, which is within the 
metropolitan district of Bradford.  
Kildwick & Farnhill and Glusburn & Cross  Hills 
5.112 The Green Wedge in this location includes land to the east of Glusburn & 
Cross  Hills and consists of agricultural fields and the River Aire. It is most 
effective in maintai ning distinct settlements (including settlements in the 176 
 
 
 neighbouring district of Bradford), but its value as a recreational resource is 
somewhat limited by the busy intersection of the A629, B6172 and Skipton 
Road.  
 
POLICY ENV13: GREEN WEDGES  
 
Green Wedges  will help settlements to grow in ways that maintain and 
reinforce their individual character and identity, by safeguarding against the 
coalescence of separate built -up areas, and will help to maintain and, 
wherever possible, enhance local recreational opp ortunities. Therefore, 
within the Green Wedges listed below and defined on the Policies Map, 
development will be resisted where it would  fail to preserve the separate 
character and identity of settlements or would fail to preserve the sense of 
separation b etween settlements . In addition, the Council will seek to 
consolidate, strengthen and enhance the character, appearance and, where 
appropriate, recreational value of these areas.  
 
1. Land between High and Low Bentham.  
 
2. Land between Glusburn, Cross  Hills , Sutton -in-Craven, Farnhill and 
Kildwick and up to the plan area/district/county boundary, near Eastburn, 
West Yorkshire.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 177 
 
 
 SECTION  6:  HOUSING  
SPECIALIST HOUSING FOR OLDER PEOPLE  
6.1 People in Craven are living longer, which means that there are more active 
older people in good health in the population, but also more people 
(especially the very old) living with on -going conditions that may affect their 
mobility , hampering their ability to get out and about and socialise ,  leading to 
issues of lone liness and isolation for many .   
6.2 The number of people across Craven District  aged 65 or over is projected to 
increase from 14,000 in 2015 to 21,200 by 2037 (a 50% increase) according 
to ONS 2014 -based population projections, so it is important that th ere is 
provision of a range of appropriate housing provision, adaptation and support 
for Craven’s older population.   Additionally, providing a wider range of older 
persons’ accommodation has the potential to free -up larger family 
accommodation. The two ma in types of this specialist housing for older 
people are:  
 Age Restricted -Exclusive/Sheltered/Retirement Housing – This is 
accommodation that is built specifically for sale or rent to older 
people.  They comprise self -contained units (apartments) with 
commu nal facilities and a live -in or mobile scheme manager and 
alarm call systems in case of emergency, and  
 Assisted Living/Extra Care/Very Sheltered Housing – This is 
similar to Sheltered Housing, but is designed to enable residents to 
retain their independenc e as they grow older and their need for 
support and/or care increases.  Residents still occupy their own 
self-contained home with blocks of flats, estates of bungalows or 
retirement ‘villages’ but often enjoy enhanced communal 
accommodation and occupants m ay also be offered individual care 
and assistance from support staff, within the complex, 24 hours per 
day. 
 178 
 
 
 6.3 The provision of affordable housing for local needs is an important objective 
of the plan and the Council’s evidence on viability identifies th at both private 
and public sector housing for older people can make a contribution towards 
affordable housing.  This evidence, referenced in the supporting text to Policy 
H2, justifies minimum levels of affordable housing for private sector schemes 
on site  or an equivalent financial contribution for off -site provision.  These 
minimum levels of on -site provision are set out in Policy H2: Affordable 
Housing of the plan.  The Council will publish additional practical guidance on 
the provision of affordable hou sing for this and general market housing in the 
form of a Supplementary Planning Document (SPD).  In consultation with 
stakeholders, this SPD will set out more detail on how Policy H2 will operate 
and be administered.   
6.4 The Strategic Housing Market Ass essment Update November 2017(SHMA) 
includes information on the likely scale of increased demand for older 
person’s specialist provision, and suggests that there is a need to double the 
current level of provision for older people, particularly the provision  of 
enhanced sheltered and extra care provision.41  
6.5 The SHMA also highlights that research tends to show that the majority of 
older people (generally upwards of 65%) want to stay in their own homes 
with help and support when needed, so as well as increa sed provision 
overall, it is important that a more diverse range of housing options is 
provided to meet the diverse housing needs of older people.  
 
POLICY H1: SPECIALIST HOUSING FOR OLDER PEOPLE  
 
The diverse housing needs of older people in the area will be met by: - 
a) supporting the provision of specialist housing for older people across all 
tenures in locations with reasonable access to local services, facilities and 
                                                           
41 SHMA November 2017 page 92 Table 7.4  179 
 
 
 public transport, provided proposals accord with Policy SP4, H2, and INF3 
and all other rel evant local plan policies;  
 
b) supporting proposals to adapt/extend existing residential properties to 
meet the needs of those with disabilities and older people ; 
 
c) allocating specific sites in Settle, Bentham and Gargrave within Policies 
SP6,  SP7 and SP10 res pectively for delivering specialist forms of 
residential accommodation to meet the housing needs of older people.  
 
AFFORDABLE HOUSING  
Affordable housing need and evidence  
6.6 Households in affordable housing need are those who lack their own housing 
or wh o live in unsuitable accommodation and cannot afford to meet their 
housing needs in the housing market. Craven has a significant need for 
affordable housing, largely as a result of a mismatch between local incomes 
and the cost of renting or buying homes. E vidence from the Council’s 2017 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) indicates that the minimum 
incomes required for entry -level open market renting and owner -occupation 
are £23,712 and £36,000, respectively. This means that only a very small 
minorit y of households on the housing register could afford open market 
rents or prices. More generally, households with single earners can only 
afford lower quartile rents based on income alone. There is a greater range 
of rented housing options that are afforda ble to average earners, although 
even lower quartile, median and average house prices would still be 
unaffordable.  
6.7 According to the 2017 SHMA, Craven’s net affordable housing imbalance is 
126 dwellings per annum and future affordable housing provision should be 
approximately 15% -25% intermediate tenure, and 75%-85%  affordable 180 
 
 
 rented, with 87.4% one and two bedroom dwellings and 12.6% three (or 
more) bedroom dwellings. Based on the Housing Register in 2017 reported 
in Table 7.2 of the 2017 SHMA, the gre atest need is for two bed dwellings 
and this is to meet the needs of newly forming households.  The SHMA also 
recommends that intermediate tenure options should continue to be actively 
promoted, particularly for newly -forming households, and identifies a 
potential market for 154 starter homes over 5 years (31 per annum).   In 
determining planning applications, the Council will have regard to the need to 
deliver an appropriate mix and range of affordable housing and will have 
regard to the most up to date evi dence of need from the SHMA and any 
other relevant sources such as the Housing Register (which is a continually 
updated waiting list for rented affordable housing).  
6.8 Craven’s housing market will be reassessed periodically to ensure that 
evidence of aff ordable housing need remains up to date.   
Addressing affordable housing need  
6.9   The NPPF states that where local authorities have identified that affordable 
housing is needed, local plans should contain policies for meeting this need 
on site, unless off  site provision or a financial contribution of broadly 
equivalent value can be justified.   This plan has been examined against the 
provisions of the 2012 NPPF.  This version of the NPPF combined with the 
NPPG, included thresholds below which on site afford able housing provision 
and off site financial contributions should not be required.  These and the 
reference to vacant building credit are given below:   
 Local Planning Authorities should no longer seek affordable housing 
contributions from developments of 10-units or less, and those which 
have a maximum combined gross floor  space of no more than 1,000 
square metres (gross internal area)  
   In designated rural areas authorities may choose to implement a lower 
threshold of 5 dwellings or less.  Where the lower 5-unit or less  181 
 
 
 threshold is applied, affordable housing and tariff style contributions 
should be sought from developments of between 6 and 10 units in the 
form of cash payments which are commuted until after completion of 
units within the development  
 Vacan t building credit has been introduced. Authorities should apply   
the credit where developments include the re -use or redevelopment of 
empty buildings, so that affordable housing contributions relate only to 
net increases in floor  space.  
 6.10 The  Craven Local Plan Viability Assessment: Addendum (November 2017) 
has assessed the impact of the Council’s emerging policies which seek 
developer contributions for open space, sport and  recreation, education, 
highway infrastructure and affordable housing on the vi ability of ‘typical’ 
housing sites that are likely to come forward during the plan period.  Fourteen 
different typologies have been assessed and tested based on different sizes 
and locations across the plan area, including sites between the thresholds of 
6 to 10 dwellings. The Viability Assessment concludes that 30% affordable 
housing on greenfield sites is viable across all site typologies for general 
market housing.  
6.11 The Craven Local Plan Viability Reports: Brownfield Land Update (October 
2018) and th e Supported Living for Older People Update (Oct/Nov 2018) 
provide the justification for the level of affordable housing contributions set 
out in this policy for general market housing on previously developed land 
and for specialist housing for older people  on both greenfield and previously 
developed land.  A definition of the two types of specialist housing for older 
people set out in this policy is provided in the supporting text to Policy H1 of 
this plan.   
6.12 The Spatial Strategy of the local plan at Po licy SP4 makes an allowance for  
sites to be delivered in the smaller Tier 5 settlements across the plan area, 182 
 
 
 most of which are designated rural areas42.  The conclusion of the Viability 
Assessment is that the provision of 30% affordable housing on small s ites 
between the thresholds of 6 to 10 dwellings is viable.  This means that 
developments of 6 to 10 dwellings can contribute in a small, but nevertheless 
important way to a key objective of the local plan to improve housing choice 
in terms of house type, size, tenure, price and location and to address the 
issue of a shortfall in affordable homes across Craven, as evidenced in the 
SHMA 2017.  A lower threshold of 5 dwellings in the designated rural areas 
of Craven is therefore considered to be justified.  Financial contributions  will 
be required from such sites rather than on -site provision.  
6.13 To address the issue of a shortfall in affordable homes across Craven, 
increasing the supply of new affordable homes is a priority for the local plan. 
Securing new  affordable homes through the planning system is an effective 
way of achieving this. The local plan sets out policy mechanisms which seek 
to maximise affordable housing provision through a number of approaches, 
including: the contribution of affordable hom es by housing developers, where 
the homes are usually taken on by registered providers (e.g. housing 
associations); financial contributions from housing developers, where the 
money is used to secure affordable homes off -site; and the release of rural 
excep tion sites. As well as registered providers, there are other affordable 
housing providers who may operate under equivalent arrangements or, more 
often, may specialise in offering innovative intermediate tenure products. In 
addition to increasing the supply  of new affordable homes, Craven District 
Council, North Yorkshire County Council and registered providers will seek to 
reduce the need for  affordable housing through homeless prevention 
measures, mortgage rescue schemes and the provision of grants and loa ns 
                                                           
42 Within the Craven plan area, desi gnated rural areas are the Forest of Bowland Area of Outstanding Natural 
Beauty and the parishes of Bank Newton, Bentham, Bolton Abbey, Burton -in-Lonsdale, Clapham -cum -Newby, 
Coniston Cold, Embsay -with -Eastby, Gargrave, Giggleswick, Halton East, Hellifield , Ingleton, Langcliffe, 
Lawkland, Long Preston, Otterburn, Rathmell, Settle, Stirton -with -Thorlby, Thornton -in-Lonsdale and 
Wigglesworth. Please refer to Section 157 of the Housing Act 1985 and the Housing (Right to Buy) 
(Designated Rural Areas and Designa ted Region) (England) Order 1988.   183 
 
 
 to support necessary alterations or energy efficiency measures to improve 
existing unsuitable housing. The local plan’s employment policies will also 
help to make living in Craven more affordable for people who work in Craven, 
by promoting local employm ent opportunities . 
6.14 Affordable housing  is housing for sale or rent, for those whose needs are not 
met by the market and is defined in the NPPF.  
6.15 Despite the scale of need in Craven, the local plan cannot insist that all new 
homes to be built in the  future are built as affordable housing. The main way 
in which additional affordable housing will be provided in Craven in the future 
is as a contribution from developers as a proportion of housing built on new 
development sites.  
Affordable housing target and viability  
6.16 The scale of need revealed by the 2017 SHMA justifies  the Council 
establishing a high target for the amount of affordable housing that will be 
required from new development sites. However, it is important  that this target 
is realistic an d set at a level that allows housing land to come forward and 
maintains the delivery of new homes without making schemes unviable. It is 
also important to ensure that the need to provide affordable housing is 
balanced with the need for developers of housin g sites to contribute to 
necessary infrastructure improvements and community facilities as well as to 
build to improved sustainable construction standards. Along with affordable 
housing contributions these factors all influence the economics of housing 
schemes and ultimately the decisions of landowners to release sites.  
6.17 The Council’s Local Plan Viability Assessment Addendum ( November 2017) 
has been used to inform the affordable housing targets and site thresholds. 
The assessment work indicates that, f or all the different types and sizes of 184 
 
 
 greenfield sites43  typically found and likely to come forward in the plan area, 
the vast majority of sites will be able to deliver 30% affordable housing. It is 
expected therefore that, normally, it will be viable fo r housing sites in Craven 
to provide 30% affordable dwellings and meet other planning obligation 
requirements of the local plan.  Abnormal costs associated with individual 
sites should be negotiated between the developer and the landowner.  
6.18 In some cir cumstances, development proposals may seek to include a lower 
proportion of affordable housing.  To comply with this policy these 
circumstances must be exceptional.  For example, unusual and wholly 
unexpected/unforeseen development costs which affect schem e viability, or 
where there are clear and overriding reasons to meet other planning 
objectives, such as the restoration of heritage assets. In these  exceptional 
circumstances developers will be expected to conduct negotiations on a 
transparent and ‘open bo ok’ basis44.  In all cases the Council will look to 
maximise the provision of affordable housing having regard to the 
circumstances of individual sites and scheme viability.  
Size and tenure of affordable homes  
6.19 The local plan aims to secure a mix of on -site affordable housing provision to 
reflect the needs of local communities, based on the most up -to-date 
evidence of need, including the SHMA  2017 . Policy SP3 provides a guide to 
the overall mix of dwelling sizes needed across the plan area. This include s 
affordable dwellings, of which around 15 -25% will need to be intermediate 
tenure and around 75 -85% will need to be social/affordable rented. The 
precise mix of tenures on a scheme will be negotiated to ensure that the type 
of affordable housing provision  on schemes reflects the needs of the locality.  
                                                           
43 Apart from rural exception sites  
44 The Council will always want to respect the nature of information provided in confidence, however because the Council 
is a public authority, under the Environmental Information Regula tions, any information it holds can be subject to 
disclosure to third parties. Obviously the Council would approach applicants where the possibility of this disclosure may 
arise.  185 
 
 
 Financial and off -site contributions  
6.20 The basis of the calculation of financial contributions in lieu of on -site 
provision will be the difference between affordable housing transfer values 
and open market  values for 70sqm two -bedroom houses assuming they are 
available on the same site. On flatted schemes, the commuted sum will be 
based on the affordable housing transfer values for similar units. The market 
value of dwellings will be determined having regar d to the asking price and 
any sales where contracts have been exchanged, along with any evidence of 
market sales in the locality. The value of affordable housing will be 
determined by the Council’s latest published transfer prices45 (the prices a 
registered  provider will pay to a developer for affordable units). Any financial 
contributions obtained will be used to secure off -site provision to help meet 
the district’s affordable housing needs. Such off -site contributions/provision 
will rarely be appropriate f or general housing and will be acceptable only 
where doing so would meet wider planning or housing objectives e.g. on 
flatted schemes where management arrangements may make on -site 
affordable housing more expensive through the application of service 
charge s. The Council will publish additional practical guidance on the 
provision of affordable housing in the form of a supplementary planning 
document (SPD). This will include guidance on the limited circumstances in 
which off -site provision or financial contri butions will be considered in lieu of 
on-site provision  and more detail on how financial contributions will be 
calculated .  
6.21 A vacant building credit is equivalent to the existing gross floorspace of any 
vacant buildings on a site and is deducted from the normal affordable 
housing contribution required by the Council. It applies to vacant buildings 
that are to be brought back into use or to be demolished for re -development, 
but not to abandoned buildings. This is national policy and is intended to 
                                                           
45 The Council’s transfer prices have been reviewed in 2017. They are currentl y set at £1,000 per square 
metre.  186 
 
 
 incen tivise brownfield development, including the reuse or redevelopment of 
empty and redundant buildings. The Council will use national policy and 
guidance to determine  whether a vacant building credit should apply to a 
particular development and will  use the credit to help bring forward 
brownfield development that might not otherwise occur or might be 
postponed indefinitely. Vacant building credit will be deducted from the 
overall affordable housing contribution calculation. This will apply in 
calculating eith er the number of affordable housing units to be provided 
within the development or where an equivalent financial contribution is being 
provided.  
6.22 Funds gathered through financial contributions will be combined and used in 
a range of ways to address aff ordable housing need across the district and to 
prevent households falling into need.  Funds will be used to maximise 
provision and ensure an effective use of resources and may be used to 
address need in a range of ways. This may include, for example, the 
acquisition of land for rural exception sites, direct provision (building) of new 
affordable homes or the purchase of existing properties on the open market, 
including new and empty homes and properties to provide shared housing or 
houses in multiple occupa tion. The use of financial contributions provides the 
opportunity to target affordable housing need in smaller rural communities. It 
also provides some flexibility to provide a range of accommodation types and 
to respond to changing wider circumstances tha t have the potential to affect 
need over time.  
Rural exception sites  
6.23 Rural exception sites46 are sites that are released to provide affordable 
housing in locations which would not normally be used for housing. They 
                                                           
46Rural exception sites are defined in the NPPF at Annex 2: Glossary as small sites used for affordable housing 
in perpetuity where sites would not normally be used for housing. Rural exception sites seek to address the 
needs of the local community by accommodating households who are either current residents or have an 
existing family or employment connection. Small numbers of market homes may be allowed at the local 
 187 
 
 
 provide an important opportunity to a ddress affordable housing need in 
smaller communities and are a long standing mechanism supported by 
national policy to support the provision of rural affordable housing. Given that 
affordable housing need is spread across the district, the use of this 
approach is supported in principle across Craven’s smaller market towns and 
villages.  
6.24 Historically, national and local policies have supported rural exception sites 
as sites providing 100% affordable units. However,  within the current context 
of current reforms to the delivery of affordable housing and reductions in 
public finding,  the National Planning Policy Framework now provides local 
planning authorities with the opportunity to consider allowing small amounts 
of market housing on exception sites to assist the delivery of schemes. Policy 
support for this has been included in the local plan on the basis that it is an 
exceptional approach designed to support and cross subsidise the delivery of 
affordable housing in the absence of sufficient  public subsi dy through 
registered providers.  
6.25 Proposals for exception sites which seek to include an element of market 
housing should be accompanied by a detailed financial appraisal to justify the 
need to include market housing and to demonstrate that the number  of 
market homes proposed is the minimum required to deliver an appropriate 
mix of affordable homes whilst ensuring viability of the scheme.  
Furthermore, no more than 30% of the units in a scheme should be for 
market housing.  Any higher percentage of mar ket housing would undermine 
the integrity of these sites being ‘exception’ sites where housing is not 
normally permitted.  The Council will publish additional practical guidance on 
the provision of affordable housing , including on rural exception sites , in the 
form of a supplementary planning document (SPD).   
                                                                                                                                                                                   
authority’s discretion, for example where essential to ena ble the delivery of affordable units without grant 
funding.  188 
 
 
 POLICY H2: AFFORDABLE HOUSING  
a)   Affordable housing will be provided as part of general market housing 
developments, as follows:  
I. On greenfield sites, developments of 11 dwellings or more, and 
deve lopments with a combined gross floor area of more than 1000 
sqm will provide not less than 30% of new dwellings as affordable 
housing.  In designated rural areas, developments on greenfield sites 
of 6 to 10 dwellings, will be required to make an equivalent  financial 
contribution for affordable housing.  
II On brownfield sites, developments of 11 dwellings or more, and 
developments with a combined gross floor area of more than 1000sqm 
will provide not less than 25% of new dwellings as affordable housing.  
In designated rural areas, developments on brownfield sites of 6 to 10 
dwellings will be required to make an equivalent financial contribution  
for affordable housing.  
Specialist Housing for Older People  
b)   Affordable h ousing will be provided as part of spe cialist housing 
developments for older people where falling within Use Class C3  as 
follows:  
Age Restricted/Sheltered Housing  
I. On greenfield sites, developments of Age Restricted/Sheltered 
Housing or similar housing included in Policy H1, will provide n ot         
less than 30% new dwellings as affordable housing;  
II. On brownfield sites, developments of Age Restricted/Sheltered 
Housing or similar housing included in Policy H1, will provide not 
less than 25% of new dwellings as affordable housing;  189 
 
 
 Assiste d Living/Extra Care Housing  
III. On greenfield sites developments of Assisted Living/Extra Care 
Housing, or similar housing included in Policy H1, will provide not 
less than 12% of new dwellings as affordable housing.  
IV.  On brownfield sites developments  of Assisted Living/Extra Care 
Housing or similar housing included in Policy H1, will provide not 
less than 7% of new dwellings as affordable housing.  
c)   Providing an off -site contribution in lieu of an on -site contribution will 
only be supported where t here are clear advantages or overriding 
reasons for doing so and the off -site contribution is preferable in terms 
of achieving housing and planning objectives and will contribute to the 
objective of creating mixed and balanced communities.  In these 
circum stances, proposals will be expected to make a financial 
contribution equivalent to the on -site provision.  
d) Development proposals that seek to provide a lower level of affordable 
housing contribution, either on or off site, will not be acceptable unless i t 
can be clearly demonstrated that exceptional circumstances exist which 
justify a reduced affordable housing contribution.  In such exceptional 
circumstances, the local planning authority will look to maximise 
provision of affordable housing having regard  to the circumstances of 
individual sites and scheme viability.  Developers will be expected to 
conduct negotiations on a transparent and ‘open book’ basis.  The local 
planning authority will apply vacant building credit in all appropriate 
circumstances, i n accordance with the NPPF and the PPG and will reduce 
on-site and/or financial contributions accordingly.  
e) Affordable housing will also be provided by:  
I. supporting registered providers in bringing forward developments of 190 
 
 
 100% affordable housing within  Tiers 1 to 5 of the spatial  strategy, in 
accordance with Policy SP4;  
II. supporting in principle, the release of rural exception sites and  
III. supporting registered providers in the repair, alteration and 
improvement of the existing affordable housing st ock and the re -use 
of empty homes.  
f) The size, type and tenure of affordable units will be expected to reflect 
the most up -to-date evidence of affordable housing needs, from the 
Council’s latest Strategic Housing Market Assessment and any other 
robust and  up to date evidence of local housing need.  Affordable 
housing contributions should comprise either social or affordable rent 
tenures as well as intermediate tenure types.  The 2017 Craven District 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment indicates that this c urrently 
should be between 15% to 25% intermediate types and 75% to 85% social 
or affordable rent tenures.  
g) Affordable housing contributions will be sought from proposed 
developments that are phased or are brought forward in a piecemeal 
fashion and where  the total combined, or ‘holistic’ development exceeds 
the relevant threshold . 
h)  The provision of affordable housing will be secured via a planning 
obligation (section 106 agreement). The obligation will seek to ensure 
that affordable dwellings are maint ained in perpetuity for households in 
affordable housing need or that the affordable housing subsidy is 
recycled.  
 Rural exception sites  
i) Proposals for 100% affordable housing developments outside the main  
      built up area of Tiers 2 to 5 settlements  will be supported where:  191 
 
 
 I. the development will help to meet but not exceed proven need in the 
parish or a combination of parishes, as appropriate; and  
II. the site is small and is physically and visually well related to the 
settlement; and  
III. provisio n is made for the affordable units to be maintained in 
perpetuity for households in affordable housing need or for the 
affordable housing subsidy to be recycled.  
j) Market housing on proposed rural exception sites will only be allowed 
where it can be demon strated that:  
I. the market housing is essential to enable the delivery of the affordable 
housing by a registered provider and delivery of an appropriate mix of 
affordable dwelling types and tenures to reflect need in the local area; 
and 
II. the proposed market dwellings represent no more than 30% of the 
total number of dwellings proposed on the site and are the minimum 
number required to achieve viability in the absence of any public 
subsidy or with reduced public subsidy, and  
III. the developer has submi tted an ‘open book’ viability assessment 
which shows that:  
i)  aspirational land values have not been used to justify a higher 
proportion of market value units, and  
ii) viability has been based on reasonable land values for a rural 
exception site.  
 
 192 
 
 
 GYPSI ES, TRAVELLERS, SHOWMEN AND ROMA  
6.26 The local plan aims to address the local housing requirements of all 
communities, including Gypsies, Travellers, Show men and Roma who live in 
or travel through the plan area. In doing so, the local plan will contribute  to 
the overarching national aim of ensuring fair and equal treatment for 
travellers, in a way that facilitates their traditional way of life, whilst respecting 
the interests of settled communities.  
6.27 Policy H3 aims to maintain an adequate supply of si tes to meet the housing 
requirements of Gypsies, Travellers, Show men and Roma within Craven 
through safeguarding existing supply and supporting extensions to existing 
sites or new sites to meet newly arising need.   
6.28 The District Council has a duty to provide official sites to accommodate 
Gypsies,  Travellers, Show men and Roma.  An independent traveller needs 
survey and report was published in February 2013 followed by a technical 
note relating to Gypsy and Traveller Household Formation and Growth Rates 
in March 2015.  This evidence is supplemented by information gathered by 
the Council on a regular basis, including the department of Communities and 
Local Government (DCLG) Bi -annual Caravan Count and the Council’s 
Environmental Services & Housing Records of Unauthorised Encampments.   
6.29 The evidence  concludes that there is no evidence of a requirement for a 
public site in Craven and found no evidence of any deficiencies in service 
provision for any of the Gypsy & Tr aveller families within Craven.   The report 
also concluded that there is no evidence of a requirement for any extra 
provision for showpeople throughout Craven.  It is not proposed in the local 
plan therefore to make a specific allocation of land for a public site for the 
Gypsies, Travellers, Showmen and Roma community and it is considered 
that a criteria based policy is appropriate to deal with any unforeseen private 
need arising during the plan period.  193 
 
 
 6.30 There are traditional, informal stopping -off points used by travellers en -route 
to and from the Appleby Horse Fair (held during the first week of June), 
which provide for the temporary needs of gypsies and travellers passing 
through the area. Whilst the current evidence concludes that more formal 
arrangements —such as the development of perma nent transit sites —are 
unlikely to be justified or necessary, there may be opportunities for travellers, 
the district council and parish councils to collaborate on better management  
of temporary stop off sites .  Alternatively, local communities may wish to  
consider the opportunities offered by neighbourhood planning, including the 
possibility of designating land and setting local policies for a transit site within 
a Neighbourhood Plan.  
6.31 Policy H3 addresses specific design principles that should be met b y all new 
sites.  Achieving good quality design is central to government guidance for 
housing and this applies equally to accommodation for Gypsy, Travellers , 
Showmen and Roma . The Government has published good practice 
guidance relating to the design of G ypsy and Traveller pitches (Designing 
Gypsy and Traveller Sites – Good Practice Guide or its replacement) which 
should be considered by applicants when applying for planning permission or 
any subsequent or relevant guidance.  
6.32 Whilst the existing housin g requirements of Gypsies, Travellers, Show men 
and Roma are currently being met on privately owned sites, this could 
change over time and the need to identify and allocate new sites could arise 
in the future. Therefore, the existing and future housing requ irements of this 
community will be kept under review using the best and most up -to-date 
evidence available.  
 
 
 
 194 
 
 
 POLICY H3: GYPSIES, TRAVELLERS, SHOWMEN AND ROMA  
The housing requi rements of Gypsies, T ravellers, Sh owmen and R oma will 
be met by maintaining an  adequate  supp ly of private sites to occ upy, in 
line with current  evidence  of existing and f uture need. 
 
Development  of a site within  the existing establ ished supply  of private 
sites f or any other purpose  will be refused, un less: 
 
a) Current  evidence  shows that the site is  not ne eded; or 
 
b) The de velopment  proposal m akes pro vision for an equi valent 
repla cement  site of  an equal or better standard.  
 
Extensions  to ex isting pri vate sites or en tirely new private sites (including 
tempora ry, permanent or transit sit es) will be supp orted to  meet  existing 
need and  where  there is evidence  of newly arising need, and where: 
 
c) Occupie rs of t he site  would have access to empl oyment, local  services 
and faci lities,  includ ing public transport,  shops, schoo ls and health 
care pro vision; 
 
d) The site  is of su fficient size to pro vide a  good residen tial environm ent 
for future occupiers , in terms  of design, layout, spa cing, p rovision of 
faciliti es, and ameni ty spa ce; has good and  safe access to the public 
highway and adequate spa ce within t he site for the parking and turning 
of vehicl es; 
 
e) The site pro vides o pportunities to refle ct traditional lif estyles i.e., 
allowing tra vellers to live and work from the sa me location, con tributing 
to sustainabi lity; 
 
f) The site  is or can be  connected to a ll necessary  utilities and 
infrastruct ure including mains  water, electrici ty supply, drainage, 
sanitation and pro vision is made f or the  screened st orage  and 195 
 
 
 collection of  refuse, including rec yclable materia ls; 
 
g) The proposal and  neighbouring land us es can satis factorily co -
exist and t he prop osal relates well in scale and location  to existing 
neighbouring occupiers;  
 
h) Occupiers of t he site and their belongings  are not expos ed to 
unacceptable environm ental condi tions including flood  risk; and 
 
i) Any potential impa cts on the en vironm ent can be  avoided or adequately  
mitigated  and ha ve regard to the requi remen ts relating to  prote cting the 
natural and  built  environment  set out  in ot her rel evant local plan  
polici es. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 196 
 
 
 SECTION 7: ECONOMY  
EMPLOYMENT AND ECONOMI C DEVELOPMENT AND SAFEGUARDING 
EMPLOYMENT AREAS  
7.1 The local plan sets out a strategy for delivering sustainable forms of 
development across Craven. In particular, Policy SP2 provides an overview 
of the overall approach taken with regard to securing and f acilitating 
economic growth in Craven over the period to 2032. Policy SP2 identifies 
land requirements to accommodate future growth in particular. That is not to 
say that the needs of current employers and businesses are ignored.  
Providing a policy contex t that supports economic growth, retention of sites 
and premises, and promotes economic diversit y are key components of the 
local plan. Policies EC1 and EC2 provide such a context, particularly for uses 
that fall within ‘B’ classes of the Use Classes Order . 
7.2 The NPPF is clear in that planning policy should not impede economic 
development/employment uses. Paragraphs 18 -22 are of particular 
significance and set out the need to plan proactively to meet development 
needs, whilst avoiding long term protection  of allocated sites where there is 
no prospect of them coming forward for development. Paragraph 28 of the 
NPPF is also applicable to rural areas in that it provides a positive context 
that seeks to facilitate rural economic prosperity.  
7.3 The Employment Land Review (March 2017) provides further context. This 
shows that, in Craven, there is a high level of economic activity, and low 
levels of unemployment and deprivation. The study also shows however that 
wages are below average, and that Craven is a net e xporter of labour. 
Providing a policy context that safeguards, supports and enhances economic 
activity is an important part of the local plan . 
7.4 Policy EC1 sets out a positive context within which proposals for 
economic/employment uses are considered. Th e policy seeks to facilitate the 
delivery of economic development and employment proposals through a 
criteria based policy approach that enables the delivery of 197 
 
 
 economic/employment related development in the right locations, within the 
context of Policy SP 2 and the spatial strategy – Policies SP 5 to SP11. As 
such economic/employment related development will be appropriately 
located to avoid emissions arising from industry and infrastructure affecting 
sensitive land uses including residential developments, h ospitals, hotels, 
motels, hostels, caravan parks, schools, nursing homes, child care facilities, 
shopping centres, playgrounds, and some public buildings  
7.5 It is fully recognised that some employment generating uses require specific 
locations within whic h to operate and would fall outside of land traditionally 
identified for employment uses. Policy EC1 allows for this in appropriate 
circumstances . 
7.6 To retain a choice of employment sites and locations in Craven, where land 
and/or premises are in employm ent uses, policy sets out a presumption that 
these locations will be retained in employment generating uses. Policy EC2 
sets out the approach to safeguarding employment land and premises. The 
policy articulates the presumption in favour of the retention of  land and 
premises in employment uses. This is to ensure that there is adequate 
choice of sites available to accommodate a range of employment generating 
uses.  
7.7 It is though, recognised that there will be circumstances where it will not 
always be approp riate or desirable to retain sites and premises in 
employment generating uses. For example, there may be ongoing amenity 
issues for occupiers of neighbouring properties from existing industrial uses 
that cannot be mitigated, or the road network or access s erving the 
employment use may be unsuitable for the continued use of the site for 
employment uses.  Such matters would need to be demonstrated as part of a 
planning application submission.  Policy EC2 sets out circumstances where 
non employment generating uses on sites and premises currently in 
employment uses may be considered appropriate and/or acceptable.  198 
 
 
 7.8 The setting of a planning policy context that facilitates economic/employment 
growth, whilst also allowing for alternative uses in appropriate cir cumstances 
is a key tool in facilitating economic growth and achieving wider local plan 
objectives. It is within that context that the following policies EC1 and EC2 
are set.  
POLICY EC1: EMPLOYMENT AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT  
Proposals for employment/economic  development in existing employment 
areas (Policy EC2), on land allocated for employment/mixed use (Policies SP5 
to SP11), or within the main built up area of Tier 1 to 5 settlements, as defined 
in Policy SP4, will be supported subject to compliance with t he following 
criteria: - 
a) The proposal will not give rise to adverse amenity effects on sensitive 
uses that cannot be mitigated adequately;  
b) Traffic generated as a result of the proposal being satisfactorily 
accommodated in the surrounding highway network;  
c) The proposal not adversely affecting the significance of natural 
environmental assets, designated heritage assets and open space 
provision and accords with the provisions of Policies ENV1, ENV2, ENV4, 
ENV5, ENV6, ENV7, ENV8, ENV10 and ENV11;  
d) The proposal bei ng adequately served by communications infrastructure 
i.e. broadband, where possible; and  
e) The proposal being of a design that accords with the provisions of Policy 
ENV3.  
f) The proposal accords with any other relevant polici es in the local plan 
Elsewhere prop osals for employment/economic development will be 
supported where they meet criteria a) to f) above and it can be clearly 
demonstrated that: - 
g) There are no allocated sites or existing employment areas available in the   199 
 
 
 settlement or the nearest Tier 1 to T ier 4 settlement that could 
accommodate the proposal; or  
h) The proposed activity requires a specific location in which to operate 
adequately; or  
i) The proposal will help deliver specific aims and objectives of the York, 
North Yorkshire and East Riding Local Ec onomic Partnership (LEP) or the 
Leeds City Region LEP; or  
j)    The proposal will benefit the rural economy in accordance with Policy 
EC3.  
 
POLICY EC2: SAFEGUARDING EXISTING EMPLOYMENT AREAS  
In order to ensure that there is an adequate supply of employmen t locations 
in Craven for ‘B’ Class Uses, sites currently in ‘B’ class uses and sites 
identified on the policies inset map as: existing sites and premises in ‘B’ 
Class use in existing employment areas, and : sites with extant commitments 
for ‘B’ Class Use, will be safeguarded from non ‘B’ Class uses unless: - 
a) The development proposal makes equivalent compensatory provision 
of employment land/premises to an eq uivalent or better standard; or  
b) It is demonstrated that there is no reasonable prospect of the s ite being 
retained, reused or redeveloped for a ‘B’ C lass employment generating 
use; and  
c) The proposed new use is compatible with surrounding uses, and will 
not result in adverse effects to new and existing occupiers that cannot 
be adequately mitigated.  
Existing live/work units in the plan area will be safeguarded from changes to 
non-employment uses unless proposals meet the requirements of criterion f) 
of Policy EC3: Rural Economy.  
Broughton Hall Estate and Business Park provides opportunities for both ‘ B’ 200 
 
 
 Class employment and tourism development.  Existing ‘B’ Class employment 
uses in this location will be safeguarded under this policy and proposals for 
tourism development will be supported, in principle, in accordance with 
Policy EC4: Tourism.  
 
RURAL E CONOMY  
7.9 The local economy reaches beyond Craven’s towns and their industrial 
estates —extending into the countryside and even the remotest of rural 
locations. Farming, industry, tourism, culture, transportation, shops, pubs, 
community services, small bus inesses, self -employment and so on, all 
contribute to a rural economy that helps to maintain the vitality and viability of 
the countryside, the quality of its landscapes and villages, and the 
sustainability of rural life.  The contribution traditional farmi ng and 
agricultural practi ces have made and continue to make to the rural economy 
of Craven is recognised.  This policy aims to support all types of  economic 
activity that contribute to Craven’s rural economy , provided they meet the 
requirements of Policy EC3.  
7.10 Economic activity in rural areas has many things in common with economic 
activity in towns or anywhere else, but the opportunities available, the 
barriers encountered and the concerns of those involved can be quite 
different. Rural locations can  provide their own unique type of business 
opportunities, but they can impose limitations and restrictions, too, including 
the potential negative impact of development on the character of the 
countryside, the relatively poor transport links and broadband c onnections 
available in some locations.  Opportunities currently exist to deal with the 
lack of broadband through the Superfast North Yorkshire Broadband Project 
(SFNY).  The Super -Fast North Yorkshire Broadband Project has been 
completed which brings supe rfast broadband to 89% of the county’s homes 
and businesses .  SFNY is currently delivering Phase 3 to further extend 201 
 
 
 superfast coverage.  This will allow businesses to grow in rural locations 
throughout Craven.  
7.11 The following policy aims to acknowledge  the rural situation and its particular 
set of circumstances. It takes a positive stance and looks to encourage 
growth in the rural economy by supporting proposals for sustainable 
development, by broadening the scope for and increasing the variety and 
diversity of economic activity in rural areas, and by ‘not getting in the way’ of 
enterprise and innovation that offers economic, environmental , cultural  and 
social benefits to local communities. The policy is intended to be flexible and 
adaptable so that it can respond to different needs within the rural economy, 
new opportunities that may arise in the future and changes in the rural 
economy over time.  
7.12 New opportunities are likely to arise in farming, land management and 
support services, and in the use of farmland and buildings for things other 
than agriculture, for example green technology, renewable and low -carbon 
energy, flood management and related areas of research are potential areas 
of growth. Sustainable tourism projects will continue to be impor tant; there 
may be further opportunities for combined living and working in rural areas; 
and local firms will wish to grow and expand. This policy supports the rural 
economy by recognising the contribution that existing live/work units make to 
the rural ec onomy.   
7.13 For the purposes of Policy EC3, live/work units are defined as buildings of 
sufficient size to accommodate a genuine business use and that any 
residential accommodation will be ancillary to that use. Proposals for 
substantial residential acco mmodation with a token area given over to 
business use will be considered to be residential development and be 
subject to the requirements of Policy SP4 and will therefore fall outside the 
scope of Policy EC3. The proposal must relate to an employment use which 
is designed so that it can be used independently of the dwelling space (so 
that employment potential is not restricted only to occupants of the dwelling 202 
 
 
 space). The occupancy of the living space will be restricted to a person 
directly involved with t he business being operated. The exact ratio of 
employment to residential space and restrictions relating to the occupancy 
of the living space will be specified by conditions attached to any planning 
permission as appropriate. The continued use of existing live/work units will 
therefore be supported. The conversion of existing live/work units to other 
uses will be supported provided it can be demonstrated, through robust 
marketing evidence, that the existing live/work unit is no longer required or 
that there  is no reasonable prospect of it being used for its intended purpose 
in the future. Marketing evidence must substantiate a robust conclusion that 
every reasonable attempt has been made to secure a suitable business 
reuse, that the building is no longer sui table for commercial activity or that it 
is no longer required by other occupiers.  
7.14 Craven’s landscape, heritage, culture, quality of life and overall success 
depend on a living and working countryside, and on economic development 
that preserves and en hances these qualities, whilst bringing greater 
prosperity to local communities.  
 
POLICY EC3: RURAL ECONOMY  
Craven’s rural economy will be supported, so that it may grow and diversify 
in a sustainable way to provide long term economic, environmental and 
social benefits for local communities. This will be achieved in the following 
ways:  
a)   Enabling enterprise, welcoming innovation and supporting economic  
development proposals that will benefit the local economy, environment 
and quality of life, including culture and community proposals;  
b)   Recognising opportunities to use farmland and farm buildings in new 
and different ways to support individual farm businesses and to diversify 
the wider rural economy;  
c)   Helping existing and new rural businesses, inc luding tourism related 203 
 
 
 businesses to succeed, grow and expand, by working with them co -
operatively and proactively, so that development proposals can be 
supported wherever possible;  
d)   Enabling farm, forestry and other land -based businesses to build the 
new and replacement buildings and infrastructure they need to function 
efficiently, including dwellings where they are fully justified on functional 
and financial grounds;  
e)    Acknowledging the potential social, economic, environmental benefits of 
reusin g existing buildings by supporting proposals for their conversion, 
including to employment use or live/work units, providing opportunities 
for people to live and work locally.  
f)    Supporting the continued use of existing live/work units for the valuable 
contribution they make to the rural economy.  The conversion of existing 
live/work units to other uses will be supported provided it can be 
demonstrated that there is no reasonable prospect of the live/work unit 
being re -used.  
Proposals of the type describ ed above will be supported provided they 
accord with all relevant local plan policies and any relevant neighbourhood 
plan policies, and will help to achieve sustainable development.  
 
TOURISM  
7.15 Tourism is the broad term applied to the range of activitie s, businesses and 
services that people enjoy whilst visiting Craven. The economy that has built 
up around tourism is now a substantial and important part of the area’s 
overall economy and quality of life.  
7.16 The boost that tourism and visitors provide is  seen in the success of 
Craven’s market towns as local places for shopping, culture, leisure and 
business. Tourism also helps in the understanding and appreciation of 
Craven’s natural environment, heritage and culture, which, in turn, helps to 204 
 
 
 conserve the se resources for future generations. Supporting sustainable 
tourism is therefore an important aim of the local plan and will help to secure 
a thriving economy, vibrant town -centres, cultural experiences, active 
recreation, rich biodiversity, beautiful land scapes and well -preserved historic 
places, which will be both attractive to visitors and beneficial to local 
communities.  
Destinations, visitor accommodation and activities  
7.17 The local plan aims to support both established and aspiring tourist 
destinati ons that wish to develop and become better and more successful. 
Those wishing to offer a wider choice of accommodation or activities, which 
create appeal, interest and enjoyment for visitors, will be supported; and 
proposals to develop new ideas and opport unities, in a sustainable way, will 
be encouraged.  
Synergies, commitments and key locations  
7.18 Tourism businesses may combine well with other businesses in non -tourism 
sectors. Both can provide a draw, add interest and vitality, and provide 
facilities an d services that may be of wider appeal beyond their respective 
customer base. Similarly, individual businesses may benefit from integrating 
tourism and other sectors within their own hybrid operation.  The local plan 
therefore recognises and supports opport unities to secure knock -on benefits 
from locating tourism and other forms of business together — this is referred 
to as “synergies of co -location”.  
7.19 In addition to giving broad encouragement and support to sustainable 
tourism across the plan area, the local plan also establishes two specific 
tourism designations:  a Tourism Development Commitment and Key 
Locations for Tourism Development. Land designated as a Tourism 
Development Commitment already benefits from planning permission and is 
described in par agraph 7.20.  The eight Key Locations, which are described 205 
 
 
 in paragraphs 7.21 to 7.3 5, offer particularly good opportunities for 
sustainable tourism and for harnessing synergies of co -location.  
7.20 Tourism Development Commitment . Land designated as the To urism 
Development Commitment is located to the west of Hellifield and is outlined 
by a red dashed line in Diagram EC4B. This land benefits from extant 
planning permission for construction of a rural environmental centre 
comprising tourism, exhibition, trai ning, equestrian and livestock buildings, a 
hotel and nature conservation area47. However, the extent of operational 
development (buildings etc.) allowed by the planning permission is limited to 
three areas within the red dashed line and identified by grey hatching in the 
diagram, with most of the land remaining as fields, a nature conservation 
area, open public space  and a grass car park . Designation of the Tourism 
Development Commitment recognises the extent of operational development 
already approved and related Policy EC4B sets out the Council’s approach to 
proposals for alternative development, which may come forward in the future. 
Such proposals will be supported, in principle, provided that they promote 
sustainable tourism and fully address important m atters of landscape, 
heritage, local character and appearance, archaeology, biodiversity, local 
green space and public rights of way, in accordance with local plan Policies 
ENV1, ENV2, ENV3, ENV4, ENV10 and ENV12.  
7.21 Bolton Abbey/Bolton Abbey Station.  Bolton Abbey is a place of multiple 
significances. Bolton Priory has historical value as an Augustinian foundation 
dating back to 1151, built and altered over time which has the potential to 
yield evidence about past human activity. It also has high aestheti c value as 
a piece of architectural design: the ruined east end is of exceptional quality 
and a rare example in Yorkshire of late C14 architecture at its most refined. 
However, it is the wider relationship of the Priory with its landscape setting 
                                                           
47 On 11th January 2000, conditional o utline planning permission was granted for construction of Hellifield 
Rural Environmental Centre  (decision no. 5/42/149/C). The outline permission was renewed  on 10th February 
2003  (decision no. 42/2002/2763) , reserved matters were approved on 20th September 2005  (decision no. 
42/2005/5082) and works to implement the permission were subsequently carried out.  206 
 
 
 that give s this place its greatest significance. Together they form a famous 
landscape, an icon of the Picturesque and Romantic Movements of the latter  
part of the 18th and into the 19th centuries, which valued the Priory ruins in 
its landscape setting for its fort uitous aesthetic effect. The association of 
Bolton Abbey with the Romantic Movement and the area’s later accessibility 
to major populations in the industrial centres of the West Riding led to the 
development of the site as a tourist destination. The railwa y arrived at Bolton 
Abbey Station in 1888. On one August Bank Holiday in the 1890s the railway 
brought over 40,000 people to Bolton Abbey.  The site became and remains 
a popular destination for tourists, generating a strong communal value 
expressed in the continuing appreciation by the public for this place, which is 
one of the most visited sites in Yorkshire and plays a significant role as a 
gateway to the Yorkshire Dales National Park.  
7.22 Bolton Abbey is also a Tier 4b settlement (villages with basic se rvices 
bisected by Yorkshire Dales National Park boundary) within the Local Plan’s 
Spatial Hierarchy.  It is similarly recognised as a service village in the 
adopted Yorkshire Dales Local Plan (2016).  It comprises land at Bolton 
Abbey village and Bolton B ridge, and provides a range of services to its 
community and those of smaller related settlements nearby in the National 
Park.  
7.23 However, several issues at the Bolton Abbey Core Visitor Area48 (all of which 
is owned by the Bolton Abbey Estate) diminish b oth the visitor offer 
concerned and the ability of the Bolton Abbey Estate to support its ongoing 
programme of environmental management and architectural conservation.  
The Bolton Abbey Estate has identified these issues as follows: no play 
facilities for children of different age groups; no sense of arrival; vulnerability 
                                                           
48 A map showing the boundary of the Bolton Abbey Core Visitor Area (CVA) is provided in the Bolton Abbey 
Development Options Appraisal Study (BADOAS), which has been prepared by the Bolton Abbey Estate in 
liaison with local and external stakeholders. The CVA extends from Bolton Bridge to Barden Bridge, includ es 
Bolton Abbey Station and is bisected by the boundary of the Yorkshire Dales National Park. That part of the 
CVA falling within the Craven Local Plan area is shown on the Policies Map (Inset Map No. 24).  The BADOAS 
has been incorporated into the Local Pl an evidence base and supports Local Plan Policies EC4 and EC4A.  207 
 
 
 of visitor operations to bad weather and school holidays; little secondary 
spend by visitors; major planning constraints; high maintenance costs; 
increased competition; services at risk; staffing problems due to high house 
prices; very limited choice of visitor accommodation in the immediate area.  
7.24 In seeking to address these issues, the Bolton Abbey Estate has identified 
eight potential development zones within the Core Visitor Area, two of which 
are located partly within the Craven Local Plan area at Bolton Abbey and 
Bolton Bridge.  The Bolton Abbey Estate has liaised with local and external 
stakeholders on their proposals for mixed use tourism led development 
including the District C ouncil, the Yorkshire Dales National Park Authority, 
and Historic England (which supports in principle the provision of 
development of an appropriate scale, intensity and mix of uses in Bolton 
Abbey village, Bolton Bridge and other parts of the Core Visito r Area in the 
long term).  
7.25 The Bolton Abbey Estate proposals refer mainly to tourism -led development 
to support and diversify visitor operations at Bolton Abbey, improving cycling 
and walking infrastructure and providing facilities such as a farm shop  and 
eating / drinking establishments, which will also benefit the local community. 
In addition, the Bolton Abbey Estate wishes to pursue other forms of 
development to accord with policies elsewhere in the Local Plan, including 
for example small scale hous ing development and rural office development.  
7.26 Tourism led mixed use development at Bolton Abbey has the potential to 
boost the tourism economy of the area and achieve the synergies of co -
location with other business and commercial development to prov ide for 
significant high value employment opportunities in accordance with Policy 
EC4 of the Local Plan, but this must be achieved without harm to the 
important and significant historic, ecological and landscape assets of this 
special place.  
7.27 However, the Council has not allocated specific sites at Bolton Abbey for two 
reasons.  Firstly, the Council considers that a comprehensive strategy and 208 
 
 
 development masterplan must be prepared for the area which: takes into 
account the heritage, ecology and landsca pe sensitivity of the area; 
considers the fact that the National Park boundary runs through Bolton 
Abbey village and Bolton Bridge; involves Historic England, the Yorkshire 
Dales National Park Authority, Natural England, the District Council and other 
stakeholders as appropriate. Secondly, it considers that there is a need to 
establish the potential impact of detailed proposals (for uses such as a play 
barn, farm shop, play area, pub, housing, visitor accommodation, cycling 
hub, offices and biomass boiler) before confirming the use of land for a 
particular purpose.  
7.28 The local plan therefore includes a related policy to EC4 (EC4A), to support 
sensitive and sustainable tourism -led, mixed -use development at Bolton 
Abbey, in the general locations identified at Bolton Abbey and Bolton Bridge 
(see Policies Inset Map No.24 ), subject to a comprehensive strategy and 
Masterplan for the Core Visitor Area to the satisfaction of itself  and t he 
Yorkshire Dales National Park Authority  (as local planning authorities) an d in 
consultation with other key stakeholders, including , Historic England, Natural 
England and the Environment Agency.  Development proposals will be 
expected to accord with the principles of the Masterplan and development 
proposals which would prejudice the delivery of the related strategy for the 
Core Visitor Area will not be permitted.  
7.29 Broughton Hall Estate.  This is a key location that has successfully 
integrated tourism, business, heritage and landscape over many years – 
tapping in to the synergie s of co -location and creating a place of unique 
character and appeal. This achievement and the location’s potential for 
continued sustainable growth and enhancement are recognised in its 
designation.  
7.30 Ingleton – viaduct area.  Ingleton’s grade II listed  former railway viaduct is a 
significant heritage asset, which contributes to the character and appearance 
of the adjoining conservation area. At present, the viaduct is inaccessible, but 209 
 
 
 has the potential to become an elevated public walkway and the centr epiece 
of wider proposals to enhance the local tourist economy and historic 
environment.  
7.31 Gargrave – canal area.  The Leeds & Liverpool Canal is a significant 
heritage asset and its moorings, towpath and grade II listed bridges and 
locks add to Gargrav e’s attractiveness to visitors. Proposals that would help 
to enhance the canal’s significance and attractiveness, its role in the local 
economy and the range of canal -side facilities currently on offer will be 
supported in principle.  
7.32 Skipton – canal a nd railway station area.  Skipton’s busy and popular 
grade II listed railway station is an important gateway to the town, but its 
facilities, surroundings, accessibility and relationship to the town centre could 
be improved. The Leeds & Liverpool Canal, whi ch is just a short walk to the 
north, is a significant heritage asset within the Skipton Conservation Area 
and is popular for its moorings and events. The canal towpath also provides 
an attractive pedestrian and cycle route to the town centre, Aireville Pa rk and 
beyond. This part of the town has been designated as a key location to 
highlight the area’s potential and to encourage proposals that will support the 
local economy, improve accessibility, enhance the visitor experience, 
conserve heritage assets and  create a better townscape.  
7.33 Bentham – railway station area.  High Bentham has a significant number of 
undesignated heritage assets and the potential for conservation area 
designation. Its attractiveness as a tourist destination and gateway to the 
Fores t of Bowland Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty are reinforced by its 
railway station on the “Little North Western” line, which is supported by a 
community rail partnership. The station is located in an area of town where 
space and opportunities for growth  are less constrained than in the historic 
and tightly built centre immediately to the north. This greater potential is 
recognised in the area’s designation as a key location and proposals will be 210 
 
 
 supported, in principle, where they would enhance the town’ s attractiveness 
to visitors, support the local economy and conserve heritage assets.  
7.34 Hellifield – railway station area.  The grade II listed Hellifield Station marks 
the southernmost extent of the Settle -Carlisle Conservation Area, which 
follows the r oute of the popular, scenic and historic railway. The Yorkshire 
Dales National Park is to the immediate northeast, the Tourism Development 
Commitment is to the southwest and areas around the station buildings are 
mainly operational land. In this key locati on, appropriate proposals to develop 
facilities and services and to enhance linkages and relationships with the 
surrounding area will be supported in principle.  
7.35 Embsay – railway station area.  The Embsay and Bolton Abbey Steam 
Railway intends to extend  its operations to Skipton railway station where 
former platforms 5 and 6 would be brought back into use. This and other 
appropriate enhancements to services and facilities could make a significant 
contribution to sustainable growth in tourism at each of t he three key 
locations involved – Embsay, Bolton Abbey and Skipton – and will be 
supported in principle.  
Rural and countryside areas  
7.36 Tourism naturally extends beyond Craven’s main settlements and the local 
plan therefore supports sustainable tourism i n more remote locations — to do 
otherwise would be to unfairly restrict economic, environmental and social 
opportunities, and to hinder growth and diversity within the rural economy. 
Proposals for tourism development that will result in improved biodiversi ty 
and green infrastructure, and better facilities for rural communities, will be 
particularly welcomed. Wildlife activities or ‘Nature Tourism’ will be 
encouraged and supported, in principle, in both rural and urban areas.  
Community benefits  
7.37 A sustai nable approach to growth in tourism will ensure that benefits to the 
economy, environment and quality of life are felt as broadly as possible, 211 
 
 
 including within local communities. Part of this will be to attach appropriate 
community use agreements to planni ng permissions for tourism 
development, where this will improve the availability of community facilities in 
the local area. Communities will also be supported in bringing forward their 
own sustainable tourism projects through neighbourhood planning.  
7.38 Local strategies and action plans  
 Local business organisations, such as Chambers of Trade and Business 
Improvement Districts (BID), are active in promoting business, services and 
activities in their areas. Supporting tourism is a vital component of their w ork 
and this is reflected in strategies and action plans being pursued across the 
district49. Local business organisations will therefore be supported in their 
efforts to promote sustainable tourism.  
Public transport, walking and cycling  
7.39 The local plan  aims to connect tourism development to the public transport 
network and to promote walking and cycling, in the interests of sustainability, 
health and well -being. Several key locations and the tourism development 
commitment have been identified as offerin g particular opportunities to 
further these aims.   Policy SP2: Economic Activity and Business Growth 
supports enhanced connections across the public transport network, 
including the Skipton to Colne railway line, which offers opportunities to 
promote susta inable travel to Craven destinations and, therefore, sustainable 
tourism.  
Sustainable development  
                                                           
49 Skipton BID funds projects, events and other activities to ensure that the town remains the ideal place in 
which to work, visit, shop and live. Settle & District Chamber of Trade is developi ng a live business plan 
supported by a vision, objectives and actions including a website, visitor signage and cultural facilities. An 
Action Plan for Ingleton sets out a number of key improvements for the village and has been prepared by 
Craven District C ouncil, Ingleton Parish Council, Ingleton & District Tradespeoples' Association and Ingleton 
Rural Community Association.  212 
 
 
 7.40 The local plan’s general support for tourism does not mean support for any 
tourism -related development proposal that may come forward. Individual 
proposa ls will need to accord with other relevant local plan polices, promote 
relevant plan objectives and achieve sustainable development overall.   
POLICY EC4: TOURISM  
 
Tourism will grow in a sustainable way, so that it helps to improve the 
economy, environment and quality of life. Such growth will be achieved by:  
a) Enabling established destinations to become even better through the 
development of new and improved facilities;  
 
b) Helping up -and-coming destinations to establish themselves and become 
successful;  
 
c) Recognising opportunities to bring tourism into new areas that have 
untapped potential, including new types of activity and new destinations;  
 
d) Acknowledging the range of sporting, recreational, cultural, arts, wildlife 
and leisurely activities that p eople may wish to engage in as tourists;  
 
e) Ensuring that tourism development provides easy access to the network 
of public transport services, footpaths and cycle routes (including canal 
towpaths) in the area and, wherever possible, secures the improveme nt 
and expansion of that network;  
 
f)  Realising opportunities, where they arise, to secure additional knock -on 
benefits from placing tourism development and other forms of business 
and commercial development together in the same location, thereby 
achievin g synergies of co -location;  
 
g) Supporting, in principle, proposals for tourism development and for 213 
 
 
 achieving synergies of co -location, in the following key locations for 
tourism development identified on the policies map;  
 
Bolton Abbey/Bolton Abbey Railwa y Station  
 
Broughton Hall Estate  
 
Ingleton – viaduct area  
 
Gargrave – canal area  
 
Skipton – canal and railway station area  
 
Bentham – railway station area  
 
Hellifield – railway station area  
 
Embsay – railway station area  
 
h) Ensuring that the benefits of t ourism growth – to the economy, 
environment and quality of life – are felt as broadly as possible within 
local communities;  
 
i)  Securing appropriate community use of private facilities provided as part 
of tourism developments, including sports, leisure, r ecreational and 
cultural and arts facilities, shops and open spaces;  
 
j)  Encouraging and supporting communities and business organisations to 
promote sustainable tourism through Neighbourhood Plans and other 
local initiatives;  
 
Individual proposals that a ccord with the Council’s general a pproach set out 
in parts a) to j ) above must also accord with all other relevant local plan 
polices and any relevant neighbourhood plan policies and must help to 
achieve sustainable development overall.  
 
 214 
 
 
 POLICY EC4A: TOU RISM –LED DEVELOPMENT AT BOLTON ABBEY  
 
The provision of sensitive and sustainable tourism -led, mixed -use 
development at Bolton Abbey will be supported  within the Core Visitor Area 
indicated on the Policies Map (Inset Map No.24) . 
In particular, within the Co re Visitor Area, the following mix of uses will be 
supported in principle subject to their scale, design, location, inter -
relationships and cumulative impact upon the historic environment, ecology, 
flood risk and landscape character being acceptable:  
 
 Tour ism facilities, including but not limited to, farm shop, play barn and 
eating/drinking establishments;  
 New build visitor accommodation;  
 New infrastructure necessary to promote and improve cycling and 
walking;  
 Limited residential development to provide staf f accommodation and 
market housing, which conforms to policies elsewhere in the Local Plan;  
 Limited commercial development, which conforms to policies elsewhere in 
the Local Plan.  
 
Larger scale development will be restricted to the following general locati ons 
indicated on the Policies Map (Inset Map No. 24):  
 
 Land including and surrounding the main village car park at Bolton Abbey 
village  
 Land to the north -north -west of the B6160 / A59 roundabout at Bolton 
Bridge  
 Land north of the highway spur (part of for mer A59) to the west of the 
B6160 at Bolton Bridge  
 
A comprehensive strategy and Masterplan for the Core Visitor Area, 
including detailed development and design principles and a Landscape and  215 
 
 
  
Visual Impact Assessment, shall be produced to the satisfactio n of the local 
planning authorities in consultation with key stakeholders, including Historic 
England, Natural England and the Environment Agency. Development 
proposals will be expected to accord with the principles of the Masterplan 
and developments which  would prejudice the delivery of the related strategy 
for the Core Visitor Area will not be permitted.  
 
 
POLICY EC4B: TOURISM DEVELOPMENT COMMITMENT AT HELLIFIELD  
Alternative sustainable tourism development will be supported on land at 
Hellifield identifi ed as grey hatching on Diagram EC4B, provided that the 
following requirements are met:  
I)  Conservation of the landscape and of the setting and special qualities of 
the Yorkshire Dales National Park  
II) Conservation of heritage assets, including archaeolog ical remains, the 
Long Preston Conservation Area and the Settle -Carlisle Conservation 
Area  
III) Conservation of biodiversity value  
IV) Preservation or enhancement of Local Green Space, including its open 
character, local significance and value to the commu nity 
V) Preservation and enhancement of the existing public rights of way 
network  
VI) Preservation or enhancement of the character and appearance of the 
local area.  
 
Proposals that include the development of non -designated land (shown in 
white on Diagram E C4B) for the purposes of sustainable tourism will be 216 
 
 
 supported in principle, provided that:  
i)  the land adjoins an area identified by grey hatching on the Policies Map 
and Diagram EC4B; and  
ii) the amount of any such land is limited in scale compared to t he amount of 
adjoining land identified by grey hatching; and  
iii) the proposal meets the requirements of I) to VI) above.  
Individual proposals that accord with the Council’s approach set out above 
must also accord with all other relevant local plan polici es and any relevant 
neighbourhood plan policies.  
 
 
 
217 
 
 
 RETAIL AND TOWN CENTRES  
Town Centres in Craven  
7.41 The historic character of market towns and villages in Craven present an 
attractive setting for retailing, business, commercial  activity, leisure, cul ture 
and recreation that reinforces a competitive advantage, whilst building 
relationships with other centres in wider retail networks that lie beyond  (but 
include) Craven. Recent experience and change highlights that the future 
context for retailing in to wn centres will be very different  and centres will 
need to adapt to the changing policy and economic landscape. For Craven, 
historic shopping areas, streets and spaces are intertwined with the health 
and future trajectory of retail and commercial activitie s in market town and 
village centres.  
7.42 In terms of retailing activity, the Retail and Leisure study  (2016)  identifies that 
in Craven, capacity for comparison retailing exists in all centres for the period 
to 2032 which could assist in clawing back pote ntial expenditure to Craven, 
which otherwise would be leaked to centres outside of the area. The study 
also shows capacity for convenience retailing  in Craven ( particularly in 
Skipton ) for the period to 2032 , except for Settle. In Settle the study identifi es 
no capacity for convenience retailing in the town for the period to 2032. 
Supporting and enhancing the health and vitality of centres is an important 
factor in supporting communities.  
7.43 Our centres are part of local community identity and strong busi ness 
identities. In particular, continued multiple town centre retail investment close 
to prime pitches in Skipton but with opportunities for lower rents away from 
primary frontage areas are likely to be appealing to independent retailers as 
a trade -off for lower footfall.  
Craven Retail Hierarchy  
7.44 The retail hierarchy for Craven is set out at Policy EC5 and centres in it will 
be resilient to, and not harmed by, retail and indoor leisure development 218 
 
 
 proposals elsewhere. Out of centre proposals in Craven that are larger than 
the thresholds set out in Policy EC5 will be required to demonstrate the 
degree of impact on the centres. This may include addressing impact on 
more than one of the centres depending on the location, scale and nature of 
the proposal. T he scope and nature of an impact assessment will be 
determined at the time of application.  
7.45 The hierarchy of retail centres accords with their size, function and capacity. 
Centres within the hierarchy may fall within different retail networks, which 
extend beyond the plan area.  
7.46 The following retail hierarchy statements consider the role of centres 
identified in the retail hierarchy and links between them or the purpose of the 
hierarchy and levels within the hierarchy.  
7.47 Level 1  - Skipton Town Centre 
• The primary retail location for Craven that is also attractive to visitors from 
outside the district, and as a gateway to the Yorkshire Dales ; 
 
• Limited current available capacity to accommodate additional growth;  
 
• Historic townscape and dense resident ial and rural greenspace 
surroundings ; 
 
• Attractive natural and historic waterside environments within the town 
centre.  
7.48 Level 2 - Settle Town Centre  
• A secondary retail location for Craven that serves primarily the immediate 
hinterland whilst also actin g as a gateway to the Yorkshire Dales ; 
 
•  The compact 17th century core is centred on the market square around 
the Town Hall and the Shambles and is surrounded by narrow lanes and 219 
 
 
 backyards leading off Kirkgate, Duke Street and Constitution Hill (source: 
parish profile) ; 
 
•  Located in the northeast of the compact town beneath limestone crags of 
the adjacent Yorkshire Dales National Park.  
7.49 Level  3 - Bentham Town Centre  
• A local centre that serves primarily the day to day needs of residents 
whilst also offer ing a number of higher order services that serves a wider 
hinterland.  
 
• A working town feel with an auction market within the town centre and 
manufacturing plants on the fringe of the town centre.  
7.50 Level 3 - Main Street, Cross Hills  
• A local centre that serves primarily the day to day needs of residents 
whilst also offering a number of higher order services ; 
 
• The location of the centre astride the A6068, a well trafficked 
thoroughfare, detracts from the attractiveness of Cross  Hills as a 
destination retai l centre serving a greater than the day to day retail needs 
of residents.  
7.51 Level 4  – Ingleton  
• A local centre that serves primarily the day to day needs of residents 
whilst also offering a number of services aimed at the tourist economy ; 
 
• There is an el ement of potentially competing convenience retail provision 
on the A65 New Road.  
 
 
Challenges and Opportunities  220 
 
 
 7.52 The assessment of the key characteristics of each centre in the retail 
hierarchy presents a number of challenges to their future health and  vitality. 
Arising from this, there are also opportunities for enhancement and to build 
upon/create the competitive advantages of the centres in question. These 
are summarised in Tables  5 and 6 below:  
 Table 5 - Key Settlement Specific Challenges  
 Historic  and dense 
layout limitations 
to  continuous / 
circular high 
footfall routes  Competing retail 
development 
along nearby main 
through A road   Lack of available 
town centre / edge 
of centre sites for 
new build 
development  Historic 
buildings 
perceived as 
obsolete for 
some town 
centre uses  Environmental 
quality suffers 
from  traffic 
movements and 
road layout  
Skipton       
Settle       
Bentham       
Cross Hills       
Ingleton       
 
Table 6 -Key Settlement Specific Opportunities / Competitive Advantages  
 Historic waterside 
recreation 
interactions with 
shopping areas  Extensive range of 
purposes for 
visiting or lingering   Underexploited 
trans P ennine 
passing trade 
potential  Appealing 
physical place 
by look and feel 
(eg: intertwined 
historic streets)  Interestin g diverse 
mix of uses on 
distinct streets 
encourages 
footfall  
Skipton       
Settle       
Bentham       
Cross Hills       
Ingleton       221 
 
 
 Approach to Retail and Town Centres in the Plan  
7.53 The ultimate goal of the plan is to secure sustainable long term growth that 
responds to the distinct evolution and change of the retail economy.  The 
centres in the retail hierarchy will be supported and enhanced by 
development which strengthens their resilience to economic, social and 
technological change. This will b e achieved by a flexible and positive 
planning policy approach to development including hybrid use of premises 
within the parameters of sustaining a majority retail use of primary frontages 
and being in keeping with their scale, historic character and dens e residential 
surroundings.  
Skipton  
7.54 The Retail and Leisure study confirms that Skipton is the primary retail centre 
in Craven, and this is reflected in being identified at tier 1 of the town centre 
hierarchy. The policy approach supports and seeks to secure more effective 
land use within Skipton in defined areas for change as set out at Policy SP5. 
This approach will meet short and long term requirements for convenience 
and comparison retail floor  space growth thereby enhancing the retail offer in 
the town. In a changing retail economy these areas present particular 
advantages and opportunities.  Elements and projects will enhance:  
• The perceived attractiveness of Skipton as a place in which to invest;  
 
• Interactions with the market, public spaces, commun ity events venues, 
waterside environments and a well balanced mix of diverse independent 
and multiple occupiers;  
 
• Distinct retail, market, service, leisure, community, business, cultural, 
tourism and education functions that complement retail networks and 
promote customer choice, the range of purposes for using the centre and 
the experience of users;  222 
 
 
 • Successful and innovative business environments embracing new 
technology; property market churn and choice; and innovative and hybrid 
use of historic and perce ived obsolete buildings to secure their viable and 
sustainable future;  
 
• Opportunities for social interaction including the inclusivity of the evening 
economy, cultural events, public seating provision and a broader leisure 
economy catering for growth in yo ung family, one person and elderly 
users of the centres;  
 
• The distinct balanced mix of main town centre uses at ground floor level 
along primary shopping frontage with the majority of each primary 
frontage section on the local plan maps being in retail use . 
 
• Attractive accessibility to and from the town and between elements within 
the centres, particularly for the mobility impaired, older persons, young 
families, cyclists and public transport users;  
 
• An attractive, green and secure pedestrian environment an d public realm 
that provides legible continuous main footfall pedestrian routes around 
the centre connecting and supporting elements within the centre, in 
particular focal point / buildings and distinct geographic features, and 
interactions between them.  
 
• Effective car parking and traffic management;  
 
7.55 Recent development at the rear of Skipton Town Hall has addressed a need 
for modern units suitable for the needs of multiple retailers. However in 
Skipton, the forecast additional need for 2,441 sq. m ne t new convenience 
retail floor  space and 3,291 sq. m net new comparison retail floor  space to 
2032 does not account for commitments or recent developments since the 
completion of the Retail and Leisure Study in 2016.  This is explicitly 223 
 
 
 referenced in the s tudy and the assessed need should be viewed in this 
context.  Residual need should be met first by those sites allocated under 
Policy SP5. The redevelopment of any car park areas in Skipton Town 
Centre area will need to consider whether it is appropriate t o make 
compensatory provision for the potential loss of spaces as part of the 
proposal.  
Elsewhere in Craven  
7.56 Away from Skipton the Retail and Leisure study shows more limited capacity 
for retail development and this will primarily support service provi sion in the 
smaller market towns and villages ; enable local people to meet their daily 
needs for shopping within walking distance of their homes, and meet demand 
for local produce. Notably the evidence shows no new capacity for 
convenience retailing in Set tle for the period to 2032.  
Town Centre Uses, Primary Shopping Frontages and the Role of 
Residential Development and Use in Town Centres  
7.57 In line with the provisions of the NPPF, the policy approach taken in the plan 
supports and seeks to enhance the p rimarily retail function of town and 
settlement centres in Craven. This is achieved through the identification of 
primary shopping frontages in Skipton and wider town  and settlement centres 
in Skipton , Settle , Bentham, Ingleton and Cross Hills  which has b een 
informed by evidence in the Retail and Leisure study. It is though, recognised 
that whilst the primary retail function of centres should be safeguarded, 
securing an appropriate balance of town centre uses including commercial, 
leisure, tourism, cultura l, community and where appropriate residential uses 
is also an important factor in supporting and enhancing vitality in town 
centres in Craven.  
7.58 In this regard residential use  warrants particular comment.  The policy 
approach seeks to secure and safegu ard the retail, commercial and leisure 
functions of premises at ground floor level, particularly within primary 224 
 
 
 shopping areas identified in the plan. However above ground floor level, the 
nature and character of centres in  Craven means that residential us es could 
support and underpin retail, community and commercial activity at ground 
floor level. This is particularly the case in the smaller centres where the 
concept of ‘living above the shop’ can be attractive to business owners and 
operators. In Skipton,  the character of the town centre may limit the 
practicality or desirability of ‘living over the shop’. However, the range of sites 
identified in the plan for a mix of town centre uses including residential uses 
under Policy SP 5 will allow for a mix and b alance of uses in the town centre,  
including an element of residential.  
Out of Centre Retail Proposals  
7.59 The plan sets a context for supporting and promoting town centre uses in 
town centres. However, it is possible that proposals will come forward on 
identified and unidentified sites for retail uses in out of centre locations. 
Where this occurs, the impact of proposals on the health and vitality of town 
centres will need to be assessed and the plan sets floorspace thresholds as 
to the scale of proposals  where an impact assessment will be required. The 
ultimate aim is to ensure that the health of retail centres is not adversely 
affected by out of centre retail proposals.  It is within this context, that the  
followi ng policies are brought forward.  
POLICY EC 5: TOWN, DISTRICT AND LOCAL CENTRES  
Proposals for the ongoing enhancement and focus of town and village 
centres as locations for commercial, retail, leisure, cultural and community 
activity (town centre uses) will be supported in lin e with the following 
hierarchy:  
Level 1 Town Centre – Skip ton 
Within the Primary Shopping Area, as identified on the policies map, the retail 
role and function of the area will be safeguarded to protect its vitality and 
viability.  Changes of use from retailing (Class A1) to oth er uses will not be  225 
 
 
 permitted where this would lead to a significant adverse impact, either 
individually or cumulatively, on the vitality and viability of Skipton.  
Elsewhere within the town centre, as identified on the policies map, the 
commercial, retail , leisure, cultural and community functions of Skipton will 
be safeguarded and enhanced.  Proposals for town centre uses will be 
supported where they underpin and support the function of the centre.  
Proposals for main town centre uses identified as part of  the regeneration 
sites identified under Policy SP5 (site references SK139 and SK140) will be 
supported in principle, subject to meeting other relevant local plan policies, 
including the impact tests set out below where necessary.  
Level 2 Town Centre – Settle 
Within the town centre, as identified on the policies map , the commercial, 
retail, leisure, cultural and community functions of Settle will be safeguarded 
and enhanced.  Proposals for town centre uses will be supported where they 
underpin and support t he function of the centre.  
Level s 3 and 4 District  and Local Centres – Bentham, Cross Hills and Ingleton  
Within the District and Local Centres of Bentham, Cross  Hills and Ingleton, as 
identified on the policies map, proposals for main town centre uses will  be 
supported where they underpin and support the commercial, retail, leisure, 
cultural and community functions of these District and Local centres and are 
commensurate in size and scale to the role and function of the centres  
 
Retail Capacity  
The followin g capacity by centre for comparison and convenience retailing as 
at February 2016 is presented in the table below. Development proposals will 
need to take account that circumstances may change as a result of 
commitments and implemented developments since F ebruary 2016 and the 
implications these may have on potential residual capacity.   226 
 
 
 Level  Town/Village centre  Comparison floor 
space requirement to 
2032  Convenience floor space 
requirement to 2032  
1 Skipton Town Centre  3,291 sq.m  2,441 sq.m  
2 Settle Town Centre  650 sq.m  0 (-588) sq.m  
3 Bentham District Centre  217 sq.m  474 sq.m  
3 Cross Hills District Centre  83 sq.m  353 sq.m  
4 Ingleton Local Centre  285 sq.m  389 sq.m  
 
Proposals that make contributions to meeting the identified capacity will be 
supported, subject to compliance wit h other relevant plan policies.  
 
Main Town Centre Uses Outside of Defined Town Centres  
Proposals for main town centre uses in locations outside of defined town 
centres  as identified on the  policies map , will be required to demonst rate that 
there are no sequentially preferable locations that are available  and suitable 
for the proposed development , and that the proposal will not result in a 
significant adverse impact on vitality and viability.  
The following  impact thresholds are appl ied in respect of retail, office and 
leisure use proposals in locations outside of defined  town centre s: 
Level  Settlement centre  Floor Space Impact 
Thresholds (gross)  
1 Skipton Town Centre  1,500 sq.m  
2 Settle T own Centre  750 sq.m  
3 Bentham District Centre 500 sq.m  
3 Cross Hills District Centre  500sq.m  
4 Ingleton L ocal Centre  250 sq.m  
 
 227 
 
 
 POLICY EC5A: RESIDENTIAL USES IN TOWN, DISTRICT AND LOCAL CENTRES  
Skipton Primary Shopping Area  
Within the primary shopping area (PSA) of Skipton, as identified on the  policies 
map, the primarily retail function of this area will be safeguarded and protected. 
Within the PSA of Skipton, proposals for residential use at ground floor level will 
not be permitted where this would lead to a significant adverse impact on vital ity 
and viability.  
 
Skipton and Settle Town Centre Areas  
Proposals for standalone residential uses that require planning permission 
within the identified town centre areas of Skipton and Settle will be supported 
where it can be adequately demonstrated that  the proposed residential use will 
not result in the loss of retail, commercial, leisure accommodation or premises 
suitable for community uses and will not result in significant adverse impact on 
town centre vitality and viability.  
Within the identified to wn centre areas of Skipton and Settle, mixed use 
regeneration proposals that include an element of residential uses will be 
supported where the mix of uses underpins and enhances the vitality and 
viability of those centres.  
 
Bentham District Centre, Cross Hills District Centre, Ingleton Local Centre  
Proposals for residential uses at ground floor level within the District Centres of 
Bentham and Cross Hills and the Local Centre of Ingleton, as identified on the 
policies map, will be supported where the retail , commercial and leisure function 
of the District or Local centre is not undermined.  
 
First floor residential use  
At first floor level, proposals for residential uses within the identified primary 
shopping area of Skipton, within the identified town centre  boundaries of Skipton 
and Settle and the district/local centres of Bentham, Cross Hills and Ingleton will 
be supported where it can be demonstrated that the proposal will not undermine 
the retail function of the identified centre; supports and enhances th e vitality of 
the centre and accords with other relevant plan policies.  
 228 
 
 
 SECTION 8: INFRASTRUCTURE, SERVICES AND FACILITIES  
 
PLANNING OBLIGATIONS  
8.1 Planning obligations or “section 106 agreements” may be entered into by 
developers as part of the develop ment process. They are sometimes needed 
to ensure that places and communities grow in a sustainable way and to help 
deliver the objectives, aspirations and strategy of the local plan. In general, it 
is preferable to attach a condition, rather than an oblig ation, to a planning 
permission, but planning law and guidance may dictate otherwise, depending 
on the circumstances. Where necessary, obligations will be used to mitigate 
the impact of development, to compensate for the loss of or damage to 
specific featu res, or to prescribe the form of development and will only be 
sought where they meet all of the following tests : 
• necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms;  
 
• directly related to the development; and  
 
• fairly and reasonably related in sca le and kind to the development.  
Development will be resisted if necessary mitigation measures cannot be 
secured through appropriate conditions or obligations.  
Community infrastructure levy (CIL)  
8.2 The Council will consider the introduction of CIL in cons ultation with 
developers, local communities and infrastructure providers and will undertake 
the necessary work and procedural requirements to ensure that any charges 
do not undermine the local plan strategy. Planning obligations and CIL will 
perform their separate and respective functions and developers will be 
safeguarded from “double charging”.  
 Infrastructure Planning  
 
8.3 The Council is required to assess the level of infrastructure required to 
support the development set out within the Local Plan.  The  Council engages 229 
 
 
 with infrastructure delivery bodies and relevant stakeholders to determine 
infrastructure requirements, assessing infrastructure requirements from site 
allocations and assessing the level of growth cumulatively.  These are 
detailed within the Council’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan as set out within 
Policy SP12.   
 
Development viability and delivery  
8.4 Considerations of cost, the need for landowners and developers to receive 
competitive returns and a necessary degree of flexibility have all  been built 
into the local plan’s policy requirements for affordable housing, infrastructure 
and other mitigation measures. This will ensure that the viability and delivery 
of planned development is not undermined.  
Negotiations and planning applications  
8.5 The council encourages applicants to discuss policy requirements and 
planning obligations at the pre -application stage, in order to prevent 
subsequent delays. Evidence on scheme viability should be made available, 
if necessary, and applicants should adop t a transparent and open -book 
approach. There are likely to be limited opportunities to negotiate on 
essential site specific items, such as road improvements, but affordable 
housing or tariff -style contributions are likely to provide more scope. In such 
cases, site -specific circumstances will be take n into account. Whilst 
applicants do not have to agree to planning obligations, they need to be 
aware that this may lead to their planning applications being refused or left 
undetermined. Once a planning obligat ion is in place, it can be renegotiated 
by agreement or, after 5 years, an application can be made to change it. 
Where an obligation relates to affordable housing, an application can be 
made at any time and will be determined on the economic viability of 
affordable housing only. No affordable housing or tariff -style planning 
obligations will be required from starter -home exception sites.  230 
 
 
 Implementation and monitoring  
8.6 The council keeps details of obligations on its public planning register, 
ensures that contributions are received and used, publishes relevant 
information and reports on progress. Any obligations requiring financial 
contributions will set out how and when funds will be paid and spent, and will 
allow for funds to be returned as a necessary la st resort.  
POLICY INF1: PLANNING OBLIGATIONS  
 
Where necessary, planning obligations will help to mitigate the impact of 
Craven’s growth, support the provision of local infrastructure  as identified 
under Policies  H2, INF2, INF3, INF5, INF6 and INF7,  secure community 
benefits and achieve sustainable development.  This wil l be done in the 
following ways:  
 
a)  Planning obligations will be required where the form of development 
needs to be prescribed or where proposed development needs to be 
accompanied by new o r improved infrastructure, facilities or services, or 
by environmental improvements.  
 
b) Contributions secured through planning obligations may be required on -
site or off -site or via the payment of funds; may be linked to the phasing 
of development and may  be co -ordinated in partnership with 
infrastructure providers, service providers or other relevant bodies.  
 
c)  Financial contributions secured through planning obligations may be 
pooled to address needs or cumulative impacts arising from more than 
one dev elopment proposal.50 
 
d) Development proposals will be refused if they are likely to have any 
                                                           
50 No more than 5 planning obligations may be pooled together (Community Infrastructure Levy Regulations 
2010 – Part 11 Planning Obliga tions)  231 
 
 
 relevant and significant adverse impact, including cumulative impact,  that 
cannot be adequately mitigated by a planning obligation (or planning 
condition, if appro priate).  
 
e) Negotiations undertaken during pre -application discussions or during the 
planning application process will take account of scheme viability and site 
specific circumstances.  
 
f)  Individual planning obligations will be renegotiated where a rele vant and 
significant change in circumstances has occurred and the obligation no 
longer serves a useful purpose.  This will include changes in scheme 
viability where this can be supported by compelling viability evidence.  
Applications to remove or modify a ffordable housing obligations will be 
determined solely on the economic viability of meeting those obligations.  
 
g) Applicants will be expected to make adequate viability evidence available 
and to adopt a transparent and open book approach to negotiations.   
Financial or other sensitive information, which may be made available 
during negotiations, will be treated as confidential, unless the applicant 
indicates otherwise.  
 
h) Planning obligations relating to financial contributions will specify a point 
in tim e at which funds will be returned, if they have not already been used 
for their intended purpose.  
 
i)  Proposals for the development of starter -home exception sites will be 
exempt from planning obligations and planning conditions requiring the 
provision of  affordable housing or tariff style contributions.   
 
 
 
 232 
 
 
 COMMUNITY FACILITIES AND SOCIAL SPACES  
8.7 Community facilities and social spaces include; civic spaces, community 
centres, town and village halls, other cultural venues, schools, colleges, 
nurserie s, church halls ,  places of worship, health services, care homes and 
extra care facilities, libraries, public houses, village/community shops and 
hubs or Post Offices that cater for day to day needs in both urban and rural 
communities.  Town and village ha lls, community centres and church halls 
often  provide the only place to meet within a rural community, providing vital 
and diverse support to improve quality of life, particularly for those who are 
least able to travel to a  more distant centre of activitie s. Assets of Community 
Value are also included in this definition.    
8.8 Policy INF2  does not apply to sports facilities, open space and built sports 
facilities as development proposals affecting these spaces and facilities will 
need to meet the requireme nts of Policy INF3: Sport, Open Space and Built 
Sports Facilities.  
8.9 The aim of local plan Policy INF2 is to support the retention and improvement 
of existing facilities and spaces, and the provision of new ones, to help 
safeguard the social well -being o f communities and specifically to ensure that 
older people can avoid isolation and loneliness.   The Council’s Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan (IDP) sets  out the new infrastructure or improvement s to 
existing  infrastructure that is necessary to support develop ment within the 
Local Plan as detailed in Policy SP12.   
8.10 Community facilities and social spaces used by local communities are wide 
ranging and are places of social interaction.  The loss of these facilities, 
particularly in rural communities can reduce  a community’s ability to meet its 
day to day needs.  This can result in people travelling larger distances to 
facilities, disadvantaging the less mobile in particular and overall community 
wellbeing . 233 
 
 
 8.11 Recent changes to the planning system mean that, f or a period of two years, 
public houses that are not designated as a community asset do not require 
permission for change of use to A1, A2, A3 and B1 uses.  The Local 
Planning Authority however recognises the important role the 'local pub' can 
play within the community, especially in rural settlements and would support 
proposals for their retention through broadening the use or offer.  
8.12 Civic spaces and cultural venues provide important spaces for both residents 
and visitors.  This policy supports propos als for the improvement of such 
spaces, including public realm improvements to enhance quality of life and 
recognises the role they play in helping to economically sustain facilities and 
settlements.   A range of town/village action and improvement plans ex ist 
throughout the plan area, which identify the need for improvement of 
open/civic space.  These are documents that have been informed by and 
developed in consultation with the community; are based on addressing an 
identified need; are closely aligned wit h the vision and objectives of the Local 
Plan and also directly contribute to achieving the Council’s priority for an 
Enterp rising Craven.  These existing plans and any prepared in the future will 
be used to inform the implementation of Policy INF 2. 
8.13 Specifically in Craven there are concerns about the ability of communities to 
access health services and social care, especially in the mid and north sub -
areas.  Technological improvements, such as rural broadband, offer some 
opportunities for accessing ser vices in new ways; however service threats 
and opportunities vary across the plan area and are influenced by different 
trends in population change, migration and commuting.  For example, there 
is a notable trend towards falling school rolls in the north su b-area. These 
kinds of issues and pressures can threaten the sustainability of Craven’s 
communities and make rural isolation more likely.   
8.14 Loneliness is a particular challenge faced by older people living in rural 
communities, which affects health, w ellbeing and quality of life. Craven is 
ageing more rapidly than North Yorkshire and the nation as a whole, and the 234 
 
 
 over 80s age group is forecast to be the fastest growing of all, over the next 
15 years. Given this rapid growth in the older age groups ove r the plan 
period there is likely to be a continued requirement for older person’s 
accommodation.  Nationally there is a move away from traditional care 
homes towards better home care support, including extra care housing.  This 
policy recognises the need for both traditional care homes and extra care 
accommodation to meet the existing and future needs of Craven’s older 
population and the opportunities that exist to deliver new accessible clusters 
of facilities for this age group in certain locations.  Cultu ral provision at a local 
level further supports measures to combat social isolation and loneliness.  
POLICY INF2: COMMUNITY FACILITIES AND SOCIAL SPACES  
 
Craven’s communi ty faciliti es will be improved, and n ew ones will be 
created, to  meet the ne eds of the local communi ty as it gr ows and changes 
over time. This  will help to pr omote  health, wellbeing and equa lity and will 
be achie ved in the foll owing ways: 
Where n ew commun ity facilities or  impro vemen ts to existing communi ty 
faciliti es are propo sed and it can  be dem onstrated that t here is a loc al 
need for the facili ty, encour agement  and supp ort will be given to :- 
 
a) Development  proposals that are of  a scale that is in keeping with the 
locatio n; the prop osed facilities or  spaces are well located  and 
accessible and  there would be no significant  adverse impact on 
residen tial ameni ty. 
 
b) Innovative schemes  for sustaining or  improving communi ty facilities, 
including oppor tunities to secure  benefits  from locating n ew 
communi ty assets with or  along side other f orms of developmen t. 
 
c) Development  proposals for or  including  public r ealm enhan cemen ts 
that pr ovide or impro ve places of rec reation or  social  interaction.  
 235 
 
 
  
Existing communi ty facilit ies and so cial spaces that are  used  and valued by 
local  communities  will be safeguar ded wherever possible  from  unnece ssary 
and a voidable los s. Development  propo sals that would  result  in the loss of 
such communi ty facilities  will need to be fully justified on groun ds that:  
 
d) The fac ility is not suitable or n eeded f or any alternat ive communi ty use;   
and 
 
e)  The facili ty and its use  are no longer  viable in fina ncial or functional 
terms and all  reasonable  efforts ha ve been m ade to retain t he facility 
and to con tinue i ts use; and  
 
f) Realistic ma rketing of  the facili ty has been carried out recen tly, but has 
been unsuc cessful, with little or no genuine  interest being sh own; or 
 
g) The facili ty to be lost  will be replaced by an equ ivalent facility of equal 
or greater value to t he same l ocal communi ty and ar rangemen ts for 
this repla cement  will be secured by  a planning obligation or o ther 
accep table means.  
 
 
 
 
SPORT,  OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION FACILITIES  
8.15 In order to plan effectively for sport, open space and built sports 
opportunities, and to meet the NPPF requirement that policies relating to 
such facili ties and spaces should be based on robust and up to date 
assessments of needs and opportunities for new provision, a Playing Pitch 
Strategy, Open Space Assessment and Built Sports Facility Strategy were 
prepared in 2016  (Appendix A) .   236 
 
 
 8.16 This study make s an assessment of the quality, quantity and accessibility of 
existing provision and identifies areas of deficiency and surplus, making 
recommendations as to where facilities could be improved or redeveloped, 
or where new open spaces, pitches and facilitie s could be provided to 
address localised quantitative and accessibility deficiencies.  Below is a 
summary of the findings of this work.  
Open Space  
8.17 The types of open space assessed are:  
• Parks and gardens  
• Amenity greenspace  
• Provision for children and young people  
• Allotments  
• Cemeteries, churchyards and other burial grounds.  
• Civic spaces  
• Natural and semi natural greenspaces (primary purpose is wildlife 
conservation, biodiversity and environmental education and awareness) 
and green corridors ( primary purpose is for walking, cycling or horse riding 
for leisure purposes or travel and opportunities for wildlife migration)51  
(Note; due to the rural nature of the plan area most residents have access 
to the open countryside, therefore only natural/se mi natural and green 
corridors located within existing settlements have been assessed e.g. 
Skipton Woods and the Leeds & Liverpool Canal).  
                                                           
51   Source: Assessing needs and opportunities: a companion guide to PPG17  237 
 
 
 8.18 Open spaces contribute to individual and community wellbeing.  It is 
therefore important that existing open spac es should be retained, improved 
where required and that new opportunities are realised wherever possible.  
8.19 The 2016 Assessment identifies future needs and demands for open space 
and recommends the creation of an “iplay” playground in Aireville Park and  
Settle; provision of a skatepark in Settle; implementation of the Aireville 
Park Master Plan, improvement of the Leeds  & Liverpool Canal corridor 
through the implementation of the Leeds  & Liverpool Canal Towpath 
Access Development Plan, construct a new pu mp track in the mid and 
north sub area; create new or improve existing playgrounds to incorporate 
“green play” i.e., at Aireville Park and in Bentham; build a  new Multi Use 
Games Area (MUGA) in the mid sub area i.e., in Settle.  There is also a 
need to mee t the following quantitat ive shortfall of open space that exists:  
• Parks and garden provision in North and Mid Craven ; 
 
• Green corridors in North and Mid Craven ; 
 
• Amenity greenspace in South Craven ; 
 
• Provision for children and young people in Mid and North C raven ; 
 
• Allotment provision in North Craven ; 
 
• Cemeteries, churchyards and burial grounds in North Craven ; 
 
• Civic spaces in North Craven.  
 
8.20 The assessment shows that throughout the plan area generally, by the end 
of plan period (2032) there are deficien cies in all types of open space.  
More detailed analysis against open space standards by north, mid and 
south Craven sub areas are provided within section 7 of the Open Space 
Assessment.  Prioritisation and identification of the type of open space to 238 
 
 
 be pr ovided or improved will be informed by the 2016 Open Space 
Assessment and any subsequent updates.    
Playing Pitches  
8.21 The Council’s Playing Pitch Strategy (PPS) 2016, provides an up to date 
analysis of supply and demand regarding playing pitches (grass  and 
artificial) which serve Football, Rugby Union, Cricket and Hockey.  The 
PPS concludes that:  
• Craven has sufficient quantitative provision for current and future levels 
of demand for cricket, football and hockey and the focus should be on 
improving the quality of provision.   
 
• Rugby does not currently have adequate quantitative provision to satisfy 
the demand of local residents, therefore it is recommended that existing 
rugby pitches are improved and that a new rugby specific 3G Artificial 
Grass Pitch (A GP) is addressed through development at Giggleswick 
School.   
 
• The quality of pitches is fairly ordinary apart from cricket, which scored 
well against a number of high quality sites.  
 
• There is a shortage of 3G Artificial Grass Pitch (AGP) provision, which 
could be addressed through development at Giggleswick School and 
the installation of floodlights at South Craven School to  allow further 
community use of their full size 3G AGP.  
 
• An opportunity exists to develop Sandylands in Skipton as a multi -sport 
hub t o improve the quality and quantity of provision at one of the most 
accessible and largest site s in the district.   
8.22 The Local Plan will support, subject to meeting other relevant local plan 
policies the delivery of the recommendations set out in table 4 9 of the PPS.  239 
 
 
 The aim of Policy INF3 is to help to maintain the current level of pitch 
provision that exists for cricket, football and hockey, and increase the level 
of rugby pitch provision, subject to the  delivery of specific objectives set out 
within t he PPS and any subsequent updates.  Additionally, an emphasis 
should be placed on improving the quality of playing pitches and 
ancillary/associated facilities, particularly where deficiencies have been 
identified through the PPS.  
Built Sport Facilities  
8.23 The Council’s Built Sports Facilities Strategy (2016) provides a clear 
understanding of the overall surpluses and deficiencies that exist across 
the plan area relating to indoor and outdoor built sports facilities, which 
include swimming pools, sports ha lls, fitness facilities (gyms) , bowling 
greens and tennis courts .  The assessment also provides specific 
geographical and/or individual facility current and future needs.   The 
strategy has identified a need for a multi -purpose sports hall space in 
Skipton , the replacement for ageing sports halls at Sandylands and Skipton 
Academy, improvement or replacement of facilities at Settle Pool and the 
need to optimise capacity for community use of sports facilities on 
education sites including Giggleswick and South  Craven Schools.  A 
deficiency in pool space has been identified by the end of the plan period 
(2032).  The assessment recognises planned improvements to existing 
tennis facilities in Skipton and recommends that existing bowling greens 
should be protected and enhanced to meet the changing demographics of 
Craven.  
8.24 In terms of built sports facilities, the aim of local plan Policy INF3 is to 
maintain the current level of provision and to improve the quality of existing 
facilities or provide replacement fac ilities in line with the Built Sports 
Facilities Strategy.  
8.25 In addition to the Playing Pitch Strategy, Open Space Assessment and Built 
Sports Facility Strategy, a range of public realm improvements have been 240 
 
 
 identified within existing town/village acti on and improvement plans, and 
the Retail & Leisure Study with Health Checks 2016.  These improvement 
schemes are set out in the Council’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), 
therefore local plan Policy INF1: Planning Obligations is a relevant policy 
consid eration when assessing planning proposals relating to open spaces, 
public realm and sports facilities.   
8.26 Policy INF3 will support, subject to meeting other relevant local plan 
policies, the delivery of the standards, recommendations and actions set 
out in the PPS, Open Space Assessment and the Built Sports Facilities 
Strategy 2016 and any subsequent updates.  Priority will be given where 
the greatest deficiency exists in terms of the type of open space, pitches or 
facilities, as identified in the study  and any subsequent updates.  
8.27 In order to take account of national planning policy requirements Policy 
INF3 requires all new residential developments of 11 or more dwellings and 
on any site with a combined  gross floor  area of more than 1000 sqm , to 
provide or contribute towards new or improved sport, open space and built 
sports facilities.  In designated rural areas52, as identified under Section 
157 of the Housing Act 1985, all new housing and mixed use developments 
of between 6 to 10 dwellings and fro m developments of less than 6 
dwellings but more than 1000m2 combined gross floorspace will also be 
required to provide or contribute towards new or improved sport, open 
space and built sports facilities.   Contributions will be commuted until after 
complet ion of units within the development.   
8.28 Proposals for new residential development of 50 or more dwellings may be 
required to provide new sport, open space and built sports facilities on site; 
                                                           
52 Within the Craven plan area, designated rural areas are the Forest of Bowland Area of Outstanding Natural 
Beauty and the parishes of Bank Newton, Bentham, Bolton Abbey, Burt on-in-Lonsdale, Clapham -cum -Newby, 
Coniston Cold, Embsay -with -Eastby, Gargrave, Giggleswick, Halton East, Hellifield, Ingleton, Langcliffe, 
Lawkland, Long Preston, Otterburn, Rathmell, Settle, Stirton -with -Thorlby, Thornton -in-Lonsdale and 
Wigglesworth. Pl ease refer to Section 157 of the Housing Act 1985 and the Housing (Right to Buy) 
(Designated Rural Areas and Designated Region) (England) Order 1988.   241 
 
 
 however this depends on the extent and nature of deficiencie s identified 
across the plan area.  
8.29 Standards and formula relating to the provision of new or improvements to 
existing sports, open space and built sports facilities are set out at 
Appendix A.  Applications for development which would result in a loss of 
space or facilities in a settlement to below the standards set out in 
Appendix A are unlikely to be acceptable.  
8.30 Where new provision is required on site, appropriate arrangements must be 
made for the on -going maintenance of the new facilities.  Furt her details are 
provided in Appendix A. 
8.31 Open Spaces and sports facilities (both indoor and outdoor) provide 
essential informal and formal recreation opportunities for communities and 
they should be protected from redevelopment wherever possible.  
Neve rtheless, there may be limited circumstances where the loss of 
facilities or spaces may be acceptable.  These circumstances are set out at 
d) in the policy below.   
8.32 This policy, together with other relevant Local Plan policies, for example 
ENV5: Green  Infrastructure and ENV10: Local Green Space aims to 
promote healthy lifestyle choices by providing opportunities to establish or 
improve existing green corridors and spaces throughout the plan area.  
POLICY INF3: SPORT, OPEN SPACE AND RECREATIONAL FACILITI ES 
Craven's gr owth will promo te health,  wellbeing and eq uality by safeguarding 
and impro ving sport, open spa ce and bu ilt spor ts facilities. This  will be 
achie ved in the f ollowing ways. 
 
a) Supp orting prop osals for t he pro vision of n ew sport, open  space and 
built spor ts facilities, or for the impro vement  of exi sting spor t, open 
space and built  spor ts facilities, including  faciliti es for tempora ry events, 
provided the pr oposals are of  a scale in keeping  with the location, are  242 
 
 
  
well located and accessible by dif ferent modes of transport including 
walking, cycling and public transport and a ccord  with all relevant local 
plan pol icies and any relevant neighbourh ood plan polic ies. 
 
b) The pro vision or con tribution t owards new or impro ved spor t, open 
space and built  spor ts facilities is required  in the f ollowing 
circumstances: 
 
1. All new housing  and mixe d-use developmen ts of 11 or  more 
dwellings and on a ny site with a combined  gross fl oor area of more 
than  1000 sqm, i ncluding tho se on sites allocated  under l ocal plan 
Policies SP5 to  SP11.  Contribu tions will not be soug ht from 
developmen ts of 10 units or l ess, or  which have a maximum  
combined gross floor  space of no more than 1 000sqm (gross  internal 
area).  
2. In designa ted rur al areas all new housing  and mixed  use 
developmen ts yielding b etween 6 to 10  dwellings  and fr om 
developmen ts of l ess than 6 dwellings but  more than 1000m2 
combined gro ss floo rspace.  In designated rural areas, 
contributions will not be  soug ht from de velopmen ts of 5 units or 
less. 
 
c) New provision or contributi ons towards improving existing spaces and 
facilities must cater for the needs arising from the development.  W here 
a quantity deficiency exists in a  location, t he Cou ncil will seek, where 
possible, on-site pro vision of facilities and will expect appro priate 
arrangements to be ma de for  their o n-going main tenan ce. Where  the 
locality has a  deficiency in the quali ty of existing open spa ce or spor ts 
and recreation facilities, the Cou ncil will require  a contributi on to be 
made to  address that  qualitative deficie ncy off-site.  Deficie ncies are  243 
 
 
  
identified  in the Pl aying Pitch Strate gy, Open Spa ce Assessment  and   B uilt 
Sports Fa cilities St rategy 2016 and any subsequent up dates when compared 
against mi nimum standards.    The requirement for either on -site or off -site 
provision will be calculated by applying the standards and formula set out 
in Appendix A  
 
d) Safeguarding  existing spor t, open s pace and built spor ts facilities 
from  unnece ssary and avoidable los s. This mea ns that de velopment 
proposals involving the loss  of spor t, open spa ce or built  spor ts 
faciliti es will only be supported in the foll owing limited cir cumstances. 
1. A surplus in the re levant type of  sport, open spa ce or built  spor ts 
facili ty has been i dentified, in the l ocality, by the Playing Pitch 
Strate gy, Open Spa ce Assessment  and Built Spor ts Facilities 
Strate gy 2016 (or a ny subsequent up dates), and t he site cannot  be 
reused or adapted to  meet  an identified deficit in  another type or form 
of spor t, open spa ce or recreational facility; or 
2. An equivalent replacement  sport, open  space or  built sports 
facility, the benefit of  which will be at least equal  to that being lost, 
is to be pr ovided on t he site or in an accessible location ne arby; or 
3. If spe cific sites are identified in an up to date Playing Pitch 
Strate gy, Built Spor ts Fac ilities Strate gy or Open Spa ce 
Assessment  as being partial ly surplus, and  theref ore can be 
developed in return for impro vemen ts, the partial l oss of a  site may 
be justified  where e vidence  is pro vided and  where a propo sal is 
supp orted by the rel evant National Go verning Bodies for Spor t. 
 
 
 244 
 
 
 PARKING PROVISION  
8.33 Parking for cars and other vehicles in residential developments, for new 
businesses including industrial estates, town centre and other retail schemes 
is an important sustainabil ity consideration in reducing congestion, 
supporting sustainable transport modes and in promoting road safety.   
8.34 Craven’s sparse rural nature with large distances between settlements and 
often limited public transport, means the district is heavily ca r reliant with 
83% of households owning a car (2011 Census) and a higher proportion than 
average of households with more than one car. Furthermore, travel to work 
statistics show (2011 Census) that 57% of people in work in Craven, drive to 
work, compared t o 54% nationally. It is recognised that such high levels of 
car use are likely to remain given the issues faced and as such careful 
management of parking for both public and private use is required.  
8.35 In their role as local highway authority and a statu tory consultee on planning 
applications, North Yorkshire County Council has published ‘Interim 
Guidance on Transport Issues including Parking Standards and Advice on 
Transport Assessments and Travel Plans (2015)’. This publication provides 
useful guidance on recommended minimum parking standards for cars, 
motorised two -wheel vehicles, disabled parking and operational service 
requirements. Developers are encouraged to refer to this guidance when 
formulating proposals for planning applications, as it will hel p them to ensure 
that all relevant considerations are identified, taken into account and 
adequately addressed in their submissions.  
8.36 The level of parking provision required can be influenced by the location of 
new development, accessibility to public t ransport, provision for cyclists and 
the availability of public parking. The Local Plan recognises that 
improvements to public transport can reduce the requirement for parking 
provision, and have a beneficial impact on "anti -social" parking, particularly 
with respect to commuting. It will therefore support all necessary 
improvements in public transport that have a positive impact on existing 245 
 
 
 problems of parking provision and congestion at key "pinch points”. 
Environmental considerations including townscape character, the historic 
environment and landscape value all have a bearing on determining the 
appropriate level of parking provision for new development proposals.  
8.37 Previous consultations with residents have identified a number of towns and 
villages wh ere existing problems of anti -social parking exist, particularly 
within historic villages with a tight grain. In such locations, careful 
consideration will need to be given to ensuring existing problems are not 
made worse or new problems created. This may include requiring new 
development to incorporate parking provision in excess of the minimum local 
standards.  
8.38 Craven District Council has responsibility for off street parking, with Civil 
Parking Enforcement managed by Harrogate Borough Council. The Cr aven 
District Council Parking Strategy 2014 -2019 includes a series of objectives to 
manage off street parking effectively. In terms of on street parking, North 
Yorkshire County Council is responsible for managing on street parking, the 
North Yorkshire Coun ty Council Parking Strategy (2011), makes provisions 
for all aspects of parking under the local highway authority’s control.  
8.39 The parking strategy should be read in the context of the North Yorkshire 
Local Transport Plan which recognises the importance  of managing on -street 
parking provision because of the potential for major impacts on the transport 
network. Through adopting a managed approach to parking, benefits can be 
delivered including reducing traffic congestion, road safety and access to 
public transport, and improving parking and servicing of local businesses.  
8.40 Where relevant both the Craven District Council Parking Strategy and the 
North Yorkshire County Council Parking Strategy should be given due 
consideration.  
8.41 The take -up of ultra -low emissions vehicles within rural areas, to date has 
been relatively slow, with only one publicly available electric vehicle charging 246 
 
 
 point in operation at Ingleton. However, with an ever increasing range of 
vehicles including electric, plug -in hybrid and  hydrogen powered cars and 
vans and purchasing costs reducing, it is anticipated that usage will increase 
significantly over the lifetime of the Local Plan playing an important role in 
cutting greenhouse gas emissions and air pollution. To encourage take u p 
locally, the provision of charging points is supported as part of new 
development proposals. Location and design of necessary infrastructure will 
be important considerations.   
8.42 When considering proposals for parking, in order to reduce potential for 
surface water flooding and the protection of water quality, sustainable 
drainage systems should be implemented (S uDS) with surface materials 
being permeable.  
POLICY INF4: PARKING PROVISION  
 
New development s will help to minimise congestion, encourage susta inable 
transport modes and reduce conflict between road users by ensuring proper 
provision and management of parking for cars and other vehicles. This will 
be achieved in the following ways:  
 
a)  The provision of safe, secure, and convenient parking of an appropriate 
quantity including the need for parking or secure storage for cars, cycles 
and motor cycles, and where relevant, coaches and lorries.  
 
b) The provision of appropriate parking space for cars, motorised two -wheel 
vehicles, disabled parking and op erational service requirements having 
regard to the nature and circumstances of the proposed development. The 
Council will adopt a flexible approach with each case being determined on 
its own merits, enabling good design solutions to be achieved.  
 
 
c) In areas where anti -social parking is a recognised problem or potential 247 
 
 
 exists for a problem to arise impacting on the quality of life or vitality of 
an area, the Council will work with developers to ensure existing 
problems are not made worse or new problems created.  
 
d)  In drawing up and determining proposals for new development, relevant 
consideration will be given to any likely impacts on public off -street 
parking and parking on the public highway (on -street parking).  
 
e)  Encouragement will be given to t he increased use of low emission 
vehicles, including where appropriate the provision of electric vehicle 
charging points.        
                                                                       
f) The incorporation of sustainable drainage systems (Su DS), permeable 
surfacing materials and means of protecting water quality in drainage 
schemes for example through oil interceptors should be ensured.  
 
 
COMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE  
8.43 The expansion of communication infrastructure across Craven  will be 
supported, particularly in areas where mobile and broadband connectivity is 
poor or non -existent.  
8.44 The provision of appropriate communications infrastructure within new 
development should balance the viability of a new development with that of 
the long term social and economic viability and vitality of Craven  in terms of 
connectivity to high quality communications infrastructure and the benefits it 
provides to residents and businesses.  
Mobile Telephony  
8.45 There is likely to be a need to establish new m obile telecommunications 
infrastructure within Craven over the lifetime of the Local Plan. This policy 248 
 
 
 seeks to ensure that new infrastructure makes use of existing sites and 
structures wherever possible. Any applications for new telecommunications 
infrast ructure will be expected to demonstrate the need for their location if 
this is not the case.  
Broadband Access  
8.46 Broadband connectivity across the plan area varies considerably. 
Government initiatives to invest  in broadband infrastructure aims to ensure 
that 95% of premises in England will have access to Next Generation Access 
broadband (also referred to as superfast broadband) by 2017. In addition the 
European Commission, through the Digital Agenda for Europe, anticipates 
100% coverage of 30Mbps broadban d or more by 202053  and that over 50% 
of households will have a subscription to broadband connection in excess of 
100Mbps.  
8.47 Occupiers of new residential or commercial premises now often expect a 
high quality broadband connection as a utility similar to  the provision of 
electricity or water.  Applicants are required to actively demonstrate that they 
have considered broadband within their proposals and the digital 
requirements of the development and the resulting level of connectivity.  
8.48 Policy INF5 indicates that all development will enable Next Generation 
Access broadband where viable. The definition of Next Generation Access 
used within this policy is defined as a broadband service that provides a 
download speed in excess of 30Mbps as detailed in the Digital Agenda for 
Europe.  
8.49 Where it can be demonstrated that Next Generation Access broadband is not 
viable , the development should provide a minimum download speed of 
10Mbps and incorporate measures to facilitate future delivery of Next 
                                                           
53   https://ec.europa.eu/digital -agenda/en/broadband -strategy -policy  249 
 
 
 Generation Ac cess broadband within their plans i.e. laying ducting capable of 
carrying fibre cables from multiple providers . 
8.50 Where a proposal would be classed as major development applicants should 
engage with communication providers and local broadband projects a s 
appropriate to identify where the development may contribute to and 
integrate with existing initiat ives.. 
8.51 Agreement in February 2016 between the Department for Culture, Media and 
Sport, the House Builders Federation and Openreach  have outlined  a 
process for the delivery of Next Generation Access broadband on new 
residential developments which should be considered.   
8.52 Access to free public WiFi supports the vitality of town and village centres for 
residents, visitors and businesses. Opportunities  to add to the visitor 
experience by extending existing or creating new public WiFi networks will be 
supported provided the infrastructure meets the requirements of  Policy INF5.  
POLICY INF5: COMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE  
The expansion of communications inf rastructure including Next Generation 
Access broadband (or its equivalent) will be suppo rted. This will be achieved 
by: 
a) Supporting the expansion of communications networks which use 
existing infrastructure, including masts and structures;  
 
b) Supporting the p rovision of new communications infrastructure where it 
can be demonstrated that using existing infrastructure or equipment 
would not be feasible and provided the proposal does not have a 
significant adverse impact on the character or appearance of the  
 
surrounding area. Where apparatus or associated infrastructure is 
proposed to be located on a building, the proposal will be supported 250 
 
 
 provided the siting, scale and design of the apparatus or associated 
infrastructure does not have a significant adverse imp act on the external 
appearance of the building.  
 
c) Ensuring the location and design of proposals avoid harm to sensitive 
areas * or buildings/structures and accord with local plan Policies ENV1: 
Countryside and Landscape, ENV2: Heritage, and ENV4 Biodiversity .  
 
* Sensitive areas are identified as Forest of Bowland AONB (including 
setting); Yorkshire Dales National Park (including setting), Conservation 
Areas, Listed Buildings, Scheduled Ancient Monuments, Registered Parks 
and Gardens, Special Protection Areas  (SPA), and Special Areas of 
Conservation (SAC), Sites of I mportance for Nature Conservation (SINC), 
Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), Ancient Woodland.  
 
Broadb and Access in New Developments:  
d) All new development proposals will be required to dem onstrate the 
anticipated connectivity requirements of the proposed use and how the 
development will contribute to, and be compatible with, Next Generation 
Access broadband (or its equivalent).  
 
e) All new development will be required to enable a Next Generati on Access 
broadband connection (or its equivalent) where viable. Where it can be 
demonstrated that the provision of a Next Generation Access broadband 
connection (or its equivalent) is not viable  or possible , proposals should 
provide a minimum download con nection of 10Mbps or the requirements 
of any universal service obligation , whichever is greater, and incorporate 
suitable infrastructure to support delivery of Next Generation Access 
broadband (or its equivalent) at a future date.  
 
f) Applicants proposing maj or development schemes should engage with 251 
 
 
 communication providers and local broadband groups to explore how 
Next Generation Access broadband (or its equivalent) can be provided 
and how the development may contribute to and integrate with active 
broadband p rojects within the local area.  
 
 
EDUCATION PROVISION  
8.53 In the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) the government attaches 
great importance to ensuring that a sufficient choice of school places is 
available to meet the needs of existing and new co mmunities. Local planning 
authorities (LPAs) should take a proactive, positive and collaborative 
approach to meeting this requirement and to development that will widen 
choice in education. The NPPF advises that LPAs should give great weight 
to the need to  create, expand or alter schools and work with schools 
promoters to identify and resolve key planning issues before applications are 
submitted.  
 
8.54 One of the core principles of the NPPF that should underpin both plan -
making and decision -taking is that p lanning should actively manage patterns 
of growth to enable infrastructure such as primary schools to be provided in 
walkable locations to areas of new residential development to facilitate 
sustainable travel patterns.  
 
8.55 Craven District Council has wor ked closely with North Yorkshire County 
Council, (the Local Education Authority (LEA)) in producing the local plan, 
and based on the growth planned in Skipton and Bentham, this work has 
identified the potential need for two new primary schools in Skipton a nd an 
extension to the primary school in High Bentham, and the need to provide for 
education infrastructure in association with residential development. This 
provision is an important element in achieving sustainable communities.  252 
 
 
 8.56   The local plan mec hanisms, for enabling these new schools and school 
extension to be built, and for the provision of new school places in 
association with residential development are: -  
 the safeguarding of land for education purposes within two residential site 
allocation s in Skipton and one in Bentham;  
 a system of collecting developer contributions via Section 106 legal 
agreements from residential developments which are likely to have a 
significant impact on increasing pressures on school capacity.  
 
8.57 Appendix B to the plan sets out how developer contributions are calculated, 
so as to conform with the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) Regulations 
2010, as amended, on planning obligations.  
8.58 The Council has worked closely with both the local education authority 
(LEA /CSA) and the Education and Skills Funding Agency (ESFA) in 
preparing this policy. In September 2018,  a Department for Education (DfE) 
consultation commenced on ‘ Establishing pupil yields from housing 
development and securing developer contributions for e ducation’.  The LEA is 
committed to reviewing its evidence base on pupil yields and development 
costs/cost multipliers in the light of the outcome of this consultation, working 
with the ESFA. As part of the review the LEA intend to use the DfE 
Scorecard dat a. When this review is completed, Craven District Council will 
need to consider what the implications are for planning for education in the 
plan area. The options include the production of a supplementary planning 
document or a partial review of the plan i n connection with this policy and/or 
Appendix B, taking into account plan viability.  
8.59 It is possible that the educational need for one or both of the two potential 
primary schools in Skipton and the school extension in Bentham will be met 
elsewhere in  Skipton and Bentham respectively. Under these circumstances, 
the LEA will determine if this is the case and inform the LPA if any of the 
areas of land safeguarded for primary schools in Skipton and Bentham are 253 
 
 
 no longer required for educational purposes. If the safeguarded land is no 
longer required for the provision of a primary school or school extension, 
residential development will be acceptable in principle provided any proposal 
for residential development meets the development principles set out for the 
remainder of the site at Policy SP5 and SP7 respectively and accords with 
other relevant Local Plan policies.  
 
POLICY INF6: EDUCATION PROVISION  
 
Craven’s growth will ensure that a sufficient choice of school places is 
available to meet the needs of exi sting and new residents. This will be 
achieved in the following ways :  
 
a) Supporting proposals for the provision of new, replacement and extended 
or altered schools which are of a scale in keeping with the location, are 
accessible and accord with all rele vant local plan policies and any relevant 
neighbourhood plan policies.  
 
b) Unless the educational need is met elsewhere in Skipton, 1.8 hectares of 
land will be safeguarded for new primary school provision in Skipton within 
the following sites allocated i n the Local Plan, in accordance with Policy 
SP5:  
 
i. SK0081, SK0082, and SK0108: Land north of Gargrave Road and 
west of Park Wood Drive and Stirtonber, and  
ii. SK089 and SK090: Land to the north of Airedale Avenue and Elsey 
Croft and east of the railway line.  
 
c) Unless the educational need is met elsewhere in Bentham, 0.3 hectares of 
land will be safeguarded for an extension to Bentham Primary School 
within land allocation HB038, in accordance with Policy SP7.  
 254 
 
 
 d) Where a residential or mixed use development would result in a deficit of 
school places in the area, and is above the site size threshold below, it will 
be required to provide developer contributions for education provision, in 
accordance with Policy INF1 and Appendix B of this plan, or any 
subsequen t supplementary planning document, to meet the resultant 
deficit. The site threshold sizes, controls and exemptions, which apply are:  
 
i. For primary schools: more than 25 dwellings in the town of Skipton 
and 15 or more dwellings outside of Skipton, and  
 
ii. For secondary schools: more than 100 dwellings across the plan 
area.  
 
iii. Contributions will be sought from proposed developments on local 
plan allocated sites, and on windfall sites that are phased or are 
brought forward in a piecemeal fashion and where the tota l 
combined, or ‘holistic’ development of the allocated or windfall site 
exceeds the relevant threshold.  
 
iv. Contributions will not be sought from sheltered accommodation or 
genuine elderly person, student or holiday accommodation, 
temporary housing or bedsits  and one bedroomed dwellings.  
 
SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS  
8.60 The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) states that local authorities 
should work with neighbouring authorities and transport providers to develop 
strategies for the provision of  viable infrastructure necessary to support 
sustainable development. The Council will continue to work closely with all 
relevant stakeholders to maximise opportunities to travel by non -car modes 
of transport and secure a safe and efficient transport networ k for the benefit 
of local and regional businesses, tourism and the community as a whole.  255 
 
 
 8.61 Paragraphs 2.3 to 2.18 of this Local Plan set out the Sub - Regional 
Economic and Transport context of the plan area and reference s the relevant 
bodies who the Co uncil are working with on sub regional connectivity issues. 
The Council will continue to work closely with the local highway authority, 
North Yorkshire County Council, to agree appropriate transport proposals to 
accommodate and facilitate growth and seek t o develop appropriate funding 
packages to ensure that development proposals provide for appropriate 
sustainable transport opportunities and adequate highway improvements. 
The North Yorkshire County Council Local Transport Plan 2016 - 2046 (LTP4) 
(2016) and Strategic Transport Prospectus (2015) provide the local highway 
authority’s strategic, policy and planning transport documents.  
8.62 Policy SP2 c) of this plan supports enhanced connectivity with the rest of 
North Yorkshire, the wider Leeds City Region, L ancashire, Cumbria and 
Greater Manchester; the provision of pedestrian and cycle links to enhanced 
public transport facilities; and protects the original double track route of the 
Skipton to Colne railway line for future transport use. The latter is marked  on 
the plan’s policies map and is similarly protected in the Pendle District Local 
Plan.  
8.63 The NPPF seeks to actively manage patterns of growth to support 
opportunities to use of public transport, walking and cycling , and focus 
significant development  in locations which are or can be made sustainable. 
The Craven Local Plan Policy SP4 seeks to achieve this pattern of growth 
through its focussing of future development in the town of Skipton which has 
good rail and bus links. After Skipton, the market tow ns of Settle and 
Bentham will accommodate a relatively high level of growth and are well 
related to the rail network, as well as having bus services connecting them 
with the surrounding countryside and other settlements in the District.  
8.64 New developme nt has the potential to provide opportunities for travel by non -
car modes of travel and these opportunities should be maximised, through 
the planning application process, whatever the size of development. It is 256 
 
 
 important that pre -application work for any s ize of development involve 
discussions with the local highway authority, North Yorkshire County Council, 
on all transport aspects of an emerging planning application.  
8.65 The NPPF identifies the important role played by transport assessments, or 
transpor t statements, and travel plans in assessing and mitigating the 
negative transport impacts of development and promoting sustainable 
development. Travel Plans will therefore be required for all developments 
which generate significant amounts of traffic and w ill play an important role in 
identifying how the development might contribute to:  
• encouraging sustainable travel,  
• lessening the traffic generated and it's detrimental impacts,  
• minimising carbon emissions and their associated impacts on climate 
change,  
• creating accessible, connected, inclusive communities,  
• improving health outcomes and quality of life,  
• improving road safety, and  
• reducing the need for new development to increase existing road capacity 
and provide new roads.  
 
8.66 North Yorkshire Coun ty Council as the Local Highway Authority has set out 
guidance on a range of transport issues, including advice on transport 
assessments and travel plans, in a document called Interim Guidance on 
Transport Issues (2015). This guidance sets out the indicati ve thresholds at 
which transport statements, transport assessments and travel plans are likely 
to be required for different types of development. Early pre -application 
discussions should take place with the local highway authority on the 
applicability of t hese indicative thresholds to a given development proposal. 
The provision of a safe, suitable and convenient access to new development 
sites should also be agreed with the local highway authority during pre -
application discussions.  257 
 
 
 8.67 To avoid severe ad verse cumulative residual impacts of development on the 
transport network, traffic generated by all developments on the highway 
network should be mitigated and where new development necessitates the 
provision of new or upgraded infrastructure, developer de livery of the 
mitigation or contributions, as appropriate, will be required in accordance with 
Policies SP12 and INF1 of the Local Plan.  
8.68 Traffic modelling for Skipton has identified that the plan period’s growth of the 
town can be accommodated by the highway network, provided highway 
improvements are made at the following junctions:  
• A65/Gargrave Road/A629/A59. and  
• A6131/A65  
 
8.69 A preliminary cost estimate for these works is £1.1 million. The following five 
site allocations for housing development in Skipton will each contribute to 
these costs in proportion to their dwelling numbers and to ensure that the full 
costs are met by the private sector  
• SK061  
• SK081/SK082 and SK108  
• SK089/SK090  
• SK101  
• SK114/SK124  
 
8.70 The plan’s viability evidence has dem onstrated that the above costs can be 
met, along with the plan’s other planning obligations for affordable housing, 
open space and education contributions and not threaten the bringing 
forward of these sites for viable developments.  
 
 
 258 
 
 
  
POLICY INF7: SUSTAI NABLE TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS  
 
The minimisation of greenhouse gases and congestion, and the provision of 
safe and accessible travel facilities will be supported by maximising the 
opportunities for travel by sustainable transport modes; avoiding severe 
resid ual cumulative impacts of development relating to transport; and the 
design of safe and convenient access to transport facilities. This will be 
achieved through:  
 
a) working in partnership with the local highway authority, other authorities, 
local enterpri se partnerships, transport providers, developers and local 
groups to implement Policies SP5 (Site SK140), ENV3 i to l), ENV11 and 12, 
INF4e) and SP2 c) of the Local Plan, and  
 
i. promote a sustainable and improved transport system which is safe, 
reliable, and  convenient,  
ii. improve transport connectivity with the rest of North Yorkshire, the 
wider Leeds City Region, Lancashire, Cumbria and Greater 
Manchester.  
 
b) maintaining a pattern of growth which reflects the spatial strategy and 
settlement hierarchy set out  in Policy SP4 of the Local Plan.  
 
c) ensuring that all developments maximise opportunities to travel by non - 
car modes of transport through the location and design of new 
developments and developer contributions for off -site transport facilities, 
includi ng securing access to transport facilities by walking and cycling.  
 
d) ensuring all developments that generate significant amounts of movement 
are supported by appropriate sustainable travel assessments, such as a  259 
 
 
  
Transport Statement, or Transport Assess ment and a Travel Plan as 
reasonably required by the local highway authority, North Yorkshire County 
Council.  
 
e) providing safe, suitable and convenient access to all development sites for 
all modes of transport and all people, including vulnerable users  of the 
highway, and wheelchair -users, people with limited mobility and people 
with other disabilities.  
 
f) ensuring that the residual cumulative impact of traffic generated by 
developments on the highway network is mitigated and where new 
development nec essitates the provision of new or upgraded infrastructure, 
including safety measures and pedestrian and cycle connectivity: - this is to 
be developer funded.  
 
g) securing tariff style developer contributions for the highway improvements 
necessary to mitigat e the cumulative impact of the level of growth planned 
for the town of Skipton up to 2032 which are fairly and reasonably related in 
scale and kind to the relevant development. The relevant development will 
be those greenfield residential site allocations in this Local Plan in or 
adjacent to the built up area of Skipton.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 260 
 
 
 SECTION 9: MONITORING  
 
9.1 Monitoring is an essential part of the plan -making process.  By gathering a 
range of information from various sources, the Council can ensure that 
policie s are achieving the Local Plan objectives and delivering sustainable 
development, and identify any unintended, negative effects of a policy’s 
implementation.  Monitoring also gives a better understanding of the 
important social, economic and environmental factors influencing the District. 
By doing this, the authority can determine whether any changes are needed . 
9.2 The Council will use a series of indicators to monitor the effectiveness of 
policies within the Local Plan and publish the results every year i n their 
annual Authority Monitoring Report (as required by the Localism Act of 
2011).  The reports will be based on the financial year (1st April to 31st 
March).  
9.3 The table below shows the list of indicators that will be used to measure the 
delivery of  the Plan Objectives. The indicators will be monitored and reported 
on once the Local Plan is adopted. The indicators that have been chosen 
make use of available information to ensure that they can be monitored on a 
regular basis.  
9.4  As well as the indic ators listed below, the Council will continue to report on a 
number of contextual indicators, which will provide key information on the 
District including demographic changes, unemployment statistics, house 
prices etc. These contextual indicators will help  to provide an overall picture 
of whether the Vision of the Local Plan for Craven is being realised.  
9.5 It is a requirement of the NPPF that local housing needs should be met.  
The local housing needs in Craven District will be met through the housing 
policies of this Local Plan and the Yorkshire Dales National Park (YDNP) 
Local Plan (Adopted 2016).   Craven District Council will work closely with 
the YDNP authority in monitoring the supply of housing to ensure that the 261 
 
 
 housing needs of the Craven Housing Market Area (Craven District, 
including part of the YDNP) are being met.   
9.6 The Craven Local Plan Authority Monitoring Report  will feature the latest 
position on housing supply across the whole Craven Housing Market Area 
(CHMA), split between the plan a rea and that part of the District within the 
YDNP.  Evidence provided at the examination of the Craven Local Plan 
indicated that a healthy housing land supply existed to meet local housing 
need. Indeed, as at October 2018, the housing land supply solely wi thin 
the Craven Local Plan area for the plan period was over 600 dwellings 
more than the objectively assessed need for housing across the CHMA as 
a whole.  
9.7 The continued contribution of the YDNP towards meeting the housing 
need of the CHMA will be assi sted by the Park authority’s commitment to 
plan review.  Paragraph 4.12 of the YDNP Local Plan states that “The 
NPA has committed to a review of policy C1, including the sites allocated 
by it, within five years of adoption….”  (by 2021).  Policy C1: Housin g in 
Settlements, allocates land for housing in the YDNP and supports the 
principle of appropriate new housing within the housing development 
boundaries marked on the policies map.  If, through annual monitoring, an 
issue is identified in relation to deliv ering the housing needs of the whole 
CHMA, the two authorities will work together to identify any necessary 
courses of action to increase delivery in the short term.  Furthermore, the 
review of Local Plans at least every five years from adoption will allow  the 
policies of both planning authorities to respond to any issues that are 
identified for the medium to longer term.  
 
 
 262 
 
 
 Table of Monitoring Indicators  
Plan 
Objective  Relevant Local Plan 
Policies   Indicator  Target  
PO1  SP4:Spatial 
Strategy and 
Housing Gr owth  
 SP5 to SP11 
Strategy for Skipton, 
Settle, Bentham, 
Glusburn/ Cross  
Hills, Ingleton, 
Gargrave and Tier 
4A and 4B villages.  
 SP12 : Infrastructure 
Strategy and 
Development 
Delivery  
 ENV8: Water 
Resources, Water 
Quality and 
Groundwater  
 ENV12: Footpaths, 
Bridleways , Byways  
and Cycle Routes  
 INF1: Planning 
Obligations  
 INF2: Community 
Facilities and Social 
Spaces  
 INF3: Sport, Open 
Space and 
Recreation Facilities  
 INF4: Parking 
Provision  
 INF5: 
Communications  Housing completions by 
settlement, expressed as:  
o Number of net additional 
dwellings and 
percentage of total 
completions.  
o Housing completions on 
allocated sites.  
o Housing completions on 
unallocated (windfall) 
sites, split by previ ously 
developed and 
greenfield land.  
 
 
 Amount of money secured 
through Section 106 
agreements for the delivery of:  
o Infrastructure  
o Sports, open space, built 
sports, and recreation 
facilities  
o Education provision  
o Community facilities  
 Delivery of projects/ sch emes 
identified in the Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan over the 
monitoring year.  
 Number of community 
facilities granted permission.  
 Provision and loss of sports, 
open space and built sports 
facilities  
  Housing completions by 
settlement to follow the 
settlemen t strategy set out in 
Policy SP4.  
 In settlements where 
development sites have been 
allocated under policies SP5 
to SP11, housing development 
to generally take place on 
allocated sites in preference to 
windfall sites.  
 The majority of windfall 
development to  take place on 
previously developed land.  
 
 Meet the requirements of the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Monitor provision.  
 
 Meet the action plan targets 
identified in the Playing Pitch 
Strategy, Open Space 
Assessment and Built Sports 263 
 
 
 Infrastructure  
 INF6: Education 
Provision  
 INF7: Sustain able 
Transport and 
Highways  Faciliti es Strategy, 2016.  
PO2  ENV1: Countryside 
and Landscape  
 ENV2: Heritage  
 ENV3: Good Design  
 ENV4: Biodiversity  
 ENV5: Green 
Infrastructure  
 ENV10: Local Green 
Space  
 ENV11: The Leeds 
and Liverpool Canal   Number of planning 
applications approved where 
there are u nresolved issues 
from:  
o Natural England  
o Historic England.  
 Number of designated 
heritage assets on the Historic 
England ‘Heritage at Risk’ 
Register.  
 Number of non -residential 
developments of 1,000m² or 
more meeting BREEAM ‘Very 
Good’ standards.  
 Developmen t on sites 
identified as Local Green 
Space that falls outside the 
allowances of the policy   No planning applications 
should be granted against 
the advice of Historic 
England or Natural England.  
 
 
 No assets to be added to the 
list as a result of planning 
decisions.  
 
 All non -residential 
developments of 1,000m² or 
more to meet BREEAM 
‘Very Good’ standards.    
 No inappropriate 
development to take place 
on sites allocated as Local 
Green Space.  
PO3  ENV1: Countryside 
and Landscape  
 ENV7: Land and Air 
Quality  
 ENV13 : Green 
Wedges   Protection of best and most 
versatile (Grade 3) agricultural 
land.  
 Development on land 
allocated as Green Wedge.  
 
 Changes in sites designated 
for their importance for nature 
conservation (SINCs).   No windfall development to 
take place on Gr ade 3 
agricultural land.  
 No development to take 
place within the Green 
Wedge.  
 Monitor changes on previous 
years.  
PO4  SP1: Meeting 
Housing Need  
 H3: Gypsies, 
Travellers,  Housing trajectory:  
o Net additional dwellings 
completed since 1st April 
2012.   
 Minimum of 230 net 
additional dwellings per 
annu m. 264 
 
 
 Showmen and 
Roma  o Net additional dwellings 
completed for the 
monitoring year, split by 
PDL and green field.  
o Estimation of additional 
dwellings which could 
potentially be delivered 
in future years (Number 
of units with extant 
planning permissions or 
under construction , 
housing capacity of 
undeveloped sites 
allocated under Local 
Plan Policies SP5 to 
SP11)  
o Managing housing 
delivery over future 
years.  
 Number of Gypsy, Traveller, 
Showmen and Roma pitches 
in the plan area.    Maintenance of a five -year 
supply of developable 
housing sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Identified housing need 
of Gypsies, Travellers, 
Showmen and Roma is met 
within the District.  
PO5  SP3: Housing Mix 
and Density  
 H1: Specialist 
Housing for older 
People  
 H2: Affordable 
Housing   Average density of housing 
completions.  
 Number of one, two, three and 
four + bedroom dwellings 
completed as a percentage of 
total completions.  
 Number of units of extra care 
or other specialist housing 
accommodation for older 
people pro vided.  
 Net additional affordable 
homes provided, split by type 
and tenure.  
 Number of affordable homes 
granted planning consent.   Achieve an average net 
housing density of 32 dph.  
 The size of new houses and 
mix of housing types to 
broadly reflect the 
recommendations of the 
Strategic Housing Market  
Assessment, its successor, 
or other appropriate an up to 
date evidence of housing 
need.  
 Monitor provision compared 
to requirement.  
 Monitor provision compared 
to requirement.  265 
 
 
  Number of sites of 11 
dwellings or more, or 
exceeding 1000 m2 combined 
gross floorspace, achieving 
30% affordable housing on 
site.  
 Money secured for off -site 
provision of affordable 
housing through S106 
agreements.   
 
 30% of proposed new 
dwellings as affordable 
housing on developments of 
11 dwell ings or more/ more 
than 1000m2 combined 
gross floorspace.  
 Monitor provision.  
PO6  EC5: Town, District 
and Local Centres  
 EC5A: Residential 
Uses in Town , 
District and Local  
Centres   Changes of use within Skipton 
and Settle Town Centres 
away from commercial,  retail, 
leisure, cultural and 
community functions.  
 Change of use away from 
retail in the Primary Shopping 
Area of Skipton.  
 Changes of use to residential 
at ground floor level within the 
Primary Shopping A rea of 
Skipton, and within town, 
district and local  centres of 
Settle, Bentham, Cross  Hills 
and Ingleton.  
 Number of vacant units in 
Skipton and Settle Town 
Centres.  
 Comparison and Convenience 
floorspace (m²) created in 
town , district and local centres 
of Skipton, Settle, Bentham, 
Cross  Hills and Ingleton.   No loss of ground floor retail 
units to residential in primary 
retail area Skipton.  
 Minimal levels of changes in 
other town and village 
centres so as not to 
undermine the retail, 
commercial and leisure 
function of the centre.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Monitor changes on pre vious 
years.  
 
 Meeting the identified 
floorspace needs in the town 
and village centres as 
identified in Policy EC5 – 
target floorspace figure.  
PO7  SP2: Economic 
Activity and 
Business Growth   Take -up of employment land 
allocated under policies SP5, 
SP6, SP9 and SP11 and area  Steady take up of 
employment land al located 
under policies SP5, SP6,  266 
 
 
  EC1: Employment 
and Economic 
Development  
 EC2: Safeguarding 
Existin g 
Employment Areas  
 EC4: Tourism  
 of allocated employment land 
remaining available (ha), over 
the monitoring year and since 
the adoption of the Local Plan.  
 Employment develo pment on 
unallocated sites in towns, 
villages and rural areas (ha) 
over the monitoring year.  
 Total amount of additional 
employment floorspace 
completed by type (m²).  
 Total amount of employment 
floorspace by type on 
previously developed land 
(m²).  
 Area of  existing employment 
land and existing employment 
land commitments (allocated 
under Policy EC2) lost through 
development/ change of use 
to uses other than B1, B2 or 
B8 (ha).  
 Development on land 
protected for future transport 
connectivity improvements.  SP9 and SP11 . 
 
 
 
 Tracking the trend of 
employment development on 
unallocated sites over the 
plan period.  
 Meeting targets for 
employment land provision 
over the plan period.  
 
 
 
 
 No safeguarde d land to be 
lost to uses other than B1, 
B2 and B8.  
 
 
 
 
 No development to take 
place on land protected for 
future transport connectivity 
improvements, including the 
Skipton to Colne track bed 
and the Cross  Hills Railway 
Station site.  
PO8  ENV6: Flood Risk   Number of planning 
permissions granted contrary 
to Environment Agency 
advice.   No development proposals 
to be granted consent 
against the advice of the 
Environment Agency.  
PO9  ENV9: Renewable 
and Low Carbon 
Energy   Planning permissions granted 
for renewable  energy 
schemes.   Monitor  
PO10   EC3: Rural  Number of rural buildings  Monitor new and lost 267 
 
 
 Economy  
 EC4: Tourism  
 EC4A: Tourism -Led 
Development at 
Bolton Abbey  
 EC4B: Tourism 
Development 
Commitment at 
Hellifield  converted to Live/Work use.  
 Loss of Live/work units to 
residential.  
 Number of type of approvals 
for tourism development.  provision.  
 
 
 Monitor provision.  
 
 
 
 1   
 
 
CRA VEN LOCAL  PLAN  
2012 to 2032  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX  A: TO POLICY  INF3: 
SPORT, OPEN  SPACE & B UILT 
SPORTS  FACILITIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2  1. INTRODU CTION  
 
 
1.1 Promoting healthy  lifestyle choices is a key part of improving standards of 
living and re ducing  health i nequality. The Local Plan  aims  to facilitate healthy 
living, not only  by providing high quality housin g, a high quality natural 
environment and promoti ng sustainable transport c hoices su ch as walking 
and c ycling throu gh Green Infrastructure, but also by  ensuring that 
communities have access to  high quality open spaces, sport and built sports  
facilities. 
 
2. WHAT TYPE OF PR OPOSALS WILL POLI CY INF3 BE  APPLIED TO?  
 
 
2.1 The Co uncil’s standards for t he provision of open space  will be applied to all 
applications for new residential  development that re sult in  a net gain in 
residential  units.  This includes proposals that involve: 
 
• Conversions & C hange of Use 
 
• Flats  
 
• Sheltered and extra care housing  
 
• Affordable Housin g 
 
• Self-catering holiday accommodation 
 
• Agricultural workers  dwelling 
 
• Rene wal of planning permiss ion that has expired 
 
 
• Revised planning permission where the numbers of bedr ooms increase as a 
result of the revision. 
 
• Planning applications to make temporary dwellings permanent. 
 
2.2 The following forms  of development that will not be subject to the policy: 
 
 
• Rest homes and nursing homes 
 
• Replac ement dwellings 
 
• Resid ential extensions and annexes 3  • Revised planning permission (pro vided that the number of bedr ooms is not 
increased  by the re vision) 
 
• Rene wal of planning permiss ion that has not expired 
 
• Temporary  dwellings. 
 
3. WHEN WILL WE ASK FOR PROVI SION?  
 
 
3.1 Provision wi ll be made in all new housing and mixed-use developments of 11 
or more dwellings and on any site wit h a combined gross floor area of more 
than 1000 sqm including those on sites allocated un der local p lan policies 
SP5 to SP11, to provide or contribu te towards new  or impro ved sport, open 
space  and built sports  facilities. 
 
3.2 Within designated rural  areas*  new housing  and mixed use developments are 
required to  provide or contribute towards n ew or impro ved sport, open space 
and built sports facilities on  developments of between 6  and 10-units and from 
developments of less than 6 dwellings but more than 1000sqm combined 
gross floorspa ce. Financial  contribut ions will be c ommuted until after 
completion  of units within t he development. 
 
3.3 Propo sals for new resident ial de velopment of 50 or more dwellings may be 
required to provide new open s pace on site. The standards set out in table 1 
below  will be used to calculate the sport, open space  and built sports f acility 
requirement. The Council will use th ese st andards  to negotiate the le vel and 
type of provision and whether new provision is re quired on site or whether 
the quality of existing  open s pace should be improved. 
 
 
 
 
* Within the Craven plan area,  designated rural areas are the Forest of Bowland Area  of 
Outstanding Natural Beauty and the parishes of Bank Newton, Bentham, Bolton Abbey, 
Burton-in-Lonsdale, Clapham-cum-Newby, Coniston Cold, Embsay-with-Eastby,  Gargrave, 
Giggleswick, Halton East, Hellifield, Ingleton, Langcliffe, Lawkland, Long Presto n, Otterburn, 
Rathme ll, Settle, Stirton-with-Thorlby, Thornton-in-Lonsdale and  Wigglesworth. Please refer 
to Se ction 157 of the Housing Act 1985 and  the Housing (Right to Bu y) (Designated Rural 
Areas and Designated Region) (England) Order 1988. 4  4. HOW  WILL T HE PO LICY OPE RATE? 
 
4.1 The Co uncil will assess each development (of 11 or more dwellings and on 
any site with a combined gros s floor area of more than 1000 sqm , and for 
developments of between 6-10 dwellings, and from developments of less 
than 6 dwellings but more than 1000sqm combined gross floorspace  within 
designated rural ar eas) for the existing  quantity  and quality of open space, 
sports  facilities and pitches, within cat chment of the development, in order to 
determine the local need and if existing provision can me et the need 
generat ed by the development. This will be based  upon the 2016 
assessment and subse quent updates. 
 
4.2 Where there is  a quantity and or quality deficiency  the C ouncil will use t he 
standards and formula set out in this appendix to negotiate for provision 
and/or co ntributi on to ensure that adequate quantity  and quality of open 
space,  sports facilities and pitches are provided in order to meet the need 
generat ed by the development. 
 
4.3 When an application is recei ved in “o utline” an initial calculati on will be made 
based on an indicative number of dwellings proposed for an outline proposal. 
Once a res erved matters application is s ubmitted, this initial calculat ion will be 
updated by a more detailed one based on the actual number and size of 
dwellings proposed.  
 
5. WHAT STANDARDS WILL WE  APPLY  FOR PROVIS ION?  
 
 
5.1 Table 1  below contains both national and local standards.  The national 
standards are  derived from the Fields  In Trust recommended benchmark 
guidelines for formal open space. Local  open space standards have been 
calculat ed by expressing  provision in hectares per thousand population by 
comparing existing  (2012) a nd projected (2032) population figures with the 
actual level of cur rent provision and provide a baseline standard based on 
existing  levels of o pen space  throughout the plan area. 
 
5.2 These s tandards  have been used to identify current and future deficits or 
surplu ses in  the quantity, quality and access ibility of open space and this 
analysis w ill be used by the Council  to meet the standards s et out in Table 1. 
Natio nal Standards  will be used  where there  is a potential loss  of existing  5  open space provision and local standards will be used to calculate  the 
provision of new open space re quired throughout the plan area. 
 
5.3 Where a quantity deficiency  exists in a  locati on, the Council will negotiate  for 
on-site provision of facilities, subject  to recommended minimum  size 
standards for open space types as set out in Table 1  below. Where the 
locality has a deficiency in the quality of existing  open space or facilities, t he 
Council will require a contribut ion to be made to address that deficiency.  A 
deficiency  is where the  existing  provision does not meet the minimum quality 
standards s et out in Table 1  below. The exact type of sports,  open space  or 
built sports facility required will be dependent on the quality and quantity 
deficiencies  that exist across t he plan area and within catc hment of the new 
development. These deficiencies  are id entified in the Playing Pitch Strate gy, 
Open Space Asses sment and Built Sports Facilities Strate gy 2016, and any 
subse quent updates. 6   
 
 
 
 
Table 1 – Adopted Standards for Open Space provision for Craven District plan area   
TYPOLOGY / 
 
DEFINITION QUALITY STANDARD NATIONAL 
QUANTITY 
STANDARD SOURCE  LOCAL 
QUANTITY 
STANDARD NOTES 
Parks and 
 
Gardens  
 Welcoming clean, well maintained area with 
 
hard/s oft landsc aping 
 
 A one stop community facility, acc essible to  all with 
a range of leisure,  recreati onal and play 
opportunities 
 Safe to visit, pleasant to walk and  sit in 
 
 Cut back trees  and bushes  for safety and cl ear 
sight-lines 
 Include paved and planted areas, paths, grassed 
areas, seatin g, clear pathways, appropr iate lighting 
and si gnage to, and within, the si te 
 Include ramps in stead of steps and wide paths for 
wheelch air and pushchair users  
 May provide opport unities for public realm art 
 
 Shou ld link to surrounding green s pace. 0.8 ha/1,000 
 
population  
 
 
 
710 m 
 
walking Fields in  
 
Trust 
 
 
 
Fields in 
Trust 0.61 ha/ 1,000 
 
population 
 
 
 
710 m  
 
walking Local s tandard 
 
adopted 
 
 
 
Natio nal standard 
adopted 
 
 
Recommended 
minimum si ze 
standard for new 
on site  provision 
is 0.2Ha with 
5meter buffer 7   
Table 1 – Adopted Standards for Open Space provision for Craven District plan area   
TYPOLOGY / 
 
DEFINITION QUALITY STANDARD NATIONAL 
QUANTITY 
STANDARD SOURCE  LOCAL 
QUANTITY 
STANDARD NOTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amenity 
greensp ace 
i.e Village 
Greens 
 Clean and well maintained green space, with 
 
appropriate ancillary furniture pathways, and  natural 
landscaping 
 Safe site with spacious outlook 
 
 Enhance the environment/ could become a 
community focus 
 Large spaces may  afford opportunities for informal 
play. 
 
 
 Smaller landscaped areas in and around housing 
areas  
 Informal recreation 
 
 Provide connections  for wildlife and people 
movement 
 Include, and often connect to, green lungs 
 
 Contribute to biodiversity  
 
 Planted using native species  
 
 Areas to be main tained clear of dog fouling and litter  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.6 ha/1,000 
 
population  
 
 
 
480 m 
 
walking  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fields in 
Trust 
 
 
Fields in 
Trust  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.41 ha/1,000 
 
population 
 
 
 
480 m  
 
walking  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Natio nal standard 
adopted 
 
 
Natio nal standard 
adopted 
Recommended 
minimum si ze 
standard for new 
on site  provision 
is 0.1Ha with 
5meter buffer 8   
Table 1 – Adopted Standards for Open Space provision for Craven District plan area   
TYPOLOGY / 
 
DEFINITION QUALITY STANDARD NATIONAL 
QUANTITY 
STANDARD SOURCE  LOCAL 
QUANTITY 
STANDARD NOTES 
 
  Provision of seating and bins 
 
 May provide opport unities for public realm art 
 
 May include woodla nd.     
Play Areas 
for 
Children 
and 
Facilities 
for Young 
People  and 
Teenagers 
 A range of provision for young  people  of both 
equipped and natural play areas 
 Spaces  should be well sited, accessible, 
convenient, visible, s afe and secure, with seating for 
adults,  litter bins  and cycle racks  – also c onsider 
push chair/wheelch air access  
 Well lit with informal surveillance when possible 
 
 Equipment should suit the needs of all ages and 
abilities a nd be well maint ained 
 Zones to prevent co nflict and spaces  and seating 
for supervision 
 Shou ld be clear ly bounded, well maintai ned, free of 
dog fouling, have clear  pathways, appropr iate 
lighting  and si gnage 
 The Co uncil does not encourage the provision of 0.55 ha/ 
population  
 
 
 
 
LAPs  – 100m 
LEAPs  – 
400m  
NEAPs  – 
1,000m 
700m for 
Youth 
provision 
 
 
 
 
Recommend Fields in 
Trust 
 
 
 
 
Fields in 
Trust 0.30 ha/ 
population 
 
 
 
 
LAPs – 100m 
LEAPs – 
400m  
NEAPs – 
1,000m 
700m f or 
Youth 
Provision Natio nal standard 
Adopted 
 
 
 
 
Natio nal standard 
adopted 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LAP to have min 
100m2 of activity 9   
Table 1 – Adopted Standards for Open Space provision for Craven District plan area   
TYPOLOGY / 
 
DEFINITION QUALITY STANDARD NATIONAL 
QUANTITY 
STANDARD SOURCE  LOCAL 
QUANTITY 
STANDARD NOTES 
 unequipped Local Areas for Play. 
 
 Robust yet imaginative play environments ranging 
from youth shelters to  skate  parks and multi-use 
games areas 
 Kick ab out/games areas, skate  parks,  basket ball 
courts  
 If located within o ther areas of open space they 
should  include buffer zones  to prevent c onflict 
 Shou ld promote a sense of ownership and be 
accessible to all and have clear p athways, 
appropriate lighting  and signage 
 They should be visible and safe, well maintained 
and free of dog fouling ed minimum  
 
size standard 
for new on 
site provision 
is 0.01ha - 
LAP,  0.04ha - 
LEAP,  0.1ha 
- NEAP and 
Youth 
provision   space  with 5m 
 
buffer 
 
LEAP  to  have 
min  400m2 
activity space 
with 20m buffer. 
NEAP  and Youth 
provision to have 
1000m2  of 
activity space 
and 30m buffer 10   
Table 1 – Adopted Standards for Open Space provision for Craven District plan area   
TYPOLOGY / 
 
DEFINITION QUALITY STANDARD NATIONAL 
QUANTITY 
STANDARD SOURCE  LOCAL 
QUANTITY 
STANDARD NOTES 
Formal  
 
Open 
Space – 
Cemeteri es 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Civic 
Space 
 Encou rage greater use of cemeteries for informal 
 
recre ation e.g. allow movement inclusi ve of 
cemeteries for walking 
 Contribute to bi odiversity  
 
 Provision of seating and bins 
 
 Good level of natural surveillance and lighting  for 
safety 
 Ensure wheelc hair/pushchair  access and accessible 
paths for inclusi veness  
 Tackle  the problem of dog fouling. 
 
 Use of pavement obstructions  e.g. Display  boards 
outsi de shops 
 
 
 Create a sense of local identity  by: 
 
 Increased seating  provision thr oughout town centre 
civic spaces  
 Make greater use of civic spaces  for events 
 
 Opportunities  for public art to enhance civic spaces.  Quantity N/A 
 
 
 
 
 
400 m 
 
walking 
(local 
significance) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Quantity N/A 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
400 m 
 
walking (local 
significance)  
 
 
 
 
 
GLA 0.5 ha/1,000 
 
Population*  
 
 
 
400 m  
 
walking (l ocal 
significa nce) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Included in 
above Local s tandard 
 
adopted 
 
 
 
Natio nal standard 
adopted 
No rec ommended 
minimum si ze for 
on site pro vision 
as new housing 
developments will 
not be required to 
provide on site 
 
 
As above 
Recommended 
minimum si ze 
standard for new 
on site  provision 11   
Table 1 – Adopted Standards for Open Space provision for Craven District plan area   
TYPOLOGY / 
 
DEFINITION QUALITY STANDARD NATIONAL 
QUANTITY 
STANDARD SOURCE  LOCAL 
QUANTITY 
STANDARD NOTES 
     is 0.1ha with 5m 
 
buffer 
Formal  
 
Open 
Space - 
Allotment 
Gardens  
 Secure  area of land commonly within, or on the 
 
edge of, a developed area which can  be rented by 
local people for the growing of vegetables, flowers 
or fruit not-for-profit 
 Provide opportunities  for those who wish to  grow 
their own produce, and support health, 
sustainability and social inclusion  
 Sites s hould be well drained and accessible  with 
wide paved paths, car  access and parking, toilets, 
recycling facilities and inorganic waste disposal 
facilities 
 Areas s hould be well lit and provide safe paths. 0.3 ha /1000* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1200 m 
 
walking (local 
significance) Fields in  
 
Trust 
other 
local 
standards 
 
 
Fields in 
Trust – 
other 
local 
authoritie 
s 0.3 ha/1,000 
 
population 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
400 m  (local 
significa nce) Local  and 
 
Natio nal FIT 
standard adopted 
as the same 
Natio nal FIT 
other local 
authority 
standard adopted 
Recommended 
minimum si ze 
standard for new 
on site  provision 
is 0.1ha with 5m 
buffer 12  6. HOW  IS THE AMOUNT OF PROV ISION CALCULATED?  
 
 
6.1 The Co uncil uses a formula which is based  upon the following elements:  
 
• The number of people that the development is likely  to generate  (demand) 
 
• How much open space provision is re quired from the generated demand 
based upon our adopted standards  - see Table 2  below  
 
• How will this demand affect the existing  local supply  in terms  of quantity  and 
quality of local provision to  meet the needs generat ed by the development? 
 
• If a quantity  deficiency exists then  on si te provision wi ll be required based 
upon our adopted standard and subject to meeting  minimum size 
requirements - see notes in Table 1  above and Table 2 below  of quantity per 
person.  
 
• If there is a  quantity  deficiency  for just  one type of provision, the C ouncil may 
ask t he development to inclu de this  one provision on site  as a priority, 
 
• If a quality deficiency  in local pro vision exists, t hen a contributi on is required 
to impro ve this to ensure that  needs generated by development can be 
catered for. 
 
• For off-site provision, the Council  has a cost calculator that is applied for the 
different types of provision re quired. Table 4 & 5 below sets this out for each 
of the types of provision and how the amount is generat ed. 
 
 
 
 
7. HOW  WILL T HE NU MBER OF PEOP LE GENERATED BY A 
DEVELOP MENT BE CALCULATED?  
 
7.1 In calculating  the amount of open space to be provided by a development, the 
estimated population to be genera ted is  based on the 2012 based household 
projections  to 2037 for England, including the average household si ze for 
Craven which ra nge from 2.21 in 2012, 2.16 in 2017, 2.13 in  2022, 2.10 in 
2027 and 2.07 in 2032. Population generated from developments will also be 
based on the size and type of dwellings proposed and what need is generat ed 
by a specific development. 13  8. HOW  MUCH PROVIS ION IS REQU IRED BASED UPON  THE S TANDARD 
FOR EACH OPEN S PACE AND SPORTS TYPE? 
 
8.1 The calculation  will use the adopted standards for new provision as set out in 
Table 1  above. This is  based on hectare per 1000 population or m2 per 
person.  These equate to the following amount of space and sports  facility per 
person:  
 
Table 2 – Adopted Quantity Standards  for Open Space provis ion for Craven 
District plan  area meter squared (m2) per person fi gure 
 
Open Sp ace Standard per person  
Allotme nts 3 m² 
Amenity Green space  4.1 m² 
Parks a nd Gardens  6.1 m² 
Civic Space Only 0.35 m² 
Children’s E quipped play areas 3 m² 
Youth Provision – MUGA, 
 
Skatepark, Shelter, ip lay, 
BMX/Pump Track etc 2.5 m² 
Green Cor ridor – Leeds Liverpool  
 
Canal 1 m² 
Spor ts Type Required sp ace per perso n 
Swimming pool  – water space 0.00921 m² 
Sports Hall – Community 
 
Accessible Badminton court 
space  Skipt on 2015 0.143 m² 
Sports Pit ch improvement 10.2 m² 
Ancillary accommodation i.e. 
 
Clubhou se 0.15 m² 
 
 
 
8.2 The Sports t ype is  based upon the identified supply  deficiency, as set out in 
the pitch  and sports facility assess ment, and the number of people in the plan 
area.  The equation divides the total supply  against the total population.  i .e. 14  The Leeds  & Liverpool canal  total size is 33,000 m² divided by the South 
Craven population (33,441) 
 
 
 
 
9. ARE THERE  ANY SPECIFIC  AREA NEEDS T HAT DEVELOP MENTS WILL 
BE REQUIRED TO CONT RIBUTE TO WARDS? 
 
9.1 The 2016 assessments highlight a number of deficiencies ac ross the different 
sub areas and by open space, sports facility.  These i nclude the Leeds & 
Liverpool Ca nal, which is loc ated throughout the South Cra ven Sub area and 
Settle  Swimming pool, which serv ices the M id and North C raven areas. 
These facilities/green corridor serve the needs of all existing  and future 
residents  of these sub areas, therefore developments in these  sub areas will 
be re quired to make a contribut ion towards t hese t wo specific sub area needs 
based upon the formula for amount and cost. 
 
10. WHAT IS THE FOR MULA AND HOW  IS IT  CALCULATED?  
 
 
10.1 The formula for calculating provision will be the following: Number of 
propo sed new units X  the average household size for Craven* X  the amount 
of new/improved provision re quired X the costs of each  of the provision types 
*Where develo pments are for s maller units, such as 1 bedroom flat, then the 
avera ge household s ize will be negotiable  to reflect the likely  need genera ted 
by the develo pment. 
 
EXAMPLE:  
 
As an  example, a mixed si ze housing  development of 25 units would generate 
the following: 
 
Table 3 – Example of  Quantity S tandards for Op en Space provis ion for a 
devel opment of  25 units 
 
Open Sp ace Typolo gy Amount of new provision requi red for  
 
25 units*  
Allotme nts 25 X 2.21 X 3m2 = 166 m² 
Amenity Green space  25 X 2.21 X 4.1m2 = 221 m² 15   
Parks and Gardens  25 X 2.21 X 6.1m2 = 337 m² 
Civic Space &  Cemeteries 25 X 2.21 X 5m2 = 276 m² 
Children’s E quipped play areas 25 X 2.21 X 3m2 = 165 m² 
Youth Provision – MUGA, 
 
Skatepark, Shelter, ip lay, 
BMX/Pump Track etc 25 X 2.21 X 2.5m2 = 138 m² 
Green Cor ridor - Leeds Liverpool  
 
Canal 25 X 2.21 X 1m2 = 55 m² 
Pitch and Spor ts Facility 
 
Provision**  Amount of new or Improved 
 
provision required f or 25 units  
Swimming pool water space  – 
 
Mid/North Cra ven 25 X 2.21 X 0.00921 = 0.50 m² 
Sports Hall – Community 
 
Accessible Badminton court 
space  2015  - Skipt on Only 25 X 2.21 X 0.143 = 7.9 m² 
Sports  pitch improvement 
 
requirement 25 X 2.21 X 10.2m2 = 564 m² 
Sports Pit ch Clu bhouse 
 
impro vement 25 X 2.21 X 0.15m2 = 8.3 m² 
 
 
 
10.2 The total amount of Open space need generated by a 25 dwelling 
development is 1303 m² plus  the Green Cor ridor (Leeds & Liverpool Canal) 
and Sports  / Pitch provision based upon local need, pre suming quantity 
deficiencies  exist in all types of open space. 
 
10.3 As set out in Policy INF3  the Council will assess each proposed development 
in relation  to the quantity and quality of existing  local pro vision based upon the 
most recent assessm ent. Where there is  existing adequate quantity and 
quality of an open space type that can cater for the needs generated by the 
development, then the Council will not re quire the  development to contribute 
towards t his. Where there is a quantity deficiency of local pro vision then the 
Council would ne gotiate with the  developer to cater for this  need. This n eed 
will therefore meet not only the developments needs but that of the wider 
community.  The Council will also assess t he quality of provision and where a  16  local deficiency is iden tified, in the most rec ent asses sment, then the 
development will be expect ed to contribu te towards t his. 
 
11. WHAT IS THE MINIMUM SIZE FOR ON SI TE PROV ISION?  
 
 
11.1 The rec ommended minimum size sta ndards  for on-site provision are set out in 
Table 1. Developments of 50 units or more are likely  to generate enough 
demand for onsite  provision, assuming quantity deficiencies e xist for all types 
of open space. The Council  would e xpect a 50 unit development to provide 
on-site open space of 2600m2. Priority for which t ype of open space will be 
based upon the greatest loc al deficiency  as set out in the most re cent Open 
Space  assessment. Currently, if a development of 50 dwellings were 
propo sed in: 
 
• North C raven area there would be  a requirement to provide an allotment; 
 
• Mid C raven area there would be  a requirement to provide a park and garden; 
 
• South Cra ven area there would be  a requirement to provide youth/teenage 
provision. 
 
11.2 Developments of 100units or more will be expected to make on site  provision 
for all t ypes of open space i. e. a multi-purpose open space  site (ca 5200m2) 
with a mix of elements such as a Park a nd Garden,  an equipped children’s 
and youth play area with an allotment sectio n, area  of amenity  green s pace 
and a civic space.  
 
11.3 Developments of 50 units or more may be required to  make a contribution 
towards off site provision for other types incl uding Green Corridor, Sports 
Facil ities and Pitches based  upon the lo cal need as set out in the 
assessment s. 
 
12. HOW  IS THE AMOUNT OF FI NANCIAL CONTRIBUTION CALCULATED 
FOR OFF SITE  PRO VISION?  
 
12.1 The following process  and information will be used to calculate  developer 
contribut ions for the provision of new and improvement of existing  sports, 
open space and built sports  facilities off site: 17  1. Spor ts Facilities: swimming pools, sports halls and fitness facilities  – use 
Sport England’s facility cost calculat or by the type of provision. This will use 
the latest published quarterly  costs calculations  
 
2. Spor ts Pitch es and ancillary pitch acc ommodation  – use a combination of 
Sport England’s facility cost cal culator  by the type of provision and local pitch 
impro vements s chemes previously delivered or as detailed in an up to date PPS.  
It includes  maintenance costs  for 10 years. As  of 2016 the average costs of 
provision to impro ve playing pitches is £11.10 per m². The annual maintenance 
costs  for maintaining  a pitch is  £0.85per m².  A figure of half this is inclu ded in the 
table to co ver the uplift costs of maintaining  an impro ved pitch to high quality 
standard as it assu mes that the current maintenance is inadequate and only half 
the required costs of maintaining  a high quality pitch are required. 
 
3. Open  Space  – Existing  formula  used by CDC  but updated by construction 
tender pr ice costs or retail price in dex.  This is based upon the actual cos ts of 
providing  or upgrading  play space for children  and young  people. The provision 
of amenity greenspac e, parks a nd gardens, allotme nts is a combined figure for 
the likely  costs associa ted with this t ype of provision. The costs for play 
equipment and youth pro vision also combines the  Sport  England cost 
calculati ons for type of provision and cat alogue price for play equipment where 
we do not have such provision in the distr ict such  as iPlay  systems and includes 
maintenance costs for 10 years.  
 
4. Leeds & Liverpool Canal  is based  upon the Leeds &  Liverpool  Canal Towpath 
Access De velopment Plan 2014, which incl udes c osts for upgrading and 
impro ving the canal.  Developer contribut ions will be c alculat ed by excluding the 
cost of improving the s ection from Skipton to Bradley  as this was completed in 
2016. Re gard will also be  had to the requirements of policy ENV11:  The Leeds  
& Liverpool  Canal and specific development principles  set out for site allocations 
which are within reason able pro ximity of The Leeds & Liverpool Ca nal. 
 
12.2 The Co uncil has a formula f or calcu lating  requirements under this policy.  This 
includes  all the above data, including the Sport En gland facility cost calculat or 
and has a  full breakdown of the costs for each t ype of provision.  By  inputting the 
number of units, the formula c alculates the amount of provision the  development 
will generate  together with the costs of any off site  contribution. This 18  spreadsheet is updated annually with updated costs by inflation adjustment and 
can be found on the Co uncil website  
https://www.cravendc.gov.uk/planning/planning -policy/planning -policy -facts -and-
figures/planning -policy -evidence -base/infrastructure/   
 
13. WHAT ARE THE COSTS FOR PROV ISION?  
 
 
13.1 The table below  sets out the Councils costs for developer contrib utions 
towards off site provision. 
 
Table 4 – List of costs for each Open Space type by m², per p erson and per 
standard house unit (2 .21 persons  per unit) 
 
Type of  Provision Cost per  
 
meter2  Cost per  
 
person ba sed 
upon 
standard  Cost per u nit 
 
(2.21 persons per 
unit)  
Park a nd Garden  £25 £75 £166 
Amenity Green space  £25 £102 £225 
Civic Space  Based  upon 
 
spec ific Sc heme   
Allotme nts £25 £102 £225 
Equipped Children’s  play 
 
area £132 £369 £815 
Teenage and Youth 
 
Provision £134 £335 £740 
Leeds Liverpool C anal 
 
Green corridor 
impro vement £114 £96 £212** 
Swimming Pool – water 
 
space  25m x 4lane 
(200m2) £17,150 £439 £970** 
Sports Hall  improvement £485 £69 £152 
Sports Pit ch improvement £11 £112 £248 19   
Sports Pit ch annual uplift 
 
maintenance* £4.25 £43 £95 
Sports  pitch  ancillary 
 
acco mmodation £853 £127 £281 
 
 
 
*A Pitch maintenance: uplift cost is re quired in  order to maintain the improved 
pitch to the new quality standard.  All sports pitches in  Craven  are li able to  fall 
to poor quality pitches if not maintain ed to high standards  due to the clay soil 
type that dominates the pitch stock. The mainte nance  cost assumes that  the 
current site  owner or users of poor quality pitches do not maintain  the pitch to 
high standard and only incurs h alf the maintenance cost required for this. 
 
** Contribution for these elements will be r equired for sites within the defined 
catchments f or these types of open space and faci lities within the sub area 
where the provis ion requirement exists in  order to s ecure planning gain and 
meet CIL re gulations if  CIL is intr oduced by the Co uncil.  
 
13.2 Full sup porting documents showing how these c osts have been developed 
can be provided upon request and is  available on the Council  website. 
 
13.3 The above figures ha ve been check ed by benchmarking against other L ocal 
Authority charges for Open  Space, Sports  provision. 
 
14. WHAT ELEMENTS OF COSTS FOR FACILITIES  ARE INC LUDED IN THE 
POLIC Y? 
 
14.1 There are a number of eligible c osts assoc iated with making  open space 
provision and these are set out in Table 5: 
 
Table 5 – Details of what is incl uded in the cost calculati ons set out by open 
space  type. 
 
Allotme nts Costs are: Professional Fees such as site assessment 
 
i.e. , topographical survey as well as design. 
 
Costs c over lands caping, drain age, paths, services, 
equipment: benches  and bins, si gns etc, Construction 
works and 10years maintenance  20   
Amenity Green  
 
space  Costs are: Professional Fees such as site assessment 
 
i.e. , topographical survey as well as design. 
 
Costs c over lands caping, drain age, paths, services, 
equipment: benches  and bins, si gns etc, Construction 
works and 10years maintenance  
Parks a nd 
 
Gardens  Costs are: Professional Fees such as site assessment 
 
i.e. , topographical survey as well as design. 
 
Costs c over lands caping, drain age, paths, services, 
equipment: benches  and bins, si gns etc, Construction 
works and 10years maintenance  
Civic Space  Costs are: Costs will be based upon any specific 
 
sche me that is identified within t he 2016 Open Space 
Assessment  and any other relevant evidence i.e., the 
2016 Ret ail & Leisure  Study with Health C hecks and 
subse quent updates. 
Children’s  
 
Equipped play 
areas and 
Youth Provision 
– MUGA,  
 
Skatepark, 
Shelter,  iplay, 
BMX/Pump 
Track etc Costs are: Professional Fees such as site assessment 
 
i.e. , topographical survey as well as design. 
 
Costs c over lands caping, drain age, paths, services, 
equipment: benches  and bins, si gns etc, All play 
equipment costs and constructi on works and  10years 
maintenance. 
Green Cor ridor 
 
– Leeds 
Liverpool Ca nal Costs are based upon the Sustrans Access  
 
Development Plan 2014 for a detailed costed sche me 
of work along  the whole of the canal secti on excluding 
Bradley  to Ski pton section that has been completed. 
Swimming pool 
 
– water space The cost relate to affordable  community swimming 
pools taken  from Sport England’s Sports  facility costs. 
Sports Hall  
 
impro vement Costs are a quarter  of the new build costs for a 
 
community sports hall  based upon Sport En gland’s 
Sports Faci lity costs 21   
Sports Pit ch 
 
impro vement Costs rela te to professional fees such as detailed site 
 
agronomist report  and sche me of work including type 
of drainage, all  materials, project  management costs 
and contin gency – includes  VAT 
Sports Pit ch 
annual uplift 
maintenance  Costs relate  to annual cuttin g, fertilising, weed kil ling, 
 
sand  dressin g, spiking, aeration, drain r odding. The 
figure is 50% of the annual costs as  it ass umes the 
clubs/owners alre ady have a pitch maint enance cost 
but not at the standard to maintain a high quality pitch 
– includes VAT 
Sports  pitch  
 
ancillary 
acco mmodation Costs are: professional fees such as architect and 
 
planning fees, s cheme of work including, all materials, 
constructi on costs, project management costs and 
contin gency  – includes VAT 
 
 
 
Costs will be re vised annually using the Ret ail Price I ndex measure of inflation 
 
15. WHAT ABOUT  MAINTENANCE OF PROV ISION?  
 
 
15.1 Developers will be expected to make provision for the maintenance of sport, 
open spaces and built sports  facilities by a local or ganisati on, club  or 
residents group. This relates  to the both on site and off site provision as well 
as new or imp roved provision and will be for a minimum period of 10years. 
Mainte nance  costs will not be re quired for Sports hal ls, Swimming pools, 
Clubhou ses as it is e xpected that these would genera te income from users to 
cover on going maintenance costs.  
 
EXAMPLE 
 
Example of how the formula is calcula ted for Youth/Teenage provision: Youth 
Teenage provision inclu des the following mix of provision: S katepark, MUGA, 
with lighting, Youth Shelter with Blu etooth, iPlay system, Climbing  Boulder, 
BMX/Pump Track. This requires an area 3000m² (0.3Ha).  Co sts are a 
combination of Sport England Cost Calculati ons for provision, act ual costs of 
previous recent  delivered projects su ch as Skipton  Pump Track as well as 22  brochure  costs from suppliers such  as the iP lay and POD youth shelter. The 
capital  and installation cost are  £372,000. Maintenance  costs covering 
10years would be  £10 per m² (£30,000) based upon existing  known 
maintenance  costs for play provision.  This would give a total cost  of £402,000 
to provide this facility, which would ser ve 12,000 people based upon our 
adopted standard (0.25ha Youth provision = 2. 5m² per person).  To generate 
the cost per m² the formula divides the  total cost by  the size of area: £402,000 
/ 3000m² = £134 per m².  Taking the example above of a 25 unit development 
a contributi on of £18,500 would be required to me et the local need (£134 per 
m² X 138m²). NB – if within t he catchment of the development there is 
already  some of the above provision such as a skatepark,  then the costs of 
this can  be remo ved from the equation. 
 
16. HOW  WILL T HE CO UNCIL SECURE PROV ISION?  
 
 
16.1 Provision, impro vement and main tenance of sport, open space and built 
sports  facilities will be secured  through an appropr iate mechanism,  for 
example S106 Agreement, Unilateral U ndertaking, conditi on or through CIL  if 
appropriate. If CDC  agree to intr oduce  a CIL charging schedule, large 
projects su ch as replacement of Settle Pool may  be inclu ded within CIL list. 
Prior to any adoption of a CIL  charging schedule, the C ouncil will contin ue to 
secure developer contributions  towards off site open space  provision thr ough 
S106  Agreements.  The Council will require all agreements rel ating to a 
financial contribution  to be inflation adjusted based  upon the R etail Price 
Index or another s imilar inflation measure. The adjustment  will be from the 
date of the agreement being  signed to the date by which t he payment is d ue, 
referred to as trigger point. The Council has a separate acco unt set up for 
each  planning gain financial c ontribut ion. The Co uncil also has a Section  106 
register that incl udes all relevant pla nning gain co ntributi ons relating  to open 
space.  The monies cannot be used for the funding  of projec ts or schemes 
other than for the public open space or sp ort facilities as s et out in the 
agreement and within catchment of the development. Monies  will be 
safeguarded until there is an agreed sc heme in place for the use of the funds 
or until there are s ufficient funds to  underta ke the necessary works.  A greed 
sche mes must have a minimum secur ity of tenure of ten years, at the time of 23  spending.  If the funds remain unspent ten years after the completion of the 
development, they will normally be repaid to the applicant. 
 
 
 
 
17. FURTHER IN FOR MATION  
 
 
Planning Policy Team: 01756 706472 
 
Sports De velopment: 01756706391 
 
Arts De velopment: 01756 706408 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 24   1 CRA VEN LOCAL  PLAN 
2012 to 2032  
APPENDIX B: TO POLICY I NF6: 
EDUCATION PROVISION  
2 
 Introduction  
1.1 In accordance with the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) the 
Craven Local Plan seeks to  ensure that forecast demands for education from 
the housing requirement of the plan, and its distribution across the plan area 
can be provided for.  
1.2  Paragraph 72 of the 2012 NPPF states that: “The Government attaches great 
importance to ensuring that a sufficient choice of school places is available to 
meet the needs of existing and new communities. Local planning authorities 
should take a proactive, positive and collaborative approach to meeting this 
requirement, and to development that will widen cho ice in education. They 
should:  
• give great weight to the need to create, expand or alter schools; and  
• work with schools promoters to identify and resolve key planning issues 
before applications are submitted.”   
1.3  A Government policy statement “Planning for Schools Development” August 
2011 also recognises the importance on the provision of school places.  
1.4  Education provision is recognised in the NPPF and the NPPG as a type of 
infrastructure for which planning o bligations may be sought from developers 
(Paragraph: 026 Reference ID: 23b -026-20150326).  
1.5  The Craven Local Plan Policy INF6: Education Provision, of the Craven Local 
Plan, seeks to ensure that appropriate residential developments contribute to 
the provision of school plac es where such development will result in a need 
for new school places.  
1.6  This policy and Policy SP5: Strategy for Skipton, safeguards land for two new 
primary schools in the town. This safeguarded land is located within the 
following residential develo pments:  
• SK0081,82 and 108: Land north of Gargrave Road and west of Park Wood 
Drive and Stirtonber, and  3 
 • SK089 and SK090: Land to the north of Airedale Avenue and Elsey Croft 
and east of railway line.  
1.7  Also, Policy SP7: Strategy for Bentham safegua rds land for a primary school 
extension within the residential allocation of HB038.  
1.8 This appendix explains how developer contributions are calculated and the 
process involved in this calculation. This process conforms with the 
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) Regulations 2010, as amended, on 
planning obligations.  
1.9 North Yorkshire County Council (NYCC) is the Local Education Authority 
(LEA) and Craven District Council (CDC) is the local planning authority.  
1.10 An increased number of children in an area will add to the number of pupils 
attending local schools. This increased number of children may or may not be 
able to be accommodated at a particular school, dependent upon its capacity. 
Where there is insufficient capacity at local schools arising  from the impact of 
a proposed new residential development, planning regulations allow local 
planning authorities to seek developer contributions which would fund, or 
contribute to the funding of, the ‘infrastructure’ deficit. To determine whether a 
school  place deficiency exists and whether this policy should apply to 
development proposals, CDC and NYCC will undertake the following steps:  
2.0  STEP 1: Screening out inappropriate developments .  
2.1  Developer contributions will not be required for retail a nd employment 
development where residential development does not form part of the 
proposal.  
2.2  Developer contributions will not be sought for the following types of 
accommodation:  
• Sheltered  
• Elderly  
• Student, or  4 
 • Holiday  
2.3  Such accommodation  will be that which clearly is incapable of occupation for 
general residential purposes by virtue of its internal layout, ownership or 
management or which has occupancy restricted by planning condition or legal 
agreement. Nor will developer contributions b e sought for temporary housing 
or bedsits and one bedroom dwellings.  
2.4  Developer contributions will not be sought from changes of use, conversion or 
redevelopment schemes where there is no net increase in the number of 
residential units to which contrib utions would apply.  
2.5  For primary school places, developer contributions will not be sought from 
residential developments of less than  
• 15 dwellings in all parts of the plan area outside Skipton, and  
• less than 25 dwellings in Skipton  
2.6  For secondary school places, developer contributions will not be sought from 
residential developments of below 100 dwellings  across the whole plan area.  
2.7  Whilst these thresholds could be lower in terms of the evidence given below 
on pupil to dwelling r atio, and the advice given in the NPPG (Paragraph 031 
Ref ID: 23b -031- 20161116), the LEA seek  to focus the operation of this policy 
on a scale of development that is likely to have a clear and significant impact 
on school capacity in the area.  
2.8  Wher e proposed developments seek planning permission for a smaller part of 
a local plan housing allocation or a small part of a clearly larger development 
site, the size of the whole allocation site or the larger development site will be 
used to determine whet her developer contributions will be sought. Otherwise, 
there could be a significant ‘education infrastructure’ deficit.  
2.9  Developer contributions will only be sought for qualifying development 
proposals (at, and, above the site size thresholds) where a school place deficit 
is identified in Step 5 below.  
 5 
  
3.0  STEP 2: Identifying School Capacity   
3.1  North Yorkshire County Council, the LEA, maintains and regularly updates its 
database of existing and forecast school capacity for schools across Craven 
and North Yorkshire as a whole.  
3.2  This database will be used by the LEA to provide the baseline information on 
school capacity when planning applications for residential development are 
submitted to Craven District Council. This data will identify the n et capacity of, 
and the number of pupils in, the appropriate primary and secondary school 
within the catchment area of the proposed residential development over a 
three year period.  
3.3 The primary school pupil forecasts  are prepared using information on 
historical trends in admissions, current numbers on the roll and the historic 
birth rate from the Office of National Statistics. An average percentage of the 
current district birth rate is taken against numbers on the rol l in the past three 
reception years. This percentage is then applied to forecast and actual district 
birth rates to provide forecast Yr1 Reception numbers. Numbers are then 
rolled forward a year group. A migration trend based on a three year average 
of pas t numbers on the roll, excluding reception is then applied to further 
primary year groups to provide for the next and subsequent years. Annex 1 1 
illustrates the  approach taken by the LEA in making these forecasts  
3.4  Pupil forecasts for secondary school s are constructed using current 
numbers on the roll and historic trends in admissions from primary school 
feeder schools. Secondary school numbers on the roll are taken from the 
October School Census count. Admission factors are calculated as the 
percentag e of entry to secondary school compared to the numbers of pupils 
leaving the last year at primary school in the previous year. This three year 
average is then applied to the total pupils leaving the feeder primary schools 
to provide forecasts for the first  year of entry to the secondary school. In a 
similar way to the primary school forecasts a migration trend is applied to the 
                                                           
1 Annex 1 is set out in Craven Local Plan Examination Document EL3.012 (iii)  6 
 current numbers on the roll to provide forecasts for the next and subsequent 
years.  
3.5 The above methodology for both primary and  secondary schools is an 
accepted method of forecasting used by many local authorities (See 
Education and Skills Funding Agency School Capacity (SCAP) Survey 2017: 
Guide to forecasting pupil numbers in school planning (July 2017).  
3.6 The population proje ctions suggest an overall increase or decrease in the 
population of school age children generally. However, the projections from 
additional housing development better forecast the impact of that housing on 
a particular area. This tends to be over and above  what would be expected 
from population and migration projections alone. For example by 2022/23 the 
general population projections only forecast an increase of 7 pupils in total 
across the catchment areas of all five Skipton town primary schools. This 
show s that the expected increase in pupil number across these schools is 
mainly housing related.  
4.0  STEP 3: Measuring the impact of new residential development on school 
capacity .  
4.1  The next step in this process requires an estimate of the likely number  of 
children of primary and secondary school age that are likely to be generated 
by the number of dwellings proposed in the development. The LEA’s evidence 
to support this estimation has recently been updated. Annex 22 of the 
Council’s Education Provision Forecasts (Sept. 2018) provides the results of 
this updating for Craven District. These results have been derived from the 
following information:  
• Residential developments of 25 dwellings or more completed in the Craven 
Local Plan area since between 2008  and 2018.  
• The identification of the number of primary and secondary school pupils 
generated by each residential development by comparing: School pupil roll 
                                                           
2 Annex 2 is set out in Craven Local Plan Examination Document EL3.012 (ii i) 7 
 data, including home addresses with the street names of the completed 
developments  
4.2  The res ults in Annex 2  show a Craven District  ‘pupil to dwelling’ ratio which is 
slightly higher than the North Yorkshire average. Clearly the Craven District 
evidence more than supports this North Yorkshire average and it is this county 
wide lower average that is used in the plan. This is a pupil to  dwelling ratio of 
‘1 in 4’ for primary schools and ‘1 in 8’ for secondary schools. This pupil to 
dwelling ratio will be reviewed within 5 years of the plan’s adoption.  
5.0 STEP 4: Identifying the need for developer contributions   
5.1  Step 2 of the proces s will produce a figure which represents a surplus, 
deficiency or balance of capacity at the local primary and secondary school 
without taking into account the increased pressures of the proposed new 
development (A minus B in Figure 1). Step 3 will provide  the number of 
additional school places generated by the proposed new development. Hence 
step 4 will use the conclusions of steps 2 and 3 to determine whether the 
proposed new dwellings will result in a deficiency in school places in the local 
area.  
5.2 Forecasts of future school capacity and national population growth are made 
by the CSA over a three year period. If, following these calculations the 
primary or secondary school is deemed to be at capacity or in shortfall in year 
three, contributions will b e sought at the full rate. (This means the cost to the 
developer will be the total number of school places generated by the 
development multiplied by the cost required to increase the school capacity by 
one school place – see Step 5 below).  
5.3 If there i s a surplus of capacity in year three by ‘x’ amount and the 
development generates ‘y’ school places, contributions will be sought on the 
difference between ‘x’ and ‘y’. The example given in Figure 1 illustrates this 
type of situation where there is a surpl us of 5 school places at year three and 
the proposed development generates 15 new school places. Hence the 
developer contribution is for the ‘net’ school place deficiency caused by the 
development proposal of 10 school places.  8 
 5.4  The number of children g enerated by each individual residential development 
will vary dependent upon the type and size of dwelling and by its location. In 
some cases, it may be argued that the dwellings built are for a particular 
market, for example couples, starter homes, or tha t a development is not 
within easy reach of a primary school. However, CDC and the LEA will not 
normally reduce the basis for the calculations. Over time any dwelling 
(excluding sheltered, elderly person only, or one bedroomed units) in any 
location has th e potential to accommodate children of school age.  
6.0  STEP 5: Estimating the level of developer contributions   
6.1  Where a deficiency of school places is not identified as a result of the 
proposed residential development, then no developer contributions will be 
sought. Where, in step 4, a deficiency does exist from the impact of the 
proposed development a calculation i s made by NYCC to estimate an 
appropriate level of cost to the developer.  
6.2 The Department for Education (DfE) publishes a cost multiplier per pupil place 
for primary and secondary school places. It is the average of multipliers for 
new schools and exte nsions to existing schools, weighted to reflect the 
national balance of such projects. An ‘area per pupil’ estimate is multiplied by 
a cost per square metre to provide a cost per school place.  
6.3 The 2009 DfE cost multiplier, currently used by the LEA is : 
• £12,257 per primary school place, and  
• £18,469 per secondary school place.  
6.4  These costs are adjusted to take account of regional cost factors. 
contingencies and professional fees (10%), plus furniture and equipment 
(£383 per school place) (All co sts have been normalised to a common UK 
average price level using regional location factors published by BCIS to 
accord with the UK Mean 100. Index taken at November 2016).  
6.5  This results in a total cost per school place deficiency to the developer of:  
• £13,596 per primary school place, and  9 
 • £20,293 per secondary school place.  
6.6 For a 10 school place deficiency identified for a primary school, a contribution 
of £135,960 would be sought (See the final row of calculation in Figure 1).  
6.7  Calculations will be based on the number of dwellings included in the planning 
application. Any increase in the number of dwellings approved through, for 
example, a revised application, is likely to generate additional contributions. 
No account will be taken of the rate of housebuilding on the site, as this is an 
uncertain variable. A review of the cost multiplier will take place on an annual 
basis.  
7.0  Procedure and practice   
7.1  Appli cants are encouraged, at the earliest opportunity through pre -application 
dialogue with NYCC and CDC, to identify the likely need for education related 
developer contributions and a preliminary estimate of their scale.  
7.2 Upon receipt of a formal and rel evant planning application, CDC will contact 
NYCC who will formalise the position regarding the need for, and scale of 
developer contributions for each proposal. The applicant and CDC will be 
notified accordingly and where necessary, negotiations can then take place 
between NYCC and the applicant on the details of this matter.  
7.3  The decision on the application and the need for a Section 106 legal 
agreement is a matter for CDC. As a general principle the Council will not 
issue a decision notice on an app lication until such agreement, when 
necessary, has been reached between the two parties. Any contribution due 
will be made payable to the North Yorkshire County Council (as the LEA) and 
not the District Council as local planning authority.  
7.4  As stated earlier, developer contributions will only be required where a local 
need for/‘net deficit’ of school places has been identified. NYCC will show to 
the Council and the applicant how funds received will be spent within a 
prescribed period. Contributions wil l normally be spent within a five year 
period after receipt, but some flexibility on this period is necessary to allow the 
pooling of developer contributions where necessary to make the best use of  10 
 the monies available to meet the local plan’s proposed lev el of growth in an 
area.  
7.5 In the majority of cases, funds will be spent on the local primary and 
secondary school. However, NYCC reserves the right to allocate the funds to 
other schools if overall education strategy or changes in catchments or 
parenta l choice so demand and the agreement of CDC is secured.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 
 Figure 1:  Assessment Form used by the CSA to determine the need for developer contributions towards 
Primary school buildings  
 
 
12 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
1 
  
 
 
CRAVEN LOCAL PLAN  
2012 - 2032  
 
  
 
APPENDIX C: TO POLICY ENV6: FLOOD 
RISK  
ENVIRONMENT AGENCY TECHNICAL 
NOTE  
 
 
 
 
2 
 Appendix C - Policy ENV6 – Environment Agency Technical Note : 
a) Surface water should be discharged in the following  order of priority:  
1. An adequate soakaway or some other form of infiltration system.  
2. An attenuated discharge to watercourse.  
3. An attenuated discharge to public surface water sewer.  
4. An attenuated discharge to public combined sewer.   
b) Developmen t necessitating a discharge to a public sewer should be supported 
by clear evidence demonstrating why alternative options are not available. 
Approved development proposals should be supplemented by appropriate 
maintenance and management regimes for surface  water drainage schemes.  
Landscaping proposals should consider what contribution the landscaping of a 
site can make to reducing surface water discharge. This can include hard and 
soft landscaping such as permeable surfaces  
c) Development should not increa se flood risk on greenfield sites.  Surface water 
run-off rates for greenfield sites should be restricted to the existing run -off rate 
from a lower order storm event, e.g. a 1 in 1 year storm.  
d) Development on brownfield sites should offer a 30% reduction  in surface 
water run -off.  
e) Sufficient attenuation and long term storage should be provided to 
accommodate at least a 1 in 30 year storm. Any design should also ensure 
that storm water resulting from a 1 in 100 year event, plus 30% to account for 
climat e change, and surcharging the drainage system, can be stored on the 
site without risk to people or property and without overflowing into a 
watercourse.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CRAVEN LOCAL PLAN  
2012 TO 2032  
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX D: POLICIES SCHEDULE  
 
 
 
 
2 
 A number of policies from the Craven Local Plan (1999) were saved in 2007.  The  
majority of these  saved policies have been replaced by the policies in this Local 
Plan.  The following table details these replacements.  
Replacement Local Plan Policy  Saved Craven Local Plan Policies (1999)  
Saved in 2007  
Strategic Policies  
SD1 N/A 
SD2 N/A 
SP1 H1 
SP2 EMP1,T6,T7  
SP3 N/A 
SP4 H3, H4, H5, H8, H17, H18  
SP5 H2, H3 , EMP3, SRC13, SRC14  
SP6 H2, H3  
SP7 H2, H3  
SP8 H2, H3  
SP9 H2, H3  
SP10  H2, H3 
SP11  H2, H3,H4,H5  
SP12  N/A 
Environment  
ENV1  ENV1, ENV2, ENV18, EMP16, SRC12  
ENV2  N/A 
ENV3  H20 
ENV4  ENV10  
ENV5  N/A 
ENV6  N/A 
ENV7  N/A 
ENV8  N/A 
ENV9  N/A 
ENV10  BE2 
ENV11  SRC11  
ENV12  SRC12  
ENV13  BE3 
Housing  
H1 N/A 
H2 H12 
H3 N/A 
Economy  
EC1 EMP2, EMP3, EMP4, EMP5, EMP6  
EC2 EMP2, EMP7  
EC3 EMP5, EMP8, EMP9, EMP15, EMP16, 
EMP17, EMP18, ENV12, ENV13, R10 
EC4 EMP11, EMP14, EMP15, EMP16, 
EMP17, EMP18  
EC4A  EMP11  
EC4B  EMP11  3 
 Retail  
EC5 R1, R2  
EC5A  R3 
Infrastructure, Services and Facilities  
INF1  N/A 
INF2  N/A 
INF3  SRC2  
INF4  N/A 
INF5  N/A 
INF6  SRC13  
INF7  T2 & T4 
 
Note:  Saved Local Plan Policies EMP19 and SRC14 were not required to be replaced in this Local Plan.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Craven District Council  | 1 Belle Vue Square | Skipton | BD23 1FJ | 
www.cravendc.gov.uk   
Planning Policy Team | 01756 706472 | localplan@cravendc.gov.uk  
 
 
If you would like to have this information in a way that’s better for you, please 
telephone 01756 700600.  
 
T  
T  
M T  M 
P  3 
25 POLICIES MAP  
CRAVEN LOCAL PLAN 
(Outside the Yorkshire Dales National Park)  
Adopted  
12th November 2019  
Based on Ordnance Survey Mapping  
 © Crown Copyright and database right 2017 
Ordnance Survey 100024694  
The Policies Map should be read in conjunction with 
the Written Statement  N 1:180,000  
M 
x2  3 
Inset Map 
Number  Settlement  Inset Map 
Number  Settlement  
1 Skipton  18 Thornton in Craven  
2 Glusburn, Cross Hills, Sutton in Craven  19 Broughton  
3 Skipton Town Centre  20 Embsay with Eastby  
4 Settle and Giggleswick  21 Carleton  
4a Giggleswick north west  22 Stirton with Thorlby  
5 High and Low Bentham  23 Draughton  
6 Ingleton  24 Bolton Abbey  
7 Burton in Lonsdale  25 Cononley  
8 Rathmell  26 Farnhill and Kildwick  
9 Langcliffe  27 Low Bradley  
10 Clapham  28 Lothersdale  
11 Newby  29 Cowling  
12 Keasden  30 Coniston Cold  
13 Hellifield  31 Bell Busk  
14 Gargrave  32 Halton East  
15 Wigglesworth  33 Lower Westhouse  
16 West Marton  34 Tosside  
17 East Marton  M M 
M M 
18 
17 
16 
5 
15 
8 
4a 
9 
4 
7 
12 
10 
11 
P 
19 P 
24 
29 
26 
2 
28 
23 
27 
1 
21 
22 
20 
M 
M M M Key Notation and Relevant Policies  
Landscape  
Yorkshire Dales National Park  ENV1, ENV9  
Forest of Bowland Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty  ENV1, ENV9  
Nature Conservation  
Special Protection Areas (SPA) and Special Areas of Conservation (SAC)  ENV4  
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)  ENV4  
Site of Importance for Nature Conservation (SINC)  ENV4  
Ancient Woodland ENV4  
Fresh Aire —Leeds City Region Green and Blue Infrastructure Project  ENV4, ENV5  
Towns and Villages
Conservation Area  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2, ENV3, 
ENV9, ENV11  
Designated Rural Area  H2, INF3  
Tourism
Key Locations for Tourism Development  EC4 
Safeguard Land and Transport
Leeds – Liverpool Canal Corridor  ENV2, ENV11  
Protection of Railway Trackbeds and Infrastructure   SP2 
Scheduled Ancient Monument (outside of inset map areas) SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, 
SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV1, ENV2, H1, H2, H3, EC1, EC3, EC4, EC4a, EC5, EC5a
Parks and Gardens of Special Interest (outside of inset map areas)  ENV1, ENV2  
Source Protection Zone (outside of inset map areas) ENV8  
Other
 Plan Area Boundary  
 Inset Map Area  M 
P 
13 
14 
3 
6 
30 
32 
33 
34 
31 Based on Ordnance Survey Mapping  
 © Crown Copyright and database right 2017 
Ordnance Survey 100024694  
Base map date: 13th January 2017  INSET MAP 1  
SKIPTON (1:20,000)  
CRAVEN LOCAL PLAN 
Adopted  
12th November 2019  
 
 
Inset Maps should be read in conjunction with the Written Statement  N 
M 
M 
M M M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M Key Notation and Relevant Policies  
Landscape  
Yorkshire Dales National Park  ENV1, ENV9  
Nature Conservation  
Site of Importance for Nature Conservation (SINC)  ENV4  
Ancient Woodland ENV4  
Towns and Villages
Open Space, Civic Space, Sport and Recreation Facilities  INF3 
Local Green Space Designation  ENV10  
Conservation Area  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2, 
ENV3, ENV9, ENV11  
Listed Buildings  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2  
Designated Rural Area  H2     
Housing and Employment
Housing Allocation  SD1, SP1, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2, ENV3, 
ENV4, ENV5, ENV6, ENV7, ENV8, ENV9, ENV10, ENV11, ENV12, H1, H2, INF1, INF3, INF4, INF6 
Green Infrastructure Provision on Housing Allocation  SD1, SP1, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, 
SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV5  
Existing Green Infrastructure Commitment  ENV5  
Existing Housing Commitment  SP1 
Employment Allocation  SD1, SP2, SP4, SP5, SP9, ENV2, ENV3, ENV4, ENV5, ENV6, ENV7, 
ENV8, ENV9, ENV11, ENV12, EC1, INF1, INF3, INF4  
Green Infrastructure Provision on Employment Allocation  SD1, SP2, SP4, SP5, ENV5,  
Existing Employment Area  SP2, EC2  
Mixed Use Opportunity Regeneration Area   SP5, SP6, EC5  
Primary Retail Area for Skipton  EC5, EC5A  
Town Centre Boundary for Skipton  EC5, EC5A  
Educational Provision  
Primary School Provision  INF6 
Primary School Provision (new primary school to be provided on 1.8ha of the total 
site area)  INF6 
Tourism 
Key Locations for Tourism Development  EC4 
Safeguard Land and Transport
Leeds – Liverpool Canal Corridor  ENV2, ENV11  
Protection of Railway Trackbeds and Infrastructure   SP2 
Scheduled Ancient Monument  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, 
SP11, ENV1, ENV2, H1, H2, H3, EC1, EC3, EC4, EC4A, EC5, EC5A  
Other
 Plan Area Boundary  
 Inset Map Area  
XX-LGS1  
M 
XX001  
XX001  
XX001  
 
 
Based on Ordnance Survey Mapping  
 © Crown Copyright and database right 20117  
Ordnance Survey 100024694  
Base map date: 13th January 2017  
Inset Maps should be read in conjunction with the Written Statement  N INSET MAP 2  
GLUSBURN, CROSS HILLS, SUTTON IN CRAVEN  
 
CRAVEN LOCAL PLAN  
Adopted  
12th November 2019  
 
 
 
 
M  
INSET MAP No. 2: GLUSBURN, CROSS HILLS, SUTTON IN CRAVEN (1:12000)  
SC085  Key Notation and Relevant Policies  
Landscape  
 Green Wedge  ENV13  
Nature Conservation  
 Site of Importance for Nature Conservation (SINC)  ENV4  
 Ancient Woodland ENV4  
Towns and Villages  
 Open Space, Civic Space, Sport and Recreation Facilities  INF3 
 Local Green Space Designation  ENV10  
 Conservation Area  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2, 
ENV3, ENV9, ENV11  
 Listed Buildings  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2  
Housing and Employment  
 Housing Allocation  SD1, SP1, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2, ENV3, 
ENV4, ENV5, ENV6, ENV7, ENV8, ENV9, ENV10, ENV11, ENV12, H1, H2, INF1, INF3, INF4, INF6 
 Heritage Led Housing Development Allocation  SP8 
 Green Infrastructure Provision on Heritage Led Housing Development Allocation  SD1, 
SP1, SP3, SP4, SP8, ENV5                                
 Existing Housing Commitment  SP1 
 Existing Employment Area  SP2, EC2  
 District Centre Boundary for Cross Hills  EC5, EC5A  
Safeguard Land and Transport  
 Leeds – Liverpool Canal Corridor  ENV2, ENV11  
 Site of Former Cross Hills Railway Station  SP2 
 
 Scheduled Ancient Monument  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, 
SP11, ENV1, ENV2, H1, H2, H3, EC1, EC3, EC4, EC4A, EC5, EC5A  
Other  
  Plan Area Boundary  
  Inset Map Area  M 
XX001  
XX001  
XX-LGS1  
Based on Ordnance Survey Mapping  
 © Crown Copyright and database right 2017  
Ordnance Survey 100024694  
Base map date: 13th January 2017  INSET MAP 3  
SKIPTON TOWN CENTRE (1:6000)  
CRAVEN LOCAL PLAN  
Adopted  
12th November 2019  
 
 
 
 
 Inset Maps should be read in conjunction with the Written Statement  N 
Key Notation and Relevant Policies  
Nature Conservation  
 Site of Importance for Nature Conservation (SINC)  ENV4  
Towns and Villages  
 Open Space, Civic Space, Sport and Recreation Facilities  INF3 
 Local Green Space Designation  ENV10  
 Conservation Area  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2, 
ENV3, ENV9, ENV11  
 Listed Buildings  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2  
Housing and Employment  
 Housing Allocation  SD1, SP1, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2, ENV3, 
ENV4, ENV5, ENV6, ENV7, ENV8, ENV9, ENV10, ENV11, ENV12, H1, H2, INF1, INF3, INF4, INF6 
 Green Infrastructure Provision on Housing Allocation  SD1, SP1, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, 
SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV5  
 Existing Housing Commitment  SP1 
 Existing Employment Area  SP2, EC2  
 Mixed Use Opportunity Regeneration Area   SP5, SP6, EC5  
 Primary Retail Area for Skipton  EC5, EC5A  
 Town Centre Boundary for Skipton  EC5, EC5A  
Tourism  
 Key Locations for Tourism Development  EC4 
Safeguard Land and Transport  
 Leeds – Liverpool Canal Corridor  ENV2, ENV11  
 Protection of Railway Trackbeds and Infrastructure   SP2  
Other  
  Inset Map Area  
 
XX001  
XX001  
XX-LGS1  
  
Based on Ordnance Survey Mapping  
 © Crown Copyright and database right 2017  
Ordnance Survey 100024694  
Base map date: 13th January 2017  INSET MAPS 4, 4a & 5  
SETTLE, GIGGLESWICK, HIGH AND LOW BENTHAM  
CRAVEN LOCAL PLAN  
Adopted  
12th November 2019  
 
 
 
 Inset Maps should be read in conjunction with the Written Statement  N 
 
INSET MAP No. 5: HIGH AND LOW BENTHAM (1:13000)  
 Housing and Employment  
 Housing Allocation  SD1, SP1, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2, ENV3, 
ENV4, ENV5, ENV6, ENV7, ENV8, ENV9, ENV10, ENV11, ENV12, H1, H2, INF1, INF3, INF4, INF6 
 Green Infrastructure Provision on Housing Allocation  SD1, SP1, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, 
SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV5  
 Existing Green Infrastructure Water Meadow Commitment   SP1, SP3, SP4, SP6, ENV5  
 Existing Housing Commitment  SP1 
 Mixed Use Employment -led Allocation  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP6, EC1, ENV2, ENV3, 
ENV4, ENV5, ENV6, ENV7, ENV8, ENV9, ENV11, ENV12, H2, H4, INF1, INF3, INF4  
 Green Infrastructure Provision on Mixed Use Employment -led Allocation SD1, SP1, 
SP2, SP3, SP4, SP6, EC1, ENV5  
 Existing Employment Area  SP2, EC2  
 Mixed Use Opportunity Regeneration Area   SP5, SP6, EC5  
 Town Centre Boundary for Settle  EC5, EC5A  
 District Centre Boundary for High Bentham  EC5, EC5A  
Educational Provision  
 Primary School Provision (extension to school to be provided on 0.3 ha on the     
eastern part of the site)  INF6 
Tourism  
 Key Locations for Tourism Development  EC4 
Safeguard Land  
 Scheduled Ancient Monument  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, 
SP11, ENV1, ENV2, H1, H2, H3, EC1, EC3, EC4, EC4A, EC5, EC5A  
Other  
  Plan Area Boundary  
  Inset Map Area  
XX001  
XX001  
XX001  
M 
SG032  
SG027, SG068  
SG025  SG021,  
SG066, 
SG080  
SG064  SG014  SG035   
INSET MAP No. 4a: GIGGLESWICK NORTH WEST (1:12500)  
 
INSET MAP No. 4: SETTLE AND GIGGLESWICK  
(1:12500)  
M  Key Notation and Relevant Policies  
Landscape  
 Yorkshire Dales National Park  ENV1, ENV9  
 Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty  ENV1, ENV9  
 Green Wedge  ENV13  
Nature Conservation  
 Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)  ENV4  
 Site of Importance for Nature Conservation (SINC)  ENV4  
 Ancient Woodland ENV4  
Towns and Villages  
 Open Space, Civic Space, Sport and Recreation Facilities  INF3 
 Local Green Space Designation  ENV10  
 Conservation Area  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2, 
ENV3, ENV9, ENV11  
 Listed Buildings  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2  
 Designated Rural Area  H2 
XX-LGS1  
  
INSET MAP No. 7: BURTON IN LONSDALE (1:5000)  
M  
Based on Ordnance Survey Mapping  
 © Crown Copyright and database right 2017  
Ordnance Survey 100024694  
Base map date: 13th January 2017  INSET MAPS 6—12 
INGLETON, BURTON -IN-LONSDALE, RATHMELL, LANGCLIFFE, 
CLAPHAM, NEWBY, KEASDEN  
 
CRAVEN LOCAL PLAN  
Adopted  
12th November 2019  
 
 
Inset Maps should be read in conjunction with the Written Statement  N 
INSET MAP No. 8:  RATHMELL (1:5000)  
 
INSET MAP No. 10: CLAPHAM (1:5000)  
 
INSET MAP No. 11: NEWBY (1:5000)  
 
INSET MAP No. 12: KEASDEN (1:5000)  
 
INSET MAP No. 6: INGLETON (1:7500)  
M 
Key Notation and Relevant Policies  
Landscape  
 Yorkshire Dales National Park  ENV1, ENV9  
 Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty  ENV1, ENV9  
 
Nature Conservation  
 Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)  ENV4  
 
 Site of Importance for Nature Conservation (SINC)  ENV4  
 
 Ancient Woodland ENV4  
 
Towns and Villages  
 Open Space, Civic Space, Sport and Recreation Facilities  INF3  
 
 Local Green Space Designation  ENV10  
 
 Conservation Area  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2, 
ENV3, ENV9, ENV11  
 
 Listed Buildings  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2  
 Designated Rural Area  H2 
 
Housing and Employment  
 Housing Allocation  SD1, SP1, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2, ENV3, 
ENV4, ENV5, ENV6, ENV7, ENV8, ENV9, ENV10, ENV11, ENV12, H1, H2, INF1, INF3, INF4, INF6  
 
 Green Infrastructure Provision on Housing Allocation  SD1, SP1, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, 
SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV5  
 
 Existing Housing Commitment  SP1 
 
 Employment Allocation  SD1, SP2, SP4, SP5, SP9, ENV2, ENV3, ENV4, ENV5, ENV6, ENV7, 
ENV8, ENV9, ENV11, ENV12, EC1, INF1, INF3, INF4  
 
 Existing Employment Area  SP2, EC2  
 
 Local Centre Boundary for Ingleton EC5, EC5A  
Tourism  
 Key Locations for Tourism Development  EC4 
Safeguard Land  
 Scheduled Ancient Monument  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, 
SP11, ENV1, ENV2, H1, H2, H3, EC1, EC3, EC4, EC4A EC5, EC5A  
 
Other  
  Plan Area Boundary  
 
  Inset Map Area  
 M 
XX001  
XX001  
XX-LGS1  
 
INSET MAP No. 9: LANGCLIFFE (1:7500)  
 
INSET MAP No. 16:  WEST MARTON (1:5000)  
P  
INSET MAP No. 17: EAST MARTON (1:5000)  
M  
  
Based on Ordnance Survey Mapping  
 © Crown Copyright and database right 2017  
Ordnance Survey 100024694  
Base map date: 13th January 2017  INSET MAPS 13—19 
HELLIFIELD, GARGRAVE, WIGGLESWORTH, WEST MARTON, EAST 
MARTON, THORNTON IN CRAVEN, BROUGHTON  
 
CRAVEN LOCAL PLAN  
Adopted  
12th November 2019  
 
 
 Inset Maps should be read in conjunction with the Written Statement  N 
Key Notation and Relevant Policies  
P  
INSET MAP No. 15: WIGGLESWORTH (1:5000)  
 
INSET MAP No. 18: THORNTON IN CRAVEN (1:5000)  
 
INSET MAP No. 13: HELLIFIELD (1:8500)  
 
INSET MAP No. 19: BROUGHTON (1:5000)   
INSET MAP No. 14: GARGRAVE (1:7500)  
M 
M 
 
INSET MAP No. 19: BROUGHTON (1:5000)  
P Landscape  
 Yorkshire Dales National Park  ENV1, ENV9  
Nature Conservation  
 Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)  ENV4  
 
 Site of Importance for Nature Conservation (SINC)  ENV4  
 
Towns and Villages  
 Open Space, Civic Space, Sport and Recreation Facilities  INF3  
 
 Local Green Space Designation  ENV10  
 
 Conservation Area  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2, 
ENV3, ENV9, ENV11  
 
 Listed Buildings  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2  
 Designated Rural Area  H2 
 
Housing and Employment  
 Housing Allocation  SD1, SP1, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2, ENV3, 
ENV4, ENV5, ENV6, ENV7, ENV8, ENV9, ENV10, ENV11, ENV12, H1, H2, INF1, INF3, INF4, INF6  
 
 Green Infrastructure Provision on Housing Allocation  SD1, SP1, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, 
SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV5  
 
 Existing Housing Commitment  SP1 
 
 Existing Employment Area  SP2, EC2  
 
Tourism  
 Key Locations for Tourism Development  EC4 
 Tourism Development Commitment  EC4B  
 
 Approved Operational Development  EC4B  
 
Safeguard Land and Transport  
 Leeds – Liverpool Canal Corridor  ENV2, ENV11  
 
 Protection of Railway Trackbeds and Infrastructure   SP2  
 
 Scheduled Ancient Monument  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, 
SP11, ENV1, ENV2, H1, H2, H3, EC1, EC3, EC4, EC4A EC5, EC5A  
 
 Parks and Gardens of Special Interest  ENV1, ENV2  
 
 Source Protection Zone  ENV8  
Other  
  Plan Area Boundary  
 
  Inset Map Area  
 M 
P 
 
XX001  
XX-LGS1  
Based on Ordnance Survey Mapping  
 © Crown Copyright and database right 2017 
Ordnance Survey 100024694  
Base map date: 13th January 2017  INSET MAPS 20—24 
EMBSAY WITH EASTBY, CARLETON, STIRTON WITH THORLBY, 
DRAUGHTON, BOLTON ABBEY  
CRAVEN LOCAL PLAN 
Adopted  
12th November 2019  
 
Inset Maps should be read in conjunction with the Written Statement  N 
INSET MAP No. 23: DRAUGHTON (1:5000)  INSET MAP No. 21: CARLETON (1:5000)  
INSET MAP No. 24: BOLTON ABBEY (1: 23,000 ) 
M 
M 
M Key Notation and Relevant Policies  
Landscape  
Yorkshire Dales National Park  ENV1, ENV9  
Nature Conservation  
Special Protection Areas (SPA) and Special Areas of Conservation (SAC)  ENV4  
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)  ENV4  
Site of Importance for Nature Conservation (SINC)  ENV4  
Ancient Woodland ENV4  
Towns and Villages
Open Space, Sport and Recreation Facilities  INF3 
Local Green Space Designation  ENV10  
Conservation Area  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2, 
ENV3, ENV9, ENV11  
Listed Buildings  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2  
Designated Rural Area  H2 
Housing and Employment
Housing Allocation  SD1, SP1, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2, ENV3, 
ENV4, ENV5, ENV6, ENV7, ENV8, ENV9, ENV10, ENV11, ENV12, H1, H2, INF1, INF3, INF4, INF6 
Green Infrastructure Provision on Housing Allocation  SD1, SP1, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, 
SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV5  
Existing Housing Commitment  SP1 
Existing Employment Area  SP2, EC2  
Tourism
Key Locations for Tourism Development  EC4 
Core Visitor Area (Tourism -Led, Mixed -Use Development Opportunity Site at Bolton 
Abbey)  EC4A  
General locations for development within the Core Visitor Area at Bolton Abbey  EC4A  
Safeguard Land and Transport
Scheduled Ancient Monument  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, 
SP11, ENV1, ENV2, H1, H2, H3, EC1, EC3, EC4, EC4A EC5, EC5A  
Other
 Plan Area Boundary  
 Inset Map Area  
M 
XX001  
XX-LGS1  
INSET MAP No. 22: STIRTON WITH THORLBY (1:5000)  
INSET MAP No. 20: EMBSAY WITH EASTBY (1:8500)  
 
INSET MAP No. 26: FARNHILL & KILDWICK (1:7500)  
M INSET MAPS 25—29 
CONONLEY, FARNHILL, KILDWICK, LOW BRADLEY, LOTHERSDALE, 
COWLING  
 
CRAVEN LOCAL PLAN  
Adopted  
12th November 2019  
 
 
 Based on Ordnance Survey Mapping  
 © Crown Copyright and database right 2017  
Ordnance Survey 100024694  
Base map date: 13th January 2017  
Inset Maps should be read in conjunction with the Written Statement  N 
M  
INSET MAP No. 28: LOTHERSDALE (1:7500)   
INSET MAP No. 25: CONONLEY (1:7500)  
 
INSET MAP No.27: LOW BRADLEY (1:5000)  
 
INSET MAP No. 29: COWLING (1:7500)  
Key Notation and Relevant Policies  
Landscape  
 Green Wedge  ENV13  
Nature Conservation  
 Site of Importance for Nature Conservation (SINC)  ENV4  
 Ancient Woodland ENV4  
Towns and Villages  
 Open Space, Sport and Recreation Facilities  INF3 
 Local Green Space Designation  ENV10  
 Conservation Area  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2, 
ENV3, ENV9, ENV11  
 Listed Buildings  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2  
Housing and Employment  
 Housing Allocation  SD1, SP1, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2, ENV3, 
ENV4, ENV5, ENV6, ENV7, ENV8, ENV9, ENV10, ENV11, ENV12, H1, H2, INF1, INF3, INF4, INF6 
 Existing Housing Commitment  SP1 
 Mixed Use Housing -led Allocation  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP11, EC1, ENV2, ENV3,     
ENV4, ENV5, ENV6, ENV7, ENV8, ENV9, ENV11, ENV12, H1, H2, INF1, INF3, INF4  
 Existing Employment Area  SP2, EC2  
Safeguard Land and Transport  
 Leeds – Liverpool Canal Corridor  ENV2, ENV11  
 
 Scheduled Ancient Monument  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, 
SP11, ENV1, ENV2, H1, H2, H3, EC1, EC3, EC4, EC4A EC5, EC5A  
 
Other  
  Inset Map Area  M 
XX001  
XX001  
XX-LGS1  
INSET MAPS 30—34  
Coniston Cold, Bell Busk, Halton East, Lower Westhouse, 
Tosside  
 
CRAVEN LOCAL PLAN  
Adopted  
12th November 2019  
 
 
 Based on Ordnance Survey Mapping  
 © Crown Copyright and database right 2017  
Ordnance Survey 100024694  
Base map date: 13th January 2017  
Inset Maps should be read in conjunction with the Written Statement  N 
M  
INSET MAP No. 30: CONISTON COLD (1:5000)  
 
INSET MAP No. 33: LOWER WESTHOUSE (1:5000)   
INSET MAP No. 32: HALTON EAST (1:5000)  
 
INSET MAP No. 34: TOSSIDE (1:5000)  
 
INSET MAP No. 31: BELL BUSK (1:5000)  
Key Notation and Relevant Policies  
Landscape  
 Yorkshire Dales National Park  ENV1, ENV9  
Nature Conservation  
 Site of Importance for Nature Conservation (SINC)  ENV4  
Towns and Villages  
 Open Space, Sport and Recreation Facilities  INF3 
 Conservation Area  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2, 
ENV3, ENV9, ENV11  
 Listed Buildings  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, SP11, ENV2  
 Designated Rural Area  H2      
Safeguard Land and Transport  
 Scheduled Ancient Monument  SD1, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, SP10, 
SP11, ENV1, ENV2, H1, H2, H3, EC1, EC3, EC4, EC4A EC5, EC5A  
 
Other  
  Plan Area Boundary  
  Inset Map Area  M 
