CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 1  
       
 
 
 
 
Draft Crawley  Borough Local Plan 2021 –  2037  
January  2021 
 
For  
Submission Publication Consultation: January  – February  2021  
 
         
 
 
  
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 2   CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 3  CONTENTS : PAGE 
NUMBER : 
Foreword  7 
1. Crawley’s Local Plan  9 
 o Current Stage of Consultation & Local Plan Timetable  9 
 o Preparation of Evidence Base  11 
 o Sustainability Appraisal  12 
 o Infrastructure Plan  13 
 o Local Plan Map  13 
 o Duty to Cooperate  13 
 o Monitoring and Review  14 
 o Supporting Guidance Documents  15 
 o Key Diagram  16 
Crawley : A Vision  17 
2. Crawley  Borough Local Plan   18 
 o Spatial Context  18 
 o Planning Policy Context  26 
3. Sustainable Development  29 
 SD1 Presumption in Favour of Sustainable Development  29 
 SD2 Enabling Healthy Lifestyles and Wellbeing  30 
WELLBEING  & COMMUNITIES  35 
4. Character , Landscape  & Development Form  36 
 CL1 Neighbourhood Principle  39 
 CL2 Making Successful Places – Principles of Good Urban Design  40 
 CL3 Movement  Patterns,  Layout  and Sustainable Urban Design  44 
 CL4 Compact  Development – Layout, Scale and Appearance  46 
 CL5 Development Briefs and Masterplanning  48 
 CL6 Structural Landscaping   50 
 CL7 Important  and Valued  Views   51 
 CL8 Development Outside the Built -Up Area  53 
 CL9 High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty  56 
5. Design  & Development Requirements   58 
 DD1 Normal Requirements of All New Development  59 
 DD2 Inclusive Design  62 
 DD3 Standards for All New Dwellings (including conversions)  63 
 DD4 Tree Replacement Standards  66 
 DD5 Aerodrome Safeguarding  67 
 DD6 Advertisements  68 
 DD7 Crossovers  69 
6. Heritage  71 
 HA1 Heritage Assets  72 
 HA2 Conservation Areas  74 
 HA3 Areas of Special Local Character  76 
 HA4 Listed Buildings and Structures  77 
 HA5 Locally Listed Buildings  78 
 HA6 Historic Parks and Garden s 79 
 HA7 Heritage Assets of Archaeological Interest  81 
7. Open Space, Sport & Recreation  83 
 OS1 Open Space, Sport and Recreation  83 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 4  CONTENTS : PAGE 
NUMBER : 
 OS2 Provision of Open Space and  Recreational Facilities  86 
 OS3 Rights of Way and Access to the Countryside  88 
8. Infrastructure Provision  91 
 IN1 Infrastructure Provision  91 
 IN2 The Location and Provision of New Infrastructure  93 
 IN3 Supporting High Quality Communications  94 
ECONOMIC GROWTH & SOCIAL MOBILITY  96 
9. Economic Growth  97 
 EC1 Sustainable Economic Growth  99 
 EC2 Economic Growth in Main Employment Areas  103 
 EC3 Manor Royal  106 
 EC4 Strategic Employment Location  109 
 EC5 Employment and Skills  Development  114 
 EC6 High Quality Office Provision  117 
 EC7 Hotel and  Visitor Accommodation  119 
 EC8 Evening and  Night -Time Economy  120 
 EC9 Supporting the Creative Industries  121 
 EC10 Flexible Temporary Art and Creative Uses  123 
 EC11 Employment Development and Residential Amenity  123 
 EC12 Neighbourhood  Centres   125 
 EC13 Rural Economy  126 
10. Gatwick Airport  128 
 GAT1  Development of the Airport with a Single Runway  130 
 GAT2  Safeguarded Land  131 
 GAT3 Gatwick Airport Related Parking  133 
 GAT4 Employment Uses at Gatwick  134 
11. Crawley Town Centre  136 
 TC1 Primary Shopping Area  137 
 TC2 Town Centre Neighbourhood Facilities  139 
 TC3 Town Centre  Key Opportunity Sites  141 
 TC4 Active and Engaging Frontages  142 
 TC5 Town Centre First  143 
HOUSING   147 
12. Housing  Delivery  148 
 H1 Housing Provision  155 
 H2 Key Housing Sites  158 
 H3 Housing Typologies  164 
 H3a Housing Typologies: Estate Regeneration  165 
 H3b Housing Typologies: Densification, Infill Opportunities and 
Small Sites  166 
 H3c Housing Typologies: Town Centre Residential Sites  167 
 H3d Housing Typologies: Upward Extensions  168 
 H3e Housing Typologies: Conversions from Commercial/Non -
Residential Uses  169 
 H3f Housing Typologies: Open Spaces  170 
13. Meeting Housing Needs  172 
 H4 Future Housing Mix  173 
 H5 Affordable Housing  175 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 5  CONTENTS : PAGE 
NUMBER : 
 H6 Build to Rent  179 
 H7 Self and Custom Build  181 
 H8 Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Sites  182 
 H9 Houses in Multiple Occupation  184 
ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY  186 
14. Green Infrastructure & Biodiversity  187 
 GI1 Green Infrastructure  187 
 GI2 Biodiversity Sites  191 
 GI3 Biodiversity and Net Gain  194 
 GI4 Local Green Space  198 
15. Sustainable Design &  Construction  199 
 SDC1  Sustainable Design and Construction  200 
 SDC2  District Energy Networks  204 
 SDC3  Tackling Water Stress  207 
16. Environmental Protection  211 
 EP1 Development and Flood Risk  212 
 EP2 Flood Risk Guidance  for Householder Development and Minor 
Non-Residential Extensions  215 
 EP3 Land and Water Quality  217 
 EP4 Development and Noise  218 
 EP5 Air Quality  220 
 EP6 External Lighting  223 
17. Sustainable Transport  224 
 ST1 Development and Requirements for Sustainable Transport  224 
 ST2 Car and Cycle Parking Standards  226 
 ST3 Improving Rail  Stations  227 
 ST4 Safeguarding of a Search Corridor for a Crawley Western Link 
Road 228 
Appendix A : Sustainability Objectives  231 
Appendix B : Supporting Guidance Documents  233 
Background Studies and Evidence Base Documents  237 
Glossary  242 
 Definitions  242 
 Abbreviations  256 
Planning Obligations Annex  258 
Parking Standards Annex  278 
Noise Annex  287 
Housing Trajectory Base Date 1 September 2020  296 
Employment Land Trajectory Base Date 1 September 2020  300 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 6   CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 7  
Foreword 
Planning affects us all. The homes we live in, the places we work, the open spaces where we 
relax and the roads we travel on are all a result of planning decisions that have been made. 
Crawley Borough Council is revising the Local Plan in order to help to guide development in 
Crawley over t he Plan period from 2021  – 2037 .  
To meet the needs of its growing population and its key economic role at the heart of the 
Gatwick Diamond, by 2037  Crawley would need to provide 12,000  more homes , generating 
approximately  20,500 new jobs. In the past, Crawley’s growth has mainly been through the 
creation of entire new neighbourhoods, and commercial development at Manor Royal. H owever, 
Forge Wood is  the last full neighbourhood  which can be built within the borough boundary as 
there is  simply no space left. Most of  the large sites have been built out on Manor Royal, with 
many  having been redeveloped.    
We are, therefore, facing the challenge of incorporating additional and higher density development within our existing neighbourhoods, within Manor Roya l, and within the town 
centre. We are also seeking to consider if other land within the borough can come forward appropriately to help meet identified needs. This Local Plan aims to manage this change to 
ensure we do as much as we can to m eet the housing and employment needs of our growing 
population whilst retaining the important character and features of the town which our residents, 
businesses and visitors value. The Plan’s policies seek to secure high quality of design, with 
new development providing decent and affordable new homes and attractive workspaces whilst 
protecting the amenity and wellbeing of existing residents. It also aims to ensure new 
development is sustainable in location and construction, and promotes public transport, c ycling 
and walking.     
Even with further development within the borough, Crawley will not be able to meet its housing 
needs  in full because of its small size and constraints including flooding and  aircraft noise. 
Therefore, we are reliant on effective cooperation with our neighbouring authorities to help 
address Crawley’s unmet needs. New development may come forward just outside Crawley’s boundaries, and this Plan seeks to ensure these developments will meet the needs of Crawley’s  
residents, including for affordable housing, will follow Crawley’s sustainable neighbourhood 
principle, and will provide the infrastructure they need to ensure they don’t become a burden on 
the town.   
This document is the  draft new Local Plan which the c ouncil considers to be legally compliant 
and ‘sound’ , and is available for full  final public consultation ahead of its submission to central 
government for its independent examination.    
I encourage you to respond.    
 
 
Councillor Peter Smith  
Cabinet Member for Planning and Economic Development  
Crawley Borough Council
 
 
 
 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 8  
   
 
     
 
  
   
 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 9 Crawley’s Local Plan  
1.1 The draft Crawley Local Plan Review seeks to revise the current adopted Crawley 
2030 Local Plan in order to update it in accordance with national  policies and local 
changes. This will ensure Crawley maintains an up- to-date Local Plan to support and 
direct the growth of the borough. The Local Plan is an important document which 
sets the way forward for  planning the future of Crawley  – where we live, work and 
visit – for the next 15 years. The Crawley Borough Local Plan Review  has involve d 
engagement with residents, businesses and other stakeholders throughout its 
production.  The Local Plan provides a clear indication of the council’s  approach to 
the development of the town, including helping to support the delivery of key 
priorities: wellbeing and communities , economic growth and social mobility , housing 
delivery and environment al sustainability .  
1.2 This document forms the Submission draft Crawley  Borough  Local Plan and is 
published for public consultation. It contains the emerging draft  strategic  and non-
strategic  planning policies and principles to help shape the future of the town. Some 
of the Policies are proposed to be retained from the existing Local Plan, others have 
been changed, and some new policies are being proposed. All elements of the draft 
Local Plan are publicised for scrutiny and comment.   
1.3 Once adopted, t his Local P lan will replace the  Crawley Borough Local Plan (2015 –  
2030)  to provide the basis for future planning decisions in the borough . It sets out the 
strategic priorities for Crawley and the planning policies to deliver:  
• Homes and jobs ; 
• Provision of retail, lei sure and other commercial development ; 
• Provision of infrastructure for transport, telecommunications, water supply, 
wastewater, flood risk management, and energy ; 
• Provision of community , social  and cultural infrastructure and other local facilities ; 
• Climate c hange mitigation and adaptation;   
• Conservation and enhancement of the natural , built  and historic environment, 
including landscape and green infrastructure1; and  
• Control of Gatwick Airport.  
Current Stage of Consultation  & Local Plan Timetable  
1.4 This six-week period of public consultation forms a second “Publication” stage of the 
preparation of Crawley’s Local Plan2. This  forms the Local Plan the council considers 
to be its legally compliant and ‘Sound’3 Plan for Submission to central government for 
its Independent Examination. The Submission Draft Local Plan sets the planning 
policies  associated with the future development and potential growth of Crawley over 
the next 15 years.   
1.5 The consultation runs  from 6 January  2021  until 5pm  17 February  2021 . 
 
 
                                                 
1 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 20 (2019) MHCLG  
2 This relates to Regulation 19 of the Town and Country (Local Planning) (England) Regulations 2012  
3 This means the Plan is positively prepared, justified, effective and consistent with national planning policy 
(National Planning Policy Framework, para. 35, 2019, MHCLG)  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 10 1.6 Responses  must  be provided in writing  and using the council’s Response Form . This 
can either be in electronic format (via email to strategic.planning@crawley.gov.uk  or 
by post to:  
Strategic Planning   
Crawley Borough Council  
Town Hall  
The Boulevard  
RH10 1UZ  
1.7 The council ’s response form, which must be completed to make formal 
representations to the Local Plan,  will be available for completion, or download,  
through the council’s website:  www.crawley.gov.uk/localplan . Electronic copies are 
available to view at the Town Hall. Y ou are invited to respond on the document as a 
whole, a specific topic area, a policy or a paragraph.  
1.8 This document is considered to be a draft Local Plan  Review . It follows a review of 
the existing adopted Local Plan, and does not seek to start from a blank page. In 
many cases, the p rinciples and policies of the Crawley Borough Local Plan 2015 
remain up -to-date and ‘sound’. Therefore , for some topic areas, progress is well 
advanced and there may be little change proposed to the current approach. For other 
areas, the review has provided the opportunity for proposing a change or a new 
approach to be considered.   
1.9 Following the close of consultation, all responses received will be collated and 
submitted to the Planning Inspectorate as part of the Submission of the Plan for its 
independent examination.  
1.10 The following timetable sets out details of the consultations  and critical stages for the 
Local Plan’s preparation.  
Stage Date  
Early Engagement consultation 15 July 2019 –  16 September 2019  
Publication ( Submission)  consultation 20 January – 2 March 2020  
Additional Publication (Submission) consultation  6 January  – 17 February 2021  
Submission March 2021  
Examination in Public  May – September  2021  
Adoption March  2022  
Consultation Statement:  
1.11 The previous stage of Publication (Submission) Consultation, took place between 
January and March 2020. This stage is now being repeated due to updated 
evidence, changes in national policy and guidance from the Planning Inspectorate.  
The first Publication Consultation followed a formal decision taken at Full Counci l in 
December 2019. In total, 69 representors made formal representations on wide 
ranging matters. The responses received during the initial Publication consultation CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 11 have been collated and published as part of the dra ft Local Plan Consultation 
Strategy. Where considered appropriate, matters raised have sought to be 
addressed through amendments to the Plan. These amendments are currently 
subject to further scrutiny as part of this formal public consultation. All comment s 
received as part of both Regulation 19 consultations ( January – March 2020 and the 
current, January – February 2021) will be submitted to the Planning Inspector.  
1.12 “Early Engagement” consultation, took place between July and September 2019. 
This was a wide ranging consultation, using a variety of media and medium in order 
to generate debates regarding the future growth of Crawley and the emerging draft planning policies. Staffed exhibitions were held at different venues and at different 
times to engage  residents, visitors and employees in Crawley, and forums were held 
with specific invitees from developers and businesses, and community groups. 
Officers at tended meetings to promote the P lan and the consult ation and receive 
feedback. In total, 210 representors provided comments, including 76 from the online 
and paper survey, 50 businesses, organisations, authorities and agencies, and local 
residents by email and attending the exhibitions. Full details of the consultation and 
all representations rec eived, along with the council’s response detailing how the 
comments have been taken into account in preparing this Submission Version of the 
Plan are set out in the draft Local Plan Consultation Statement.  
1.13 In addition, the draft Local Plan Consultation Statement sets out the full  details of this 
current Submission consultation.  
Preparation of Evidence Base 
1.14 The review of the Crawley Borough Local Plan is based on the results of technical 
studies and the views of residents, businesses, statutory consultees and other 
interested parties gathered through formal and informal stages of consultation.  
Evidence Base  
1.15 It is essential that, to meet the requiremen ts set by national guidance, the Local Plan 
is underpinned by an adequate, up- to-date and relevant evidence base4 about the 
economic, social and environmental characteristics, needs and prospects of the area. 
In light of this,  new and updated studies  have been carried out to ensure Crawley’s 
Local Plan will reflect the locally distinctive issues, challenges, and opportunities , 
unique to the town. T hese include the following:  
• Deliverability of the Local Plan:  draft Sustainability Appraisal  Report; a draft 
Infrastructure Plan ; and an updated Viability  Study . 
• Housing Needs:  Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA); Strategic 
Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) ; Housing Trajectory ; and Gypsy, 
Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Accommodation Needs Assessment Review . 
• Employment Land Requirements:  Economic Growth Assessment (EGA)  and 
update; Employment Land Availability Assessment ; Employment Land Trajectory 
(ELT) ; and a Retail and Leisure Assessment and Town Centre Neighbourhood 
Needs Study.  
• Constrai nts and Assets:  Habitat Regulations Assessment; Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment (SFRA); Baseline Character Assessment;  Densification Study; 
ASEQs and Locally Listed Buildings Heritage Assessm ent; Noise; Built -Up Area 
Boundary; Landscape Character Assessment; Historic Parks & Gardens Review; 
Green Infrastructure Plan ; Transport Modelling ; Eco-Serv Report;  Playing Pitch 
Assessment, Indoor Sports Study and Open Space Study ; updated Water Cycle 
Study ; and Heritage Assets Review . 
                                                 
4 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 31 (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 12 1.16 More detail regarding the technical studies is included within the topic chapters, 
where appropriate, supporting the context and justification for the policies and a full 
list can be found at the end of this document. Additional evidence will continue to be 
gathered as required. The completed evidence base studies are available alongside 
the Local Plan to support this consultation.  
Sustainability Appraisal  
1.17 All Local Development Documents must be prepared with a view to contributing to the achievement of sustainable development
5. The requirement for a Strategic 
Environmental Assessment (SEA) is originally set out in European legislation6 which 
was adopted into UK law as the “Environmental Assessment of Plans and 
Programmes Regulations 2004”. An SEA ensures that the environmental effects of 
certain plans and programmes, including land- use plans, are taken into account.  
1.18 The aim of the Sustainability Appraisal (SA) is to ensure that the Local Plan is as sustainable as possible. The process involves examining the lik ely effects of the Plan 
and considers how they contribute to environmental, social and economic wellbeing.  
1.19 As the SA and SEA processes are so similar they  will be undertaken together and for 
ease of reference, both processes are referred to as the Sustainability Appraisal. The 
SA/SEA processes consider the impacts of proposed development options on people’s health and covers the criteria of a Health Impact Asses sment (HIA). The 
SA/SEA also considers the potential effects of the Plan on people in respect of 
disability, gender and racial equality impacts, in accordance with the requirements of 
the Equalities Act 2010 for an Equalities Impact Assessment (EIA).  
 
1.20 A draft Sustainability  Appraisal  Report to support  the Local Plan Review  has been 
produced. The Scoping Report was published and subject to formal consultation as 
                                                 
5 Section 39 of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004  
6 European Directive 2001/42/EC  
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 13 part of the Early Engagement consultation alongside the Local Plan. The draft 
Sustainability Objectives are set out in Appendix A  of this document  along with the 
summary table of outcomes of the Local Plan Policy Sustainability Appraisal  
assessments .  
Infrastructure Plan  
1.21  Local planning authorities are expected to work with other authorities and providers 
to assess the quality and capacity of infrastructure for transport, water supply, 
wastewater and its treatment, energy (including heat), telecommunications, utilities, 
waste, health, social care, education, flood risk management, and its ability to meet 
forecast demands.  
1.22 Crawley Borough Council has produced a draft Infrastructure Pl an which has been 
agreed with the key infrastructure and service providers within Crawl ey to confirm 
capacity to meet the needs of the growth of the town anticipated through the Local Plan and highlight any mitigation required.  
Local Plan Map  
1.23 Development allocations and protection designations related to the policies and 
proposals within this draft Local Plan and in the West Sussex Minerals and Waste 
Plans  are illustrated on the draft Local Plan Map.  Any c hanges to the allocations and 
designati ons for sites within Crawley in policies established through future 
examination of these Plans , or any other Development Plan Documents  will result in 
corre lating updates being carried out  to the Local Plan Map.     
Duty to Cooperate  
1.24 The Duty to Cooperate7 establishes  a need to plan for cross -boundary strategic 
issues, and places a requirement on planning authorities to work together on such issues.  
1.25 The Duty applies to all local planning authorities, national park authorities and county 
councils in England, and to a number of other public bodies. The Duty:  
• relates to development or use of land that would have a significant impact on at 
least two local planning areas or on a planning matter that falls within the remit of 
a county council;  
• requires that councils set out planning policies to address such issues;  
• requires that councils and public bodies ‘engage constructively, actively and on 
an ongoing basis’ to develop strategic policies;  
• requires councils to consider joint approaches to plan making.  
1.26 The NPPF provides further guidance on meeting the Duty to Co- operate in plan-
making.  Effective and on -going joint working should be demonstrated through the 
preparation and maint enance of Statements of Common G round, documenting the 
cross- boundary matters being addressed and progress in cooperating to address 
them . These should be made publicly available throughout the plan- making process 
to provide transparency
8.  
1.27 The strategic issues relating to the future development of Crawley over the Local 
Plan period have been identified as including:  
• Meeting housing needs  
• Economic growth  
• Gatwick Airport  
                                                 
7 Section 110 of the Localism Act provides the legislative basis for the Duty by transposing it into a new Section 
33a of the Planning & Compulsory Purchase Act 2004.  
8 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 27 (2019) MH CLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 14 • Gypsy, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
• Key transport routes  
• High quality c ommunications connectivity  
• Low carbon economy  
• Water resources  
• Flooding and flood risk.  
1.28 These strategic issues are currently discussed beyond the borough’s administration 
in the following forms:  
• Individual discussions on a one -to-one basis with neighbouring authorities .  
• Meetings at a Northern West Suss ex Authorities level, with Mid Sussex  District 
Council, Horsham District Council and West Sussex District Council ; and 
commissioning joint evidence base such as the Strategic Housing Market Assessment  and the Economic Growth Assessment.  
• Participating at a Gatwick Diamond level, with the Gatwick Diamond Authorities (crossing the County authority areas of West Sussex and Surrey). Jointly  
updating and signing up to the Gatwick Diam ond Memorandum of Understanding 
and Local Strategic Statement.  
• Considering Count y-wide issues, through meeting with West Sussex  and Greater 
Brighton  Authorities at officer and member levels  and participating in the 
preparations for a West Sussex and Greater Brighton Local Strategic Statement . 
• Involvement on a river basin management level in  preparing the Brief for updating 
the Water Cycle Study evidence.  
• Meeting as Gatwick Airport Joint Local Authorities  at officer and member level  to 
share the current and future implications of Gatwick Airport  operations . 
• Participating as a member of the Greater Brighton Economic Board.  
• Participating as a member of the Ashdown Forest Working Group in relation to 
Habitats Regulations Requirements associated with the Ashdown Forest Special 
Area of Conservation. Joint signatories to the Ashdown Forest Statement of 
Common Ground.  
1.29 Effective cooperation with neighbouring authorities is critical for Crawley because of 
its primary economic role in the sub- region and the wider economic and 
environmental implications relating to Gatwick Airport. Equally, cooperation is essential as , due to its  compact size, tight borough boundary around the urban area, 
significant physical constraints such as flooding and Area of Outstanding Natural 
Beauty, and restrictions due to airport noise and possible future expansion, Crawley 
cannot meet the housing and employment needs of its growing population within its 
own boundaries in full.  
1.30 More detail on the Duty to Cooperate, the outcomes of joint working and the agreed 
series of Statements of Common Ground, and its influence on the Crawley Local 
Plan Review , form part of the Local Plan supporting documents . 
Monitoring & Review  
1.31 The draft Local Plan period will cover 15 years between the anticipated adoption year 
of 2022 and 2037 . It will be prepared in order  to be flexible and appropriate for 
ensuring delivery of sustainable development and economic growth throughout a range of economic and social cycles.  
1.32 However, the Local Plan will be subject to continual monitoring to ensure the policies remain relevant and effective, and a review will be undertaken in 2027 , at the latest, 
to ensure the Local Plan remains up- to-date, in accordance with the requirements of 
the NPPF . Should it be considered, at that stage, that a partial or full update of the 
Plan is req uired, this will be reported in the Authority’s Monitoring Report and the CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 15 timetable for this process will be established by the council’s adopted Local 
Development Scheme.  
1.33 In particular, should changes to national aviation policy allow for the removal of the 
safeguarding of all the land for Gatwick Airport expansion, the opportunities and 
constraints of this land will be considered comprehensively through a review of the Local Plan, rather than as piecemeal development.  
Supporting Guidance Documents  
1.34 Policies within the Local Plan refer to guidance relating to a range of topics that sit  
outside of the Plan. This guidance includes standards, benchmarking tools, principles 
or local and national policies.  Thes e have been listed in Appendix C  to this draft 
Local Plan.  
1.35 Over the Plan period it is anticipated  that some of this guidance will be revised, 
replaced or deleted. When guidance:  
• has been revised, the new version of the guidance should be used;  
• is replaced or new standards introduced, the new  guidance or standard that is most 
similar to or, where justified by local circumstances, exceeds the existing requirements should be used;  
• is deleted and not replaced, the requirements of the deleted guidance should still 
be utilised unless it is seen by the council as no longer being relevant.  
1.36 The council will provide up to date information on its website ( www.crawley.gov.uk
) to 
inform applicants of any  changes to the policy requirements and which guidance 
should be used.  
 
  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 16  
Key Diagram  
 
  
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 17  
Crawley : A Vision 
 
Crawley will be a modern, vibrant , healthy and sustainable town that stands proud of its achievements and uses its strengths to reach its 
potential. Its strong and diverse communities, neighbourhood structure, sustainable economic growth and excellent connections  within 
and beyond the region will make it a place that people enjoy and want to live, work and visit.  
 
Providing High Quality Leisure and Cultural Facilities and Supporting Health and Wellbeing Services: Wellbeing  
By 2037 , Crawley will be a place that people want to visit, to have fun and spend their leisure time. As a town within a countryside setting 
that is very much valued by local people,  it will be safe and well cared for. The rich heritage which has shaped what the town is today will 
be respected, protected and enhanced.   
 
Local communities will be directly involved in planning how the town grows and develops in order to achieve the best outcome for all 
concerned; particularly where difficult choices have to be made.  Neighbourhoods will continue to offer local facilities and amenities that 
can be easily accessed along with informal green spaces for all to enjoy. The spirit and pride of individual communities will  continue to be 
harnessed to make neighbourhoods the focus of local celebration.  People will be encouraged to stay physically and mentally fit and 
active, high standards of health care will be delivered locally and people will be able to age with confidence as they grow o lder. Crawley’s 
parklands and open spaces, its sporting and leisure facilities , along with its cult ural offer , will be enhanced for the benefit of local people 
and visitors.  
 
Creating Stronger Communities: Diversity and Community  
Neighbourhoods will continue to feature in the development of the town, recognising the important role they play in helping s hape and 
develop communities.  Growth will be sustainable and supported by an infrastructure plan that complements development enabling 
people to live a long and happy life.  All people who live here will be proud, confident and self -reliant, working together and with others for 
the good of the town.  Crawley will continue to improve the quality of life for its residents throughout every stage in their life. Excellent 
early years’ provision will support children’s development, which will be further assi sted by the provision of good primary, secondary, 
further and higher education. Education, for both young and old, should unlock potential, giving people a real choice about w hat they do 
in their working life.  
 
Improving Job Opportunities and Developing t he Local Economy: Economic Growth & Social Mobility  
As a progressive town, Crawley will strive to be the premier town between London and the South Coast providing jobs, learning and 
development opportunities and a leisure and cultural offer that is attractive to residents and visitors.  Crawley will continue to be an 
economic leader , with a diverse, resilient and productive economy that meets  the needs of the borough and supporting  the overall 
prosperity of the region. An environment that supports and encourages new and established businesses to grow and flourish will be 
developed, and supporting necessary infrastructure, including telecommunications, will be enhanced. Crawley will be the first choice of 
business location for a variety of sectors and both domestic and international markets. Innovation, entrepreneurship and advanced 
technologies will thrive, and our community will benefit from access to high value, sustainable economic growth.  Additional jobs will have 
been created for people living in and around the Crawley area across a diverse range of sector s, including creative industries. Access to 
jobs will be supported by learning and development opportunities giving people a real choice about the work they can and want to do.  
 
Redeveloping and revitalising the Town Centre and further regeneration of the Manor Royal Business District , and identifying land for a 
new industrial -led Strategic Employment Location will reinforce the status of  Crawley as the place to do busi ness in the South East.  
Manor Royal will be seen as a premier business park, attracting sustained business investment that will deliver high value em ployment 
and higher levels of productivity and economic growth.  Sustainable growth of  Gatwick Airport will help to support the economic growth of 
the town, whilst opportunities for new employment land will be explored.  
 
The revitalised Town Centre will be the heart of the town, providing a central point for local people and others from across the region to 
enjoy social activities, shopping, culture and entertainment both during the day and at night. It will have a welcoming and attractive family 
friendly environment.  The Town Centre will become a business growth hub and a recognised neighbourhood with local facilities 
supporting its residents.   
 
Delivering Housing to meet Local Needs and Affordable Homes for Crawley and Reducing Homelessness: Housing  
By 2037 , 5,300 new homes will have been built to support the needs of the growing population. A mix of new homes will be designed for 
residents in all stages of life. These will be built in locations which respect the town’s unique development and design prin ciples and 
preserve the most valued of the town’s environmental features.  
 
Protecting the Environment: Sustainability  
By 2037,  in response to the Climate Emergency,  significant progress will have been made towards Crawley becoming a carbon neutral 
town. Crawley will be s een as a place where green growth is the driver of the economy and where green technology and businesses can 
thrive. Active travel and public transport will be significantly improved and supported by a road network  that prioritises sustainable 
transport modes . Electric Vehicles will be promoted along with, and through, e- car clubs.  A sustainable  road network will be 
complemented by a good public transport system, giving people choice about how they travel. As a modern town, the technologic al and 
communication infrastructure will be in place to ensure residents and businesses have the support needed to develop and grow.  
 
Conserving natural resources to support future growth will be vital to the longevity of the town.  Air, noise and water  pollution will be 
reduced. The borough will prepare for the increasing effects of climate change, through adaptation measures including lower w ater usage 
standards and delivering a net gain in biodiversity.  Losses to protected and priority species and habitats will  have been avoided and the 
delivery of vital ecosystem services, including pollination, flood alleviation and carbon capture, will have been enhanced in  order to 
facilitate a sustainable and resilient future.  
 
  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 18 Crawley Borough Local Plan 
 
 
Crawley will be a modern, vibrant , healthy and sustainable town that stands proud of its achievements 
and uses its strengths to reach its potential. Its strong and diverse communities, neighbourhood 
structure, sustainable economic growth and excellent connections withi n and beyond the region will 
make it a place that people enjoy and want to live, work and visit.  
 
2.1  Crawley stands unique alongside other towns in the sub- region. Located half way (20 
miles to Brighton seafront and 20 miles to Croydon) between London and the south 
coast, it is a progressive and modern New Town that benefits from a historic past. It 
is an urban town which benefits from a countryside setting and  a network of green 
spaces. This mix of old and new, built and natural has blended over the years to 
shape Crawley’s distinct sense of place, and created a desirable offer for residents 
and businesses.  
Spatial Context  
2.2  Crawley is situated in  the north eastern part of the c ounty of West Sussex . Horsham 
district abuts the town on the western side, Mid Sussex district is to  the south and 
east whilst the c ounty of Surrey lies to the north of the borough beyond Gatwick 
Airport.  
2.3 Crawley borough covers 4,497 hectares. Its administrative boundaries are drawn 
tightly around the town itself, with very little land falli ng outside of the built up area. 
This is  particularly  the case to the west of the urban area, although this location 
offers some of Crawley’s greatest connections, visual and physical, with the open 
countryside beyond. The M23 motorway forms t he borough boundary to the 
east/south east . To the south, beyond the M23 and the A264 dual carriageway, lies 
an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty. Gatwick Air port is located within the borough 
to the north of the town –  the land between the town and the airport is heavily 
constrained by noise and  may potentially be required for  the future development of 
the airport.  
2.4 Migrat ion patterns for Crawley show the strong est relationships with n eighbouring 
areas of Mid Sussex and Horsham , followed by  Reigate and Banstead,  as well as 
having notable inflows from  Croydon9. The Crawley Travel to Work Area extends to 
include Horley, Redhill, Leatherhead and Dorking (essentially extending north to the M25) as well as the main settlements in both Horsham and Mid Sussex
10. These 
commuting patterns indicat e the role Crawley plays across this wider area in 
providing employment for significant numbers of people.  
Gatwick Diamond & Greater Brighton  
2.5  Reflecting Crawley’s inter -relationship with its neighbours , links have been formed, 
both at a local authority and a business level, across an identified functional sub-
region known as the Gatwick Diamond. Crawley is one of 7 Local Authority areas 
forming the Gatwick Diamond (along with Epsom and Ewell, Horsham, Mid Sussex, 
Mole Valley, Reigate & Banstead and Tandridge), which crosses  the Surrey and 
West Sussex County boundary. Whilst t his is an area that does not have any official 
boundaries , the Diamond extends over a range of towns and villages, set in attractive 
countryside, stretching from the southern edge of London to the northern boundaries 
                                                 
9 ONS (2014) based on 2011 Census data.  
10 2011 Census/ONS analysis (2014)  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 19 of Brighton and Hove, and forming the central element of the Coast to Capital Local 
Enterprise  Partnership (LEP) area.  
 
Fig 1: Crawley in the Context of the Coast to Capital Local Enterprise Partnership Area11 
2.6  Much of Crawley’s development opportunities and pressures are determined by its 
role within the Diamond and the wider economic sub- region. With Gatwick Airport as 
the economic core, the borough offers the focus for large businesses, travel and 
retail provi sion. It is supported in this role by the neighbouring districts within the 
wider area;  each of which provide complementary offers in terms of housing, 
employment and leisure.  
2.7 Crawley has recently joined the Greater Brighton Economic Board, and the We st 
Sussex and Greater Brighton Strategic Planning Board. This recognises the 
increasing importance of strategic working across the wider LEP area in order to 
maximise benefits and secure mutually advantageous economic and social outcomes 
as well as address  the significant challenges faced by the area.  
2.8 This wider sub- regional role for Crawley offers both opportunities and challeng es. 
The Local Plan ensures that Crawley’s strategic responsibilities  will be su pported, 
whilst recognising the physical and aircraft noise constraints  that mean the town’s 
anticipated housing needs cannot solely  be met within its own administrative 
boundaries.  The degree to which c onstraints created by historic safeguarding for a 
potential future runway at Gatwick Airport will allow for Crawley to meet employment 
and infrastructure needs are being c onsidered through the Local Plan Review .  
A New Town in a countryside setting  
2.9 Crawley was designated a New Town in 1947 and incorporated the settlements of Crawley, Ifield an d Three Bridges. As a planned New Town, it was organised and 
                                                 
11 Strategic Economic Plan, Gatwick 360o (2018) Coast to Capital Local Enterprise Partnership  
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 20 designed around a neighbourhood structure.  Laid out according to twentieth century 
quality of life and sustainable development principles , Crawley has subsequently 
grown beyond the original masterplan and many elements of the original New Town 
now form an important part of the town’s history.  
2.10 The masterplan phased the development of the town through the addition of complete neighbourhoods, each with good access to its own centre offering a mix of 
uses to serve local needs. The relatively small size of each neighbourhood was 
intended to help build up the new communities, achieve closer integration and 
provide greater accessibility to the neighbourhood centres. In 2037 , the principle of 
the neighbourhoods will remain a characteristic of the town, and neighbourhood centres will continue to play an important role as a focal point for community facilities and local shopping.  
2.11  Crawley’s urban and landscape structure consists of a number of dis tinct character 
components , such as : 
→ The Economic Centres (Crawley Town Centre, Manor Royal and Gatwick  
Airport ); 
→ The Historic Town of Crawley ( the pre -‘New Town’ Crawley: including Medi eval, 
Late Victorian, Edwardian. Forming  the area stretching from , and including,  Goffs 
Park/Ifield Road/St. Peters, east to , and including,  the historic High S treet area 
and Alms Houses and  south to include Brighton Road and Malthouse Road) ; 
→ The Historic Villages (Ifield, Worth, Three Bridges);  
→ The 1950s -70s ‘New Town’ Neighbourhoods;  
→ The sylvan or wooded suburbs;  
→ The places connected to open countryside (visually and physically) (wider Ifield 
along Rusper Road, beside Tilgate Park, Worth Village);  
→ Areas of Open Parkland, Countryside and Meadows (Tilgate, Ifield Meadows,  
north of Manor Royal, Langley Green and Pound Hill/Forge Wood, Pease 
Pottage and the High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty).  
2.12 The management of change is necessary  so as not to unduly restrict growth whilst 
retaining the valued features of the town. This will be achieved through the 
assessment of the character of the borough, the protection and enhancement of 
important and positive assets, improvements to areas with significant negative 
features and the delivery of high quality development that  takes full account of its 
context.    
2.13 The Local Plan Review continues to  ensure the protection of other valued features of 
the natural and built environment, both within and around the town. New development will provide high quality environments and w ill be of a high standard of 
design and sustainable construction. The character of the countryside surrounding 
the town will be protected through the Local Plan by policies which set out the 
considerations for the land beyond the built -up area boundary.  
A working town  
2.14  Crawley is the largest economic centre in the Northern West Sussex Functional 
Economic Market Area
12, and also the largest economic area of the Gatwick 
Diamond representing a significant proportion of its total commercial floorspace and 
employment. While Crawley boasts average salaries that are among the highest of 
the Gatwick Diamond, many residents are employed in low skilled industries, and it is 
recognised that on average people who travel into Crawley for work earn more than local people. Crawley’s resident workforce has a lower than average level of 
Qualifications at NVQ4 and above 36.9%) when compared to the South East region 
(42.2%) and Great Britain (39.3%) as a whole and many firms are concerned about 
                                                 
12 i.e. that covering Crawley Borough, Horsham and Mid Sussex Districts  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 21 skill shortages. Unemploym ent in Crawley has been historically low and,  prior to the 
Covid -19 pandemic , the Local Universal  Credit claimant count was at 2 .8% in March 
2020. This has risen sharply to 7.5% in August 2020, given the significant impact the 
pandemic has had on Crawley’s  aviation- related employment sectors, making 
Crawley the worst affected in the Coast to Capital LEP area. Through the Crawley 
Employment and Skills Programme 2019- 2024, positive steps are being made to 
address the skills gap and help Crawley residents to better access employment.  
2.15 Reflecting the critical  economic role of Crawley, within the borough and for the wider 
economy beyond, the Local Plan seeks to ensure sustainable economic growth is 
achieved through the consolidation and enhancement of the existing main 
employment areas, identification of new employment land, helping residents that need support in accessing the job market, and supporting greater  diversification and 
flexibility to help Crawley’s economy adapt to future change.  
The Economic Centres  
Manor Royal  
2.16  Manor Royal is one of the largest business parks in the south east covering a total of 
240 hectares and is home to more than 600 businesses and  over 32,000 jobs – 
which accounts for 40% of Crawley’s total employment. It provides 77%  of Crawley ’s 
employment land; 19% of employment land in West Sussex; and 22% of employment land in the Gatwick Diamond. Since its official naming in 1950, Manor Royal has 
evolved and diversi fied its employment offer from its  traditional manuf acturing base 
of 60 years ago, and i ts notable size, scale and varied business base represent key 
strengths. The redevelopment and intensification of existing sites, and identification of appropriate extensions to extend Manor Royal, will help add to its available land 
supply pipeline, whilst focus on high quality design and the provision of supporting 
facilities for employees and visitors will reinforce its status as a premier business 
destination.  
Crawley Town Centre  
2.17 The Town Centre is a key component of Crawley’ s economic role in the sub- region, 
and therefore plays a critical part in the Local Plan’s development strategy. It is a 
sustainable location for major retail, office and leisure related developments 
consistent with typical town centre uses attracting larg e numbers of people, and for a 
mix of uses including housing. With a growing residential population, the Town 
Centre is increasingly becoming a neighbourhood in its own right, requiring 
supporting facilities and services to meet the needs of the people that live there. The 
Town Centre will be enhanced through new commercial, community and residential 
developments that will ensure its viability and vitality is enhanced, helping strengthen 
its local and sub- regional role.  
Gatwick Airport  
2.18 The economy of C rawley , and the wider Gatwick Diamond area,  is buoyed by the 
presence of Gatwick Airport. 75% of Crawley’s jobs  (by employment numbers) is in 
distribution, hotels, transport, communications, banking and finance of which Gatwick Airport accounts for approximately 25,000 jobs directly. Crawley is the main place of 
residence for airport employees with 26.9% of the wor kforce living in Crawley . The 
economic situation arising from the Covid- 19 pandemic h ad a major impact on the 
aviation sector, which in turn has significantly  affected Crawley’s economy given the 
important role of aviation and its related sectors.  
New Strategic  Empl oyment Location 
2.19     There remains significant remaining need for a minimum of  24.1ha new industrial -led 
employment land in Crawley , principally within the logistics and warehouse sectors . 
Therefore , a Strategic Employment Location is allocated at land East of Balcombe 
Road at Gatwick Green.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 22 Meeting housing needs   
2.20 Crawley’s development as a New Town, in addition to the influence of Gatwick 
Airport, has significant implications for the future of the town in terms of population 
growth; and the need to accommodate development remains a key challenge for 
Crawley . By 2037, to meet the needs of its growing population, the town would need 
a further  12,00013 new homes. Accommodating even some of this need involves 
difficult decisions and invariably plac es pressure on some of the key features that 
define Crawley’s character.  
2.21 Crawley’s population profile is very different to most neighbouring areas and this places its own special demands upon the local economy and local services. The 
population reached 106,600 in 2011 (an increase of about 22% since 1991)  and 
stands at 113,500 residents currently
14. Crawley  has a greater proportion of younger 
people (between the ages of 25 and 34) and a lower percentage of elderly, compared with the rest of the South East; with about two- thirds of Crawley’s population less 
than 45 years of age.  However , future demographic change  particularly  as the 
younger population have families will intensify  demands upon the need for housing, 
along with social, community, leisure, educational and retail facilities. This is in clear 
contrast with the demographic challenges faced by many  neighbouring districts.  
Furthermore, the ag eing population is increasing at a disproportionately faster rate 
than other age groups, with growth of 65 years and over population accounting for  
35% of the total projected change.  
2.22 In line with national guidance, sufficient market and affordable housing should be 
provided to meet the needs of existing and future households across the housing 
market area as well as to provide an appropriate amount to sustain the local 
economy. However, this must be reconciled with the other priorities in the draft Local 
Plan, particularly those with regards to protection and enhancement of the built and 
natural environment, and meeting the objectives for  future  economic growth.  The 
confined boundaries of the borough  and the scarcity of land without physical and 
policy constraint s makes the need to balance and plan for any growth particularly  
challenging.  
Identification of Housing Sites  in Crawley  
2.23 Crawley’s identified land supply allows for almost 50%  of its housing needs to be met 
through new housing developments within the borough boundaries. M uch of this is to 
be delivered through  the completion of the Forge Wood neighbourhood i n the north 
east of the borough,  and through residential development in the town centre15, with 
the remainder com ing forward on a number of small er sites within existing 
neighbourhoods .  
2.24 Within the borough, t he identification of housing sites has required consideration of 
all competing land use needs including open space and employment to ensure an 
appropriate balance has been struck in delivering sustainable development.  
2.25 All sites, small/medium up to entir e new neighbourhoods, contribute towards meeting 
housing requirements in Crawley, particularly as the land supply available within the 
administrative and urban boundaries of the town is becomi ng increasingly 
constrained. Nevertheless, as a New T own with a large stock of modern and 
generally well -designed and laid out housing, precedence for maintaining this 
                                                 
13 For the period from 2021 to 2037: 750 dwellings per annum x 16 years, based on the Standard Methodology 
Figure 2014-based Household Projections, calculated January 2021.  
14 ONS Population Projections (2020) based on 2018 data:  
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/populationandmigration/populationprojections/datasets/l
ocalauthoritiesinenglandtable2   
15 A total of 3,264  dwellings to come forward within Forge Wood and the Town Centre combined (1, 038 in Forge 
Wood + 2, 226 in the town centre) out of the total net supply of 6,056 dwellings over 2020 –  2037 = 54% CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 23 standard has been set. All new housing and surroundings should be suitable in terms 
of size, design and facilities for the requirements of its occupants  and should not lead 
to environmental and amenity problems.  
Crawley’s Unmet Housing Needs  
2.26 The scale of unmet need of approximat ely 6,680  dwellings over the Plan period is 
fully acknowledged and is being discussed with neighbouring authorities in a 
constructive and effective manner, including across the Gatwick Diamond and West 
Sussex  and Greater Brighton.  
2.27 Crawley’s housing market functions within a wider  geographic  area – identified as the 
Northern  West Sussex Housing Market Area, which is predominantly within the local 
authority administrative areas of Crawley Borough, Horsham and Mid Sussex 
Districts; extending northwards into the administrative area of Reigate and Banstead 
Borough to a lesser deg ree. Taken as  a whole, the towns within the N orthern West 
Sussex H ousing Market Area provide a complementary role, offering housing 
opportunities for the local population and workforce for each stage and socio-
economic position within lifecycles, and provi ding housing for employees working at 
Gatwick Airport and Manor Royal . This highlights a critical inter -dependence and 
reliance between areas with regard to housing and economic growth.   
2.28 In the preparation of the adopted Crawley Borough Local Plan 2015, i t was  
recognised by the authorities across the N orthern West Sussex Housing Market Area 
that Crawley had sought to fully  maximise its capacity for housing development within 
the borough boundaries in order to meet its own housing needs16. Similarly, each 
authority within the area considers it is doing the maximum reasonable to meet the 
objectively assessed housing needs of the area as a whole, taking into account local 
constraints, local aspirations and the need for sustainable development17. Further 
acknowledgement is provided within the adopted  Development  Plans for Horsham, 
Mid Sussex and Reigate and Banstead: with recognition that their housing provision 
figures will contribute to  meeting the wider needs of the  Northern West Sussex 
Housing Market Area and supporting the delivery of economic growth within the 
Gatwick Diamond18.  
2.29 However, the increase in projected annual household growth through the Standard Method (which includes 40% uplift for addressing affordability), and the additional 
seven years  beyond the adopted Plan period (2030 –  2037 ) has increased the 
amount of unmet need to be addressed by the Local Plan Review. This is 
acknowledged to be increasingly challenging for the Housing Market Area, as the 
need figures for Mid Sussex and Horsham districts using the Standard Method are  
also significantly increasing (see  table below).  
 Crawley  Horsham  Mid Sussex  NWS HMA 
total  
Existing Local Plan Objectively 
Assessed Housing Needs  675dpa  650dpa  876dpa  2,201dpa  
Existing Local Plan Requirements  340dpa  800dpa  964dpa  2,104dpa  
Standard Method Requirement19 750dpa 965dpa  1,102dpa  2,817 dpa 
                                                 
16 Northern West Sussex Authorities Position Statement, paragraph 6.13 (September 2013), Crawley Borough 
Council, Horsham District Council and Mid Sussex District Council  
17 Northern West Sussex Authorities Position Statement, paragraph 6.21 (February 2015), Crawley Borough 
Council, Horsham District Council and Mid Sussex District Council  
18 Reigate and Banstead Core Strategy, paragraph 7.4.1 –  7.4.4 (2013) Reigate and Banstea d Borough Counci l; 
Horsham District Planning Framework, paragraph 6.3 (November 2015) Horsham District Council; Mid Sussex 
District Plan 2014 – 2031, Policy DP4: Housing, second paragraph, page 30, and Policy DP5: Planning to Meet 
Future Housing Need, pages 33 -34 (March 2018) Mid Sussex District Council   
19 2014- based Household Projections; affordability ratio ONS 20 20 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 24 Development adjacent to Crawley  
2.30 Delivery of homes in new neighbourhoods in close proximity to Crawley is an 
appropriate way  to meet the needs of the emerging households from within the 
existing population, and joint working has been long established in recognition of this. 
This has included the Joint Area Action Plan prepared and adopted by Crawley 
Borough and Horsham District  Councils  in 2009 for West of Bewbush which is seeing 
the current delivery of the new Kilnwood Vale neighbourhood, immediately adjacent to Crawley’s boundary whilst being located wholly within Horsham District.  The 
identification of a Strategic Development  Location to the West and North West of 
Crawley for 2,500 homes was set out in the West Sussex Structure Plan. Kilnwood 
Vale was subsequently determined as the most appropriate  location to take forward 
following  detailed assessments of  the opportunities and constraints for providing a 
new neighbourhood and development potential around all of Crawley ’s boundaries
20.  
2.31 In addition to Kilnwood Vale, the new neighbourhood within Crawley’s administrative 
boundaries ( Forge Wood ) and the new neighbourhood level extensions to Horley 
(within Reigate and Banstead administrative boundaries) are being progressed.  
Further s ignificant level of development is permitted, and taking place,  to the east of 
Crawley’s administrative boundaries at land west of Copthorne, to the west along 
Rusper Road and to the south, in the Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, at Pease 
Pottage.  The development coming forward adjacent to the borough’s administrat ive 
boundary, is shown on the plan below.  
 
Fig 2: Planned Development Adjacent to Crawley  
                                                 
20 At Crawley Study (2009) GL Hearn  
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 25  
2.32 Other potential urban extensions to Crawley may include extensions to the east 
and/or west of the borough boundary. All opportunities are being explored to 
understand whether these would constitute the most sustainable housing 
development locations in the context of the wider housing market area and travel to 
work area and whether the existing infrastructure, and environmental constraints can be resolved.  
2.33 This plan should not be considered as an indicator of the extent of acceptable development adjacent to Crawley. Many physical, environmental and policy 
designations apply to these areas, including Green Belt, Area of Outstanding Natural 
Beauty, Ancient Wo odland and Sites of Special Scientific Interest. The planning 
policies of the neighbouring authorities will apply in cases of development outside of 
Crawley’s administrative boundaries. However, it illustrates the locations of current 
developments taking place close to Crawley which will have implications for, and 
impacts on, Crawley’s infrastructure and setting.    
Environmental sustainability  
2.34 Crawley borough has some unique characteristics and opportunities that enable the 
delivery of a clear approach to mitigation against, and adapting for a changing 
climate, whilst positively embracing the town’s ambitious target of being carbon 
neutral by 2050 . This uniqueness arises from the density of the urban area, the level 
of anticipated development and the clearly identifiable opportunity areas such as the Manor Royal business district , the town centre redevelopment areas and Gatwick 
Airport.  
2.35 Furthermore, the borough is identified as an area of high radiant energy and subject 
to serious water stress.  In a high density, growing urban area, water resources and 
water quality should both be addressed. As more water is required, less is available for ecosystems, more wastewater is produced, which may ultimately affect the 
aquatic environment. Another point that should possibly be included in the section of 
environmental sustainability is the risk of stress on sewage infrastructure as the 
population grow s. This may lead to negative impacts on water quality.  
2.36 The borough’s Green Infrastructure Network is critical to provide connective 
ecological network opportunities through the urban area, for biodiversity and human 
mental and physical health benefits. This connects beyond the borough’s boundaries 
to the wider  countryside located mainly within the neighbouring authority areas. 
Ongoing partnership working
21 will continue to maximise opportunities  to conserve 
and enhance the green infrastructure network  across boundaries .  
2.37 As a result of this, t here are sever al areas where the planning system can build upon 
nationally described standards to ensure that the borough’s potential to adapt and 
mitigate against the effects of climate change  is maximised . These are fundamental 
to the priori ty objectives for Crawley to 2037  and to the most significant elements of 
the town’s locally distinctive context.  
2.38 The priority areas are:  
1. Ensuring new buildings are l ow carbon  
2. Bringing forward district energy networks  
3. Combating serious water stress  
4. Promoting public transport and active travel  
5. Protecting and enhancing the Green Infrastructure Network in terms of 
connectivity, accessibility and net gain in biodiversity , including water quality . 
                                                 
21 Including as part of the Sussex authorities in partnership with the Sussex Biodiversity Record Centre; the 
Gatwick Diamond Authorities; Gatwick Greenspace Partnership; and through individual cross -boundary 
discussions on site- specific matters.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 26 Accessible transportation links  
2.39 Crawley has excellent communications, lying adjacent to the M23, close to the M25 
and is on the main railway line linking London to the south coast. Gatwick Airport is 
located within the borough. The town itself is served by a rapid guided bus service: 
Fastway, and a network of green corridors, providing attractive pedestrian and cycle 
routes through the neighbourhoods and into the town centre and out into the countryside. The National Cycle Route 21, from Greenwich to Eastbourne and 
forming part of the “Av enue Verte” Greenway, linking London to Paris, also runs 
through the borough.  
2.40 Attractive and effective public transport is essential in order to facilitate and 
encourage a shift to sustainable modes of transport. In order to make effective use of land, the identification and delivery of improved public transport needs to be focused 
on optimal routes and connecting the higher density neighbourhoods to Crawley’s three primary economic centres and its two regional transport nodes: Three Bridges 
station and Gatwick Airport  and its station. This will help to provide a viable, 
dependable and sustainable transport alternative. Together with promoting active 
travel, cycling and walking, this will lead to reduced carbon emissions, improved air 
quality, and a reduction in traffic volumes and the borough’s over -dependence and 
reliance on private vehicles for getting around.   
2.41 All new development will be planned to maximise links in the transport  network and 
opportunities for all forms of sustainable transport. A key priority area for the Plan 
period will be to build upon and improve the dependability, frequency, capacity and 
speed of the Fastway service in key areas of the borough, in order to encourage a 
viable and attractive alternative to car use, both for commuters, residents and 
visitors.  
Planning Policy Context  
National Planning Policy Framework  
2.42 The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) sets the planning policies for 
England and confirms that the purpose of the planning system is to contribute to the 
achievement of sustainable development.  
Gatwick Diamond Local Strategic Statement  
2.43 The Gatwick Diamond Local Strategic Statement (LSS)  was updated in 2016/17 on 
behalf of the  six Districts, and both of the County Councils  within the Gatwick 
Diamond, building on the joint working over recent years. The LSS  seeks to provide a 
consistent strategic direction for the Gatwick Diamond area, shaping a sustainable 
future; set out how that strategic direction will be translated into change and 
development; establish effective mechanisms for inter -authority cooperation on 
strategic issues so that longer term decisions made through the plan making 
processes are fully informed; and identify priority themes for joint working.   
2.44 The Statement is structured around six priority  themes:  
1. Achieving a Sustainable Economy and Prosperity including Supporting Low 
Carbon Growth;  
2. Investing in Urban and Rural Centres;  
3. Delivering a Choice and Mix of Homes;  
4. Education and Skills;  
5. Infrastructure; and  
6. High Quality Natural Environment, Countryside and Landscape.  
Crawley Borough Council Corporate Priorities  
2.45 The corporate priorities (2018 to 2022) set out the council’s strategic direction over 
the medium -term. The priorities consist of six key headline priority objectives which 
are underpinned by 24 objectives, projects and initiatives. The six pr iorities  are: CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 27 • Delivering value for money and modernising  the way we work ;  
• Delivering affordable homes for Crawley and reducing homelessness ;  
• Improving job opportunities and developing the local Economy;  
• Creating stronger communities;  
• Providing high quality leisure and culture facilities and supportin g health and 
wellbeing services;  
• Protecting the environment . 
2.46 Planning within Crawley can affect and influence a number of these priorities. To 
reflect this,  the Crawley Local Plan Review follows the Corporate Priorities:  
1. Wellbeing & Communities  
→ Corporate Priorities: Creating stronger communities & Providing high quality 
leisure and culture facilities and supporting health and wellbeing services.  
→ Local Plan C hapters: Character, Landscape and Development Form, Design 
& Development Requirements; Heritage; Open Space, Sport & Recreation; 
and Infrastructure Provision 
2. Economic Growth & Social Mobility  
→ Corporate Priority: Improving job opportunities and developing the local Economy  
→ Local Plan Chapters: Economic Growth; Gatwick Airport; and Crawley Town Centre  
3. Housing 
→ Corporate Priorities: Delivering affordable homes for Crawley and reducing 
homelessness  
→ Local Plan Chapters: Housing Delivery; and Meeting Housing Needs  
4. Environmental Sustainability  
→ Corporate Priorities: Protecting the environment  
→ Local Plan Chapters: Green Infrastructure & Biodiversity; Sustainable Design 
& Construction; Environmental Protection; and Sustainable Transport.  
Crawley Economic and Regenerat ion Programmes  
2.47 Located at the heart of the Gatwick Diamond, Crawley is the major economic driver 
for the region. Through its Economic and Regeneration Programmes, the ambition is 
to create a dynamic business growth hub with a bold and vibrant communit y heart for 
Crawley and the Gatwick Diamond, driving a diverse retail and leisure offer, excellent 
public realm, sustainable transport infrastructure, high quality town centre living and a 
thriving evening economy.  
2.48 Through the Crawley Growth Programme , an investment package of £31.412 million 
has been secured, funded by the Coast to Capital Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP), West Sussex County Council and Crawley Borough Council. This delivering a 
range of infrastructure improvements and physical regeneration in the town centre, 
Manor Royal and Gatwick, designed to support significant increases in new homes, 
business investment and employment growth. The whole programme will deliver 
7,000 new jobs, 135,000 square metres of refurbished commercial floor space and 
1,000 new homes. Forming part of this work, the Town Centre Regeneration 
Programme has secured £18 million investment from the Coast to Capital LEP and 
has already delivered significant improvements to Queens Square and Queensway, 
with further in vestment to come through regeneration at Station Gateway and 
Eastern Gateway. Significant work is also being undertaken through the Crawley Employment and Skills Programme (2019 -2024), focused on bridging the local skills 
gaps by working with partners to c reate the right conditions for career opportunities 
within the borough.  
 
 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 28 Zero Carbon Neutral Commitment  
2.49  Crawley Borough Council declared a Climate Emergency by a unanimous vote at Full 
Council on 17 July 2019. This pledged to reduce carbon emissions  generated by 
Crawley Borough Council activities by at least 45% by 2030 and to zero by 2050 as recommended by the Inter -governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPPC).  
2.50 This improves the Crawley Carbon and Waste Reduction Strategy (adopted 2012) 
which aims to make Crawley carbon neutral and zero waste by 2050, by focusing on 
the council:  
• being a role model for sustainability within its own buildings and in its service 
delivery; and 
• working in partnership to help residents and other organisations to limit their own 
carbon emissions and waste.  
2.51 The key strategic objectives and aims which are related to the planning system and 
the priorities and policies in the Local Plan are as follows:  
• Low carbon, decent ralised energy network for the t own:  
- work in partnership with energy service companies, property owners and other 
partners with the aim of delivering combined heat and power schemes where 
possible.  
• Promote sustainable housing and t ransport within Crawley:  
- Investigate opportunities, in partnership with West Sussex County Council ; 
- Set an example with the council’s  own social housing stock ; 
- Significantly increase the number of residents  walking,  cycling  and using public 
transport for more every -day journeys . 
Crawley Transport Strategy  
2.52 The emerging Crawley Transport Strategy seek s to identify opportunities for Crawley 
for developing a more attractive and practical transport infrastructure that works for 
everyone, whether or not they drive and whether or not they are able -bodied, and will 
look at developing access to work, education, shopping and leisure that is easier, 
more affordable and healthier.  
2.53 The Crawley Transport Strategy is  set within t he context of the West Sussex Local 
Transport Plan which establishes  the following objectives for the county:  
1. Promoting economic growth  
2. Tackling climate change  
3. Providing access to services, employment and housing 
4. Improving safety, security and health.  
2.54 The government’s Cycle and Walking Investment Strategy was published in 2017, 
with the aim to double the numbers of cycling trips and significantly increase walking 
by 2025. Reflecting  this, a draft Crawley Local Cycle and Walking Infrastructure Plan 
(LCW IP) has been prepared and has been subject  to public consultation.  
Neighbourhood Plans  
2.55 Currently there are no neighbourhood plans within the borough, but the council is 
working closely with neighbourhood forums and other groups, and is offering support 
if any wish to bring forward a neighbourhood plan.  
  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 29 Sustainable Development  
Presumption in Favour of Sustainable Development  
3.1 The NPPF confirms that the purpose of the planning system is to contribute to the 
achievement of sustainable developm ent22, and sets o ut the planning system’s role 
in supporting the three dimensions of sustainable development:  
• An economic objective : to help build a strong, responsive and competitive 
economy, by ensuring that sufficient land of the right type is available in the right 
places and at the right time to support growth,  innovation and improved 
productivity ; and by identifying and coordinating the provision of infrastructure;  
• A social  objective:  to support strong, vibrant and healthy communities, by  
ensuring that a sufficient number and range of homes can be provided to meet the 
needs of present and future generations; and by  fostering a well -designed and safe  
built environment, with accessible services  and open spaces  that reflect  current 
and future  needs and support  communities’  health, social and cultural well -being; 
and 
• An environmental  objective:  to contribut e to protecting and enhancing our 
natural, built and historic environment;  including making effective use of land,  
helping to improve biodiversity, us ing natur al resources prudently, minimising 
waste and pollution, and mitigating  and adapt ing to climate change,  including 
moving to a low carbon economy.   
Strategic Policy SD1: Presumption in Favour of Sustainable Development  
In line with the planned approach to Crawley as a new town, and the spatial patterns 
relating to the neighbourhood principles, when considering development proposals the 
council will take a positive approach to approving development which is s ustainable.  
The council will work proactively in partnership with applicants, stakeholders and other 
partners to jointly find solutions which mean that development can be approved wherever 
possible, whilst securing development that improves the economic, social and 
environmental conditions of Crawley and the wider Gatwick Diamond and West Sussex 
and Greater Brighton sub region s. 
Development will be supported where it meets the following strategic objectives:  
1. Progress towards Crawley’s commitment to being carbon neutral by 2050 and adapts 
to climate change;  
2. Complements Crawley’s character as a compact town within a countryside setting, 
developed on a neighbourhood principle and maximises the use of sustainable travel;  
3. Conserves and enhances the heritage of the borough;  
4. Protects, enhances and creates opportunities for Crawley’s unique Green 
Infrastructure;  
5. Provides a safe and secure environment for its residents and visitors;  
6. Provides for  decent and affordable homes and meets  the social and economic needs 
of Crawley’s current and future population; and  
7. Accords with the policies and objectives set out in this Plan unless material 
considerations indicate otherwise.  
                                                 
22 National Planning Policy Framework,  paragraph 7 (2019) MHCLG   CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 30 Reasoned Justification:  
3.2 Taken as a whole, the principles and policies set out in this Local Plan for Crawley 
will deliver the sustainable development of the town and will guide development 
proposals to meet the long- term vision as well as maximising short -term benefits. All 
plans  should be based upon and reflect the presumption in favour of sustainable 
development, with clear policies that guide how the presumption should be applied locally.  
3.3 This must be achieved having regard  to the limited availability of developable land in 
Crawley, which is a result of the borough’s tight a dministrative borough boundary  and 
constraints including flooding and aircraft noise . This means that the Local Plan must 
strike a considered balance between conflicting demands to meet Crawley’s significant housing, employment, and open space needs in a sustainable manner. To 
ensure this is the case,  Policy SD1 provides the overarching principles on meeting 
the presumption in favour of sustainable development.   
3.4 In accordance with the NPPF,  the presumption in favour of sustainable development 
applies unless specific policies indicate development should be restricted. Those 
sites with strongest weight against development
23 will include land designated as 
Local Green Space, Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, designated heritage assets 
(including Listed Buildings, Conservation Areas , Scheduled Ancient Monuments  and 
non-designated heritage  assets of archaeological interest which are demonstrably of 
equivalent significance to scheduled monuments ), locations at risk of flooding and 
irreplaceable habitats, such as  areas of Ancient Woodland and ancient and aged 
trees24. Other constraints which have been locally assessed within Crawley include 
areas subject to unacceptable levels of noise, particularly from aircraft ; historic parks 
and gardens;  Local Wildlife Sites ; structural landscaping; and open space which has 
not been identified as surplus t o open space requirements.  Development within these 
locations will be considered carefully against the reasons for their designation and 
will only be approved if  mitigation measures can adequately  reduce the negative 
impacts of development.  
3.5 To ensure development is truly sustainable and support s the needs of economic 
growth within such a constrained and tightly drawn urban borough, it is essential for 
Crawley to be considered in its wider geographical context,  including its housing 
market and travel to work areas, rather than restricted to its administrative 
boundaries, and for continued cooperative w orking to ensure the most appropriate 
balance is struck.   
Enabling Healthy Lifestyles and Wellbeing  
3.6 There is now a strong evidence base that our health is impacted by the environments 
and places within which we live. Government planning policy is explicit that ‘planning 
for health’, achieving healthy and safe places is a material consideration to enable 
and support healthy lifestyles to address identified local health and wellbeing needs. 
Creating and enabling healthy places and improving the wider determinants of health 
can help to promote good health, better lifestyles, prevent poor health and have a 
positive impact on reducing health inequalities.  
3.7 The Covid -19 pandemic has brought health inequalities into clear focus, highlighting 
these issues and demonstrating the critical importance of people’s living 
environment, availability of private and public open space and access to local 
facilities in sup porting healthy lifestyles.  
                                                 
23 National Planning Policy Framework, paragra ph 11 and footnote 6 (2019) MHCLG  
24 National Planning Policy Framework, glossary definition “Irreplaceable habitat”, page 67- 68 (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 31 3.8 To aid understanding of the built and natural environment and health,  researchers25 
have devised the Health Map (Figure 3 ). The map is focused on the role of 
neighbourhood and planning, and emphasises the importance of the built and natural 
environment’s contribution to health and wellbeing outcomes, in line with the socio-
ecological approach to health (Orme et al., 2010).  
 
Fig 3: Barton and Grant  Health Map   
3.9 Therefore , planning for health involves thinking about the interrelated factors that 
affect health, including social and psychological elements, such as wellbeing and 
fulfilment. The wider determinants of health are conditions in which people are born, 
grow, work, live and age, and the wider set of forces and systems shaping the 
conditions of daily life. A healthy place is one that can contribute to the prevention of ill health and provide the environmental conditions to support positive health and 
wellbeing.  
3.10 When considering the health impact of individual developments, it is important that its 
surroundings are taken into account as well as its intended purpose. This includes 
looking at population health as a whole. It also involves the examination of population 
groups, vulnerable communities and sensitive uses, such as residential care homes, supported housing, schools, hospitals and health centres.  
3.11 Public Health England has noted that “Some of the UK’s most pressing health 
challenges – such as obesity, mental health issues, physical inactivity and the needs 
of an ageing population – can all be influenced by the quality of our built and natural 
environment ”. The considerate design of spaces and places can help to promote 
good health by providing:  
                                                 
25 Barton and Grant (2006), drawing upon the work of Dahlgren and Whitehead (1991)  
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 32 • Healthy lifestyles: places to a ccess good diet, nutrition, opportunities to 
breastfeed, take part in physical activity minimise risk taking and addictive 
behaviour such as gambling, alcohol and smoking.   
• Positive social and community influences on health: community cohesion, 
community power, identity and local pride, community resilience, neighbourliness, 
sense of belonging, community connectivity and inclusiveness, social networks 
and support.  
• Good mental health and wellbeing: facilitating a sense of control, enabling 
participation in the community and economic life, access to green open spaces 
and water bodies,  and access ibility to social opportunities . 
• Safe and healthy living environmental conditions: air quality, attractiveness of 
area, noise control,  dementia friendly communities and homes, social inclusion,  
community safety, accessibility, housing quality and tenure, home safety and 
safety of public spaces, adaptable dwellings  and high quality green space 
accessible to all.   
• Economic conditions that affect and promote health : employment 
opportunities, availability of  food and fuel, income, economic activity and good 
working conditions such as those related to health and safety . 
• Access and quality of services: access to leisure services, information 
technology, medical and health services, education and training, public 
amenities, shops and commercial services, sustainable transport (including 
parking, public transport and active travel) . 
• Positive macro- economic, environmental and sustainability factors : 
biodiversity, mitigating climate change (i.e. flooding, heatwave), sustainable 
development principles (integration; collaboration; involvement; long term 
thinking; and prevention) and regeneration for example.   
Strategic Policy SD2: Enabling Healthy Lifestyles and Wellbeing  
New development must be designed to achieve healthy, inclusive and safe places, which 
enable and support healthy lifestyles and address health and wellbeing needs in Crawley , 
as identified in the Crawley Joint Strategic Needs Assessment .  
In order to maximise opportunities to enable healthy lifestyles,  new development must:  
• Meet the pri nciples of good urban design and support Crawley’s status as a 
Dementia- Friendly Town, throu gh ensuring legibility of layout, materials and design  
(Policies  CL2 and DD1);  
• Meet the needs of all through the use of the highest standards of accessible and 
inclusive design ( Policy DD2 ); 
• Provide opportunities for high quality open space, play and recreation (Policies OS1 –  
OS2) ; 
• Prioritise  the use of accessible and reliable sustainable transport  and active travel 
through providing greater levels of safe and attractive opportunities for active travel  
(Policies OS3 , ST1 – ST2); 
• Be supported by, and not result in a loss of, necessary infrastructure p rovision 
(Policies IN1 –  IN2);  
• Ensure proposals are safe for future site users and do not result in unacceptable 
harmful impacts (Policies EP1 – EP6); and  
• Ensure proposals incorporate biodiversity and green infrastructure which enable 
climate change resilience (Policies GI1 and GI3 ). CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 33 Major developments must set out how they address the requirements of Policy SD2 as 
part of the planning application. In order to satisfy this policy requirement,  a Health Impact 
Assessment  must  be included with qualifying planning applications, as set out in the Local 
List of Requirements,  at the point of submission for validation purposes . 
Reasoned Justification  
3.12 National planning policy confirms that planning polices and decisions should aim to 
achieve healthy, inclusive and safe places which: promote social interaction, 
including opportunities for meetings between people who might not otherwise come 
into contact with each  other – for example through mixed- use developments, strong 
neighbourhood centres, street layouts that allow for easy and safe pedestrian and 
cycle connections within and between neighbourhoods, and active street frontages26.  
3.13 To provide the social, recreational and cultural facilities and services the community 
needs, planning policies and decisions should:  
• Plan positively for the provision and use of shared spaces, communi ty facilities 
(such as local sh ops, meeting places, sports venues, open space, cultural 
buildings, public houses and places of worship)  and other local services to 
enhance the sustainability of communities and residential environments27; 
• Take into account and support the delivery of local strategies to improve  health, 
social and cultural well -being for all sections of the community;  
• Guard against the unnecessary loss of valued facilities and services, particularly 
where this would reduce the community’s abili ty to meet its day -to day needs.  
3.14 The Health and Social Care Act (2012) sets out  local authorities’ new duties and 
responsibilities for health improvement and health protection. The Act requires every local authority to use the levers at its disposal to improve health and wellbeing.  
Through the Sustainability Appraisal, the health impacts of the Local Plan are assessed against the identified issues. The benefits and outcomes of the 
implementation of the Plan will be monitored annually against these indicators through the Authority’s Monitoring Report.  
3.15 Planning for health involves thinking about the interrelated factors that affect health, 
including social and psychological elements, such as wellbeing and fulfilment. The 
wider determinants of health are conditions in which people are born, grow, work, live 
and age, and the wider set of forces and systems shaping the conditions of daily life. 
A healthy place is one that can contribute to the prevention of ill health and provide 
the environmental conditions to support positive health and wellbeing.  
3.16 The West Sussex Joint Strategic Needs Asses sment (JSNA) “People and Places ” for 
Crawley (2019)
28, highlighted the following characteristics to consider:  
• There has been a 10% increase in residents since 2007, due both to more births than deaths and inward migration;  
• 133,425 people were registered with Crawley CCG GP practices in 2017/18 
(more than the 111,700 total residents within the borough);  
• The resident population has a younger profile compared with England with 22% aged 0- 15 years and only 13% aged 65+ years , although the numbers of the 
elderly population are increasing;  
• 28% of the local population were from black and minority ethnic (BAME) groups 
at the time of the last census (2011), higher than England;  
• 83.3% of the adult populati on are economically active (2017- 2018) and the 
borough has a very high ratio of private sector jobs to public sector jobs;  
                                                 
26 National Planning Policy Framework  p27, paragraph 91a)  (2019)  MHCLG  
27 National Planning Policy Framework  p27, paragraph 92 a), b), c)  (2019) MHCLG   
28 https://jsna.westsussex.gov.uk/updates/west-sussex -jsna-summary -2018/   CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 34 • Deaths (under 75 years) from cardiovascular disease have fallen over the last 10 
years, although the rate of decline has slowed in recent years.   
3.17 The West Sussex Joint Strategic Needs Assessment (JSNA) highlighted the 
following health challenges for Crawley : 
• There are 14,900 people aged 65+ , a number whic h is increasing more quickly ; 
• The rate of violent crime in Crawley has increased in the last 5 years;  
• Life expectancy has increased but  considerable inequalities persist, with a 
notable gap between the richest and poorest particularly in relation to men. Life expectancy is lower for people with mental health problems and for people with 
learning disabilities;  
• Approximately 18% of Year 6 pupils (10/11 year olds) are obese;  
• In 2016/17 62% of adults were estimated to be physically active (doing 150 
minutes of moderate intensive exercise per week) and 24% physically inactive 
(<30 minutes of moderate intensive activity).  
3.18 Proposals should consider and reflect the expectations of the West Sussex Joint 
Health and Wellbeing Strategy and the Sustainability Transformation Plans published 
by Crawley’s local NHS/CCG partnership.  Reference should be made to the Sport 
England and Public Health England’s Active Design guidance
29, which sets out 
established guidance on how the design and layout of new developments can be planned to make communities more active and healthier. This includes “Ten 
Principles of Active Design”:  
1. Activity for all;  
2. Walkable communities;  
3. Connected walking and cycling 
routes;  
4. Co-location of community 
facilities;  
5. Network of multifunctional open 
space;  6. High quality streets and spaces;  
7. Appropriate infrastructure;  
8. Active buildings;  
9. Management, maintenance, 
monitoring and evaluation;  
10. Activity promotion and local 
champions.  
The Essex Design Guide
30 should be considered against Crawley -specific 
circumstances and taken as a baseline for implementing the Ten Principles of Active 
Design into specific design guidance to help to activate spaces, including in relation 
to the specific advice in relation to planning and designing new developments with 
regards to the needs of the aging population and establishing health and wellbeing in 
order to help people achieve and experience better quality lifestyles.   
3.19 Health Impact Assessments (HIA) and screening should be undertaken for all major 
applications and developments likely to give rise to significant health impacts. This 
should draw together the health benefits of the other application submission 
documents, i ncluding the design and access statement, design code, transport 
assessment and travel plan. This will allow schemes to be refined to maximise 
positive effects on health and wellbeing.  Proposals should draw on good examples of 
best practice elsewhere, incl uding, for example, healthy new towns, garden villages 
and communities, obesity trailblazers, London superzones, local delivery pilots,  in 
order to design schemes within Crawley to meet the identified needs of the borough.  
When considering the health impac t of individual developments, it is important that its 
surroundings are taken into account as well as its intended purpose. This includes 
uses involving vulnerable communities and sensitive uses, such as residential care 
homes, supported housing, schools, hospitals and health centres.   
  
                                                 
29 http://www.sportengland.org/facilities -planning/planning-for -sport/planning-tools -and-guidance/active-design/  
30 https://www.essexdesignguide.co.uk  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 35 Wellbeing  & Communities  
 
 
 
Providing High Quality Leisure and Cultural Facilities and Supporting Health and 
Wellbeing Services: Wellbeing  
By 2037 , Crawley will be a place that people want to visit, to have fun and spend their leisure 
time. As a town within a countryside setting that is very much valued by local people, it will 
be safe and well cared for. The rich heritage which has shaped what the town is today will be 
respected, protected and enhanced.  
 
Local communities will be directly involved in planning how the town grows and develops in 
order to achieve the best outcome for all concerned; particularly where difficult choices have 
to be made.  Neighbourhoods will continue to offer local facilities and amenities that can be 
easily accessed along with informal green spaces for all to enjoy. The spirit and pride of 
individual communities will continue to be harnessed to make neighbourhoods the foc us of 
local celebration. People will be encouraged to stay physically and mentally fit and active, 
high standards of health care will be delivered locally and people will be able to age with 
confidence as they grow older. Crawley’s parklands and open spaces, its sporting and 
leisure facilities, along with its cultural offer, will be enhanced for the benefit of local people 
and visitors.  
 
Creating Stronger Communities: Diversity and Community  
Neighbourhoods will continue to feature in the development of the town, recognising the 
important role they play in helping shape and develop communities. Growth will be 
sustainable and supported by an infrastructure plan that complements development enabling 
people to live a long and happy life. All people who live here  will be proud, confident and 
self-reliant, working together and with others for the good of the town. Crawley will continue 
to improve the quality of life for its residents throughout every stage in their life. Excellent 
early years’ provision will suppor t children’s development, which will be further assisted by 
the provision of good primary, secondary, further and higher education. Education, for both 
young and old, should unlock potential, giving people a real choice about what they do in 
their working life.  
 
  
  
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 36 Character , Landscape  & Development Form  
4.1 Crawley is known chiefly as a New Town, but has in fact, existed as a settlement for 
centuries, growing up around the original town of Crawley, and the villages of Ifield 
and Three Bridges.  
4.2 Being awarded New Town status in 1947 accelerated the town’s expansion; and the 
town has subsequently been planned and developed on a neighbourhood -by-
neighbourhood basis, supported by economic growth at Manor Royal, Gatwick 
Airport and in the town centre.  The New Towns Act provided that when a New Town 
was judged to be substantially complete, its development corporation would be 
wound up. In Crawley, this stage was reached in 1962 although four additional 
neighbourhoods have been added since then and two m ore are under construction.  
4.3 The neighbourhoods are a key feature of Crawley’s character; with each of the 
town’s 13 neighbourhoods having been designed to ensure sufficient facilities and 
services are in place to support the day -to-day needs of residen ts. The 
neighbourhood principle is still relevant today, with the two new neighbourhoods 
being built at Forge Wood, north east of Pound Hill, and Kilnwood Vale, to the west of 
Crawley.   
4.4 The green landscaping in and around the built environment is also  a key part of 
Crawley’s New Town character; as is the setting of the town, with a clear distinction between the urban area and countryside providing a sense of place for residents and 
visitors and ensuring accessible countryside remains within easy reach by foot.  
Chapter Content  
4.5 This chapter sets out policies to guide the overarching design and form of all new 
development, the relationship between development proposals and key elements of 
Crawley’s character, including urban and rural context, and the general planning 
policy considerations for development outside the Built -Up Area Boundary. More 
detailed design policies are set out in the subsequent chapter: ‘Design & 
Development Requirements’.  
The Key Issues  
Neighbourhoods  
4.6 The neighbourhoods are a key feature of the planning and development of Crawley 
and represent a sustainable form of development. The principles contained in the 
original Crawley masterplan which underpinned the layout of each successive 
neighbourhood continue to reflect government  guidance, particularly with regard to 
meeting local needs by focusing shops, schools and other community services and facilities in locations accessible by sustainable transport in the heart of each neighbourhood.  
4.7 As a New Town, much of Crawley’s built environment has been constructed over the last 6 0 years. However, there is increasing recognition of the value of some of the 
“New Town” buildings and spaces that have been built since 1947. Many of these assets are l ocally distinctive and it is of importance to have a clear approach for 
enhancing and protecting them . This may include their group value, as well as the 
spaces between the built form, the setback from the highway, and the existing soft landscaping, which all contribute to the valued sense of place and local distinctive 
character of Crawley. These will be recognised in considering new development 
proposals which come forward.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 37  
Fig 4: Crawley Neighbourhoods  
Character  
4.8 In January 2020, the Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government 
(MHCLG) published “Living with Beauty”, the final report of the Building Better, 
Building Beautiful Commission (BBBBC), setting out its recommendations to the 
government  and raising some concerns about the quality of  post-war development .  
4.9 This concern is particularly relevant and timely when considering the NPPF’s 
requirements and emphasis in regard to the efficient use of land and increasing 
densities, and the importance of how new development should maintain and be 
grounded in an understanding and evaluation of each area’s defining local character 
and history. The NPPF31 states that permission should be refused for development of 
poor design that fails to take the opportunities available for improving the charact er 
and quality of an area and the way it functions. The identification and understanding of local character is the essential first design and planning step to altering and 
reversing these disillusioning development outcomes.   
4.10 In October 2019, the gov ernment published a new National Design Guide (NDG) 
entitled “Planning practice guidance for beautiful, enduring and successful places”. This states:  
                                                 
31 National Planning Policy Framework  (NPPF), Chapter 12,  paragraph 130 ‘(2019) MHCLG  
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 38  “A place is more complex and multi -faceted than a building:  
• it is a setting for a diverse range of uses and activities, and is experienced by 
many people in many different ways;  
• it is made up of buildings, and also landscape and infrastructure, which are likely to endure longer than the buildings themselves;  
• most  places evolve over a long period of time once they have been established, 
with many incremental changes that can affect their quality;  
• the quality of ‘delight’ includes a richness of experience gained from all of our senses, not only the visual; and  
• beauty in a place may range from a long view down to the detail of a building or landscape”
32. 
4.11 The NDG addresses the question of how we recognise well -designed places in the 
form of ten characteristics33, covering themes of character, community and climate.  
These ten characteristics work together to create the physical character of a place 
and are addressed in this Local Plan. This Chapter introduces a number of key 
policies, which address the NDG’s characteristics and the concerns raised by the 
BBBBC includ ing key foundational steps to guide and direct the form of new 
development from the outset. This is particularly important as Crawley is a growing 
town with constraints on development set within a tight  administrative boundary. T his 
presents challenges, not least in terms of finding appropriate sites for the new development and infrastructure that is needed to support the town in the future. With 
significant development needed over the next 15 years, it is essential that the locally 
distinctive features that contribute positively to the town’s sense of place are 
recognised, protected and, where possible, enhanced.  
Effective Use of Land  
4.12 The effective use of land is an important objective in making development more sustainable. As such, it is embedded in government policy. Compact development 
not only uses less land, but it also has the potential to create efficiencies in the use of 
other resources, including energy supply, services and transportation and to allow 
better provision of open space. It is i mportant that land is used effectively, particularly 
given the limited land supply in the borough.  
4.13 The NPPF is clear that in setting new policies, plans must contain policies to optimise 
the use of land in their area and meet as much of the identified  need for housing as 
possible. This should include the use of minimum density ranges with higher 
densities expected particularly in Crawley Town Centre and other locations which are 
well served by high frequency, reliable public transport (see Policy CL3).  In such 
locations, major new development should seek a significant uplift in the average 
residential densities (as outlined in Policy CL4), unless it can be shown that there are 
strong reasons why this would be inappropriate.  
4.14 Today Crawley’s residential neighbourhoods are characterised predominately by two-
storey, family -sized homes; all built meeting established internal and external space 
standards. In seeking higher densities for the borough, compromising the town’s character, reducing quality of life for residents and creating town cramming, will still 
not be accepted.  
4.15 Building at higher densities can make more efficient use of land and also deliver high quality development. However, higher densities can produce a poor quality 
environment and generate negative public perceptions. Higher residential densities 
can be successfully achieved in lower rise developments which use innovative ways 
of providing outdoor amenity space. Many of England’s best urban areas are widely 
                                                 
32 National Design Guide (NDG), Chapter 5,  page 3 (2019) MHCLG  
33 NDG, Part 2 (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 39 seen as attractive plac es in which to live, yet have a compact form and relatively high 
density.  
4.16 Good examples of compact forms of development within Crawley include its 
Conservation Areas , such as St Peter’s, Brighton Road and Ifield Village,  as well as 
more recent developments , such as the Commonwealth Drive scheme at Three 
Bridges. In terms of layout, design and residential amenity, compact development requires more thought, expertise and craft than is usually applied to low density 
development. A far greater quality of architectural design, attention to detailing, 
materials and consideration of the needs of future occupants is needed. Crucially, 
compact development form needs to be carefully stitched and moulded into its 
surroundings, guided by the existing character of an area. The NPPF states that:  
“In determining applications, great weight should be given to outstanding or 
innovative designs which promote high levels of sustainability, or help raise the standard of design more generally in an area, so long as they fit i n with the overall 
form and layout of their surroundings ”
34.  
Landscape Character  
4.17 Trees and areas of landscaping form a central part of Crawley’s New Town heritage. 
As development pressures increase and development land within the urban area 
becomes sc arce, it is critical that this land is protected and improved and used to 
secure multiple benefits. Consideration should be given to the key role of structural landscaping and strategic views in order to maintain or improve the character of 
Crawley.  
4.18 Crawley’s countryside is an extremely valuable leisure, amenity and environmental 
asset for the community, which should be conserved and enhanced in a positive way. 
This must be integrated with the need to achieve the Plan’s wider vision and 
objectives to support sustainable development within the countryside.  
Local Plan Policies  
Neighbourhood Principle  
4.19 Crawley was designated a New Town in 1947 and incorporated the settlements of 
Crawley, Ifield and Three Bridges. Minoprio’s  masterplan phased the development of 
the town through the addition of complete neighbourhoods, each with good access to its own centre offering local shops, services and community facilities. The relatively 
small size of each neighbourhood was intended to help build the new communities, 
achieve closer integration and provide greater accessibility to the neighbourhood 
centres.  
Strategic Policy CL 1: Neighbourhood Principle 
The neighbourhood principle will be protected and enhanced by:  
a) maintaining the neighbourhood structure of the town with a clear pattern of land uses 
and arrangement of open spaces and landscape features. Development within the 
neighbourhoods should mainly be residential, in -keeping with the existing 
neighbourhood. Mix ed use and higher density development may be compatible with 
the existing structure of the neighbourhood, particularly if it is situated in sustainable 
locations such as their neighbourhood centres;  
b) ensuring the neighbourhood centres remain the focal point for the local community, 
providing facilities that meet their day -to-day needs within walking distance; and  
                                                 
34 National Planning Policy Framework , Chapter 12, ‘Achieving well -designed places’ (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 40 c) encouraging development unless it would result in local facilities and services which 
help meet the day -to-day needs of residents being lost or conflicts with other policies 
within the Plan.  
Reasoned Justification  
4.20 The NPPF places a particular onus on the promotion of healthy and inclusive 
communities. Attention is drawn to the role that planning can play in bringing people 
together, promoting sustainable development, and taking an integrated approach to 
the location of housing, economic uses, and community services and facilities. The 
neighbourhood principle continues to represent the most sustainable approach to 
meeting these objecti ves. 
4.21 Therefore, the role of the neighbourhood centres will be protected and enhanced. Uses which meet the day -to-day needs of residents and generate local trips, 
including shops, community uses, small employment premises and schools, will 
continue to be focused in locations which are most accessible by foot, cycling and/or 
public transport. The proximity and mix of uses and the ease of accessibility also 
contributes to the character of the centres by creating a focus of activity.  
The Form of New Development:  Urban Design Principles  
4.22 Successful, sustainable places share a number of characteristics based upon key 
urban design principles. Crawley Borough Council will apply these principles to all 
development proposals. New development can influence whether successful places 
are created, retained or enhanced, whether the schemes are strategic, creating new 
streets and spaces, or smaller but affecting an existing place, for example by 
providing natural surveillance over an unsupervised path.  
Existing Local C haracter  
4.23 Many definitions a re used to define what people perceive as the character of an area, 
such as sylvan, rural, suburban, V ictorian, high street, leafy and terraced. However, 
these definitions are not enough on their own to define the character of a place. 
Behind these labels there is a less obvious physical skeleton, or rural/urban 
structure, underpinning every area. This structure consists of tangible physical 
elements (e.g. paths, landmarks, roads, an edge of woodland, views and vistas), 
which together give a place its disti nct form. In order to guide the form of new 
development, these key components need  to be defined accurately. Their 
identification clarifies how and why people experience, appreciate and enjoy a place.  
The Form of New Development  
4.24 Form refers to how places have arisen, are arranged and designed. This applies to both landscape and built form both in an urban and rural context. Form identifies and 
defines the relationships, shape and size of buildings; landscape patterns and 
features; structures, routes /paths, typology and spaces; and how places are 
arranged. The NPPF sets out that achieving high quality places and buildings is fundamental to the planning and development process and that it also leads to 
improvements in the quality of existing environments.  
4.25 Buildings are an important component of places. However, their good design involves 
careful attention to other important components of places, including those beyond the 
development site boundary, in effect understanding the wider context. A well -
designed place is unlikely to be achieved by focusing only on the appearance, 
materials and detailing of buildings; instead it comes about through making the right 
choices at all levels.  
 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 41 Strategic Policy CL 2: Making Successful Places –  Principles of Good Urban Design  
To assist in the creation, retention and/or enhancement of successful places, applications 
must demonstrate that the form of new development proposals has addressed the 
following principles:  
1. Existing Character  
All new development must identify, respond to and be based upon a thorough 
understanding of the significance and distinctiveness of both the site and the wider area’s 
existing character. All proposals should demonstrate they have considered the council’s 
relevant character and her itage assessments as a starting point for the design 
assessment.  
For major applications, proposals must demonstrate and document how the components 
of existing rural/urban structure, movement patterns, individual landscape/built assets and 
topography have guided and directed the form of new development. Proposals must be 
dictated to and directed by these various elements, setting out a clear design vision which 
builds upon, protects, reinforces and enhances the existing character, while not 
preventing or di scouraging appropriate innovation or change (such as increased 
densities).  
2. Effective Use of Land  
All new development must i dentify, test, determine and (where appropriate) embrace  
opportunities for increased density.  
3. Built Form, Layout and Movement  
In considering the layout, scale and arrangement of buildings or streets, all new 
development must:  
i. demonstrate how all the components and characteristics of place have been 
considered to create a well -designed p roposal ; 
ii. demonstrate how places are experienced and make connected places that are 
permeable for people and wildlife; and  
iii. optimise orientation, solar gain and aspect.   
Major applications must:  
a) ensure the proposed urban structure results in movement paths and corridors which 
are determined by  where people want to go within and beyond the development, 
taking advantage of direct desire lines as much as possible;  
b) provide recognisable spaces and routes that are attractive, safe, uncluttered and 
which work effectively for all in society, including disabled and elderly people. 
Intersections and landmarks should be used and designed to help people find their 
way around and create places that are legible and easy to read;   
c) create continuous frontages onto streets and spaces enclosed by development which 
clearly define private and public areas and ensure streets, footpaths and open spaces 
are overlooked by buildings ; and  
d) ensure movement corridors and the placing of new development take account of long 
distant vistas, landmarks, views into and out of adjoining areas, gateways to and 
between par ticular areas, and focal points.  
Illustrative tools, such as accurate 3D views modelling, should be used to show major 
proposals in relation to the existing setting/context, particularly from a street level 
perspective.  
Reasoned Justification  
4.26 An unprecedented number of densification, intensification and infill development 
projects as well as new planned urban extensions are occurring across big cities and CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 42 towns throughout the UK, and Crawley is no exception.  New urban characters are 
being introduced near, alongside and within established neighbourhoods, at a fast 
pace. Policy CL2 aims to ensure the positive characteristics and qualities of a place 
are articulated, defined and understood.  
4.27 The impact of development on the existing character of an area is complex and it needs to be considered through varied lenses. Existing character assessment is required in order to produce a vital evidence baseline and study. Character 
Assessments should bring together as  many aspects of a place as possible in order 
to appreciate and understand it better. They will provide an understanding of the local context and an analysis of local character and identity to guide and dictate the form 
of new development. The extent, cont ent, analysis and conclusions reached will vary 
and overlap across differing areas.  
4.28 In 2009, the council completed a baseline character assessment of the town to help define its sense of place and this should be considered to inform the design of 
development proposals
35. While the council is bringing forward full area wide 
character assessments, this existing evidence will help provide an initial 
understanding of local context and identity. However, should the relevant full, 
detailed assessment not be c ompleted where a development is proposed, 
developers will be expected to support us in their delivery. The 2009 assessment 
identified broad character areas and positive features that should be protected and 
enhanced, including the green setting of the town  and the quality of particular 
buildings and views. The assessment used key urban design principles to assess the 
quality of areas drawn from the DETR publication “By Design –  Urban Design and 
the Planning System”. This was supported by a Heritage Assessment of some of the 
key heritage and character areas within the borough, carried out in 201036 (reviewed 
in 2020). Some of the places identified are now designated as Conservation Areas and Areas of Special Local Character (ASLC’s). These areas are identified  in this 
Local Plan Chapter 6: Heritage.  
Well- Designed Places:  
4.29 “Well -designed places and buildings come about when there is a clearly expressed 
‘story’ for the design concept and how it has evolved into a design proposal. This 
explains how the concept  influences the layout, form, appearance and details of the 
proposed development. It may draw its inspiration from the site, its surroundings or a 
wider context. It may also introduce new approaches to contrast with, or complement, 
its context. This ‘story ’ will inform and address all ten characteristics. It is set out in a 
Design and Access Statement that accompanies a planning application”37. Taking 
account of Government guidance38, the council considers good design utilises  the 
following key urban design characteristics : 
1. Context  
Good design should enhance its surroundings through a character -directed design 
process. This prompts an area specific, bespoke design approach to each site. This is fundamental to all decisions made in relation to the form of new development. 
However, this does not mean that appearance, scale, density, height, massing and 
form of new developments need to be the same as the surrounding area.  
The identification of individual components that contribute positively to existing 
character is dependent on an accurate evidence base, including heritage 
assessments, landscape and visual constraint analysis, identification of the existing 
                                                 
35 Crawley Baseline Character Assessment (2009) EDAW/AECOM  
36 Crawley ASEQs and Locally Listed Buildings Heritage Assessment (2010) Alan Baxter  
37 National Design Guide, page 16 (1 October 2019) MHCLG  
38 National Design Guide (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 43 rural and urban structure, areas of special environmental quality, key views, and 
pedestrian rights of ways and desire lines.  
It is possible to identify and chart the physical elements, as well as the more elusive perceptions and experiences, of a place, which all work together to form an area’s 
character. Analysing and understanding existing form is the key to  defining character. 
The identification of the rural/urban structure will help to accurately detect the 
significance and distinctiveness of any given site and the wider spirit of a place. To 
successfully achieve this, it is necessary to pinpoint the positi on, function and extent 
of various character components; identify how any existing site and local area is experienced, perceived and enjoyed; and establish a key set of diagrams of fixed 
parameters which direct and guide the form of new development.  
2. Identi ty 
Good design should be attractive and distinctive. It should be based on an understanding of the identity of the place within which it is located, including:  
• The relationship between the natural environment, landscape and built development: underlying landform, patterns of built form, the street pattern, their 
proportions and landscape features; environmental and heritage assets and their 
settings; the proportions of buildings framing spaces and streets.  
• The identity of a place including locally distinct ive patterns, the local vernacular, 
and other landscape and architectural features that contribute to local character.  
• How places are experienced and perceived by both residents and visitors.  
Baseline Character Area Appraisals should identify context and identity.  
3. Built Form  
New development should provide and maintain a coherent pattern of development, 
through clear consideration given to its Layout (Urban/Rural Structure; Urban Grain, 
Density and Mix); Scale (Height and Massing of buildings and spaces; Building Type, 
Density, Façade and Interface); and Appearance (Details and Materials; Façade and 
Interface and Building Type).  
This should build on the following components of structure: movement routes; linear 
boundaries; character areas; strategic points; and landmarks.  
4. Movement  
New development should be accessible, clear and easy to move around within as 
well as to and from. In particular attention should be provided to Movement Patterns 
(Streetscape and Landscape; Separation aspects, such as Connectivity , Permeability 
and Legibility).  
Movement is one of the most significant elements of form. People observe the 
countryside or urban environment while moving through it, along streets, lanes, 
public rights of way or across open space. It is along, and from, t hese paths that the 
other four structural components (Layout, Scale, Appearance and Public Realm) are 
arranged, viewed and relate to one another. Different modes of transport and speed 
dictate the layout, scale, appearance and environmental quality of new development 
adjoining movement corridors. For example: the setting and form of development 
adjacent to a 40mph vehicular path is impacted very differently to that situated 
alongside a pedestrian- only path or a vehicular 20mph traffic street.  
5. Nature  
Opportunities for nature to be enhanced and optimised through new development 
should be taken in line with the principles and requirements of the NPPF requirement 
to enhance biodiversity, and the Local Plan requirements on Green Infrastructure 
connectivity and Bi odiversit y Net Gain (Policies GI1 and GI3 ). 
 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 44 6. Public Spaces  
Public spaces should be safe, social and inclusive. In addition to its location, shape 
and scale, detailed design elements of the Public Realm must be carefully 
considered (Streetscape and Landscape; Details and Materials; Façade and 
Interface).  
The quality of the spaces between buildings is as important as the buildings  
 themselves. Public spaces are streets, squares  and other spaces that are open to all 
and they are the setting for most movement. The design of a public space 
encompasses its siting and integration into the wider network of routes as well as its 
various elements. These include areas allocated to differ ent users –  cars, cyclists 
and pedestrians39. Successful spaces and streets contribute to the quality and 
character of a place, not just how it functions.   
7. Uses  
Uses should be mixed and integrated, where these are complementary and can be 
designed to mitigate against any potential significant conflict (Policies DD1 and 
EC11. Active and engaging frontages should be sought in appropriate locations (Policy TC4).  
Illustrative Tools:  
4.30 In order to assess and communicate the quality and impact of large ne w 
development form, accurate views from key points are essential. Chosen views must 
be from a realistic street level position (i.e. average adult eye height). Accurate 
photo- montaged images which include adjoining/retained context should also be 
included t o aid visual communication.  
Compact Development, Layout and Sustainable Movement  
4.31 Good urban design is sustainable design. Urban form and structure have a major influence on climate change. There is a crucial relationship between form and space, 
buildings, energy, movement patterns, land take and location. As the National Design 
Guide s tates:  
“Compact forms of development bring people together to support local public 
transport, facilities and local services. They make destinations easily accessible by 
walking or cycling wherever this is practical. This helps to reduce dependency upon 
the private car”
 40. 
 “Patterns of movement for people are integral to well -designed places. They include 
walking and cycling, access to facilities, employment and servicing, parking and the 
convenience of public transport”.  
4.32 Sustainable urban design is not just about changing the way places look but about making places work better.  Good design should be based on an understanding of 
movement patterns around which appropriate uses can be located and then suitable 
densities determined (see Policy CL4). Choices made in relation to the layout and scale of new development strongly influence everyday human activity, particularly in 
relation to movement which dictates how people move within, through and around a 
place. As a result it has a major influence on climat e change. Government policy 
makes it clear that higher residential densities, public transport and sustainability are 
all interconnected and that they rely upon one another in order to achieve an 
increase in the supply of residential units.  
4.33 Higher lev els of sustainable residential density depend on a one key infrastructural 
foundation in particular: fast, reliable, frequent and high capacity public transport. 
                                                 
39 National Design Guide, page 30 ‘Public Spaces’  (1 October 2019)  MHCLG  
40 National Design Guide, page 19, 63, ‘Compact form of devel opment’ (1 October 2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 45 Crawley already has some of this transport infrastructure in place with key bus and 
rail routes and interchanges.  
Policy CL3 : Movement Patterns,  Layout  and Sustainable Urban Design 
All development should seek to:  
1. Use land more efficiently and sustainably, integrate land uses and transport networks. 
It should build upon, connect to, enhance and extend sustainable movement, in turn 
maximising opportunities for compact development and sustainable travel and 
increased levels of sustainable transport modal share.  
2. Put people before traffic and encourage walking and cycling through establishing a 
layout of pathways which:  
i. Understand and respond to the wider borough pattern of movement, 
demonstrating how walking and cycling connect ions will enhance and integrate 
schemes with Crawley Town Centre, local centres, transportation hubs, schools 
and employment areas.  
ii. Connect new development to areas of rural open space and/or large urban areas 
of green open space and ensure new route alignments follow direct desire lines 
as much as possible allowing for through routes to be straight and direct, 
providing clear, legible and obvious linkages to adjoining areas.  
iii. Ensure that buildings are orientated to overlook movement corridors in order to 
provide passive supervision and safet y.   
In addition to the above, larger schemes will be required to establish a development  form 
based on sustainable compact layout and scale. These must:  
a. Be planned and located adjacent to stations, stops or interchanges along existing 
segregated, high capacity, high frequent public transport corridors; and  
b. Be designed and laid out to ensure future residents and users are within eight minute 
walking distance of such rail stations or bus stops.   
Reasoned Justification:  
4.34 The commercial viability of frequent and reliable public transport depends on 
compact development and minimum densities (see Policy CL4). Compact 
neighbourhoods provide a more substantial and reliable customer base for public 
transport services. In turn, frequent and reliable services encourage a shift away from 
private car use, Research41 suggests net densities of 60 dwellings per hectare are 
necessary to sustain a dependable, frequent and high capacity public transport 
service, such as currently exists in Crawley along sections of the Fastway bus 
network.  The borough’s existing key corridors, access points and inter changes 
include:  
1. Crawley Town Centre rail and bus station hub.  
2. Two high frequency, quality bus corridors, running north/south along Fastway bus 
Route 10, including Routes 20 and 100, as follows:  
a. Where Route 20 aligns with 10, all stops between Gatwick Airport and the 
Gatwick Road North stop; and all stops between the Southgate Avenue south 
of station way top and to Broadfield Barton stop;  
b. Where Fastway Routes 10 and 100 intersect; the Manor Royal Centre stop, 
and in the Town Centre, Crawley Bus Station and the Broadway.  
3. Gatwick Airport and Three Bridges rail stations.  
4. Gatwick Airport coach station.  
                                                 
41 Urban Des ign Compendium, page 47 (HCA 2013 and English P artnerships 2007)  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 46 4.35 Too often permeability and connectivity is treated as an afterthought leaving new 
development isolated with minimal or disjointed linkages to the wider sustainable 
transport network and reliant only on the car. New development should be seen as 
an opportunity to integrate improvements to active travel and public transport 
corridors. Whether strategic or small in size, all new development needs to consider  
its place and impact within the wider context and should think beyond the site’s red 
lines. This is particularly important, with regard to movement patterns, in establishing 
walkable neighbourhoods and ensuring new development can optimise and promote 
modal shift to sustainable alternatives.  The smallest development proposals can 
contribute to improvements, such as enhancing a short link to a footpath, or including 
a window for natural surveillance over a route.  
4.36 Thresholds for larger development, as referred to in Policy CL3, include new 
residential development in excess of 80 units, or other types of development as per 
the thresholds outlined in the Local Validation Checklist: for example, hotels, 100 
beds or more, 50+ bed hospitals, B1 2500sqm, B2 4000sqm and B8 5000sqm (see 
Policy ST1).  
4.37 Delivering relatively straight, through routes, particularly for pedestrians and cyclists, 
is very important. It requires looking both outward to the wider network as well as 
inward to the site being developed. When a district or movement corridor is well 
connected it will naturally encourage sustainable movement patterns and reduce the 
dependence and reliance on vehicular movement. It will also have high pedestrian 
footfall, which will improve local centre viabi lity and attract local shops and services, 
closer to where people live and work.  
Layout  and Scale : Density , Height and Massing  
4.38 The NPPF is clear that “ the creation of high quality buildings and places is 
fundamental to what the planning and developme nt process should achieve”42. Good 
design is key as it helps make development acceptable to communities. All areas have differing capacities for change and potential for intensification; there are, for 
example, limited opportunities for change in Conservati on Areas and Areas of 
Special Local Character.  
4.39 Density is just one aspect of built form. As referred to earlier, building height, block 
size and building typology all affect the character of an area and the perception of 
density. Density and mix is concerned with the amount of development, intensity of 
activity and the associated range of uses. Accessibility, street life, vitality and viability 
are all impacted differently depending on development scale or levels of density. 
Many schemes are perceived to be excessively dense, visually inappropriate and 
generally out of keeping with their adjoining context when they fail to take account of 
the need for density and form to be appropriate to its context. This does not mean 
that density, design or unit typology should be the same as the surrounding area, but 
new buildings need to respect their neighbours.   
4.40 The creation of high quality buildings and places is fundamental in order to secure more sustainable, compact development across the borough. Compac t development 
and the determination of density ranges must be directed first and foremost by the following two parameters:  
1. The existing character of an area: Density and mix, height and massing and 
proposed urban structure must complement, build upon, retain and protect 
successful attributes of an area, as outlined in Strategic Policy CL2.  
2. Proximity to sustainable movement or the potential for achieving this (Policy CL3).  
                                                 
42 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 124 (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 47 Policy CL4 : Compact  Development – Layout, Scale and Appearance  
Residential Density  
Across the borough, in general, a density of at least 45 dwellings per hectare will apply to 
all residential  developments within the Built -Up Area Boundary unless the existing 
character justifies a lower figure.  
In specific locations outlined below, for ma jor applications, proposals must achieve 
minimum densities in line with the following categories, unless the existing character 
justifies a lower figure, in orde r to make the best use of land and encourage modal shift to 
take advantage of sustainable trans port options :  
i. High density: A minimum of 200 dwellings per hectare.  
Where: Brownfield development sites within eight minutes walking distance of Crawley rail 
and bus station, Town Centre Fastway stops at the Broadway and Leisure Park 
and Three Bridges rail station .  
ii. Medium density:  Within a range of 60 - 200 dwellings per hectare.  
Where: Areas of the town with good access to public transport and local facilities but 
where the established local character precludes the high density, including:  
• Within the same distances as (i) above, pre-1947 areas  of the borough 
including Victorian districts , and areas within or affectin g the setting of the 
original New Town shopping precinct;   
• Neighbourhood Centres ; and  
• Areas within eight minutes walking distance of stops along Fastway Route 10, 
or where a similar or enhanced public transport service is provided in the 
future.  
Reasoned Justification  
4.41 National planning policy emphasises the need to plan for the effective use of land in 
order to deliver a sufficient supply of homes, and states that strategic policies should 
make “as much use as possible of previously -developed or ‘brownfield land”43… and 
“promote and support the development of under -utilised land and buildings”44. 
Furthermore, the NPPF identifies that  “small and medium sized sites can make an 
important contribution to meeting the housing requirement of an area, and are often 
built-out relatively quickly”45.    
4.42 Density, which will be measured as the net dwelling density in dwellings per 
hectare46, has to be appropriate to context in the first instance. Policy CL1(a) 
confirms that mixed use and higher density development may be compatible with the existing structure of the neighbourhood, particularly if it is situated in sustainable 
locations such as their neighbourhood centres. Local Design Standards and area -
wide design assessment will inform which options are most appropriate in terms of 
character and context for different parts of Crawley. Successful extensions of the 
character of the surrounding area can help create great settings for new 
development. Policy CL4 establishes a minimum density expectation for the borough 
of at least 45 dwellings per hectare. This has been reached through an assessment 
of the town’s existing density levels, considering good practice within the borough 
and through seeking to achieve a challenging but generally appropriate minimum 
                                                 
43 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 117 (2019) MHCLG  
44 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 118d (2019) MHCLG  
45 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 68a (2019) MHCLG  
46 Net dwelling density is calculated by including only those site areas which will be developed for housing and 
directly associated uses, including access roads within the site, private garden space, car parking areas, 
incidental open space and landscaping and children’s play areas, where these are provided  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 48 level in order to maximise effective use of land without creating significant harm to 
amenity and character.  
4.43 In all areas (including w ithin those locations specified in the policy to be appropriate 
for high and medium density levels) the presence of sensitive heritage assets and 
existing character could mean much lower densities would be required. For example, 
these may be areas within or affecting the setting of Listed Buildings, Conservation Areas and Areas of Special Local Character or l ocally listed asset . In such locations, 
significant adverse impact on sensitive assets would justify not meeting the minimum density levels required by  this Policy and development which could potentially cause 
significant adverse impact on such locations must be carefully designed (in accordance with the Policies set out in the ‘Heritage’ chapter of this Local Plan).  
4.44 Density is usually expressed in units per hectare. However, whilst density is a 
mechanism to measure schemes against, no specific design qualities or characteristics are implied. In ensuring reaching higher density levels in Crawley 
does not result in poor decisions and/or town cramming, it is essential that density is 
seen as a product of design, not a determinant of it. The council’s Densification Study 
provides greater detail in relation to increasing densities in Crawley to support the 
implementation of this policy.  
4.45 The way in w hich a place is designed is more important to its desirability than the 
measurement of its density. Measured density and perceived density are not necessarily aligned. On the same sized plot, different approaches to urban form and 
height can achieve the same density. The following three approaches to form are a 
good example of this:  
(1) two and three storey terraced housing; urban form: high site coverage pattern;  
(2) three and four storey buildings with varying height, block size and building depth; 
urban form: medium site coverage;  
(3) a high rise tower block; urban form: low site coverage.  
4.46 As is typical of new towns, Crawley was conceived as a lower -mid density town with 
average densities of 21/28 dwellings per hectare. Many of England’s best urban 
areas and many of Crawley’s historic Conservation Areas have a compact form and 
considerably higher densities   
4.47 In seeking to achieve higher densities, an over -provision of smaller studio and one 
bed units against the council’s housing needs would not  be considered acceptable. 
Policy H4 sets the expected housing mix for schemes within the borough and 
proposals will be measured against this starting point. Similarly, the council’s policies 
relating to internal and external space standards and accessible and adaptable 
buildings (Policies DD2 and DD3) will also be required to be met in all new residential developments. The Housing Typology policies (H3 and H3a- H3f) provide some 
further policy consideration for housing development on a range of sites across  the 
borough.   
Masterplanning, Design Codes and Design Review  
4.48 A suite of government guidance supports the NPPF objectives outlining and 
illustrating the government’s priorities for well -designed places. Specific, detailed and 
measurable criteria for the good design of larger applications are most appropriately 
set out at the local level. This may take the form of further design guidance. In areas 
where higher density ranges may be appropriate, masterplans and bespoke design 
codes will be prepared by C rawley Borough Council over time or prepared with the 
support of applicants to accompany planning applications. A National Model Design Code is due to be published by MHCLG setting out detailed standards for key 
elements of successful design.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 49 4.49 The NPPF  highlights the valuable role of Design Review in ensuring high standards 
of design. Crawley Borough Council recognise how an independent design review of 
proposals could be advantageous for large or significant  applications and this will be 
discussed with developers should demand arise. Applicants will be required to 
resource any design review agreed. As is the case with pre- application consultation, 
early constructive discussions with a peer review process will help the design 
development process and desi gn quality and presentations, in particular need to 
outline the challenges of the project brief and the site and the concept approach to the issues outlined in Strategic Policy CL2. A panel would be an advisory body with 
no formal decision- making powers.  
Policy CL5: Development Briefs and Masterplanning  
To support applications for significant  developments or sites which could form part of 
wider development area, Development Briefs and/or Masterplans may  be required to 
illustrate and describe how planning and design policies and principles will be 
implemented. Pre- application consultation should take place at the earliest opportunity.    
At concept design stage, M asterplans should provide indicative and flexible vision for 
future development form, urban desi gn concepts and options. These should be informed 
by preliminary technical appraisals and viability testing.  
Masterplans must chart overall urban design guidance and intent, specifically:  
i. how a site or series of sites will be developed, implemented and phased;  
ii. setting out principles on matters of importance rather than prescribing design in 
detail.  
Reasoned Justification  
4.50 Various design tools47 are available which should be used to assist in identifying key 
components of the context and character of an area or site. Used effectively, this 
output can in turn help identify and deliver an appropriate new high quality form, both 
of landscape and str uctures, private space and public realm. In certain cases, design 
codes may also need to be developed in order to provide new development with a 
template within which to design individual buildings.  
“As with any project, you cannot hope to get what you wan t at the end of the process 
if you have not defined what you wanted at the outset and prepared a good brief. The 
implementation plan should be integral to the preparation of the spatial masterplan; 
one must inform the other”48. 
4.51 If consistent with the L ocal Plan, and if work has been prepared in collaboration with 
the local planning authority in accordance with the Planning Regulations, including 
undertaking a period of appropriate public consultation and sustainability appraisal 
screening, this work may  be adopted formally as a Supplementary Planning 
Document. Successful masterplans should set out how to create and sustain 
excellent places for living, work and play. Further detail on Masterplanning 
definitions, content and process are outlined in depth i n CABE’s publication ‘Creating 
successful masterplans, a guide for clients’ 2008/09.  
                                                 
47 Related National Design Guide Definitions:  
• A design guide: A document providing guidance on how development can be carried out in accordance with 
good design practice, often produced by a local authority.  
• A design code: A set of illustrated design requirements that provide specific, detailed parameters for the physical development of a site or area. The graphic and writ ten components of the code should build upon a 
design vision, such as a masterplan or other design and development framework for a site or area.   
• Design concept: The basic design ideas on which a proposal will be based, often expressed in a combination 
of words and visual material.  
48 ‘Creating successful masterplans, a guide for clients’ Chapter 32, 2.2 (2008/09)  CABE  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 50 4.52 This Policy applies to significant developments, which may be smaller developments 
in highly sensitive locations, or those of a significant scale. It is of particular  relevance 
where schemes may be made up from different sites and where comprehensive 
development is considered particularly critical.  In order to establish whether a 
scheme would fall into this category at the earliest opportunity, the council expects developers to engage in discussions through the pre- application process for these 
sites in order to agree the potential need for masterplan.  
4.53 Applications for appropriate schemes may be asked to present to a design review panel.    
Structural Landscaping 
4.54 Crawley’s green appearance is derived from historic landscape features combined with more recent additions attr ibutable to the New Town master plan and subsequent 
development. These features include large parks, open spaces, woods and 
woodland corridors, the cumulative impact of individual trees, wide verges, lakes and 
water courses, remnant moats, and former estate gardens that provide a distinc tive 
and characterful quality to the town. This s tructural landscaping can be attractive in 
its own right or form a back drop or setting. Areas of soft landscape can also form part 
of the structure of the borough or act as a visual buffer, perhaps shielding unattractive areas from view or softening the impact of major roads.  Development 
proposals should identify and protect existing assets and exploit opportunities that 
will enhance the landscape quality of the area.  
Policy CL6: Structural Landscaping  
Areas  of trees and soft landscape that make an important contribution to the development 
of the  town and its  distinct  neighbourhoods, in terms of character and appearance, 
structure, screening or softening, have been identified on the Local Plan Map as 
Structural Landscaping. Development s are required to respect and plan for the 
conservation of the landscape character of the town,  proposals that affect this role should 
demonstrate the visual impact of the proposals and should protect and/or enhance 
structural landscaping, where appropriate .  
Where limited or weak structural landscaping can be identified as a negative factor in the 
attractiveness of an area, opportunities will be sought to deliver enhancements as part of 
development proposals , this may  include improvements to biodiversity and habitat 
creation where multiple benefits can be achieved.  
Reasoned Justification  
4.55 This P olicy seeks to ensure that development schemes identify and take account of 
existing structural landscape assets which are a positive element of the character of 
the town.  The P olicy also seeks to ensure that impacts on structural landscaping 
assets are not dealt with as an afterthought , but progressed as an integral part of the 
design of the scheme,  includin g opportunities for improvements. Consideration 
should also be given to the key role of structural landscaping and strategic views in 
order to maintain or improve the character of Crawley. However, as an urban area, 
new tree planting may not alway s be the best use of land, and other forms of soft 
landscaping and habitats could be a beneficial alternative in some cases.     
4.56 To maximise multiple benefits of  Structural Landscaping, in line with and 
complementary to the character of the area, these can also be designed and 
managed as  species -rich habitat s. Wild flower meadows and flower -rich habitats,  in 
particular , are crucial to supporting pollinators by providing good sources of nectar 
and pollen throughout the summer and also shelter and nest si tes. The council is 
committed to securing such enhancements wherever possible.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 51  
Important Views  
4.57 The borough of Crawley straddles the Low Weald and the High Weald National 
Landscape Character Areas, as defined by Natural England. A key characteristic of 
the High Weald is a well -wooded landscape rising above the Low Weald. The 
changes in levels, which can be as much as 75 metres, allow there to be views from lower lying areas to higher, wooded land along the southern edge of the borough and 
views from higher land across the borough. Studies, including the Crawley Baseline Character Assessment (2009), have identified the key views in the borough.  
Policy CL7: Important and Valued Views  
The following types of  Important Views identified on the Local Plan Map should be 
protected and/or enhanced and development proposals should not result in a direct 
adverse impact or lead to the erosion of these views:   
• Linear Contained Views 
The robust tree planting that contains the views is essential to their quality and must 
be protected and/or enhanced.  Therefore,  all new buildings, structures, signs and 
advertisements, parked vehicles and hard surfaced areas must be well -screened by 
trees and other soft landscaping. Development proposals at the end of the view 
corridor must demonstrate that the view would be protect ed and/or enhanced.  
The Boulevard view lies between its junction with  the High Street  and the C rawley 
College Tower. Any proposals in the area will be required to retain,  or enhance,  the 
vista or to replace it with public realm of equal, or  greater , towns cape value.  
• Long Distance Views 
The points from which the view can be enjoyed must remain unobstructed by 
development in the foreground. Where the view is to an identified feature,  
development is required to protect and/or enhance this feature.  
 
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 52 Valued Vie ws 
More localised Valued Views are identified in Conservation Area Statements and other 
Supplementary Planning Documents. These form part of the special character of relevant 
areas. When considering development proposals which affect these views, the objec tive 
of protecting or enhancing them should be given appropriate weight in light of:  
i. Policies HA1 -HA7 or other character or design policies relevant to the local area;  
ii. any national or local heritage -, design - or character -related designation in place for 
the area.  
Area Character Assessment s, when prepared , will further i dentify valued localised views. 
Where such work defines urban and landscape structure, the relationship between 
landscape, sett lemen t and movement patterns, will be framed and founded upon both 
long distance and linear views.  Views out of a site or place are as important as defining 
from where there are the m ost important views into a site.  
The visual impact of proposals affecting Important  and Valued Views must be clearly and 
accurately demonstrated as part of the planning application submission, for example 
through the use of verified view montages and cross sections.  
Reasoned Justification  
4.58 The council has identified a number of important views which can be enjoyed from a 
publicly accessible viewpoint . These  enable the viewer to appreciate an attractive or 
interesting view of  areas  of the borough that may include landscape features or built 
landmarks.  
4.59 The location of viewpoints and the general direction of the view are identified on the 
Local Plan Map.  
 
 
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 53 Linear Contained Views  
• Balcombe Road:  View from Grayrigg Road and Balcombe Road towards the Grade 
I Listed Building, St. Nicholas’ Church.  
• The Boulevard:  View between the western side of High Street at its junction with 
The Boulevard to the C rawley  College tower on the eastern side of College Road, 
enclosed by trees and buildings.  
• Brighton Road:  View from A23/A264 junction, northwards along Brighton Road, to 
the town centre. The view is contained by trees between the A23/A264 junction and 
the football stadium/K2 Crawley leisure centre.  
• Hawth Avenue:  View in two directions, enclosed by trees. Any redevelopment 
proposals on Russell Way have the potential to t erminate the view from the north 
eastern end of Hawth Avenue, at the junction with Weald Drive.  
• London Road:  View between Tushmore Roundabout and Martyrs Avenue enclosed 
by trees and then up to County Oak Roundabout.  
• Northgate Avenue:  View in both directio ns between Northgate Roundabout and 
Central Sussex College, enclosed by trees.  
Long Distance Views  
• Buckswood Drive:  Panoramic views, from vicinity of the northern junction with 
Kingscote Hill, to the south -east across trees associated with Broadfield Brook and 
adjacent open space to wooded areas east of Brighton Road and within Tilgate Park.  
• Gossops Drive:  Long distance view southwards from Gossops Drive, between 
Cobnor Close and Eden Road, to the part of Target Hill that lies within the borough 
boundary.  
• Target Hill:  Views from south- eastern side of the hill, from the vicinity of the junction 
of Hobbs Road and Edrich Road, to the north- east over the Broadfield Mosque, 
across the borough t o distant hills, and to the south east over the wooded areas 
associated with Creasy’s Brook, the Eddington Hill area and the portion of Pease 
Pottage Forest and the AONB that lie within the district.  
• Tilgate Park:  Long distance views, northwards from the c ountry park car park and 
the adjacent area of open space to the north, across Tilgate, Southgate and the town 
centre and beyond to Leith Hill, Box Hill and Colley Hill.  
4.60 The designation would not duplicate protection afforded to Listed Buildings or 
Conservation Areas. Important but more localised valued views and landmarks, i.e. 
less than approximately 200m, will be identified, protected and enhanced through 
Conservation A rea, Area of Special Local Character or Locally Listed Building 
assessments. A number of the important landmarks in the borough are Listed 
Buildings and some are located within Conservation Areas, including St. Margaret’s 
Church, Ifield; St. Nicholas Churc h, Pound Hill; and the Church of St. John the 
Baptist near High Street, Northgate. These buildings are subject to national 
regulatory and policy controls which include requirements to protect their settings.  
4.61 The views identified within Manor Royal wil l be protected and/or enhanced via 
development undertaken in accordance with guidance contained in the Manor Royal 
Design Guide SPD and through any works undertaken in accordance with the Manor 
Royal Public Realm Strategy.  
Development O utside the Built -Up Area  
4.62 It is important that a vibrant multifunctional landscape around Crawley  is encouraged, 
maximising its contribution to people’s quality of life,  wellbeing,  the natural 
environment and the economy. The Crawley  Borough Council Landscape Character 
Assessment has been used to set the criteria based policies which encourage proposals that respect the character and role of different areas. Policy EC12  of the 
Local Plan supports appropriate small -scale economic devel opment beyond the Built -
Up Area Boundary,  where this would not undermine the intrinsic character and CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 54 beauty of the countryside. T here may also be limited opportunities for appropriate 
new residential development.  
Policy CL8: Development Outside the Built -Up Area  
To ensure that Crawley’s compact nature and attractive setting is maintained, 
development should:  
i. Be grouped where possible with existing buildings to minimise impact on visual 
amenity;  
ii. Identify existing character and key assets,  heritage,  landscape and built forms, and 
recognise the significant qualities of the area, including its grain, aspect, scale, natural 
resources, views, sense of space and tranquillity to guide any new development;  
iii. Identify the strategic context of such settings and environments of the town, and 
respond intelligently to the underlying landscape and environmental systems and 
form;  
iv. Maintain a loose- knit, low density rural character clearly differentiating it from 
development within the urban area;  
v. Be located to avoid t he loss of important on -site views and off -site views towards 
important landscape  and heritage  features , understanding how they function and how 
they are experienced and perceived;  
vi. Reflect local character , heritage  and distinctiveness in terms of form, hei ght, scale, 
plot shape and size, elevations, roofline and pitch, overall colour, texture and 
boundary treatment (walls, hedges, fences and gates) . Where screening and existing 
character allows, careful, unique modern new design could be considered;  
vii. Minimise the impact of lighting to avoid blurring the distinction between urban and 
rural areas and in areas which are intrinsically dark to avoid light pollution to the night 
sky; 
viii. Ensure building s and any  external hard surfacing, parking areas, access roads and 
outdoor storage are not visually prominent in the landscape;  
ix. Avoid generating an unacceptable level and/or frequency of noise in areas relatively 
undisturbed by noise and valued for their recreational or amenity value;  
x. Avoid generating  traffic of a type or amount inappropriate to the rural roads;  
xi. Ensure access to the countryside is maintained and enhanced from Crawley’s 
neighbourhoods, in accordance with Policy OS3 and demonstrate how such areas can 
be better experienced; and  
xii. Avoid introducing  a use which by virtue of its operation is not compatible with the 
countryside.  
In addition to the above, all proposals must recognise the individual character and 
distinctiveness, and the role of the landscape character area or edge in which it is 
proposed as s hown on the Local Plan Map, established by the Crawley Borough Council 
Landscape Character Assessment , and set out  below.  
Certain types of development may alter one or more important elements that make up a 
Character Area or Edge. This is acceptable if its  overall character and role is not 
compromised and measures are taken to limit impacts through mitigation and 
enhancement where possible. This may be the strengthening of other elements of the 
area’s character or general enhancement through increased biodi versity, green links and 
other mitigation measures as detailed in the Landscape Character Assessment.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 55 Proposals which alter the overall character of the area must demonstrate that the need for 
the development clearly outweighs the impact on landscape char acter and is in 
accordance with national and local policy. Mitigation and/or compensation will be sought 
in such cases where this can be proven.  Applicants are advised to consider the 
enhancement opportunities identified in the Crawley Borough Landscape Character 
Assessment.  
North East Crawley High Woodland Fringes  
Proposals which do not create , or are able to adequately mitigate,  visual/noise intrusion 
are generally supported. This area has an important role in maintaining the separation of 
the distinct identities of Gatwick Airport, Crawley and Horley.  
Upper Mole Farmlands Rural Fringe  
Proposals which do not create , or are able t o adequately mitigate,  visual/noise intrusion 
are generally supported. This area has an important role in maintaining the separation of 
the distinct identity of Gatwick Airport from Crawley and the valuable recreational links 
from the northern neighbourhoods of Crawley into the countryside.  
West of Ifield Rural Fringe  
Proposals which respect this area of locally special rural fringe, its nature conservation 
and recreation value, its positive relationship with the urban edge and links to the wider 
countrysi de will be encouraged.  
West of Gossops Green/Bewbush Rural Fringe  
The green infrastructure along Bewbush Brook and Spruce Hill Brook is of high value and 
should be protected and linked to green infrastructure in the new neighbourhood, 
Kilnwood Vale and where other opportunities arise.  
South of Broadfield into Buchan Hill Forest and Fringes  
The green fingers and local nature reserve will be conserved as they provide existing 
green infrastructure links with potential for improvement to accessing the countryside and 
wildlife corridors. The area is valued for its quiet recreational opportunities which should 
be maintained. Proposals should not conflict with the High Weald AONB Management 
Plan objectives.  
Tilgate/Worth Forest and Fringes  
Proposals within Tilgate Country Park and Worth Conservation Area/Worth Way  LWS  
should conserve and enhance their high landscape and biodiversity  value and potential 
for improved green infrastructure links to other areas.   
Where development is proposed close to, or within, the High Weald Area of Outstanding 
Natural Beauty, it should be planned and designed in acc ordance with Policy C L9.  
Reasoned Justification  
4.63 Beyond the Built -Up Area B oundary lays the urban/ rural fringe which forms an 
important  landscape  setting for the town. The nature, extent and spatial significance 
offered by differing rural settings and features offer differing advantages to the overall 
form, landscape and urban structure of Crawley. Certain features will be understood 
in the context  of the borough as a whole whilst others contribute to very local 
environments. Rural fringe areas require a policy approach which respects their 
unique character and role whilst  also encouraging sustainable devel opment which 
can enhance access and interac tion with the area from Crawley’s neighbourhoods. 
To achieve this, a well -designed approach to the urban/rural fringe is required, which 
relates development at the periphery to its rural setting, maintaining the character of Crawley as a compact town with g ood access to the countryside.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 56  
4.64 It is important to ensure t he rural fringe does not become incrementally more 
suburban in nature which would conflict with the overarching principles on meeting 
the presumption in favour of sustainable development (Policy SD1: Presumption in 
Favour of Sustainable Development) and will be resisted.  Urban extensions will be in 
the countryside outside Crawley’s boundary and need to be properly planned to ensure the important contribution of the rural landscape setting for Crawley’s 
neighbourhoods is not lost. The visual, spatial and environmental aspects of their 
landscape setting must be fully assessed and any development planned to protect 
and enhance important aspects.  
High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty  
4.65 The High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty is a nationally important landscape where great weight should be given to conserving  the landscape and 
scenic beauty  of the designation. A small area of the AONB lies within the southern 
boundary of the borough.  
Policy CL9: High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty  
The council will conserve and enhance the natural beauty and setting of the High Weald 
AONB by having particular regard to the High Weald AONB Management Plan in 
determining development  proposals affecting the AONB.  
Where development is proposed close to, or within, the High Weald Area of Outstanding 
Natural Beauty, consideration of both the visual impacts on the intrinsic scenic qualities of 
the AONB and the impacts of its landscape character or features,  must be provided within 
submitted landscape character assessments . 
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 57 Reasoned Justification  
4.66 The small area of t he AONB within Crawley’s boundary is located to the south of the 
A264 which separates it from Broadfield Neighbourhood. The western part (the 
former Broadfield Kennels) is allocated under Local Plan Policy H8 as a reserve 
Gypsy and Traveller site for up to 10 pitches. The eastern part is heavily wooded and 
incorporates the Little Trees Cemetery. To the east is a row of houses along Old 
Brighton Road, considered part of Pease Pottage Village. Buchan County Park is 
within the High Weald AONB and adjacent to C rawley’s boundary.  
 
4.67 The borough council has a statutory duty to conserve and enhance the natural 
beauty of the High Weald AONB. The visual setting of the AONB to the east is largely 
shielded by the M23. However, there are other impacts that could af fect it such as 
watercourses and historic routeways. In addition, there are some areas of Ancient 
Woodland between Pease Pottage and the A264 and the areas further north- west 
form part of Buchan Park and include archaeological assets.  
4.68 Proposals  within the AONB  will be judged against the guidelines and advice of the 
High Weald AONB Management Plan. The Management P lan provides a transparent 
and accessible means by which the council can ensure that it is exercising its duty to 
have regard to the purposes of designation49 and providing a guide for everyone 
involved with the actions they can take to care for the area.  
4.69 The Management Plan, updated in 2019, establishes  five defining components of 
character that have made the High Weald a recognisably distinct and homogenous 
area for at least the last 700 years: 1. Geology, landform and water systems;  2. 
Dispersed historic settlements;  3. Dense network of historic routeways;  4. 
Abundance of ancient woodland;  5. Small, irregular fields, bounded by hedgerows 
and woods, with distinctive zones of lowland heaths and inned river valleys.  
                                                 
49 Section 85, Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000  
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 58 Design & Development Requirements  
5.1 Design continues to be an important consideration. The NPPF is clear that “ the 
creation of high quality buildings and places  is fundamental to what the planning and 
development process should achieve”50. 
Chapter Content  
5.2 This chapter sets out poli cies to guide detailed development  matters . It covers  the 
design and the landscaping criteria expected for all new development  and specific 
requirements relating to particular developments . 
The Key Issues  
Design  
5.3 Good design is key, helping make development acceptable to communities , and 
should be grounded in an understanding and evaluation of each area’s defining 
characteristics.  Good design is a key aspect of sustainable development, is 
indivisible from good planning, and should contribute positively to making places 
better for people. It is important therefore to plan positively for the achievement of 
high quality and inclusive design for all development, including individual buildings, 
public and private spaces in new development as part of larger areas .  
 “Well- designed buildings are carefully integrated with their surrounding external 
space. All private and shared external spaces including parking (see Movement), are 
high quality, convenient and function well. Amenity spaces have a reasonable degree 
of privacy . External spaces are designed to respond to local character, as 
appropriate solutions will vary by the context, for example whether it is a town centre 
or suburb”51. 
New H ousing Development   
5.4  The design and layout of housing has for centur ies been well understood, 
appreciated and applied across Britain. Conversely , apart ment and maisonette living 
lacks the same understanding or application. Apart from the positive perceptions 
associated with Penthouse and Loft apartments, the preference of most UK urban 
dwellers would be to live in a house. People generally believe that apartment living 
offers less con veniences and flexibility. Design and residential amenity standards 
need to improve as new development now has to be more compact and sustainable 
in order to make efficient use of land. How flats are designed, improved standards in 
relation to internal planning and l ayout, as well as the management of the common 
areas, are all key to changing both perceptions and the quality of apartments and maisonettes.  
“Apart from the question of privacy, the critical issues connected with living in flats 
can be listed under three main headings:  
 - quality of internal planning and layout;  
- sharing circulation spaces (that is entrances, lifts, stairs and corridors),  
  common facilities such as refuse disposal and parking, services such as aerial  
  systems and deliveries, and most importantly, maintenance;  
- aspect and orientation”
52.  
 “Well- designed homes and communal areas within buildings provide a good 
standard and quality of internal space. This includes room sizes, floor -to-ceiling 
                                                 
50 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 124 (2019) MHCLG  
51  National Design Guide, p age 39  ‘homes and buildings’  (1 October 2019)  MHCLG  
52 The Housing Design Handbook (2010)  David Levitt, Levitt Bernstein Architects  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 59 heights, internal and external storage, sunlight, daylight and ventilation. The quality of 
internal space needs careful consideration in higher -density developments, 
particularly for family accommodation, where access, privacy, daylight and external amenity space are also important…  Well- designed places include a clear attention to 
detail. This considers how buildings operate in practice and how people access and use them on a day -to-day basis, both now and in future”
53. 
5.5 Policies DD1 -DD3 outline the requirements of all new development, particularly 
relating to new dwellings, including flats and maisonettes.  Other policies in the chapter relate to specific development issues which can affect the amenity and 
character of the borough, such as trees and advertisements.   
Local Plan Policies  
The Normal Requirements of All New Development  
5.6 An attractive and well -planned environment can contribute to wellbeing and attract 
inward investment to the borough.  Therefore,  new developments should be of a high 
quality to protect and enhance the distinctive character of the town and create successful new streets and spaces. In determining whether a development proposal 
is of a high standard of design, there should be careful consideration of how the 
scheme would look, how it would work in practice and whether it is built to last, for 
example in terms of the choice of materials.  
5.7 Once urban form and landscape characterisation assessment studies have being 
completed, the resulting understanding and evidence must guide a bespoke local 
design approach tailored specifically to the character of its immediate context .    
Strategic Policy DD1 : Normal Requirements of All New Development  
Development proposals must use land effici ently and not unduly restrict the development 
potential of adjoining land, nor prejudice the proper planning and phasing of development 
over a wider area.  
All proposals for development in Crawley will be required to:  
a)     Provide or retain a good standard of amenity for all existing and future occupants of 
land and buildings, and not cause unreasonable harm to the amenity of the 
surrounding area by way of overlooking, dominance or overshadowing, traffic 
generation and gener al activity, for example noise, smells and/or vibration;  
b)   Design the o rientation and aspect , including the location of habitable rooms in order to 
optimise  solar gain, recognising the influence of the daily sun path and green 
infrastructure.  
c)   Retai n and reuse existing buildings occupying a site or demonstrate why this is not 
feasible, viable or desirable. This is particularly relevant in the case of building, 
structures or landscape features that contribute to local character, setting and context;  
d)   Include well -located public spaces that support a wide variety of activities and 
encourage human interaction to promote health, wellbeing, social and civic inclusion. 
Street s within residential neighbourhoods should,  in particular , be designed to 
prioritise pedestrians with a focus on social interaction, such as play, communal 
gatherings and places to sit with neighbours .  
e)   Include development form and architectural quality and specification which 
complement s the existing setting and character of the area, especially where buildings 
are being replaced;    
                                                 
53 National Design Guide, pages 39-40 ‘Homes and buildings’  (1 October 2019)  MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 60 f)    For large  applications, consider flexible development forms that can respond to 
changing social, technological and economic conditions  and provide diversity and 
choice through a mix of compatible uses that work together to create viable places 
that respond to local needs;  
g)   Retain existing individual or groups of trees  and green infrastructure and biodiversity 
assets  that contribute positively to the area , and enhance soft landscaping, designing 
it in as an integral part of the layout. Trees should have sufficie nt space to reach 
maturity and s ufficient space should also be provided to ensure  private gardens would 
not be overshadowed by tree canopies  and rooms within buildings would receive 
adequate daylight. All development should meet th e standards set out in Policy DD4 
where trees would be lost to development  and all development should meet the 
Biodiversity Net Gain re quirements set out in Policy GI3 ; 
h)     Demonstrate how “Secure by Design” principles and guidance set out in “Secured by 
Design” design guide (as amended) have been incorporated into development 
proposals to reduce crime, the fear of crime, anti -social behaviour and disorder. Also , 
for all development, the potential impact on community safety must be carefully 
considered a t the earliest opportunity to ensure that measures are integrated into 
proposals without compromising other objectives;  
i)      Meet the requirements necessary for their safe and proper use, in particular with 
regard to access, circulation and manoeuvring,  vehicle and cycle parking, loading and 
unloading, and the storage and collection of waste/recycling; and  
j)      In respect of residential schemes, demonstrate how the Building for Life 12 criteria (as 
amended) for the evaluation of the design quality of residential proposals have been 
taken into account and would be delivered through the scheme.  
Major applications and any residential scheme with a density in excess of 45 dwellings 
per hectare  must be supported by an indicative future management and maintenance 
plan for all shared and all semi -public or semi -private areas of hard and soft landscaping , 
to ensure these areas become well -established.  
For all proposals, s treet scene improvements, public art , CCTV , and access and sa fety 
measures (such as fire hydrants), or contributions towards these,  will be sought  on a site 
specific basis  in accordance with policy and relevant service requirements . 
Development must be guided by the council’s waste and recycling guidance document 
when designing new developments (or changing the use of existing buildings) within the 
borough. Consideration must be given to both the internal and external design of 
properties in order to allow sufficient space for both general waste and recycling provisi on 
and to provide adequate and safe access for the council’s waste collection contractor.  
Reasoned Justification  
5.8 Further guidance on how development proposals can address all these matters can 
be found in relevant supplementary planning guidance produced by the council including the Residential E xtensions  SPD, Conservation Area Appraisals, the Manor 
Royal SPD, and advice on signs and advertisements. Further information on specific requirements for development applications can be found in the Local  List of Planning 
Requirements.  
5.9 A comprehensive approach can be more efficient and reduce the impact of development, ensuring that land that has a reasonable prospect of being developed 
is not prejudiced or restricted.  
5.10 The council places particular importance on the need for all developments, whether 
on sites with designated features or not, to be of high quality and to protect and CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 61 enhance the distinctive character and important cultural heritage of the town. Existing 
assets and their settings should be preserved and where possible enhanced.  
5.11 Many of the decisions that influence design quality are taken at early feasibility stage. ‘Building for Life 12’ ( third edition, 2015) has been developed by CABE at the Design 
Council, Design for Homes and the Home Builders Federation as a tool to evaluate 
housing proposals. Building for Life uses 12 criteria, grouped into three categories –  
‘Integrating into the neighbourhood’, ‘Creating a place’ and ‘Street and home’, to 
assist  in the design process by highlighting where good practice can be applied. To 
raise standards, the council will also encourage the use of design reviews, where appropriate. The council will continue to prepare supplementary planning documents 
and encourage  pre-application discussions.  
5.12 Community safety is an important issue in the borough and in determining whether a 
place is an attractive location in which to live, work or to visit. The fear or perception 
of crime and anti-social behaviour is also  socially damaging and detrimental to the 
local economy. The design, location , use or change of use and operation of a wide 
range of proposals  can make a significant contribution to community safety.  Strategic 
Policy CL2 3c  outline s the urban design principles all major applications need to 
apply in order to build in passive safety to development layout. In considering the  
design of individual buildings, t he application  of Secured by Design principles have 
been proven to achieve a si gnificant reduction of crime risk by  combining minimum 
standards of physical security and well -tested principles of natural surveillance and 
defensible space.  
5.13 The P olicy also seeks to ensure that development schemes identify and take account 
of existing landscape assets that are a positive element f or the character of the town, 
and that landscape proposals are not dealt with as an afterthought but are 
progressed as an integral part of the design of the scheme. All new proposals should 
be mindful of the long- term future management and maintenance requirements for 
the development scheme and address responsibilities for this as part of any planning 
application. To ensure high quality public realm across the borough, irrespective of 
the intended management responsibility, all sites should meet standards set by the 
Local Authority for the purposes of their adoption as part of its amenity maintenance 
role. Local Authority standards will be provided to support development schemes and 
the preparation of management and maintenance plans.  
5.14 This P olicy will also  ensure that retained trees  that make a contribution to the 
streetscene are not at risk of being removed because they significantly reduce the usability of new gardens for residents or  because new buildings are placed in close 
proximity.  Tree losses through development that are accepted by the local planning 
authority should be mitigated by new planting.  
5.15 Public art can highlight what is special or locally distinctive about an area and create 
cultural assets that help in the creation of interesting streets and spaces. These can 
add to the enjoyment of an area or help people to navigate the locality . Attractive 
streets and spaces can encourage other forms of investment and patronage by customers.  More information regarding providing public art as part of development 
schemes and through contributions is set out in the Urban Design SPD and the associated Public Art Annex to the SPD, and in the Planning Obligations Annex 
attached to this Local Plan.  
5.16 New development will be used in the Town Centre and neighbourhood  centres to 
achieve environmental and regeneration objectives. All development, including new 
or altered shop fronts  and advertisements , should be of a high quality design 
standard and reinforce the impact of improvement initiatives.  
“Well -designed public spaces, particularly streets, are designed to support an active 
life for everyone, and are maintained for continual use. It is important to design them CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 62 to include all of the users who may wish to use them for activities such as socialising, 
informal doorstep play, resting and movement. Their success depends on them being 
fit for purpose, attractive places that people enjoy using”54.  
5.17 Crawley Borough Council’s Local List of Planning Requirements is available from the council’s  Development  Management team, and on the council’s website:  
www.crawley.gov.uk . It sets out the local validation requirements for planning 
applications and gives specific guidance for each application type.  
Inclusive Design  
5.18 It is essential to consider inclusive design as early as  possible in a scheme’s 
development, and inclusive design should be embedded into a project from initial conception through to completion, occupation and in the on- going management and 
maintenance of the development.  
Polic y DD2 : Inclusive Design  
Development proposals are required to achieve the highest standards of accessible and 
inclusive design possible, ensuring they:  
i. can be entered, used and exited safely, easily and with dignity by all;  
ii. are convenient and welcoming with no disabling barriers, providing independent 
access without undue effort, separation or special treatment; a nd are designed to 
incorporate safe and dignified emergency evacuation for all building users. In all 
developments where lifts are installed, as a minimum at least one lift per core (or 
more subject to capacity assessments) should be a suitably sized fire evacuation 
lift suitable to be used to evacuate people who require  level access from the 
building;  
The Design and Access Statement, submitted as part of planning applications, should 
include an inclusive design statement.  
All new dwellings must be  capable of adapting to the changing needs of residents through 
the application of Building Regulations Part M  Category 2 –  accessible and adaptable 
dwellings . This will be secured through a planning condition. Plans submitted in support of 
relevant applications  must clearly show how the Building Regulations will be met to this 
level. In exceptional circumstances, flexibility may be applied in the application of this 
policy  requirement for : 
a. specific small scale infill developments;  
b. flats above existing shops or gar ages;  
c. stacked maisonettes where the potential for decked access to lifts is restricted.  
All dwelling extensions and in- fill developments that include a new external entrance must 
comply with the same Building Regulations for entrances as newly built homes.  These 
require a level or ramped entrance and minimum door width. As with new -build homes, 
sensible exceptions  include where proposals involve protected structures or landscape or 
where site conditions are difficult, such as on sloping land. Other inclusiv e features 
(downstairs toilet, 1500mm turning circle and raised power points) are  strongly 
recommended  to be incorporated,  where practicable.  
Reasoned Justification  
5.19 Crawley is projected to see a notable increase in the older person population, with 
the total number of people age 65 and over projected to increase by 55% over the 
                                                 
54 National Design Guide, page 31 ‘Public Spaces’  (1 October 2019)  MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 63 twenty years 2019 to 2039. In addition, approximately 30% of households contain at 
least one person with a long- term health problem or disability.  It is likely that the age 
profile will impact upon the numbers of people with a long- term health problem or 
disability, and those people in the oldest age bands are more likely to experience 
these. Crawley’s older population exceeds the West Sussex levels and is  close to the 
national average. The Strategic Housing Market Assessment55 (SHMA)  indicates that 
the population with a long- term health problem or disability can be expected to grow 
by 7,000 persons by 2039; and the numbers of persons with mobility problems or 
dementia can be expected to grow significantly.  
5.20 Many older people will continue to live in their existing homes.  As it is not possible to 
know when a long -term health problem or disability may affect any individual, and the 
existing stock will continue to form the majority of housing available within the 
borough in the future, it is maintained that, unless there are exceptional, practical, 
circumstances which make meeting inclusive design criteria and, in the case of 
residential developments, the ‘accessible and adaptable’ Building Regulations levels impossible, these should be clearly illustrated on submissions as part of a planning 
application. The SHMA suggests a need for around 600 wheelchair user homes in 
Crawley in the period t o 2039, which equates to about 5 % of the total housing need,
 
and provision of appropriately designed units is encouraged as part of housing schemes .  
5.21 All people should be able to visit any dwelling or building with dignity. With this in 
mind , all new development should have at least one accessible main living space or, 
in non- residential situations, one visit -able room and i nclude an accessible toilet; and 
be able to be entered and exited safely and easily.    
5.22 Incorporating accessible entrances and other accessibility features as part of 
household extensions seeks to acknowledge the fact that the existing housing stock 
will co ntinue to house the vast majority, yet there will be a growing need to provide 
more accessible housing.  
5.23 Viability constraints will not be considered reasonable justification for not seeking to apply this policy, unless it can be demonstrated that consideration to meet the 
requirements had been taken into account from the early design and layout stages of 
development, and were shown to not be practicable or physically possible to achieve.  
Standards for New Housing Development  
5.24 Crawley has a reputation for providing good quality housing. This contributes to 
residents’ quality of life and also to the character and identity of the town. Inadequate 
dwellings  make it difficult for resident s to undertake their day -to-day living activities or 
adapt their homes to address changes in circumstance and can cause problems for 
neighbours through disturbance or a lack of privacy.  
5.25 Internal and external space standards have been successfully applied to new 
housing developments in the boroug h over the last thirty  years. Nationally Described 
Space Standards were introduced in October 2015 and these are set out in the Policy.  
Polic y DD3 : Standards for All New Dwellings (including conversions)  
All new dwellings must create a safe, comfortable and sustainable living environment.  The 
minimum size for each dwelling should be based on the Nationally Described Space 
Standards , as specified below (October 2015 or as subsequently updated) .  
                                                 
55 Northern West Sussex Strategic Housing Market Assessment (2019) Iceni Projects  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 64 Table 1: Minimum floorspace standards for all new dwellings (GIA sqm)   
Number of Bedrooms  
 Occupancy  1 Storey  2 Storey  3 Storey  Built -in 
Storage  
1 bedroom/ Studio (a)  1 person  37   1.0 
1 bedroom/S tudio (b)  1 person  39   1.0 
1 bedroom  2 person  50 58  1.5 
2 bedroom  3 person  61 70  2.0 
2 bedroom  
3 bedroom  4 person  
4 person  70 
74 79 
84  
90 2.0 
2.5 
3 bedroom  
4 bedroom  5 person  
5 person  86 
90 93 
97 99 
103 2.5 
3.0 
3 bedroom  
4 bedroom  
5 bedroom  6 person  
6 person  
6 person  95 
99 
103 102 
106 
110 108 
112 
116 2.5 
3.0 
3.5 
4 bedroom  
5 bedroom  
6 bedroom  7 person  
7 person  
7 person  108 
112 
116 115 
119 
123 121 
125 
129 3.0 
3.5 
4.0 
4 bedroom  
5 bedroom  
6 bedroom  8 person  
8 person  
8 person  117 
121 
125 124 
128 
132 130 
134 
138 3.0 
3.5 
4.0 
1 person (a): with shower room ; 1 person (b): with bathroom  
Notes:  
1. The dwelling provides at least the gross internal floor area and built -in storage area set out in Table 1 
above.  
2. A dwelling with two or more bedspaces has at least one double (or twin) bedroom.  
3. In order to provide one bedspace, a single bedroom has a floor area of at least 7.5sqm and is at least 
2.15m wide.  
4. In order to provide two bedspaces, a double (or twin bedroom) has a floor area of at least 11.5sqm  
5. One double (or twin bedroom) is at least 2.75m wide and every other double (or twin) bedroom is at least 
2.55m wide.  
6. Any area with a headroom of less than 1.5m is not counted within the Gross Internal Area unless used 
solely for storage (if the area under the stairs is to be used for storage, assume a general floor area of 
1sqm within the Gross Internal Area).  
New dwellings should have a minimum floor to ceiling height  of the main living space of 
2.3m for at least 75% of the Gross Internal Area. In exceptional circumstances, this may 
not be appropriate given the local des ign context.  
Residential developments should be designed to include amenity space standards 
adequate to meet basic privacy, amenity and usability requirements; suitable for the likely 
level of occupancy. Specific consideration of the needs of families should be given to 
larger dwellings as well as 2 bedroom , 3 person apartments, or larger.  
In addition to the Nationally Described Space Standards, medium and higher density  new 
residential development  is encouraged to achieve the following : 
i.   Attractive c ommunal circulation spaces  which avoid long, narrow, badly -lit an d 
ventilated internal corridors. The use of external gallery access and the use of central 
atria to improve natural ventilation and dual aspect, is also welcomed.  
ii.  Integrate d tenures with entrance lobby and cores being shared between owner -
occupiers  and shared ownership occupiers.  
iii.  All units either dual aspect or where single aspect, south facing.   
iv. Units with minimum clear floor to ceiling height of 2.7m  for 3 person 2 bedroom uni ts 
and above o r, if proven, a lower height where it suits the proportions of  a narrow er unit. 
vi. Usable private outdoor space, at least 2.5m in depth x 4m wide, and accessed directly 
from main living areas or kitchen.   
Reasoned Justification  
5.26 Individuals need sufficient private space to undertake the normal functions of living 
together including recreational activities. The internal space standards are based on CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 65 the designed level of occupancy as the number of occupants will fluctuate over the 
life of the dwelling. The starting point for the space standards is the need for rooms to 
be able to accommodate a basic set of furniture, fittings, activity and circulation space appropriate to the function of each room. The intention is to prevent  the 
development of and cumulative effects of unsuitable homes. Designers will be able to 
respond to market demands in terms of how the space is used or whether higher standards are required for commercial reasons, for example to accommodate en -
suite bathrooms.  
5.27 The minimum size for each dwelling is net space including the area enclosed by 
unfinished faces of walls of dwellings including space taken by stairs, general storage 
space, partitions, chimney breasts, flues etc. but excluding garages, dustbin, fuel and bicycle stores, balconies, porches and lobbies open to the air, areas within any room 
with ceilings less than 1.5 metres high and any area intended to function as an 
access way.  
5.28 Minimum ceiling heights are important to ensure sufficient space and li ght in new 
dwellings, as incorporated in the space standards. However, there may be 
exceptional sites where this may not be appropriate in design terms, for example in 
Conservation Areas characterised by smaller building heights or adjacent to a Listed 
Building.  
5.29 Sufficient external space , ideally directly accessible from the main living space or 
kitchen,  is also required for residents,  to protect the amenities of neighbours and to 
enable private gardens to contribute positively to the character and appearance of the area. Further guidance is provided by the  Urban Design Supplementary Planning 
Document.  
5.30 In apartment schemes, limiting the number of dwellings accessed per floor at two or 
three improves passive management of the common areas. However, the costs of lift 
provision are recognised for smaller schemes , therefore, this is only encouraged for  
new development of medium density and above (see Policy CL4). Flats grouped 
around a core is usually the ideal arrangement. This allows for the shortest distance 
from front doors to lift and stairs, and avoids the need for long, narrow, badly lit and 
ventilated internal corridors. External  gallery access is also welcomed as it has the 
added benefit of facilitating cross ventilation and alternative floors with dual aspect when designed in conjunction with two storey maisonettes. Dual aspect windows 
within apartments maximise the provision of  natural light, and any single aspect units 
should ideally be south -facing.  Dual aspect can also be achieved by adding 
projecting ‘bay’ extensions to the main living spaces, positioned proud of the principal 
elevation, these ‘bay’ elements offer potential  for glazing in two directions.   
5.31 Developers are  also encouraged to consider the needs of families in t he layout of 
flats which differ  from those of  non-family households. For new residential 
development in excess of 80 units, an average 2 bedroom, 4 person, single storey 
family home should include:  
i. A Gross internal floor area of a minimum of 80sqm ; 
ii. Useable private outdoor space, large enough for the whole household to use 
for meals and that gets direct sunlight at some time of the day ;  
iii. Adequate additional space for recycling within the kitchen space, as per the 
requirements set down in ‘building for life’ criteria;   
iv. A utility room with space for was hing and drying appliances and an external 
vent; 
v. A minimum of 4.0sqm in built storage space within the dwelling;  
vi. Secure private storage at ground floor level ; 
vii. Flexible internal planning, to allow children to have a room of their own as 
they become teenager s; CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 66 viii. One extra living space or home office, to provide families with separate living 
space options. This is p articularly important where units have open -plan 
living, kitchen, dining arrangements.    
Tree Replacement Standards  
5.32 Existing trees can significantly contribute to the setting of new development, and can 
give the impression of early maturity and increased design quality. D evelopment 
should retain individual specimens or groups of trees that make a positive 
contribution t o visual  and biodiversity  amenity.  This needs to be accounted for at an 
early stage. Where trees are agreed for removal as part of a development scheme, 
replacement trees will be required. This policy does not apply to Ancient Woodland or 
Aged Trees which must be considered against Policy GI3 and national policy and 
guidance.  Additional new tree and landscape planting requirements for  development 
schemes, beyond any replacement provision, should seek to assist in achieving 
Biodiversity Net Gain  as required by Policy GI3 . 
Strategic Policy DD4 : Tree Replacement Standards 
Tree retention and provision needs to be accounted for at an early stage when designing 
the layout of new development. Following the completion of surveys and analysis of the 
site, consideration must be given to which trees are the most suitable for retention:  
i. Trees of the highest quality (those categorised as A and B trees in the Tree 
Survey) should be retained as part of the proposed layout.  
ii. Trees of moderate and low value (categor y C and below) should not automatically 
be considered for removal, as they may play a useful role in site screening, or as 
an important habitat feature.  
Where development proposals would result in the loss of trees, applicants must identify 
which trees are to be removed and replaced in order to  mitigate for the visual impact 
resulting from the loss of the tree canopies. Proposals must demonstrate that the number 
of replacements accords with the following requirements:  
Trunk diameter of each tree (measured in cms at 
1.5m above ground level ) to be removed:  No. of replacement trees required :  
Less than 19.9  1 
20 – 29.9 2 
30 – 39.9 3 
40 – 49.9 4 
50 – 59.9 5 
60 – 69.9 6 
70 – 79.9 7 
80+ 8 
The girth of replacement trees will vary depending on species and location but should 
balance the need to reduce the likelihood of new tree stock failing to survive whilst 
providing visual amenity from the outset.  
The replacement tree planting requirements would normally be expect ed to be met within 
the development site. Where the local planning authority agrees that this is not feasible or 
desirable, commuted sums will be sought in lieu on a per tree basis, taking account of 
constraints to planting. The approach would enable the green character and appearance 
of the borough to be maintained through tree planting on appropriate and available land.  
The Manor Royal Design Guide SPD sets out tree planting requirements for sites in 
Manor Royal.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 67 Reasoned Justification   
5.33 Trees are considered to be a material consideration where planning permission is 
required. Trees existing on or adjacent to a development site (within falling distance) 
can present significant constraints upon development, often requiring expert advice 
to find an appropriate solution. Without appropriate consideration at an early stage of 
design, existing trees and hedges can be easily damaged and lost through development. Damage can occur to trees through thoughtless construction practices, 
such as  vehicle collisions and root severance, as well as through more indirect 
factors, such as changes in the surrounding ground levels, compaction of the soil structure and contamination.   
5.34 A significant loss is incurred even when a new tree is planted to replace an older one 
that has been felled. Depending on the species, it takes between 15 and 40 years for 
a tree to grow a sufficiently large canopy to deliver meaningful aesthetic, air pollution 
removal, rainwater management and other benefits. In terms of biodiversity, the older 
the tree the richer the wildlife that it supports. To ensure that adequate compensation 
is delivered the diameter  measurement is used as a basis for the number of 
replacement trees that would achieve a similar canopy cover. The policy , in 
conjunction with the requirements of Policy GI3  on Biodiversity and Net Gain,  
ensures that the green character and appearance of the borough is maintained.  
5.35 The cost of off -site planting by the c ouncil, in lieu of provision on- site, will be based 
on the cost of a sixteen to eighteen centimetre girth tree measured at 1.5m off the 
ground, planting, sundries and watering over a five year period to ensure that the tree 
becomes established. Where tree planting will occur within a hard pav ed area, the 
additional cost of construction for a tree pit must be funded. This is set out in the 
Planning Obligations Annex.  
5.36 When planting a tree, the existing sewerage and water supply infrastructure should 
be taken into account, as well as the choice of appropriate tree species for the ground conditions and environment.  The Green Infrastructure SPD (Appendix 6) lists 
appropriate species that could be planted in Crawley. Where possible, UK sourced 
and grown tree stock should be used to support biodi versity and resilience. Site -
specifics such as ground conditions, light/sunlight and proximity to buildings and paving/footpaths must be taken into account to ensure the correct species is used for 
the location and purpose and does not result in nuisance or early removal of the tree. 
In addition, other matters for consideration include climate change resilience, 
pollination opportunities, carbon storage, air quality management, street use and bird 
strike concerns of Gatwick Airport’s aerodrome safeguarding.  
Aerodrome Safeguarding 
5.37 Aerodrome safeguarding is  the process used to ensure the safe and efficient 
operation of airports. It is in place to help protect aircraft and passengers during take -
off and landing and while flying in the vicinity of the airport. This in turn helps ensure 
the safety of people living and working nearby.  
5.38 Aerodrome safeguarding differ s to the principle of safeguarding land for a possible 
additional runway  to the south of  Gatwick Airport . Instead, it relates to how a 
development  could impact on safety.  Aerodrome Safeguarding assesses , for 
example, the  height and design of proposed development or construction equipment 
that might be used (such as cranes) which could create a potential risk to the airport 
aerodrome through impact s on radar  or building induced turbulence. It also considers 
the potential risks to aviation created by large landscaping schemes, lighting designs and new water bodies which could attract birds hazardous to aviation.  
5.39 Gatwick Airport is a n EASA certified  aerodrome. Therefore, the council is required to 
consult Gatwick Airport Limited on all planning applications where aerodrome CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 68 safeguarding applies. The safeguarded area is neither the responsibility nor the 
proposal of the local planning authority.  
Policy D D5: Aerodrome Safeguarding  
Development will only be supported if it  is consistent with the continued safe operation of 
Gatwick Airport.  
Where required, the Local Planning Authority will consult with the airport operator and/or 
the operator of technical sites (e.g. radar stations) on relevant proposals in the aerodrome 
safeguarded areas. Statutory consultation responses may require that res trictions are 
placed on the height or detailed design of buildings , structures  or other development  to 
avoid impacts on the airport aerodrome, including those relating to navigational aids or on 
developments which may increase bird- strike risk, create buil ding-induced turbulence or 
include lighting that could pose a hazard to the safe operation of the airport aerodrome . 
Proposals that cannot be mitigated to the satisfaction of the statutory consultees are 
considered to be a hazard to aircraft safety , and  will be refused . 
Reasoned Justification  
5.40 Aerodrome safeguarding is a legal requirement by way of ICAO (International Civil 
Aviation Organisation) & EASA (European Aviation Safety Agency) and is embedded 
in the Town & Country Planning process by way of ODPM/DfT circular 01/2003 
‘Safeguarding of aerodromes & military explosives storage areas’ Direction 2002.   
Recently published evidence56 is suggesting that, in general terms, the guidance in 
Planning Circular 01/2003 is not being applied consistently by local planning 
authorities, and suggests that for clarity, local plans with an officially safeguarded 
aerodrome should include a policy.  
5.41 Policy DD5  has been included to raise awareness of the requirements of Aerodrome 
Safeguarding and ensure the safe operation of Gatwick Airport  is taken into account 
in the design of development . The whole borough of Crawley is covered by the 
Aerodrome Safeguarding area , and this is shown  on the Local Plan Map.  Aerodrome 
Safeguarding also applies outside of Crawley Borough, and developers may need to 
liaise with Crawley’s neighbouring Local Authorities to clarify if development is 
subject to Aerodrome Safeguarding out side of the Crawley administrative area.  
5.42 Developers should refer to the Local List and also consult with the Gatwick Airport via 
gal.safeguarding@gatwickairport.com  for advice on planning applications in the 
vicinity of the aerodrome. Developers should also refer for general awareness to the 
AOA (Airport Operators Association) technical aerodrome safeguarding advice notes 
available at www.aoa.org.uk/policy -campaigns/operations -safety/ .  
Advertisements  
5.43 Signs and advertisements are a long -established feature of the urban environment. 
All advertisements are intended to catch the eye of passers -by, if only fleetingly. 
Outdoor advertisements should make a positive contribution to the visual 
environment and through good quality design, help create a lively atmosphere of 
colour, variety and interest, appropriate for the area in which it is t o be located.  
 
  
                                                 
56 Lichfields in liaison with General Aviation Awareness Council (July 2018)  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 69 Policy D D6: Advertisements  
Applications for express Advertisement Consent will be permitted unless the proposed 
advert(s) would have a detrimental impact on amenity or public safety, either individually 
or by virtue of cumulative impact. Relevant factors considered by the council will include:  
a) The impact on visual amenity in the vicinity of the advertisement, taking into account 
the degree to which it is in scale or keeping with any host building or structure, or with 
the character of the locality, including scenic, historic, architectural or cultural value or 
features.  
b) Any impact on visual or aural amenity , including on light sensitive species and 
sensitive habitats,  in the vicinity arising from lighting or noise associated with the 
advertisement.  
c) The potential impact on road safety through:  
i. obstruction or impairment of si ght-lines;  
ii. obstructing, confusing, or distracting the view of a road user;  
iii. leaving insufficient vertical or lateral clearance for vehicles;  
iv. confusion, glare, dazzl e or distraction caused by lighting;  
v. causing pedestrians to walk or stop in hazardous places;  
vi. misleading resemblance to road traffic signs.  
d) The potential impact on railway safety through impairment of the ability of railway 
personnel to recogni se and inter pret signals, warning boards, lights, signs and level 
crossings from the railway.  
e) The potential impact on the safety of aircraft through glare, resemblance to visual 
landing guidance signals, proximity to the flight path of aircraft, or impairment of radar 
or navigational aid equipment.  
These factors will be interpreted as appropriate in the light of the other policies in this Plan 
and supporting guidance published by the council.  
Reasoned Justification  
5.44 Poorly -designed, and inappropriately located, adverts and signs can negatively 
impact the visual environment and lead to clutter and visual confusion. They can also 
impact on light sensitive species, and on r oad, rail and aircraft safety. Therefore, it is 
important that adverts and signs are a conscious consideration and are integrated 
into the overall design of a development.   
Crossovers 
5.45 Crossovers are created where a vehicle driveway is required to cross a pavement or 
verge to access a parking area within the curtilage of a residential property. In certain 
circumstances these crossovers require planning permission.  
Policy D D7: Crossovers 
Proposals for crossovers to access hardstandings  in gardens will only be permitted where 
highway safety and the amenity of the street scene are not adversely affected; and the 
proposal will not result in a net  loss of public on- street parking spaces.  
Reasoned Justification  
5.46 As a result of its devel opment as a new town in the 1950s and 1960s , a significant 
number of properties in the town were not built with drives or garages within the 
curtilage of their property , and there are limited on -street parking opportunities . 
Therefore,  some residents seek to install hardstanding within their garden to provide CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 70 parking spaces . Whilst the provision within a garden o f a hardstanding does not 
always require a planning application, the crossing of a pavement or verge to access 
the space , if the  property is on a classified road or the land crossed is not highway , 
does. The creation of a crossover can lead to the loss of on- street parking spaces so 
it is important that the level of this impact is assessed. Any proposal will also need to 
be considered with regards to highway safety. Hardstandings  and crossovers  can 
also have a detrimental impact on the amenity of the street scene.  
  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 71 Heritage Assets  
6.1 Crawley is best known as a post -war New Town. However, the territory covered by 
the borough has  produced evidence of human activity extending back over 
thousands of years. The physical remains of this activity above and below ground 
include assets of international, national and local importance, forming a link to a long, 
complex and unique history, and a focus for identity, community and learning in the 
context of the modern town.  
6.2 Evidence of human activity recorded in Crawley includes local finds of Palaeolithic 
(Old Stone Age) and Mesolithic (Middle Stone Age) tools. The emergence of more 
complex forms of social organisation is signalled by finds and sites from the Later 
Bronze and Iron Ages. Local evidence of the Wealden iron industry extends at least 
as far back as the Roman period, as found at Broadfield and Goffs Park, and 
includes later medi eval and post -medieval sites at ASDA on Pegler Way, Ifield, 
Worth and elsewhere. Exposed and tangible archaeological remains include iron ore 
pits, as at the Hawth, a range of medieval moated sites, and a deserted medieval site 
at Tinsley Green.  
6.3 The pr esent -day town is the successor of settlements established in the Anglo- Saxon 
period. Ifield and Worth are mentioned in the Domesday Book of 1086 and Crawley 
was the site of a market from 1203. These grew through the pre- industrial period, 
with Crawley in particular benefiting from its position on the London -Brighton 
highway. The coming of the railways in the 1840s promoted further development around stations at Three Bridges and Crawley, which became the main focus of pre -
New Town growth.  
6.4 An unpreceden ted transformation of the area was heralded in 1947 with Crawley’s 
designation as one of eight New Towns selected to provide work and homes away 
from the overcrowded and bomb -damaged capital. Rapid growth followed from the 
1950s onwards, initially under the aegis of Crawley Development Corporation 
working within the framework of Anthony Minoprio’s masterplan, and latterly under the direction of a more regular system of local government.   
6.5 Much of the historic  fabric has  been retained as the town has grown, resulting in a 
borough with a rich and diverse array of heritage assets from Grade I listed 
structures hundreds of years old to excellent examples of New Town architecture and 
planning. These elements blend to  form Crawley’s unique character
57.  
Chapter  Content  
6.6 This chapter sets out heritage policies to guide development proposals . The policies 
below relate to a number of separate but interrelated designations to protect and 
enhance the borough’s historic assets.  
The Key Issues  
6.7 As a New Town, much of Crawley’s built environment has been constructed over the last 60 years, and many residents particularly value those heritage assets that 
predate this period. This is reflected in the areas and buildings that are currently 
afforded p rotection as Conservation Areas or Listed Buildings. H owever, there is 
                                                 
57 Detailed summaries of the character of the borough are provided in the Crawley Historic Character 
Assessment Report (2008), undertaken as part of the joint English Heritage (now Historic England), West and 
East Sussex County Councils’ Extensive Urban Surv ey project (EUS, 2004-9); and in the Crawley Baseline 
Character Assessment (Edaw|Aecom, 2009).  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 72 increasing recognition of the value of some of the “New Town” buildings that have 
been built since 1947. Many of these assets are locally distinctive and,  therefore , it is 
of importance  to have a clear approach for enhancing and protecting them.  
Local Plan Policies  
Crawley’s Heritage Assets  
6.8 Heritage makes a positive contribution to the local character of an area and helps define what makes Crawley distinctive.  Therefore , it is a priority for development to 
ensure that it respects all aspects of the town’s built and natural heritage.  
6.9 The council adopted a Heritage Strategy in 2008 and considerable work has been undertaken since to identify and protect the locally distinctive built and natural 
heritage assets in the borough that may not be designated nationally. The Heritage 
Strategy highlighted the importance of Crawley’s social heritage, linking residents’ 
experiences of living and working in the town with the bui lt and natural environment.  
Strategic Policy HA1 : Heritage Assets  
Crawley’s designated and non- designated heritage assets include:  
• Listed Buildings (see also Policy HA4 ); 
• Scheduled Monuments  (see also Policy HA7) ; 
• Non-designated archaeological assets of equivalent significance to scheduled 
monuments  (see also Policy HA7 ); 
• Conservation A reas (see also Policy HA2);  
• Locally Listed Buildings (see also Policy HA5)  
• Areas of Special Local  Character (see also Policy HA3);  
• Historic Parks a nd Gardens (see also Policy HA6 ); 
• Other  non-designated  assets with archaeological interest  (see also Policy HA7) . 
All development should respond to these as a finite resource,  providing a distinctive 
combination of social, economic and environmental benefits.  Proposals should seek to 
ensure that heritage assets’ key features or significance are conserved and enhanced as 
a result of development.  
Where a designated heritage asset is affected by a proposal, great weight will be given to 
its conservation, while harm to, or loss of, its significance will require justification 
according to the importance of the asset and the degree of loss or harm, in line with local 
and national policy.  
Proposals affecting the significance of a non -designated heritage asset will be considered 
according to the scale of any harm or loss, and the asset’s significance, in line with local 
and national policy.  
Where a development affects a heritage asset or the setting of a heritage asset, a 
Heritage Impact Assessment will be required. T his should:   
i. for development proposals meeting criteria set out in the council’s Local List of 
Planning Requirements: include, and be informed by, the findings of a search of 
the Historic Environment Record (HER) and/or an Archaeological Desk -based 
Assessm ent; 
ii. in all cases : describe , with reference to relevant sources (such as the National 
Heritage List for England and Conservation Area Appraisals) , the significance of 
any heritage assets affected and the contribution made by their setting, the impact 
of the development, and any measures adopted to ensure the heritage asset is 
respected , preserved  or enhanced or, for exceptionally significant developm ent, 
relocated.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 73 The loss or replacement of a heritage asset may be appropriate in exceptional 
circumstances, where justified in line with local and national policy on loss or harm, and 
where it has been demonstrated that:  
• the site is essential to the development’s success;  
• the benefits of the entire scheme outweigh the loss of the asset; and  
• any replacement scheme makes an equal contribution to local character and 
distinctiveness.  
In cases where a heritage asset is considered to be suitable for loss or replacement  in 
accordance with local and national policy , and it has been demonstrated that its site is 
essential to the development’s success, proposals will  be subject to a requirement to 
record the asset(s) concerned. The scheme of investigation, including the Historic 
England Recording Level, is to be agreed with the council in advance of its 
implementation and will reflect the importance and nature of the asset and the impact of 
the proposal.   
Applicants  in such cases will  also be required to notify any relevant parties including 
Historic England and submit their recording to the Historic Environment Record.  
Regeneration proposals that make sensitive use of heritage assets, particularly where 
these bring redundant or under used buildings or areas, especially any on Historic 
England’s At Risk Register, into appropriate use will be encouraged.  
Reasoned Justification 
6.10 To help inform the council’s heritage policy approach, the Crawley Local Heritage 
Review (2020) reviewed and updated the borough’s previous heritage evidence. 
Crawley Areas of Special Environmental Quality and Locally Listed Buildings 
Heritage Assessment (April 2010) undert ook a comprehensive assessment of the 
town’s heritage assets to review the status of Conservation Areas, A reas of S pecial 
Environmental Quality  (ASEQ s) now known as  Areas of Special Local Character  
(ASLCs ), Listed Building and Locally Listed Building designations. The findings from 
the Assessments form a key aspect of the Local Plan evidence base and should,  in 
addition to other relevant policy documentation, be considered in the application of 
heritage policies.  
6.11 Recording any heritage assets  to an appropriate level58 will ensure that a descriptive 
record of all heritage assets are maintained in the HER. This will in turn inform future 
proposals affecting heritage assets in line with the NPPF. With regard to the set ting 
of any heritage assets, consideration should be had to Historic Environment Good 
Practice Advice in Planning Note 3: the Setting of Heritage Assets59. 
6.12 As heritage assets within the borough are a limited and finite resource, development proposals must show through a Heritage Impact Assessment (HIA) how they 
preserve and enhance the asset. In the case of exceptionally significant 
development, the asset should be relocated as part of the development proposals. In 
exceptional circumstances when the asset is to be lost, it must be appropriately 
recorded and replaced with high quality development.  
6.13 Some landscape features which enjoy policy protections for other reasons such as 
their contribution to biodiversity, structural landscaping, and open space may also 
have heritage significance, or contribute to the significance of other heritage assets, 
based on their contribution to local character and their recor ded and continuing 
social, economic and cultural significance. These may include man -made features 
such as open spaces (covered in Policy OS1) as well as naturally occurring ones 
                                                 
58 “Understanding Historic Buildings. A Guide to Good Recording Practice” (2016) Historic England  
59 Historic Environment Good Practice Advice in Planning Note 3:  The Setting of Heritage Assets (2017) Historic 
England  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 74 such as ancient woodland and veteran trees (covered in Policy GI2 ). Where a 
Heritage Impact Assessment is being prepared it should include assessment of such 
significance where appropriate.   
 
Conservation Areas  
6.14 In a Conservation Area , every building matters as well as the streets, public spaces 
and gardens between them –  with each feature contributing to the unique character 
of the area. By understanding what gives each Conservation Area its special 
archit ectural or historic interest, it can be  ensured  that the special character and 
appearance of the area is preserved and enhanced. This is done with the use of additional controls over what can be done to buildings, trees and the overall 
appearance of the area.  
6.15 The special characte r of these areas does not come from the quality of their buildings 
alone, but also from the historic layout of roads, paths and boundaries; characteristic 
building and paving materials; a particular ‘mix’ of building uses; public and private 
spaces – such as gardens, parks and greens; and trees and street furniture. 
Conservation Areas give wider protection to the area and setting, rather than focusing solely on individual buildings –  all of the features within the area should be 
recognised as part of its character.  
Policy HA2: Conservation Areas  
Development within a Conservation Area should individually  and cumulatively result in the 
preservation or enhancement of the character and appearance of the area.  
All development within a Conservation Area should conform to the relevant Conservation 
Area Statement and Appraisal, and be designed according  to the following  princ iples: 
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 75 i) respect the protected area and recognise the identifiable, and distinctive, character(s);  
ii) avoid loss of, or harm to, architectural or  decorative features or details making a 
significant  contribution to the Area’s significance;  
iii) respect any historic landscape features which affect the character of the place;  
iv) maintain and enhance the area’s landscape value with regards to mature trees, 
hedges and public green spaces such as grass verges;  
v) respect and enhance the character of lower density developments with spacious 
landscaped settings. This includes  areas of  landscape dominat ing the buildings, the 
significant gaps between the buildings, the set back from the street, as well as any 
large gardens, mature trees, hedges and green verges; and  
vi) preserve and enhance the area’s architectural quality and scale.  
Conformity with the requirement s of this Policy should be demonstrated as part of the 
Heritage Impact Assessment.  
There may be structures within a Conservation Area which are not heritage assets and do 
not positively contribute to its character or appearance. Therefore,  proposals for 
demolition of these structur es will be considered on a case -by-case basis and may not be 
required to submit a recording to the Historic Environment Record. For such 
developments , early pre- application discussions are encouraged.  
Reasoned Justification  
6.16 Under the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990, the council 
have a duty to determ ine which parts of their area are of a character or appearance 
of which it is d esirable to preserve or enhance. They must then designate those 
areas as Conservation Areas. The approach to Crawley’s heritage has been 
developed by using Historic Environment Good Practice Advice Notes 1, 2 and 3, 
published by Historic England.  
6.17 In 2013 , after a review of the borough’s heritage, three new areas were designated 
and two existing areas were extended. There are currently eleven Conservation 
Areas in the borough, each very different in character and appearance, protecting 
New Town areas and much older parts of Crawley. The Conservation A reas are: 
• Brighton Road  
• Dyers Almshouses  
• Forestfields and 
Shrublands  
• Hazelwick Road  
• High Street  
• Ifield Village  • Malthouse Road 
• St Peter’s and St John’s  
• Southgate Neighbourhood 
Centre  
• Sunnymead Flats  
• Worth . 
6.18 It is important to protect, maintain and enhance these areas for future generations to 
enjoy. The main objectives of Conservation Areas are to protect and enhance the 
area’s architectural and historic interest, its distinctive layout and appearance, and 
the buil t and natural environment. It is , therefore , important to ensure that any 
alterations or development are consistent with, and r espectful of, the special 
character or appearance of the area.  
6.19 The NPPF encourages the local planning authority to consider the designation of 
Conservation Areas and to ensure that these areas justify such status because of 
their special architectural or historic interest. The council has carried out a detailed 
assessment of the borough’s heritage and believes that the existing Conservation Areas are worthy of the status. In line with the significance and quality of these areas, 
the P olicy sets appropriate requirements to ensure that development would result in 
their p reservation or enhancement.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 76 6.20 The council will from time to time review the boundaries of existing Conservation 
Areas and whether additional Conservation Areas should be designated, in 
accordance with the provisions of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation 
Areas) Act 1990, the NPPF, and best practice guidance.  The council is consideri ng 
the recommendations of the Local Heritage Review  2020 with a view to potentially 
designating further Conservation Areas in due course. Where designated, the 
boundaries for these will be included on an updated Local Plan Map.  
Areas of Special Local Character  
6.21 As a result of Crawley’s unique history the borough contains some areas which, 
though they may not possess sufficient heritage significance to justify their 
designation as Conservation Areas, are nonetheless of sufficient significance to 
warrant their identification as local or ‘non- designated’ heritage assets. These Areas 
of Special Local Character are identified on the Local Plan Map and in the council ’s 
updated Local Heritage List  which will become a Supplementary Planning Document . 
Their significance is reflective of different phases of human activity and settlement 
within the borough, from the medieval period to the town’s modern expansion. They 
should be afforded protection to prevent them being lost, incrementally or at once.  
Policy HA3: Areas of Special Local Character  
All development within an Area of Special Local Character (ASLC) should respect or 
preserve the  character of the area and be  designed with regard to the area’ s existing 
character and appearance. Proposals should be of an appropriate scale, design and 
massing, and should not result in significant adverse impact on the locality, its  setting and 
important or valued views .  
All dev elopment within an ASLC should demonstrate, as part of the Heritage Impact 
Assessment, how the proposals have regard to the area’s significance as a heritage 
asset, including its character and appearance.  
Reasoned Justification  
6.22 The “Crawley ASEQ’s and Locally Listed Buildings Heritage Assessment 2010” 
reviewed the previous Area of Special Environmental Quality designation and 
concluded that some should be designated, whilst others de -designated or made a 
Conservation Area. The following revised crit eria were used for the identification of 
these assets:  
i. Homogenous and cohesive character;  
ii. Historic landscape features ; 
iii. Landscape value, e.g. mature trees, hedges, grass verges ; 
iv. Lower density housing in spacious landscaped setting;  
v. Architectural interest.  
6.23 The 2020 Crawley Conservation Areas and Non- Designated Assets Review has 
considered this designation and the individual assets identified. The Review recommended the following amended criteria, which are consistent with those used 
to identify other non -designated heritage assets, and with Historic England best 
practice guidance
60:  
• Authenticity ; 
• Aesthetic/Architectural 
Value;  
• Historic Value ; 
• Social/Communal Value;  
                                                 
60 Local Heritage Listing: Historic England Advice Note 7  (2016) Historic England  • Group Value;  
• Landmark/Townscape Value;  
• Archaeological Interest . CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 77 6.24 With these criteria in mind, the purpose of the ASLC designation is to provide an 
appropriate degree of protection and control in areas which possess local heritage 
significance.  
6.25 The Local Plan Map identifies  the following ASLCs : 
• Albany Road/Spencers Road, West Green  
• Blackwater Lane, Pound Hill  
• Church Road, Pound Hill  
• Goffs Park Road, Southgate  
• Mount Close, Pound Hill 
• Milton Mount  Avenue, Pound Hill   
• Northgate Neighbourhood Centre, Northgate  
• Rusper Road, Ifield  
• West Green Neighbourhood Centre, West Green  
6.26 These will be included in the  Local Heritage List  SPD.  The council will assess the 
merit of identifying new ASLCs through the review of the Local Plan Map and Local 
Heritage List, in consultation with local residents, and in accordance with robust 
criteria based on best -practice guidance.  
6.27 The Local Plan Map and Local Heritage List may not be exhaustive in their inclusion 
of heritage assets which in fact possess significance in line with the stated criteria. 
Given the long history of human settlement and activity in the Crawley area, and the 
ongoing transformation of the environment through the urban development of the 
borough, further assets may come to light, including as part of the planning and 
development processes. This is particularly likely in the vicinity of existing groups of 
designated and non- designated heritage assets.  
6.28 The NPPF61 asks local authorities to set out a positive strategy for the conservation 
and enjoym ent of the historic environment;  this P olicy achieves this by identifying 
special local heritage assets that should be preserved or enhanced and setting out 
the criteria required to achieve this.  
Listed Buildings and Structures  
6.29 All Listed Buildings have unique character and importance to the town and the 
nation. Therefore, t heir protection from inappropriate development is important.  
Policy HA4: Listed Buildings and Structures  
To recognise the value of Listed Buildings (including Listed Structures) within Crawley, 
the council will ensure that any proposed works to them are consistent with the character, 
appearance and heritage  interest  of any statutory Listed Building/Structure,  in line with 
national  legislation, policy and guidance.  
Any changes must preserve or enhance the design and character of the Listed Building 
and have regard to its historic  and architectural  significance. A Heritage Impact 
Assessment is required to be submitted demonstrating how proposals will protect the 
significance  of the listed building, including its setting and its key features.  
Harm to, or loss of, the significance of a Listed Building will require clear and convincing 
justification, taking account of the grading of the building, and the degree of harm or loss, 
in line with national policy. Substantial harm to, or total loss of, the significance of a Listed 
Building will require except ional justification, including benefits that outweigh the harm or 
loss, and further demonstration of either:  
                                                 
61 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 185 (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 78 a. the public and substantial nature of the benefits concerned; or,  
b. the absence of an alternative use which averts the loss or harm and is consistent with:  
i. the nature of the Listed Building; or  
ii. medium -term viability; or  
iii. the extent of potential opportunities for grant -funding, or not -for-profit ownership.  
In cases where substantial loss or harm is  justified , the council will require the building to 
have been recorded according to an agreed scheme of investigation which is 
proportionate to the importance of the Listed Building and the impact of the proposal. The 
record shall be submitted to the Historic Environment Record. Any development on the 
site of a demolished Listed Building must have regard to the character, form and heritage 
significance of the original building.  
Development proposals involving ground works adjacent to or within the curtilage of a 
Listed Building will also need to respond to the site’s archaeological potential in 
accordance with Policy HA7.  
Reasoned Justification  
6.30 There are 3 Grade I; 12 Grade II*; and 89 Grade II Listed Buildings in Crawley. The 
oldest dating from the 10th Century: Saxon St. Nicholas’ Church, Worth, Pound Hi ll, 
to the 20th Century: including The Beehive (1934- 6) and the  Friary Church of St. 
Francis and St. Anthony (1958- 9). Their value is recognised at a national level and, 
as such,  national policy protection is applied.  
Locally Listed Buildings  
6.31 There are many buildings within Crawley that are of particular local architectural or 
historical interest. These buildings are not considered to be of national significance 
but are local heritage assets that are irreplaceable. These buildings are a type of 
‘non- designated’ heritage asset, recognised in national and local planning policy, and 
should be retained wherever possible, on account of their important contribution to the borough’s heritage and character. Locally Listed Buildings are identified on the 
Local  Plan Map and in the council’s Local Heritage List.  
Policy HA5: Locally Listed Buildings  
All development will seek to secure the retention of  Locally Listed Buildings . Development 
should also maintain features of interest, and respect or preserve the character or setting 
of the building.  
Development proposals affecting a Locally Listed Building must demonstrate in the 
Heritage Impact Assessment that the proposals take account of its heritage significance, 
including its setting and any heritage interest falling within the following categories:  
i) Age;  
ii) Authenticity;  
iii) Aesthetic/Architectural Value;  
iv) Historic Value;  
v) Social/communal Value;  
vi) Group Value;  
vii) Landmark/Townscape Value;  
viii) Archaeological Interest.  
Proposals seeking the demolition or partial demolition of a Locally Listed Building may be 
acceptable in exceptional circumstances if the development proposals:  
a) reflect or retain the key features of the original building; and  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 79 b) significantly outweigh the me rit of retaining of the original building with regard to 
social, economic and environmental benefit to the wider area .  
If demolition is seen to be acceptable, the building must first be recorded  according to an 
agreed scheme of investigation which is proportionate to the importance of the Locally 
Listed Building and the impact of the proposal.  The record must be  submit ted to the 
Historic Environment Record in consul tation with the Local Authority.  
Reasoned Justification  
6.32 National planning guidance states that while the best examples of local vernacular 
building types will normally be listed, there are many other buildings which are valued 
for their contribution to the local scene or for  their local historical association. It 
suggests that local planning authorities draw up lists of locally important buildings 
and formulate policies for their protection.  
6.33 Crawley Borough Council previously revised its list of Locally Listed Buildings in 
2010, when 58 buildings of local interest were identified. The adopted local list of 
buildings can be found on the council’s website at www.crawley.gov.uk . 
6.34 The 2010 Local Buildings List will be superseded by the council’s updated Local 
Heritage List, which will be bas ed on assessment of heritage significance against the 
following criteria, taking account of the recommendations of the Local Heritage 
Review  (2020 ), which are consistent with those used to identify other non -designated 
heritage assets, and with Historic England guidance on Local Listing62, to ensure 
consistency with similar local and national surveys:  
• Age; 
• Authenticity ; 
• Aesthetic/ Architectural 
Value;  
• Historic Value ; • Social/Communal Value;  
• Group Value;  
• Landmark/Townscape 
Value;  
• Archaeological Interest . 
6.35 The council will assess the merit of adding new locally listed buildings in consultation 
with local residents, and in accordance with robust criteria based on best -practice 
guidance, through the review of the Local  Heritage List.  
6.36 The Local Heritage List may not be exhaustive in its inclusion of heritage assets which in fact possess significance in line with these criteria. Given the long history of 
human settlement and activity in the Crawley area, and the ongoing transformation of 
the environment through the urban development of the borough, further assets may 
come to light, including as part of the planning and development processes. This is 
particularly likely in the vicinity of existing groups of designated and non- designated 
heritage assets.  
Historic Parks and Gardens  
6.37 Whilst Crawley does not have any Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest 
that are designated as nationally important by Historic England, the borough does 
contain man- made recreational landscapes which are of local importance from a 
heritage perspective. These Historic Parks and Gardens are local or ‘non- designated’ 
heritage assets identified on the Local Plan Map and in the council’s Local Heritage 
List. 
6.38 Historic Parks and Gardens are worthy of protection in the Crawley context for their 
heritage significance, including variously their age and rarity; their historic, 
archaeological, artistic and architectural interest; and their group value. This does not 
mean that development is always unsuitable in these areas but that the historic 
                                                 
62 Local Heritage Listing: Historic England Advice Note 7  (2016) Historic England  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 80 setting and character of that area must be respected or enhanced. Some Parks and 
Gardens are of particular interest as they were important features of the area before 
the devel opment of the New Town, and some are intrinsically linked with the 
development of the New Town. These areas are now attractive landscaped areas 
which are locally valued, adding to the local character of Crawley.  
Policy HA6: Historic Parks and Gardens  
The council will support development, unless it will have a negative impact upon the 
histo ric setting and character of a designated Historic Park and Garden.  
All development propos als within the boundaries of a Historic Park and Garden,  as 
identified on the Local Plan Map and Local Heritage List , will be required to demonstrate 
through a Heritage Impact Assessment :  
a. that the proposals have regard to the asset , its character , heritage significance,  key 
features  and setting ; and  
b. that proposals  respect  or enhance the area.  
In addressing this policy , developers should also respond to the value these sites have as 
structural landscaping (Policy C L6); open space (Policy OS1); green infrastructure (Policy 
GI1); and biodiversity sites (Policy GI3).  
Reasoned Justification  
6.39 The identification of the Historic Parks and Gardens is supported by the 2020 
Crawley Conservation Areas and Non -Designated Assets Review. The Review has 
recommended the identification of Historic Parks and Gardens on the basis of the 
following sub- criteria, which are consistent with the criteria used to identify other non-
designated heritage assets, and with Historic England best practice guidance, while also reflecting in a proportionate way the criteria for designation of Nati onally 
Registered Parks and Gardens
63:  
• Date and Rarity.  
• Sites which reflect the development of taste.  
• Sites which are early or representative examples of a style of layout or a type 
of site, or the work of a recognised designer (amateur or professional) of  local 
importance.  
• Sites having an association with significant persons or historic events.  
• Sites with a strong group value with other heritage assets.  
6.40 On the basis of these sub- criteria , the Local Plan Map and Local Heritage List identify 
the followi ng Historic Parks and Gardens:  
• Worth Park;  
• Land South of St Nicholas’ Church;  
• Broadfield Park;  
• Tilgate Park;  
• Goffs Park;  
• Memorial Gardens.  
6.41 The council will assess the merit of identifying new Historic Parks and Gardens through the review of the Local Plan Map and Local Heritage List, in consultation with 
local residents, and in accordance with robust criteria based on best -practice 
guidance. The council will ensure that the concept of Historic Parks and Gardens is 
not devalued by only designating those areas of special interest identified through a 
                                                 
63 Local Heritage Listing: Historic England Advice Note 7  (2016) Historic England; Urban Landscapes: 
Historic Parks and Gardens Selection Guide (2018) Historic England.   CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 81 robust assessment of their historic interest. The council assessment and the 
requirement for a H eritage Impact Assessment will serve to avoid or minimise conflict 
between the conservation of a Historic Park and Garden and any aspect of a planning proposal. This will ensure a balanced judgement is made having regard to 
the scale of any harm or loss and the significance of the heritage asset.  
6.42 The Local Plan Map and Local Heritage List may not be exhaustive in their inclusion 
of heritage assets which in fact possess significance in line with these sub- criteria. 
Given the long history of human settle ment and activity in the Crawley area, and the 
ongoing transformation of the environment through the urban development of the 
borough, further assets may come to light, including as part of the planning and 
development processes. This is particularly likel y in the vicinity of existing groups of 
designated and non- designated heritage assets.  
Heritage Assets of Archaeological Interest  
6.43 Crawley’s heritage assets of archaeological interest include four Scheduled Monuments and numerous other sites, including settlement remains, moated sites, 
and physical remains of the local iron industry. Further locations within the borough 
have known archaeological potential. West Sussex County Council has identified 
Archaeological Notification Areas which indicate the exi stence or probable existence 
of archaeological heritage assets.  
Policy HA7: Heritage Assets of Archaeological Interest  
Development proposals in the vicinity of a Scheduled Monument, or any heritage asset 
with archaeological interest which is demonstrably of equivalent significance (i.e. 
‘designated’ archaeological assets), will be expected to preserve or enhance the asset 
and its setting, including through the protection of the asset from disturbance associated 
with development activity, and through the av oidance of patterns of movement or land use 
which may cause harm to, or loss of, the significance of an asset over time. Development 
should identify and pursue opportunities to better reveal the significance of such assets.  
Development proposals affecting designated archaeological assets should be supported 
by a Heritage Impact Assessment demonstrating an understanding of the asset’s 
significance, and how this has informed compliance with the requirements identified 
above.  
Any harm to, or loss of, the signi ficance of any designated or non- designated 
archaeological  heritage asset involved in a development proposal will be considered in 
line with national and local policy, according to the significance of the asset and the 
degree of loss or harm.  
This consideration will extend to cover heritage assets which are identified, or whose 
significance is re -evaluated, during the planning and development processes. In order to 
facilitate this , applications meeting the following thresholds should be supported by an 
Archaeological Desk -Based Assessment:  
• ground works adjacent to or in the curtilage of a Listed Building;  
• any activity within a Scheduled Monument;  
• ground works within a Red Archaeological Notification Area;  
• five or more residential units OR non- residential/mi xed use development of over 
0.2ha within an Amber Archaeological Notification Area;  
• development outside an Archaeological Notification Area comprising 10 or more new 
units OR over 0.5ha of non- residential/mixed use development.  
Subject to the findings of  a Desk -Based Assessment , the council may require field 
evaluation and the recording and publication of results. In some cases , the council may 
require assets to be preserved in situ or excavated.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 82 Reasoned Justification  
6.44 Archaeological assets  provide important evidence of earlier human activity within the 
borough. They are particularly sensitive to damage from development , and 
understanding of their significance may change as development takes place. Desk -
Based Assessment should include the results of the Historic Environment Record 
(HER) , relevant entries in the Heritage List for England, and other relevant sources . It 
should examine and define the likelihood of encountering archaeological finds or 
features of all periods on the site during development works, and identify the need for 
and scope of, any further evaluation that might be necessary to refine and conclusively address this question.  
  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 83 Open Space, Sport & Recreation 
7.1 Throughout the urban area and on the fringes of the town there  are many sites that 
are important for recreation , from the wooded and open areas of grass in between 
houses to large local nature reserves and public parks. Crawley’s waterways have an 
important leisure, visual and economic role in places such as Ifield M ill Pond and 
Tilgate Lake.   
7.2 Crawley’s open spaces, sports facilities and recreational areas are important to the 
health and wellbeing of the community  and are integral to the quality of life of the 
population. These spaces make up much  of the green infrastructure network of the 
town, providing environmental benefits as well as enhancing its character, making 
Crawley a pleasant place to live, work or visit.  
Chapter Content  
7.3 This chapter sets out policies to guide the relationship between development 
proposals and open space needs and enhancement of the borough’s sports and 
recreation offer .  
The Key Issues  
7.4 The number and quality of open space sites has come under increasing pressure 
from both new development and maintenance budgetary constraints. With the need 
for new housing, Crawley’s economic role within the Gatwick Diamond, and limited 
development land,  it may be that some of these sites are considered as a potential 
supply of land. It is important that a balance is struck between meeting development 
needs whilst continuing to ensure sufficient provision of high quality open space, 
recreation and sports facilities  to meet the needs of existing and future residents.  
Local Plan Policies  
Sport, Recreation and Open Space  
7.5 This policy  sets out the criteria the council will use to determine proposals that affect 
open space, sport and recreation provision.  
7.6 It is important to ensure that there is an adequate supply of open space to serve the 
needs of both the existing and the future population of the borough. The Open 
Space, Sport and Recreation Assessment , Indoor Sports Facilities Assessment  and 
Playing Pitch  Strategy  (2020) identified the  standards for sport and recreation 
provision in the borough based on an assessment of the adequacy of existing provision, and the need for future sport and recreation development defined through 
consultation.  
7.7 Access to a network of high quality open spaces and opportunities for sport and physical activity is important for the health and well -being of communities. Planning 
policies should be based on robust and up -to-date assessments of the need for open 
space, sport and recreation facilities (including quantitative or qualitative deficits or 
surpluses) and opportunities for new provision
64.  
 
 
                                                 
64 National Planning Policy Framework, p aragraph 96 (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 84 Policy OS1 : Open Space, Sport and Recreation 
Proposals that  benefit the use of existing open space, sport and recreational spaces will 
be supported. However, proposals that  remove or affect the continued use of existing 
open space, sport and recreational spaces will not be permitted unless:  
a) An assessment of the needs for open space, sport and recreation clearly show the 
site to be surplus to requirements; or  
b) The loss resulting from the proposed development would be replaced by equivalent or 
better provision in terms of quantity and quality in a suitable location; or  
c) The development is for alternative sports and recreational provision, the needs for 
which clearly outweigh the loss . 
Whilst a site may be surplus to requirements as open space it may still be of 
environmental or cultural value. T he site’s  development may have unacceptable visual or 
amenity impact, or adversely affect its wider green infrastructure functions, including for 
climate change mitigation. Therefore, applicants should also c arefully consider the 
character , landscape, biodiversity  and other environmental policies in the Plan.  
Reasoned Justification  
7.8 Determining what open space, sport and recreation provision is needed (including 
the qualitative and quantitative deficits or  surpluses ) is a requirement set out in the 
NPPF65.  
7.9 For the purposes of this policy, open space, sport and recreation facilities broadly fall 
into the following typologies:  
• Indoor sports facilities ; 
• Parks and gardens ; 
• Natural and sem i-natural open 
spaces ; 
• Amenity green space;  
• Provision for children ; • Provision for young people;  
• Outdoor sports facilities ; 
• Allotments ; 
• Cemeteries and churchyards ; 
• Civic spaces;  
• Green corridors.  
7.10 The emerging Open Space, Sport and Recreation As sessment, Indoor Sports 
Facilities Assessment  and Playing Pitch Strategy (2020) establish Crawley’s specific 
needs and quantitative or qualitative deficits or surpluses of open space, sports and 
recreational facilities. The standards within  the studies provide guidanc e on where 
future provision of open s pace and recreation facilities  is to be provided and where 
current provision is to be maintained.   
7.11 Overall , Crawley is relatively well catered for with open space areas. However, 
distribution can be uneven which means that in some locations residents have further to travel to enjoy particular types of open space.  The Open Space Assessment 
highlights the open space distribution by neighbourhood area. Whilst  some open 
space is strategic in nature and the provision across the whole borough should be taken into account , this can be used as a starting point for understanding the needs 
of a specific location.  
7.12 The studies identify a future deficit in most types of open space across the borough 
by 2035. To improve access and quality of Open Spaces, recommendations set out 
in each of the studies are to be integrated into designs for proposals at an early 
stage.  
 
                                                 
65 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 96 (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 85 7.13 The following Open Space Standards are established for the borough:  
Open Space 
Typology  Quantity 
Standards (ha 
per 1,000 
population)  Accessibility/ 
Walking 
Standard  Quality Standards  Value Standards  
Parks and 
Recreation 
Grounds  1.6 600 metres 
(12-13 mins 
walk)  The National 
Benchmark, based 
on Green Flag, 
should be applied 
so that sites obtain 
a Quality Score of 
70% to ensure all 
sites achieve a 
Good Quality 
Score or above.  
 Sites obtain a Value Score of 
60% and above to 
ensure all sites 
achieve a High 
Value Score.  Amenity Green 
Space  0.6 480 metres (10 
mins walk)  
Natural Green 
Space  1.8 720 metres (15 
mins walk)  
Play Space 
(Children)  
0.05 480 metres (10 
mins walk)  
Play Space 
(Youth)  600 metres 
(12-13 mins 
walk)  
Allotments  0.3 - 
Churchyards and 
Cemeteries   No Standard  - 
Civic Space   No Standard  - 
7.14 The Open Space Study concludes that, where a proposed planning application 
shows that it would result in the loss of an open space, a quantity assessment should 
be carried out to understand if this would create a deficiency in that type of open 
space.  
7.15 Where a quantity assessment evidences no deficiency , an assessment of the open 
space's historical, cultural, visual, amenity and ecological value should be 
undertaken to understand the full ramifications of its loss, including impact to the wider green infrastructure functions. The local planning authority will consider the 
quality and value of the site within the decision making process by considering:  
→ the quality and value  assessment made as part of the council’s Open Space 
Assessment (if the site was included in the full quality and value assessment), 
this will highlight what the loss would be in terms on the quality of the site and its 
values;  
→ any planning designations that apply to site, for example, is the site within a 
Conservation Area or in the setting of a Listed Building;  
→ all matters covered by an Environmental Impact Assessment, if appropriate.  
7.16 The Open Space, Sport and Recreation Studies have mapped and audited Amenity 
and Natural Green Spaces larger than 0.2 ha. Sites smaller than 0.2 ha typically 
consist of roadside verges, roundabouts and incidental areas of grass. These sites 
are important contributions to the green infrastructure network within Crawley and 
can be areas of improvements to green infrastructure and biod iversity in line with 
Policy GI3 . Proposals which affect these areas will also be considered against 
amenity impacts set out in Policy DD1.  Replacement for the loss of these smaller 
sites, by equivalent or better provision of open space,  can be provided i n the form of 
smaller parcels, including areas smaller than 0.2 ha, where the loss is considered not 
to have an unacceptable harmful impact . However, for amenity and natural green 
spaces an assessment is only required for sites larger than 0.2 ha.CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 86  
7.17 The Indoor Sports Facilities Assessment  (2020)  concludes that o verall, Crawley has 
a good range of existing sport and leisure facilities across the area and there is 
sufficient pay and play accessible health and fitness provision to meet future 
demand. However, latent demand was identified in some areas and provision. The Assessment recommends that the existing facility mix  across the town, as identified 
by the study, should be protected, with flexibility to adapt to support any growth of the 
town over the coming years.   
Provision of Open Space and Recreational Facilities with New Development  
7.18 As Crawley grows , the population will increase putting pressure on existing open 
space and creating a demand for new open space and recreational facilities. 
Particularly in areas where there is a deficiency, new development can exacerbate 
this deficiency. It is important that as the town grows, so does the green 
infrastructure to support it.  
Policy OS2 : Provision of Open Space and Recreational Facilities  
The Open Space, Sport and Recreation Assessment , Indoo r Sports Facilities  Assessment 
and Playing Pitch Strategy  (2020)  provide an up- to-date evidence base on the surplus 
and deficits of provision in different neighbourhoods and are to be taken into account in 
meeting the demand for open space, sport and recreation arising from current and new 
development.  
Where development is on existing open space which is not identified as surplus and is , 
therefore , required to be replaced through Policy OS1, a S106 agreement will be sought 
to secure the replacement open space  and to provide and improve the Public Rights of 
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 87 Way network b oth within the development and connecting to the surrounding 
countryside/open spaces .  
Residential development creates a demand for open space, sport and recreation facilities. 
Depending on the characteristics and location of housing sites, on- site provisi on of open 
space may be appropriate and required as an integral part of the development  to meet the 
needs arising from the increased population from the new residential units .  
This will be proportional to the additional demand and impacts on open space generated 
by the development , using the borough’s open space standards set out in paragraph 7.13  
and the Open Space and Indoor Sports Facilities Assessments and Playing Pitch Strategy  
(2020)  (and any subsequent updates) . A site -specific assessment should b e undertaken 
to determine the existing quantitative, qualitative and accessibility of public open space 
within the locality of the development.  
Where the council agrees that such provision cannot reasonably be provided on site, the 
council will seek a fin ancial contribution towards the enhancement of existing facilities in 
order to mitigate the increased demand.  Details regarding the council’s approach to 
seeking these contributions are set out in the Local Plan Planning Obligations Annex and 
further explained in the Green Infrastructure SPD.     
Higher density development within the Town C entre will be expected to consider 
opportunities to provide on- site amenity open space, play space and community food 
growing space. A financial contribution will be expected, proportionate to the associated 
anticipated increase in population generated by the development, towards strategic sports 
pitch and ancillary facilities provision. Taking viability into account, higher density town 
centre developments will not be expected to provide a contribution towards parks and 
recreation spaces or natural green space. Imaginative design soluti ons suitable for high 
density, Town C entre style developments  should be considered  in meeting the 
biodiversity net gain requirement  on-site (Policy GI3 ). Where provision of any of the open 
space typologies required from higher density development is agreed cannot reasonably 
be provided fully on- site, the council will seek financial contributions in line with the 
Planning Obligations Annex, the Green Infras tructure SPD and Biodiversity Net Gain 
guidance.  
In addition, t he impact of the increased population from residential development on open 
space and recreational facilities  which particularly  serve  a borough -wide population will be 
mitigated by the use of t he Community Infrastructure Levy.  
Opportunities are encouraged to provide multi -use open space and/or indoor recreation 
provision, e.g. natural play areas, BMX tracks, Parkour sites, Public Rights of Way and 
other signed recreational routes , where there is  an existing undersupply of these facilities 
and the negative impact on green infrastructure, including biodiversity and visual amenity, 
can be avoided.  
Reasoned Justification  
7.19 In meeting the housing needs of the borough , it is important to provide the 
infrastructure needed to support the increase in population and mitigate the impacts 
on existing facilities. This may be new provision on- site for larger developments or 
new provision or enhancements off -site to ensure that the overall supply, accessibility 
and quality of Crawley’s open space does not diminish as the town grows. The 
general principle underlying the policy is  that all new housing should mitigate its 
impact on Crawley’s  open spaces, sports and recreation facili ties.  
7.20 Recommendations from updated Open Space Studies include:  
• protection and enhancement of existing open spaces –  including improving 
quality and value;  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 88 • provision of high quality new open space where feasible, to improve quantity and 
accessibility;  
• enhancing and promoting space for food growing (including allotments);  
• addressing provision of poor -quality ancillary and changing pavilion quality; and  
• improving drainage and maintenance of pitches.  
Further recommendations include securing community us e agreements to invest in 
increased community access to existing facilities and establishing dialogue with other 
providers of open space, sport and recreational facilities.  
7.21 Wherever possible, the council will consider opportunities for new and existi ng open 
spaces to deliver multiple functions, including:  
• Recreation;  
• Green travel routes;  
• Aesthetic;  
• Shading from the sun;  
• Evaporative cooling;  
• Trapping air pollutants;  
• Noise absorption;  
• Habitat for wildlife;  
• Connectivity for wildlife;  • Heritage;  
• Cultural;  
• Carbon Storage;  
• Food Production;  
• Wind shelter;  
• Learning;  
• Water Storage;  
• Water Infiltration; and  
• Water Interception.  
7.22 Community growing spaces have many mental and physical health benefits, as well 
as encouraging community cohesion, education and economic development through 
developing new skills and selling produce. Community food growing opportunities 
should be sought through new development and areas of derelict or underused 
spaces. A variety of si tes can be utilised such as:  
• Communal land on a housing estate;  
• Waste ground and derelict sites;  
• Land within parks;  
• Land awaiting development;  
• Rooftops;  
• Hospital grounds or school grounds; and  
• Allotments.  
7.23 Access to natural greenspace is explained in more detail in Policy GI1, including Natural England’s Accessible Natural Green Space Standard recommendations , the 
Woodland Trust’s Woodland Access Standard and the council’s local natural 
greenspace standard.  
7.24 Where necessary, developer contributions from new housing secured through CIL 
will be used  to assist in upgrading and refurbishing existing indoor sports  facilities, as 
well as those that could contribute towards the development of strategic facilities,  
sports pitches and ancillary facilities, formal parks and recreation grounds,  additional 
and safe walking, running and cycling routes, and where possible to open up other 
informal, multipurpose places and spaces where people can be active.  
Rights of Way and Access to the Countryside  
7.25 Public Rights of Way contribute to the character of the town by providing a means of active travel for residents and visitor s as well as a recreational use. T hey provide a 
route for a sustainable means of transport to improve the physical and mental health 
of residents in Crawley. In order to ensure that public access to the countryside and 
the urban network of rights of way is maintained and enhanced, the council , as a 
local p lanning authority , will protect Public Rights of W ay including footpaths, 
bridleways, byways and unclassified count ry roads.  
 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 89  
Policy OS3 : Rights of Way and Access to the Countryside 
Public Rights of W ay will be protected by ensuring that development does not result in the 
loss of, or adversely affect , a Right of Way or other recreational route, unless a new route 
is provided of equal or better value.  
Unless it can be clearly shown that a Public Right of Way is unnecessary or not needed, 
proposals which result in the loss of a P ublic Right of Way must ensure re- provision of 
equal or better value.  
Proposals which detract from the character of a R ight of Way or other type of recreational 
route must adequately mitigate the impacts or provide a new resource of equal or better 
value if this is not possible.  
This may include:  
i) the provision of safe and convenient links to nearby R ights of Way/recreational routes; 
and/or  
ii) new or upgraded existing R ights of Way to multi -functional routes  which improve 
environmental functions and visual amenity  to create benefits for a range of users , 
such as  for Non-Motorised Users (walkers, cyclists, equestrians, individuals with 
disabilities and impairments) and motorised disability users on the urban fringe of the 
town, with connections both inward to the centre, and outward to the wider 
countryside.  
Reasoned Justification  
7.26 The NPPF66 requires local planning authorities to protect and enhance Public Rights 
of Way and seek opportunities to provide better facilities for users.  PROW’s are an 
important network of roads and minor roads that facilitate safe travel for vulnerable 
users, walkers, cyclists and  equestrians.  
7.27 The footpath, cycle and bridleway links within and between neighbourhoods and from 
the town into the wider c ountryside form an important recreational role for the 
borough’s residents and visitors. The importance of access to the countryside and 
the need to improve it , is emphasised in the West Sussex Rights of Way 
Improvement Plan and accompanying Project List. Although predominantly us ed for 
leisure activities, the Public Rights of W ay network can also provide valuable intra-
urban movements and schemes should also take full account of any existing P ublic 
Rights of Way within the borough. Improvements for motoris ed disability users would 
need to be carefully designed to ensure access is prevented for other motorised 
vehicles.  
7.28 The map below  shows the current extent of Public Rights of Way (2019) in Crawley 
and surrounding boroughs as well as Crawley’s Cycle Network and the Greenway that runs in a circle around Crawley. It is important to enhance sustainable transport 
options through well mai ntained PROW’s. The map provides baseline evidence to 
where contributions towards Public Rights of Ways can be spent, for example, where 
increasing access to an area of open space through a PROW improvement can 
benefit the quality of life of new and existi ng residents living nearby. Several 
opportunities to enhance Crawley’s PROW network are listed in the Green 
Infrastructure SPD
67. Another positive approach would be to increase and enhance 
connections to Crawley’s Greenway which is a circular route around t he borough, 
taking into account the various types of users for a Public Right of Way. However, 
                                                 
66 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 98 (2019) MHCLG  
67 Green Infrastructure Supplementary Planning Document, pages 11-13 (2016) CBC  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 90 individual site assessments should also consider what open space, sport and 
recreation activities and spaces are available within close proximity, using the 
council’s accessibility standards, to a development’s location.  
 
  
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 91 Infrastructure Provision  
8.1 The retention of existing essential infrastructure and the provision of additional 
facilities and services to support new development is a key objective of the planning 
system. It is important to retain, and where possible enhance, existing essential 
infrastructure in the borough taking into account new innovations and the need to 
respond to climate change.  
8.2 A complete picture of the provision of infrastructur e in Crawley is contained in the  
draft Infrastructure Plan which supports the Local Plan Review .  
8.3 As significant parts of the town’s infrastructure ar e not actually provided by the 
borough c ouncil, it is important that the council continues to work closely with West 
Sussex County Council and utility and service providers (such as water providers, 
communication companies etc.) to ensure that the necessary infrastructure is in 
place for the lifetime of the P lan. 
Chapter Content  
8.4 This chapter sets out t he Local Plan policies and approach to ensure sufficient 
infrastructure to meet the needs of the existing and future population. It covers all 
types of general and social infrastructure provision. Green infrastructure and 
transport infrastructure are further covered in more detail in separate chapters later in 
this Local Plan.  
The Key Issues  
8.5 Crawle y’s population is still growing:  two new neighbourhoods are currently being 
added to the town;  a significant number of new dwellings are coming forward within 
the town centre; and additional housing sites are proposed in the adopted  Local Plan, 
and are continuing  to be allocated as part of this Local Plan Review . Growth in 
employment numbers and at Gatwick Airport is also anticipated  over the Plan period.  
Therefore , it is important to ensure that the key transport, utility, service and 
community infrastructure facilities are improved and if necessary expanded to meet 
the needs of the town. Some facil ities can grow incrementally as additional funding is 
provided through taxes, rates and investment plans, but other infrastructure facilities 
will soon reach a critical point beyond which a major new facility is likely to be 
needed, including secondary education and possibly the sewage treatment works. 
Given the constrained nature of the borough, some new infrastructure facilities which 
require larger sites may have to be provided outside the borough boundary.  The 
council commits to working with neighbourin g authorities and infrastructure providers 
to ensure that needs are met where this is the case.  
Local Plan Policies  
Infrastructure Provision 
8.6 People that live and work in the town need to be supported by a wide range of 
infrastructure facilities and services to enable the town to function and to provide a 
high quality of life. This can be achieved by protecting existing infrastructure and 
ensuri ng that development can make provision for any additional infrastructure it 
requires.  
 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 92 Strategic Policy IN1: Infrastructure Provision  
Development will be permitted where it is supported by , and coordinated with,  the delivery 
and maintenance of necessary infrastructure both on and off site (including where this 
infrastructure is located outside of Crawley but serves development within Crawley) . For 
individual proposed developments this includes the provision of  mitigation to avoid any 
substantial cumulativ e effects on the existing infrastructure services.  
Existing infrastructure services and facilities will be protected where they contribute to the 
neighbourhood or town overall, unless an equivalent replacement or improvement to 
services is provided or ther e is sufficient alternative provision of the same type in the 
area.  
The council will charge Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) on development taking place 
within the borough in accordance with the council’s adopted CIL charging schedule.  
Where appropriate,  developer cont ributions will be sought in the form of planning 
obligations to address site specific issues , in accordance with the tests in the CIL 
Regulations . The Planning Obligations Annex collates and sets out the anticipated 
planning obligations ass ociated with the Policies established by this Local Plan.  
Reasoned Justification  
8.7 Infrastructure covers a wide range of services and facilities such as transport, 
education, health, social infrastructure, community facilities,  cultural facilities,  sport 
centres, open space, parks and play space, blue infrastructure, waste management 
and disposal, libraries, cemeteries, emergency services, places of worship, utility 
services, waste water treatment, telecommunications infrastructure and flood 
defences.  
8.8 It is important that the necessary infrastructure and community services are made available for the whole community, for everyone to enjoy a high quality of life. The 
NPPF highlights the role that the planning system  can play in identifying and 
coordinating the provision of infrastructure
68 and requires strategic policies to make 
sufficient provision for infrastructure69. The Infrastructure Plan sets out in more detail 
an assessment of infrastructure provision in Crawley. These facilities which make a 
contribution to the provision of infrastructure provision in the town will be protected unless alternative provisions are  made.  Where alternative provision is made this 
should be suitably located in terms of the functional requirements of the facility and the access requirements of the communities served, whether this be within or outside 
the boundary.  
8.9 It is a fact that development will place additional demands on infrastructure provision and that developers will be expected to contribute to meeting the need for additional 
infrastructure generated by their development and ensuring cumulative effects are 
effectively mitigated. Development will be permitted where overall capacity limits, 
advised by infrastructure providers, are not breached. T he council will charge 
developers the Community Infrastructure Levy (C IL) on appropriate development, in 
accordance with the council’s adopted CIL Charging Schedule and the CIL 
Regulations (2010) as amended. Section 106 agreements will address relevant site 
specific issues to mitigate  direct  impacts on infrastructure  in accordance with the 
relevant tests set out in CIL Regulation 122 . The Planning Obligations Annex sets out 
the charges and calculations anticipated from the planning policies in this Local Plan 
and these have been subject to viability testing as part of the whole Plan and CIL 
Viability assessment, to support the Local Plan.  The council’s adopted 
                                                 
68 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 8a) (2019) MHCLG  
69 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 20b) (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 93 Supplementary Planning Documents  provide additional guidance on the use of S 106 
agreements.  
8.10 As required by the CIL Regulations the council will publish an annual Infrastructure 
Funding Statement concerning developer contributions. Statements for each financial 
year will be published before the end of the following December. They will set out the 
information required by the CIL Regulations, including:  
• An ‘Infrastructure List’, identifying infrastructure projects or types of infrastructure 
which the council intends will be, or may be, wholly or partly funded by CIL;  
• A ‘CIL Report’, detailing CIL receipts, allocations and expenditure;  
• A ‘Section 106 Report’, including details of new planning obligations (‘Section 106 agreements’) entered into, as well as details of receipts, allocations and 
expenditure.   
8.11 The Water Cycle Study Crawley Addendum Report (January 2021) identifies that the 
flow permit for Crawley Waste Water Treatment Works is likely to be exceeded 
towards the end of the 2030 (near the end of the AMP8 period).Thames Water has 
confirmed that the works is close to its treatment capacity, and wil l exceed its permit 
during the Local P lan period. A new permit from the Environment Agency is likely to 
require a tighter Ammonia, Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) and suspended 
solids consent, likely requiring an upgrade to achieve. It should be noted that in the 
event of an upgrade to sewerage network assets being required, up to three years 
lead in time is u sual to enable for the planning and delivery of the upgrade. As a 
developer has the automatic right to connect to the sewer network under the Water 
Industry Act, the Infrastructure Provider may request a drainage planning condition if 
a network upgrade is required to ensure the infrastructure is in place ahead of 
occupation of the development. This will avoid adverse environmental impac ts such 
as sewer flooding and/ or water pollution. It will be important to ensure that growth is 
aligned with delivery of additional capacity at Crawley W aste Water Treatment 
Works. Waste -water/Sewage Treatment Works upgrades take longer to design and 
build. Implementing new technologies and the construction of a major treatment 
works extension or new treatment works could take up to ten years to plan, design, 
obtain approvals and build.
 In case of major development , it is strongly 
recommended that developers engage with Thames Water, as the was tewater 
infrastructure provider , at the earliest opportunity to establish:  
• the devel opment’s demand for wastewater/sewage treatment and network 
infrastructure,  both on and off site, and whether it can be met; and;  
• what loading/flow from the development is anticipated.  
New Infrastructure Provision 
8.12 The Infrastructure Plan provides an assessment of infrastructure in Crawley and 
whether new or additional facilities will need to be provided to support the town and 
its growth.  
Policy IN2 : The Location and Provision of New Infrastructure  
The council will support the provision of new or improved Infrastructure in appropriate 
locations where the facilities are required to support  development , where they improve the 
medium - or longer -term resilience of infrastructure in Crawley,  or where they add to the 
range and quality of facilities in the town.  
The provision of community facilities alongside housing within sites allocated for uses 
including housing will  be considered acceptable where:  
• there is an evident need for the type of facility concerned;  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 94 • the infrastructure/facilities are suitable to meet the needs of the community served  and 
the needs of future residents ; 
• the proposal complies with other policies in this Plan, including any site- specific 
requirements for additional or r eplacement services, facilities, enhancements, 
safeguards, investigations and other mitigatory measures.  
Subject to the requirements above, education facilities may be considered acceptable as 
an alternative use on sites allocated for uses including housin g where there is a 
demonstrated  educational need arising in Crawley which cannot be met on another site . 
Major facilities providing services on sites  which are accessed by the whole town or wider 
area should be located in the most sustainable locations accessible by a variety of means 
of transport.  
Local community facilities should be located close to neighbourhood centres , in the Town 
Centre, or at suitable locations near Three Bridges Station.  
Reasoned Justification  
8.13 The NPPF highlights the need to make  provision for sufficient  infrastructure to 
support residents and businesses. As has been identified earlier , infrastructure 
covers a wide range of services and facilities. Where new facilities and services are 
provided,  consideration needs to be given to their location depending on the number 
of trips generated and the use of the facility. The proposals will also need to be assessed against general development management policies.  
8.14 The Infrastructure Plan recognises that there is an estimated need for around 6- 8 
additional forms of entry at secondary school level in Crawley during the course of the Plan and a new secondary school is therefore likely to be needed in the area.  
Due to Crawley’s tightly constrained land supply, discussions are ongoing with 
WSCC and neighbouring authorities to consider secondary school provision to meet 
Crawley’s needs as part of new strategic development close to Crawley.  However, 
the Policy also makes allowance for consideration of educ ation provision on sites 
within the borough allocated for uses including housing, should it not be possible to be met on an alternative site, particularly those currently or previously in education 
use.    
8.15 Infrastructure facilities which generate a significant number of trips should be located 
in the most sustainable location where they can benefit from good public transport access and other suitable forms of transport.  
8.16 Infrastructure which serves a neighbourhood catchment should be located clos e to 
neighbourhood centres. This will help maximise the accessibility of the site by foot 
and cycle as well as by public transport.  
8.17 Other forms of infrastructure facilities which provide services but do not generate 
significant number of trips should be located in the most appropriate location,  taking 
into account their impact on adjoining uses.  
Telecommunications and Broadband Provision 
8.18 The government requires the planning system to  support the expansion of  
telecommunications systems and increase coverage of gigabit -capable full fibre 
infrastructure, which can support future technologies such as 5G, by  prioritising full 
fibre connections to existing and new developments. Access to high quality  digital  
infrastructure, and providing access t o services from a range of providers, is 
important both in supporting economic growth and enhancing the provision to local 
communities.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 95 8.19 West Sussex councils, including Crawley, are building full fibre  infrastructure  that will 
connect key public sector  sites, capable of delivering speeds from 1,000 megabits 
per second (1 gigabit) to meet the future need of public services.  
8.20 The project will not deliver fibre broadband to homes and businesses.  There is a 
commitment to providing  greater coverage of  full fibre within the county by working 
with the market to benefit homes and businesses in the future.  
Policy IN3 : Supporting High Quality Communications  
All new employment and commercial development  over 100sqm and residential 
development  of one unit or more must  have provision for gigabit -capable full fibre 
broadband to ensure that fibre or other cabling does not need to be retrofitted.  
Reasoned Justification  
8.21 Through its Industrial Strategy, the g overnment has expressly focused on building a 
‘full fibre future for Britain’ to deliver digital infrastructure capable of providing today 
what the next generation will need tomorrow.  The NPPF is clear that planning 
policies should support the expansion of electronic communications networks , 
including next generation mobile technology (such as 5G) and full fibre broadband connections (paragraph 112).  
8.22 Crawley is part of the Greater Brighton Economic Region, one of the fastest growing 
city regions in the UK with a strong knowledge- based economy. A consistent 
message from businesses is that under -investment in infrastructure blocks growth 
and deters inward investment. This is reflected in Gatwick 360
o, the Coast to Capital 
LEP Strategic Economic Plan, which identifies need to prioritise inv estment in a new 
standard of full fibre broadband connectivity between economic hubs, and the 
Gatwick Diamond Local Strategic Statement, which identifies the continued 
development and roll -out of superfast broadband as central to the promotion of 
sustainable economic growth across the Gatwick Diamond. Without the required 
level of investment,  including in digital infrastructure,  the full growth potential in the 
area will not be achieved.  Exclusion from access to broadband can also reduce 
access to public services and employment opportunities, cause social isolation and 
mean that people may not be able to benefit from discounts for online billing or 
payments.  
8.23 Despite the demand and potential economic benefits of full fibre deployment, the 
area lacks the fibre density in access networks and backhaul to ensure that local 
businesses have access to the infrastructure they need to innovate, differentiate and 
add value, so increasing the pac e of economic growth. Increased speeds and data 
transmission and the demands of future technologies such as  5G will rely on higher 
frequencies , greater bandwidth  and network densification. Without more high 
capacity fibre, carriers will be unable to suppor t the projected minimum four -fold 
increase in mobile data traffic.  
8.24 All the local authorities in West Sussex have agreed to work together to secure 
greater coverage of  full fibre infrastructure by attract ing further commercial 
investment, to support the expansion of key urban clusters across the county into 
gigabit towns and cities.  
8.25 Retrofitting full fibre  broadband into existing development is a costly and disruptive 
process . Therefore , measures to incorporate the fibre optic cables directly int o new 
development, as part of the construction process, should be encouraged.  
 
  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 96 Economic  Growth & Social Mobility  
 
 
 
Improving Job Opportunities and Developing the Local Economy: Economic Growth 
& Social Mobility  
As a progressive town, Crawley will strive to be the premier town between London and the 
South Coast providing jobs, learning and development opportunities and a leisure and 
cultural offer that is attractive to residents and visitors. Crawley will continue to be an 
economic leader, with a di verse, resilient and productive economy that meets the needs of 
the borough and supporting the overall prosperity of the region. An environment that 
supports and encourages new and established businesses to grow and flourish will be 
developed, and supporti ng necessary infrastructure, including telecommunications, will be 
enhanced. Crawley will be the first choice of business location for a variety of sectors and 
both domestic and international markets. Innovation, entrepreneurship and advanced 
technologies will thrive, and our community will benefit from access to high value, 
sustainable economic growth. Additional jobs will have been created for people living in and 
around the Crawley area across a diverse range of sectors, including creative industries. 
Access to jobs will be supported by learning and development opportunities giving people a 
real choice about the work they can and want to do.  
 
Redeveloping and revitalising the Town Centre and further regeneration of the Manor Royal 
Business District, and i dentifying land for a new industrial -led Strategic Employment Location 
will reinforce the status of Crawley as the place to do business in the South East. Manor 
Royal will be seen as a premier business park, attracting sustained business investment that 
will deliver high value employment and higher levels of productivity and economic growth. 
Sustainable growth of Gatwick Airport will help to support the economic growth of the town, 
whilst opportunities for new employment land will be explored.  
 
The revitali sed Town Centre will be the heart of the town, providing a central point for local 
people and others from across the region to enjoy social activities, shopping, culture and 
entertainment both during the day and at night. It will have a welcoming and attractive family 
friendly environment. The Town Centre will become a business growth hub and a recognised 
neighbourhood with local facilities supporting its residents.  
 
 
 
  
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 97 Economic Growth  
9.1 Crawley is firmly established as one of the key economic drivers in the South East of 
England. The borough represents the geographic and economic heart of both the 
Gatwick Diamond sub -region and the wider Coast to Capital Local Enterprise 
Partnership (LEP) area, and through its excellent transport links Crawley continues to 
be well connected internally, nationally and internat ionally. It is home to a major 
international airport at Gatwick  and Manor Royal, the region’s premier business 
destination,  employs over 30,000 people across an area of 240 hectares. Both are 
key dr ivers of the Crawley economy and that of the wider area. Development of key 
mixed  use sites is revitalising the Town C entre as a place to do business, whilst the 
borough’s other designated main employment areas perform an important economic 
function.  
9.2 The Gatwick 360o Strategic Economic Plan 2018 -2030, prepared by the Coast to 
Capital Local Enterprise Partnership, sets out the economic vision that Crawley, alongside the region’s other major urban centres, will be ranked among the most 
productive places i n the UK. Key to achieving this is the supporting of economic 
growth through the delivery of new business space and facilities, improved connectivity (including digital) and infrastructure, and delivering the necessary skills 
for a global economy, providing high -quality, well -paid jobs in the decades to come.  
9.3 To promote the continued prosperity of the Gatwick Diamond and plan for its future 
growth, a Gatwick Diamond Local Strategic Statement
70 (LSS) has been prepared on 
a joint basis and endorsed by  the two county councils and six local author ities 
covered by the area. The S tatement sets out a commitment among local authorities 
to work together to promote the economic function of the Gatwick Diamond, recognising the strength of Crawley/Gatwick as a business location.  Dovetailing with 
LEP objectives, the Gatwick Diamond LSS establishes priorities to support delivery of 
the floorspace needed for new and growing businesses, the skills needed to enable communities to acces s job opportunities within the D iamond, and the infrastructure to 
support sustainable economic growth.  
9.4 The success of Crawley’s economy, and that of the wider Gatwick Diamond and 
Coast to Capital LEP , is significantly driven by Gatwick Airport, which is recognised 
by Coast to Capital as accounting for £2.7 billion of economic activity in the LEP 
area. The COVID -19 pandemic has impacted substantially on the aviation sector  and 
related businesses , and this has in turn impacted upon Crawley’s economy, with 
Centre for Cities (2020)
71 estimatin g that over half of the borough’s jobs  fall with in 
very vulnerabl e or vulnerable sectors. I t is anticipated that Crawley’s economy will 
respond and recover, with significant need for new business land and floo rspace 
identified over the period to 2036. Give n the significant land supply constraints faced 
within the borough, the Local Plan sets out a pro- active and ambitious economic 
strategy to support economic recovery in the shorter -term, whilst planning positively 
for economic growth and diversification, c onsistent with LEP and Gatwick Diamond 
priorities, and national planning policies, to ensure that sustainable economic growth 
can be delivered over the Plan period.  
                                                 
70 Gatwick Diamond Local Strategic Statement 2016 (April 2017) Chilmark Consulting on behalf of the Gatwick 
Diamond Authorities  
71 Centre for Cities (April 2020) What does the COVID -19 crisis mean for the economies of British cities and large 
towns?  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 98 Chapter Content  
9.5 This chapter sets out a coordinated approach, through strategic and spatial policies, 
that will enable Crawley to build on its economic strengths, maximise opportunities 
for growth and respond pro- actively to the challenges the borough faces over the 
Plan period. Drawing upon on the Norther n West Sussex Economic Growth 
Assessment 2020 (as updated) , Employment Land Availability Assessment72, 
Sustainability Appraisal/Strategic Environmental Assessment  and Employment Land 
Trajectory (2020), the chapter sets out  Crawley’s employment land and floorspace 
needs  over the 15 year  period between 2021 and 2036, and out lines the economic 
strategy through which these needs  will be planned for. Economic recovery is also a 
priority issue, with flexible policies to support e mployment growth and enable 
adaptation to change. Supporting the needs of residents and businesses through 
improving access to training and employment opportunities  will be vital, now even 
more so as the economic impacts of the pandemic are felt . Through t he economic 
policies in this chapter, and those set out in the following chapters relating to the 
Town Centre and Gatwick Airport, the Local Plan sets out the economic strategy to 
deliver sustainable economic growth in Crawley over the next 15 years.   
The Key Issues  
9.6 The NPPF is clear that planning policies should help create the conditions in which businesses can invest, expand and adapt, setting out a clear economic vision and 
strategy that positively and proactively encourages sustainable economic growth
73.  
Recognising the immediate economic situation facing the borough as a result of the 
Covid -19 pandemic, it is vital to plan positively to support economic recovery, 
particularly within the most affected aviation related sectors, whilst facilitating an 
expansion and diversification of Crawley’s economy that will enable it to adapt to 
unforeseen economic circumstances that could otherwise hinder economic growth. It 
is also important that the Local Plan looks forward, planning pro -actively to meet 
Craw ley’s significant job growth, business land and floorspace needs as the 
economy recovers, whilst supporting delivery of the upskilling, connectivity and infrastructure needed to support economic growth.  
9.7 Crawley borough is the leading economic driver in the Gatwick Diamond, forming the 
economic heart of the Coast to Capital Local Enterprise Partnership and Gatwick 
Diamond areas. With new businesses seeking to locate in the borough and existing 
businesses wishing  to grow, there is a need for a minimum of 38.7ha  new 
employment land in Crawley over the period to 2036. The scope to accommodate identified employment needs in Crawley has been severely constrained by the limited 
available land supply , which is significantly affected by the requirement to safeguard 
land in the north of the borough for a possible southern runway at Gatwick Airport. 
There remains  a risk that if Crawley’s employment needs cannot be accommodated 
within the borough, investment may be lost outside of  Crawley, and indeed the sub-
region entirely. It is therefore vital that a robust strategy is in place which plans 
positively to meet Crawley’s employment needs, supporting the continued economic 
success of Crawley and the wider Gatwick Diamond and Coast to Capital areas.  
9.8 To accommodate C rawley’s employment needs, the Local Plan strategy focuses on 
the protection and intensification of the borough’s existing main employment areas, and the identification of new employment land.  Manor Royal will remain the economic 
heart of the Gatwick Diamo nd, and is protected and promoted for business -led 
economic growth that will build upon its established role and function as the Gatwick 
Diamond’s leading business destination. Appropriate extensions to Manor Royal, 
                                                 
72 Employment Land Availability Assessment Base Date 1 S eptember 2020 (January 2021) CBC  
73 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 81 a) (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 99 located outside of the Gatwick safeguarded land, will be supported to help meet 
Crawley’s business  land needs. To accommodate Crawley’s significant requirements 
for industrial and warehouse land, a Strategic Employment Location is allocated at Gatwick Green, with the safeguarded land boundary am ended accordingly. Crawley’s 
other desi gnated main employment areas will remain the focus for a broad range of 
employment uses, and will be protected and intensified for economic growth to  
maximise the available employment land supply and ensure that their economic 
function is not undermined.  
9.9 A pro-active approach is taken to adapt to economic challenges and respond to 
Coast to Capital LEP and Gatwick Diamond Initiative objectives. Increasing local access to skills and training is a priority, and a  dedicated policy ensures that new 
development takes the opportunity for workforce upskilling. Flexibility is provided to 
support,  reinvigorate  and future -proof  a local economy that has been significantly 
affected by the impacts of COVID -19. Policies are r esponsive to changing 
circumstances, encouraging a range of economic growth, including business -
supporting uses and a dedicated business hub that enhances the offer at Manor 
Royal. Temporary cultural and creative uses are encouraged in main employment 
areas to stimulate activity, with high quality communications supported to cater for modern business needs. Barriers to investment are addressed, principally through 
ensuring the main employment areas are not undermined by non -employment uses 
that create economic uncertainty, and through simplifying the planning process to 
remove the NPPF sequential test requirement where offices are proposed in main 
employment areas, and where hotel and visitor accommodation is proposed within the Gatwick Airport boundary. Dedicated policies relating to Gatwick Airport and the 
Town Centre are covered in the two subsequent chapters.  
9.10 Through this economic strategy, the Local Plan will support sustainable economic 
growth in Crawley, building upon the borough’s existing strengths and responding to 
the challenges it faces. This will ensure that the leading economic role of the borough 
continues to go from strength to strength.  
Local Plan Policies  
Economic Growth  
9.11 To inform the level of em ployment growth that is forecast to occur over the  period to 
2036, an Economic Growth Assessment (EGA, 2020) has been prepared for the 
Northern West Sussex Functional Economic Market Area,  which in addition to 
Crawley Borough, is made up of Horsham and Mid Sussex Districts. The E GA 
provides  detailed analysis of Crawley’s economy, outlin ing forecast job growth, and 
corresponding floorspace and land supply needs over the next 15 years. This work 
has subsequently been updated (September 2020) to take account of additional 
sensitivity  testing, including the potential economic impacts arising  from the Covid -19 
pandemic and having regard to priorities for economic recovery.  
9.12 The EGA establishes  a range  of economic growth forecasts for Crawley  in line with 
Planning Practice Guidance.  Of these forecasts, the Local Plan employment land 
requirement is identified based upon Exper ian Baseline Job Growth projections , this 
representing the most appropriate basis for considering future employment land 
requirements from a labour demand perspec tive. Based on this forecast, the Local 
Plan identifies need for a minimum 38.7  hectares of new employment land to 
accommodate business74  needs in Crawley Borough to 2036.  
                                                 
74 Business is defined as office, research & development, light industry, general industrial, or storage 
& distribution uses.   CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 100 9.13 The identified need is significantly within the industrial75 sector (32.8 ha), with office 
needs accounting for 5.9ha of the total. Crawley’s Employment Land Trajectory 
(Base Date 1 September 2020) identifies an available employment land supply 
pipeline of 17.6ha, which comprises 8.8ha office land and 8.7ha industrial land. The existing available office land supply meets identified quantitative office needs, though 
as discussed under Policy EC6, there remains a broader qualitative office need. In 
addition to new office land coming forward in Crawley, the Horley Strategic Business Park site allocation in Reigate and Banstead Borough will further add to the sub-
regional offer. Therefore, Crawley’s employment land needs are substantially of an 
industrial nature, principally in relation to B8 storage and distribution use. W ith an 
existing available industrial land supply pipeline of 8.7ha, there remains outstanding 
need for 24.1ha new industrial land.  
9.14 This places a significant requirement on the Local Plan to ensure that suitable and 
appropriate employment land is available to meet bus iness needs. In the first 
instance, it is vital that the limited existing available business land supply is not undermined.  Therefore, t he Local Plan protects Crawley’s designated Main 
Employment Areas for employment use, maximising opportunities to support 
economic growth at these locations through the intensification of existing sites and efficient utilisation of land for employment uses . Manor Royal will remain a focus for 
business -led economic growth, and is protected and promoted for office and 
industrial uses, and other employment use that  supports and does not undermine its 
core mixed  business function. Other designated Main Employment Areas will 
continue to represent a focus for sustainable economic growth, including for business uses, but with greater flexibility for other appropriate forms of economic development. 
To supplement the employment land supply position and deliver new fl oorspace at 
Manor Royal, small extensions to Manor Royal, outside of the safeguarded land, will 
be supported where this would contribute positively to business -led economic growth.  
9.15 However, these measures  will not be sufficient to address what is a si gnificant 
outstanding requirement for new industrial employment land, and to ensure that 
identified employment needs can be met in full , a Strategic Employment Location is 
allocated at land east of Balcombe Road and south of the M23 spur , referred to as 
Gatwick Green. This is the only location in Crawley that is capable of providing the 
required quantum of industrial land and floorspace without prejudicing the possible 
future delivery of southern runway on the safeguarded land. Requirements for the 
allocated site at Gatwick Green are set out in further detail under Policy EC4.  
9.16 Taken as a whole, the Local Plan approach, in protecting and maximising the use of existing main employment areas for economic development, and identifying new land 
to meet Crawley’s significant business needs, represents a positive and pro- active 
strategy to secure the sustainable economic growth required to support the economic 
role of Crawley and its wider sub -region.  
Strategic Policy EC1: Sustainable Economic Growth  
Crawley’s role as the key economic driver for the Coastal to Capital and Gatwick Diamond 
areas will be protected and enhanced. Suitable opportunities are identified within the 
borough to enable existing and new businesses to grow and prosper.   
There is need for a minimum of 38.7 hectares ne w business land in the borough which, 
taking off the opportunities identified in the Employment Land Trajectory , results  in an 
outstanding requirement for 24.1 hectares  new industrial  land over the period to 2036 . 
                                                 
75 Industrial is specifically defined as uses falling within Class B2 (general industrial) and Class B8 (storage & 
distribution).  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 101 Crawley’s recognised economic role and function will be maintained and enhanced 
through:  
i)      Building upon and protecting the established role of Manor Royal as the key mixed 
business location for Crawley at the heart of the Gatwick Diamond and Coast to 
Capital areas;  
ii) Ensuring that the borough’s Main Employment Areas are protected as locations for 
sustainable economic growth;  
iii)     Encouraging the redevelopment and intensification of under -utilised sites in Main 
Employment Areas for employment  use; 
iv)     Supporting small extensions to Manor Royal,  outside of safeguarding, where this 
would deliver additional business land,  and can be achieved in a manner that is 
consistent wi th other Local Plan policies ; and  
v)      Allocation of an industrial -led Strategic Employment Location at Gatwick Green, on 
land east of Balcombe Road and south of the M23 spur . 
Reasoned Justification  
9.17 Policy EC1 recognises the key sub- regional employment function that Crawley 
provides within the Gatwick Diamond and Coast to Capital LEP areas. It encourages 
sustainable economic growth by supporting the retention and intensification of the 
existing main employment areas  for employment uses,  and through  the identification 
of new employment land to meet outstanding economic needs. The Economic 
Growth Assessment plays a key role in understanding qualitative and quantitative 
economic growth needs within Crawley and the Northern West Sussex Functional 
Economic Market Area. The work recognises that Crawley  is well placed to adapt to 
the implications of Brexit, though faces immediate challenges from the economic impact of Covid- 19 which has significantly affected Crawley’s aviation sector s and 
related supply -chains. However, the Crawley economy is forecast t o consolidate, 
recover and grow over the Plan period, necessitating the identification of new 
business land and floorspace if the borough , and more broadly the sub- regional 
economy,  is to continue to thrive.  
9.18 The EGA focuses on future job creation , new  floorspace and land take requirements 
within the business sectors of office, research and development, light industry  (these 
falling within Class E  Commercial, Business and Service),  general industrial (Class 
B2) and storage or distribution (Class B8) . Other employment uses outside of these 
sectors vary significantly in terms of range, employment density and operational 
requirements, and are more challenging to plan for in land take and floorspace terms. 
Wider economic growth, outside of the business sectors listed above, is captured 
through the Crawley Retail, Leisure and Town Centre Neighbourhood Needs 
Assessment. Therefore, with Manor Royal identified as the focus for mixed business -
led development, and Gatwick Green allocated for industrial -led growth, greater 
flexibility is afforded within the other designated Main Empl oyment Areas in Crawley 
for business  and other forms of economic growth.  
9.19 Planning Practice Guidance requires local authorities to develop an idea of future economic needs based on a range of data and forecasts of quantitative and 
qualitative need. The EGA and the September 2020 update assess  different 
forecasts of future econom ic growth in Crawley,  including those based on Oxford 
Economics and Experian 2018 and 2020 which focus on growth in labour demand as 
well as assess ing continuation of past business development rates, and labour 
supply based on population growth linked to housing need through the standard method. These produce a very wide range  of business land r equirements which are 
explained in more detail in the Economic Growth Topic Paper . 
9.20 The Local Plan approach is to plan for sustainable economic growth based on t he 
2018 Experian Baseline Growth forecast of 38.7ha business land over the 15 years CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 102 to 2036. This is  considered to represent the most sustainable and appropriate basis 
on which to plan for economic growth in Crawley. It is based on up -to-date economic 
information, assuming strong job growth in Crawley, albeit at a slower rate when 
compared with past tren ds. It identifies  need f or 38.7ha new business land which is 
closely aligned with the Past Take -Up figure of 39ha, and greater than the Labour 
Supply (supply -led) 347dpa figure of 21.7ha. The higher Labour Supply (597dpa) 
figure of 56.9ha employment land does factor in the possibility of an urban extension 
to Crawley. However, it is recognised that such an extension would not meet solely 
Crawley’s housing needs, and would also meet those from the adjoining district. 
Therefore, i t is anticipated that , although some employment needs arising from an 
urban extension would need to be met in Crawley, remaining employment need 
arising from the development may be accommodated within the urban extension 
itself, or if necessary, elsewhere within neighbouring districts . The Oxford Economics 
2018 Baseline forecast of negative growth does not factor in actual market performance or demand in Crawley and,  therefore , does not represent an effective 
basis for planning positively for economic growth.  Initial economic forecasts  following 
the outbreak of COVID -19 are subject to a high degree of uncertainty and are also 
not considered to represent an appropriate basis for long- term planning. As such, the 
Experian Baseline Growth forecast requirement for 38.7ha business land repres ents 
a sound basis on which to plan for economic growth in Crawley.  
9.21 Taking account of the available employment land supply pipeline,  as explained in 
paragraph 9.13 above,  Crawley is meeting its identified quantitative office land 
requirement, notwiths tanding a wider qualitative demand in the sub- region for higher -
specification Grade A offices. The outstanding business land requirement is therefore for industrial land, where there is need for a minimum 24.1ha , predominantly for  B8 
storage & distribution uses . This is summarised below.  
 Baseline Growth (Experian 2018)  
Office Requirement (ha)  5.9 
Office Land Supply Pipeline (ha)  8.8 
Surplus/Shortfall (ha)  +2.9 
Industrial Requirement (ha)  32.8 
Industrial Land Supply Pipeline (ha)  8.7 
Surplus/Shortfall  (ha) -24.1 
9.22 To help address the significant need for business land, Policy EC1 firstly protects the 
function of Manor Royal as the key destination for mixed business development, and 
safeguards all designated Main Employment Areas to protect their ec onomic 
function, and as a consequence that of Crawley and the wider Gatwick Diamond. To 
maximise the use of Crawley’s limited employment land supply, Policy EC1 supports 
the redevelopment and intensification of under -utilised sites in Main Employment 
Areas  to maximise their efficient use. To respond to demand for additional business 
land, carefully planned minor extensions abutting the Manor Royal boundary may be 
appropriate. Should proposals come forward for these areas, regard must be had to the countrysi de setting of the site, its surrounds and context, given its location within 
the Upper Mole Rural Fringe (Policy CL8). Crucially, development in these areas should not prejudice the potential future delivery of a s outhern runway to the south of 
Gatwick Air port within the safeguarded land. Should any extensions be considered 
appropriate, development will need to demonstrate how it delivers additional 
business floorspace in line with Policy EC3. Following implementation, the site would 
form part of the Manor Royal Main Employment Area, and Policies EC2 and EC3 will 
apply.  
9.23 However, t his approach alone will not be sufficient to meet the outstanding need for a 
minimum additional 24.1ha industrial land. Therefore land at Gatwick Green is CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 103 allocated for the delivery of a high- quality  industrial -led Strategic Employment 
Location. The Strategic Employment Location will be expected to meet, as a 
minimum, Crawley’s outstanding industrial land requirement of 24.1ha, and must be  
planned in a manner that is complementary to the established role of Manor Royal as 
a strong and competitive mixed business district and also the office -focused Horley 
Strategic Business Park allocation in Reigate & Banstead Borough.  
Main Employment Areas  
9.24 Crawley’s economy is characterised by its range of employment areas, each of which 
has an established character and function, and performs an identified role. The Main 
Employment Areas represent a focus for sustainable economic growth, and given the 
significant employment land requirement and limited available land supply pipeline, 
the council’s evidence base makes clear that the existing Main Employment Areas 
should continue to be a focus for sustainable economic growth. Therefore, Policy 
EC2 seeks to protect and improve the existing economic areas, maximising the 
potential to utilise existing employment sites . 
9.25 Manor Royal, Gatwick Airport and Crawley Town Centre represent key economic 
locations, and are identified as Main Employment Areas. Given the fundamental role 
performed by each in driving the Crawley and Gatwick Diamond economy, individual 
location- specific policies for each are established throug h Local Plan Policies EC3,  
GAT1 -4 and TC1- 5 respectively. In addition to these spatial policies , Policy EC2 also 
applies to the designated Main Employment Areas of  Manor Royal, Gatwick Airport 
and Crawley Town Centre.  
9.26 Crawley’s remaining Main Employment Areas as identified within Policy EC2 are: 
Three Bridges Corridor (including Denvale Trade Park, Spindle Way, Stephenson 
Way and Hazelwick Avenue), Maidenbower Business Park, Tilgate Forest Business 
Centre, Broadfield Business Park, Lowfield Heath,  Broadfield Stadium and K2 
Crawley, and The Hawth Theatre. The role and function of these Main Employment 
Areas  for economic development use will be protected, and further intensification for  
employment uses within these locations will be supported.   
9.27 This approach dovetails with the objectives of other policies and the wider Local Plan 
Visio n which directs employment generating uses to the  Main Employment Areas as 
sustainable and appropriate locations  for economic growth. Given the need to 
balance use of the available land supply for economic and housing needs, the loss of 
employment land and  floorspace criteria of Policy EC2 will not apply where sites  are 
allocated for housing under Local Plan Policy H2.   
Policy EC2: Economic Growth in Main Employment Areas  
As a key economic driver in the sub -region, Crawley’s Main Employment Areas make a 
significant contribution to the economy of the town and the wider area , and are 
designated  as a focus for sustainable economic growth.  
The Main Employment Areas are:  
• Manor Royal ;  
• Crawley Town C entre;   
• Gatwick  Airport ;  
• Three Bridges Corridor (including  Denvale Trade Park, Spindle Way, Stephenson 
Way and  Hazelwick Avenue) ; 
• Maidenbower Business Park ; 
• Tilgate Forest Business Centre;  
• Broadfield Business Park ; 
• Lowfield Heath ; CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 104 • Broadfield Stadium and K2 Crawley ; 
• The Hawth.   
Employment generating development will be supported  in the Main Employment Areas  
where it makes for an efficient  use of land or buildings and contribute s positively  to 
sustainable economic growth in the Main Employment A rea, and  to the  overall economic 
function of  Crawley . 
Development that would involve a net loss of employment  land or floorspace in any Main 
Employment Area  will only be permitted where it is demonstrated  that: 
i.  the site is no longer suitable, nor viable , nor appropriate for employment purposes , 
or that a limited  loss of employment floorspace will support the wider economic use 
of the site; and  
ii. the loss of any  land or  floorspace will result in  wider social, environmental or 
economic benefit to the town which clearly outweighs  the loss ; and  
iii. there would be no adverse impact on the economic function of the Main 
Employment Area, nor the wider economic function of Crawley.  
Reasoned Justification  
9.28 The approach set out in P olicy EC2 supports the established role of the Main 
Employment Areas  as destinations for sustainable economic growth. Each performs 
a different but vital role in helping to meet economic needs in Crawley.  The largest 
Main Employment Areas are Manor Royal, the leading business destination in the 
Gatwick Diamond; Crawley Tow n Centre,  a focus for Main Town Centre uses and a 
sub-regionally significant centre;  and Gatwick Airport , a key location for airport -
related employment. The borough’s other Main Employment A reas perform  an 
important complementary role, supporting a range of employment uses  that includ es 
small businesses, offices, and high quality leisure facilities. The Main Employment 
Areas, individually and collectively, play a vital role in supporting sustainable economic growth in Crawley and that of the wider Gatwick D iamond. Therefore, 
Policy EC2 ensures that the economic role and function of each Main Employment Area is protected and strengthened to support economic growth. The Policy also 
seeks to ensure that the important economic function of the Main Employment Area 
is not undermined and potentially compromised by inappropriate non -employment 
development. To further protect the employment function of the borough, Article 4 
Directions are in place for several Main Employment Areas  to control changes of use 
to residential.  
Crawley’s Main Employment Areas  
Manor Royal: A premier location for business   
9.29 Covering an area of 240 hectares, Manor Royal is the Gatwick Diamond’s  leading 
business district , accommodating over  600 businesses and just under 28,000 jobs.  
Its strategic location between Brighton and London, proximity to Gatwick Airport, and 
excellent transport links, places Manor Royal at the heart of the Gatwick Diamond. Through the Manor Royal Business Improvement District (Manor Royal BID), 
ongoing projects w ill help to build upon the Manor Royal brand and deliver the 
improvements sought by business. The Local Plan has a key role to play in 
supporting the business -led economic role of Manor Royal, supporting its key 
business focus, and setting in place a frame work for wider improvements that will 
enable Manor Royal to go from strength to strength. The specific policy approach for 
Manor Royal is set out at Policy EC3.  
Crawley Town Centre: A sub- regional shopping and leisure destination  
9.30 Crawley Town Centre is the main shopping and leisure destination in Crawley  
borough, and is a key shopping destination for people living in the wider sub- region. CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 105 It contains a good range of shops, restaurants, cafes and bars, as well as 
entertainment uses at Crawley Leisure Park, all of which contribute to the overall 
attractiveness of the town centre as an enjoyable place to visit. As a centrally located 
and highly sustainable location,  around 13,500 people work in the Town C entre. A 
growing residential population, alongside an ambitious regeneration programme, is 
further enhancing its  vitality as a place. Specific p olicies for Crawley Town Centre are 
set out at Policies TC1 to TC5.  
Gatwick Airport : An international airport   
9.31 During 2018/19, Gatwick Airport served 46.4 million passengers , a figure that the 
Gatwick Airport Master Plan forecasts to grow to 61 million passengers per annum (mppa) by 2032 within the current two terminal, single runway operation, and 
potentially to 70mppa by 2032 should the government allow the operational use of its 
existing standby runway .  As a hub for employees and visitors, and a key economic 
driver through direct or indirect employment, the airport is central to the function of the wider economic area , and within its current configuration, in 2019 t he airport 
provided 24,000 on -airport jobs within the Main Employment Area.  Specific polices 
for Gatwick Airport are set out at Policies GAT1 to GAT4 .    
Three Bridges Employment Corridor  
9.32 The Three Bridges Employment Corridor is situated in a highly sustainable location 
between Three Bridges railway station and  Crawley Town Centre, and  includes 
Denvale Trade Park, Spindle Way, Stephenson Way and Hazelwick Avenue. It 
supports a diverse range of economic uses including office, light storage,  distribution, 
trade, car showroom and automotive uses, across generally older and smaller units .  
Maidenbower Business Park, Tilgate Forest Business Centre, Broadfield Business Park  
9.33 These small scale business parks, situated adjacent to main road interchanges, 
provide a range of floorspace typologies, including offices, car dealerships, and 
commercial leisure.  
Lowfield Heath  
9.34 A traditional  industrial  estate, accommodating a wide range of light industrial and 
some non -business  uses, the area is located adjacent to the southern perimeter of  
Gatwick Airport. There is a range of  building stock, with regard to size and use, and 
the site provides a complementary employment role close to Manor Royal . This Main 
Employment Area is situ ated within the Safeguarded land for Gatwick Airport , and 
applicants should als o refer to Local Plan Policy GAT2.  
Broadfield Stadium and  K2 Crawley  
9.35 These Main Employment Areas make an important contribution to the leisure and 
sports sector of the economy, accommodating Crawley Town Football Club and K2 
Crawley, both of which provide a key commercial leisure offer within Crawley and 
also serve its wider cat chment.  
The Hawth Theatre  
9.36 The Hawth Theatre is an arts, culture and entertainment complex, situated around 
0.5 miles from Crawley Town Centre, adjacent to an expanse of ancient woodland in 
Southgate Park. It is a focus for creative and cultural uses in Crawley, and in addition 
to its theatre function, it contains a dance studio, learning and meeting space, and 
conferencing facilities.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 106  
Manor Royal  
9.37 Manor Royal  is the principal business location in the Gatwick Diamond, leading the 
way as a destination for industrial and office focused economic growth. At 
approximately 240 hectares, with over 600 businesses and providing around 28,000 
jobs, Manor Royal is critical t o the economic function of Crawley  and also that of the 
wider sub region. It is one of the largest mixed use business areas in the South East, 
with excellent transport links providing  access to a wide catchment of suppliers, 
customers and staff.  Situated just 30 minutes from both Brighton and London, it is a 
focal location for  employment  at the heart of the Gatwick Diamond and Coast -to-
Capital Local Enterprise Partnership areas . The presence of the Manor Royal BID 
adds further strength to the business distr ict, developing the Manor Royal brand,  
delivering wider enhancements to support the function of the area,  and lending a 
collective voice to its businesses.  
9.38 The ambition for Manor Royal relies on the systematic enhancement of its existing 
strengths of scale, diversity, connectivity and location. Key to this approach is a 
priority focus on business uses within Manor Royal, ensuring that its core business 
function is maintained and enhanced to promote a  high-quality environment that 
supports the operation and growth of existing businesses and attracts new business 
investment . There is  also a recognised need for supporting facilities and staff 
amenities that are of an appropriate scale and function to support the day -to-day 
needs of Manor Royal businesses and employees. These may potentially be 
accommodated in the form of a dedicated business hub that is capable of achieving 
genuine step- change at Manor Royal , but may also come forward at a smaller scale 
on an individual standalone basis . The refore, the  Local Plan applies flexibility for non -
business development  where it can be demonstrated that this will  help address 
existing deficiencies and would support Manor Royal’s core business function. There 
is als o need to support, through good design and landscaping  of all development , 
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 107 aesthetic improvements to the Manor Royal environment, helping ensure it remains a 
successful and desirable business location.  
9.39 By using positive planning to facilitate business -led development in the area, and 
improve the quality of the environment, the council, in partnership with the Manor 
Royal BID, local businesses,  and other stakeholders  will support Manor Royal 
through : 
• providing  an environment that supports and encourages business growth;  
• build ing on the unique business and physical attributes afforded by its location 
and history; and  
• enabling an attractive and desirable working environment.  
Policy EC3 : Manor Royal  
Manor Royal is the principal business location for Crawley, and instrumental to the 
success of the wider Gatwick Diamond.  
Development that is compatible with the area’s economic function and role in the wider 
sub-region will be permitted where it falls within the bus iness sectors of office, research 
and devel opment, light industry, general industrial and s torage or distribution and would 
result in the reuse, intensification, or change of use of the land or buildings.  
Development outside of the sectors identified above will be permitted  where it can be 
demonstrated that  it is of a scale and function that supports , and does not undermine, the 
established business  role and function of Manor Royal.  Such development may be 
provided on a standalone basis, or on a comprehensive basis through a dedicated 
business hub that is capable of addressing the current lack of supporting business 
facilities or staff amenities. Any business hub should be sustainably located and will be 
expected to provide genuine step- change that enhances the business function of Manor 
Royal.  
All development at Manor Royal should contribute positively to the overall setting and 
environment of the Main Employment Area as a business district through high quality 
design and landscaping that is in accordance with the Manor Royal Design Guide 
Supplementary Planning Document.  
Where developments  in Manor Royal  involve a net increase in gross internal area in 
excess of 100sqm, the council will seek a proportionate financial contribution towards 
public realm improvements in Manor Royal, subject to appropriate projects being 
identified , as set out in the Local Plan Planning Obligations Annex .  
Reasoned Justification  
9.40 Manor Royal has performed well over recent years and continues to represent a 
dominant business cluster within the Gatwi ck Diamond and wider south east. It is 
home to the largest critical mass of businesses in Crawley, its total 866,000sqm 
commercial floorspace, includes 227,000sqm office floorspace (26% of total 
floorspace), 187,000sqm industrial (22%), and 379,000sqm warehousing (44%)76. 
Despite declining land availability, new stock con tinues to be delivered, underlining 
Manor Royal’s economic vibrancy and attractiveness to a diverse mix of business occupiers and activity.  
9.41 As is the case for Crawley as a whole, t he limited  available land supply  at Manor 
Royal  represent s a challenge, present ing an obstacle for existing businesses  seeking 
to grow, and also for new businesses seeking to locate in the business district. Therefore, the  Local Plan takes a positive approach to support Manor Royal and 
                                                 
76 Manor Royal Economic Impact Study ( 2017) Lichfields  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 108 reinforce its role as the leading business destination for Crawley and the Gatwick 
Diamond. Key to its approach is support for B -class business development within 
Manor Royal, ensuring that its principal business function is maintained and enhanced, whilst adding to the overall business land- supply pipeline. Flexibility is 
provided for other employment  and ancillary  uses where these are of a scale and 
function that would support Manor Royal’s business function.  
9.42 To protect the business function of Manor Royal, a number of Article 4 Directions are 
in force. These remove permitted development rights that had previously allowed the 
change of use of B1a offices, B1c light industrial, and B8 warehouses premises to 
convert to residential.  The Article 4 Directions are in place as residential use is 
amenity -sensitive, and is not compatible with the operation and function of a working 
business district.  
9.43 There remains a recognised need to improve access to complementary business 
facilities and staff amenities within the business district, which are needed to support 
the day -to-day needs of Manor Royal businesses and employees. This includes 
facilities for meeting room hire and conferencing; childcare;  small -scale convenience 
retail ; café and restaurant uses; leisure and health; open space, and also facilities 
that would support sustainable access, for example,  electric vehicle charge points or 
cycle parking. Such facilities will be supported where it is demonstrated that development is of a scale and function that supports, and does not undermine, the 
core business function of Manor Royal. The Manor Royal Economic Impact Study 
(2017) advises that , unlike many of its competitors, Manor Royal lacks a dedicated 
hub that is designed specifically with business users in mind. A facility of this nat ure 
would provide opportunity to cluster several  of the required business support facilities 
and staff amenities in a centrally located business hub, helping reinforce the Manor 
Royal brand, and potentially achieving a genuine step- change  to support the 
business district in responding effectively to existing and emerging competitors.  
9.44 As Manor Royal was purpose- built as  part of the original Crawley New Town, it is not 
planned out in the way that more modern business parks are today, and its physical 
and aesthetic environment has in places inevitably declined. The  Local Plan will 
ensure that development in Manor Royal is of a high design quality and delivers  
suitable landscaping to suppor t improvements to the overall environmental  quality of 
the business district. The Manor Royal Design Guide Supplementary Planning 
Document will continue to play a key role in guiding the delivery of qualitative 
improvements to the business district’s envir onment through the implementation of 
high quality design standards, particularly at key gateway sites and frontages.  
9.45 To support ongoing improvements to the Manor Royal environment, a developer 
contribution will be sought towards public realm improvem ents. Subject to the 
quantum of development proposed, this may take the form of a financial contribution 
towards specified projects identified by the council in liaison with Manor Royal BID, or 
where the financial contribution sought would be £500 or less,  through appropriate on 
site provision to be negotiated with the council. Specific projects will be identified by the council in liaison with the Manor Royal BID. Further detail is provided in the Local 
Plan Planning Obligations Annex.  
9.46 Crawley Goods Yard and railhead is located within Manor Royal and provides an 
important function in the processing and bulk transportation of minerals and aggregates. As required by the NPPF, the existing railhead and associated storage 
and handling facilities are safeguarded from other forms of development through 
Policy  M10 of the West Sussex Joint Minerals Local Plan (2018). West Sussex 
County Council (WSCC) should be consulted in relation to any planning proposals at , 
or within 250m of  Crawley Goods Yard.   CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 109 Strategic Employment Location 
9.47 Land east of Balcombe Road and south of the M23 spur, known as Gatwick Green , is 
allocated for the development of a Strategic Employment Location that will contribute 
significantly to meeting Crawley’s substantial need for new industrial and warehouse 
land and floorspace. The site is strategically located in proximity to Gatwick Ai rport, 
Manor Royal Business District, and the Horley Strategic Business Park site allocated by Reigate & Banstead Borough Council. It offers significant opportunity to deliver the 
type and quantum of industrial -led business floorspace that is needed to mai ntain 
and enhance Crawley’s leading role as an economic driver of at the heart of the 
Coast to Capital LEP and Gatwick Diamond areas, and can be delivered without 
prejudicing  the delivery of a new southern runway at Gatwick Airport, should that be 
supported by the Government.  
9.48 As identified by Strategic Policy EC1, over the period to 2036 there is need for  
provision of up to 38.7 hectares new business land in Crawley. Of the total business 
land requirement, office needs account for 5.9ha, which, taking account of the 
identified office land supply pipeline of 8.8ha, can be accommodated at sites 
identified in the Employment Land Trajectory. As such, the business land supply 
shortfall relates purely to industrial land, substantially within the storage & dis tribution 
(Class B8) sectors, where there is a total need for 32.8ha land. With the Employment 
Land Trajectory identifying an existing supply pipeline of 8.7ha land within these 
sectors, this results in an  outstanding need of around 24.1ha industrial  land.  
9.49 Given the specific nature of the identified need, the allocated Gatwick Green 
Strategic Employment Location will be substantially led by the provi sion of industrial, 
storage and distribution floorspace, supported by other ancillary uses that are of an 
appropriate scale and function. Through expanding the range and quantum of 
business floorspace within Crawley, Gatwick Green will support the growth of existing 
Crawley businesses and attract new investment to the borough, enabling market 
demand for industrial and warehouse space in Crawley, which has to date been frustrated by a constrained land supply position, to be accommodated within the 
borough. This offer will be complementary to the mixed business function of Manor 
Royal, and the office -led development of Horley Strategic Business Park which is 
allocated in the Reigate & Banstead Borough Council Development Management Policies DPD.  
Strategic Policy EC4: Strategic Employment Location  
Land east of Balcombe Road and south of the M23 spur, referred to as Gatwick Green, is 
allocated for the comprehensive development of an industrial -led Strategic Employment 
Location.   
Requirements  
Proposals for developme nt of the Strategic Employment Locat ion will be required to:  
Employment Uses  
a. provide as a minimum 24.1ha new industrial land, predominantly for B8 storage and 
distribution use, demonstrating through appropriate evidence the justification for any 
further industrial floorspace beyond this amount;  
b. justify any limited complementary ancillary uses such as office floorspace,  small- scale 
convenience retail and small -scale leisure facilities that would support the principal 
industrial -led storage and distribution function.  
Movement and Accessibil ity 
c. Demonstrate through a Transport Assessment that appropriate access can be 
provided to the site having regard to both employee and operational movements . This 
must demonstrate that there will be no severe residual impact on the local and CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 110 strategic road network, taking into account the operation of Gatwick Airport as 
nationally significant infrastructure, the allocated Horley Strategic Business Park, and 
the impact of committed developments in the borough and surrounding areas.  
d. Demonstrate through a compr ehensive Mobility Strategy how the development will 
include measures and improvements to maximise sustainable access to the site, 
focusing on how the development will optimise the usage of sustainable modes of 
transport as opposed to the private vehicle, and detailing infrastructure improvements 
that will be required to adequately mitigate the development impacts on the highways 
network, detailing how these improvements will be delivered and operated. Highways 
infrastructure and improvements that are requir ed as a result of impacts arising from 
the development must be delivered as part of the development. On the basis that the 
development will be required to address its own highways impact, a S106 sustainable 
transport contribution will not be sought.  
e. Provi de improvements to public transport facilities, including existing bus 
infrastructure, and measures to maximise the accessibility of routes/services to future 
occupiers in and around the site .  
f. Upgrade and extend pedestrian/cycle routes to the site from residential areas in 
Crawley and Horley and from Gatwick Airport station.   
g. Provide appropriate levels of on- site parking solely for the uses on the site and ensure 
measures are in place to ensure no airport -related parking occurs . 
h. Submit air quality modellin g alongside the  Transport Assessment, to include 
consideration of cumulative impacts  
Sustainable Design and Construction 
i. Achieve an exemplar development in sustainability terms, achieving BREEAM 
Excellent rating, and demonstrating how the development will achieve Net Zero 
emissions and carbon neutrality by 2050  
j. Implement an energy strategy developed in accordance with the hierarchy set out in 
Policy SDC2  
k. Demonstrate, through a Flood Risk Assessment and Surface Water Drainage 
Strategy, how drainage and flood risk (including cumulative flood risk) will be taken 
into account in the design and layout of development, and appropri ately mitigated to 
ensure that the development is safe in flood risk terms and does not increase flood 
risk elsewhere;  
Digital Technology  
l. Support the needs of 21st century business through the delivery of high quality 
communications infrastructure including gigabit capable full fibre broadband.  
Character and Design 
m. Be design ed and laid out to achieve an appropriate transition to, and relationship with, 
neighbouring  residential and countryside areas, including through appropriate height, 
massing and siting of buildings and suitable consideration of shared boundaries to 
include measures to reinforce existing tree and hedgerow screening. Particular regard 
should be had  to the location of the site in the North East Crawley Rural Fringe 
landscape character area.  
n. Ensure the height and design of buildings, lightin g and other design aspects are 
consistent with the operational standards of Gatwick Airport and to respect aerodrome 
safeguarding requirements and the Public Safety Zone.   
o. Include an appropriate landscape buffer, and public open space, to reinforce the 
distinctive identity of Gatwick Green Strategic Employment Location, and its 
separation from Gatwick Airport, Horl ey, and the wider countryside setting of the site.  
p. Provide buildings  of an exemplar standard of design to reflect the Strategic 
Employment Location concept including sufficient flexibility to provide adaptability to 
cater for a range of, expanding and established businesses and major occupiers and 
to be complemented by high quality public realm . CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 111 q. Protect and enhance  ancient woodland, existing trees and hedgerow s where possible 
and enhance the green/blue infrastructure on site, including the Gatwick Wood 
Biodiversity Opportunity Area.  
r. Ensure the design of buildings provides appropriate interior environment for users, 
having regard to the impacts of noise from existing and future sources, particularly air 
traffic and the M23. Mitigate noise intrusion from activ ities on the site to adjacent 
residential and open areas . 
s. Provide measures to minimise the impact of lighting upon neighbouring residential and 
adjoining countryside areas.  
t. Ensure development proposals  have regard to conserving the setting of the Listed 
Buildings at Donkey Lane and Fernhill Road and the locally listed building at Rivington 
Farm. The retention of important hedgerows will be encouraged as will retention of a 
buffer to the green corridor along Balcombe Road to retain the historic landscape 
character .  
Impact Assessment  
It must be demonstrated how the Strategic Employment Location will address Crawley’s 
identified need for industrial focused business floorspace, and how its offer will be 
complementary to the mixed- use business function of Manor Royal, the vitality and 
viability of Crawley Town Centre, delivery of the allocated office- led Horley Strategic 
Business Park in Reigate & Banstead Borough, and other planned strategic employment 
development in the functional economic market area.  
Delivery  
Planning conditions and obligations to control delivery of the development, the use of the 
site and appropriate off - site considerations will be required, including for infrastructure, 
open space and social commitments. These will include:  
• Requirement for ongoing economic impacts testing;   
• Contribute to delivering objectives of the Crawley Employment and Skills Programme, 
demonstrating through an Employment and Skills Plan (to be agreed by the council) 
how the development, through its constr uction and end user phases, will contribute to 
addressing the local skills gap. This may include, use of local labour, local supply 
chain procurement and similar skills/capacity support (in conjunction with local 
education and training providers).  
The dev elopment of the site will be in accordance with an agreed master plan, produced 
by the site promoter in consultation with the c ouncil to ensure comprehensive 
development in line with the above requirements. The master plan will be submitted at the 
outline planning application stage to assist the consideration of subsequent planning 
application(s) and must include phasing, programming of infrastructure and details on 
quantum of development and appropriate uses.  
Reasoned Justification  
9.50 Local Plan Policy EC1 identifies an overall need for 38.7ha business land over the 
Plan period, of which the majority (32.8ha) is for industrial land, predominantly B8 
storage & distribution warehousing. With an existing industrial land supply pipeline of 8.8ha, there is outstanding need for at least 24.1ha new industrial land in the 
borough over the period to 2036.  
9.51 The ‘call for sites’ undertaken for the Local Plan resulted in land totalling just under 
140ha being promoted to the council for business -led employment use. These sites, 
set out within the Employment Land Availability Assessment , are significantly located 
on land identified in the Gatwick Airport Master Plan for safeguarding.  
9.52 As explained in para.10.17 and set out in Policy GAT 2, land at Gatwick Airport is 
required to be safeguarded for a pot ential future southern runway. Most of the sites 
promoted to the council for employment are located south of the airport, on CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 112 safeguarded land that would potentially be required to accommodate the physical 
land- take needed for a southern runway  and road diversions . Employment 
development at these sites would prejudice the future delivery of a southern runway, 
were this to be required by the Government, and cannot therefore be explored further 
for allocation, as to do so would be contrary to national policy.  
9.53 Land to the east of Balcombe Road and south of the M23 spur, referred to as 
Gatwick Green, has also been promoted to the council for employment use through 
the ‘call for sites’.  The 47 ha si te is located east of Gatwick Airport, also on land 
identified by the Gatwick Airport Master  Plan for safeguarding. However, u nlike the 
situation for the other employment sites that have been promoted, land at Gatwick 
Green does not form part of the land t ake that would be required to accommodate a 
southern runway  and the diversion of the A23 , and is shown in the Gatwick Airport 
Master Plan as being utilised for a large area of surface car parking. The council does not consider parking to represent an effic ient use of the site, particularly given 
the significant employment needs of Crawley borough, and is of the view that the airport could accommodate parking more efficiently through decked parking and 
other efficiency measures, should it be demonstrated that additional on- airport 
parking is required having regard to the airport’s surface access obligations stated in 
the S106 legal agreement. Therefore, the Local Plan retains safeguarding but 
amends  its boundary to exclude land to the east of Balcombe Road and south of the 
M23 spur, which represents the only site within Crawley that can be allocated for 
strategic employment growth without prejudicing the possible delivery of a southern 
runway at Gatwick Airport.  
9.54 Land at east of Balcombe Road and south of the M23 spur, known as Gatwick 
Green, is allocated for an industrial -led Strategic Employment Location that will 
provide a minimum of 24.1ha industrial land, predominantly  within the B8 use class. 
The site identified on the Local Plan Map is larger because the significant quantum of 
industrial floorspace could be supported by complementary uses where justified by 
evidence, including ancillary uses such as a limited provision of offices and 
supporting amenity uses that will cater for the needs of employees. Also, there is a need for the strategic development to provide comprehensive supporting 
infrastructure, appropriate landscaping and to protect the amenity of neighbouring 
properties. Anticipated to be built out over a seven to ten year period, completed by 
2035, the Gatwick Green allocation will meet Crawley’s economic needs in the latter 
part of the Plan period.  
9.55 Crawley’s emerging Economic Development Strategy (2020) is clear that diversity is 
important for the economy’s resilience, with greater economic diversity reducing the 
exposure to financial crisis. Identification of new employment land to address the 
identified provision gap in the industrial sector, particular ly in storage and distribution, 
will support the shift towards a more diverse and multi -sectoral economy in Crawley. 
It will add to the type and range  of employment sites within the borough. This will 
help to meet the growth and locational requirements of businesses that have outgrown existing sites, and attract new investment that has not previously been able 
to locate in the borough due to the scale of their operations and lack of appropriate 
sites. As such, allocation of Gatwick Green for industrial -led employment will help to 
reinvigorate Crawley’s economy, supporting existing businesses, attracting new and 
diverse growth, and reinforcing the key economic role of Crawley within the Gatwick 
Diamond.  
9.56 In doing so, it will be vital to ensure that employ ment growth at Gatwick Green is 
delivered in a manner that is complementary to the mixed- business offer of Manor 
Royal, the vitality and viability of Crawley Town Centre, the office -led Horley Strategic 
Business Park allocation in Reigate & Banstead Borough, and other planned 
strategic employment development within the functional economic market area. The CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 113 applicant will be required to demonstrate in further detail how the required 
complementarity will be achieved to ensure that Gatwick Green supports econom ic 
growth in a manner that does not undermine existing or planned development.  
9.57 Gatwick Green is sustainably located close to Gatwick Airport, though it does 
represent a countryside location, and it is vital that development is carefully master 
planned and designed to ensure that the character of its rural setting within the North 
East Crawley Rural Fringe is not undermined. Issues that will merit particular 
consideration will include the relationship with the designated Gatwick Wood 
Biodiversity Opport unity Area and existing properties that border the site, and an 
appropriate landscape buffer will be required to retain a sense of separation between the site and adjoining countryside and settlements. Regard should be had to presence of ancient woodland, trees and hedgerows, which should be protected and 
where possible enhanced.  
9.58 The allocated Strategic Employment Location is situated within the Burstow Stream 
catchment, which is identified as being at a high risk of cumulative flood impacts, 
whereby multiple development sites, unless careful ly planned could result in 
increased flood risk to third parties. To minimise cross -boundary issues, a detailed 
local area Flood Risk Assessment and Drainage Study will be required to consider 
further how the cumulative effects of potential peak rates and volumes of water from 
development would impact on peak flows, duration of flooding and timing of flood 
peaks on receiving watercourses.  This should detail how SuDS will be incorporated 
into the development, providing details of adoption, ongoing maintenanc e and 
management. This should also outline how the development will seek to provide 
wider betterment by demonstrating what measures can be put in place to contribute 
to a reduction in flood risk downstream.  
9.59 The Strategic Employment Location is surrounded by strategic transport links, but it has no immediate access to the strategic road network or Gatwick Airport railway 
station. A Strategic Employment Location of the scale proposed at Gatwick Green 
will generate surface access demands that will impact upon the existing highways 
network. The focus will be to maximise opportunities to access the site by 
sustainable transport modes, particularly for employees. However, given the scale 
and industrial nature of the proposed development, development must cater for its 
operational requirements, particularly HGV movements, demonstrating through the 
Transport Assessment and Mobility Strategy how this will be achieved without an 
adverse impact upon the highways network and residential amenity. It is vital that 
surface access demands arising from the development are appropriately catered for 
through the delivery of new infrastructure and/or improvements to existing infrastructure as part of the development. The outcomes of the Crawley Local Plan 
Transport model are at the time of writing being finalised, and will form the basis for 
more detailed modelling to be undertaken by the site promoter at the planning 
application stage. Given the requirement to provide the physical infrastructure to 
support the Strategic Employment Location as part of the development itself, a S106 
sustainable transport contribution will not be sought.  
9.60 It should be noted that the requirements set out under Policy EC4 do not represent an exhaustive list, and development at Gatwick Green wil l be required to have regard 
to the Local Plan as a whole.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 114  
Employment and Skills  Development  
9.61 Crawley is  a place that is changing and growing, as more people choose to come to 
the borough to live and work. It is  well established as a key employment destination 
in the Gatwick Diamond,  and is home to around 4,000 active businesses which 
generate  over 100,000  jobs. Despite its strong economic performance, there is a 
recognised disparity between the, on average , lower level of qualifications and 
income achieved by people that live in Crawley and those of the in- commuting 
workforce, which are on average higher. This is reflected in Crawley’s position close 
to the bottom of social mobility rankings published in the State of Nation report, 
where Crawley ranks 304th out of 324 local authorities.  
9.62 Addressing the skills gap is vital to enabling local people to access higher skilled 
employment, creating the right conditions for career opportunities within the borough. 
It is important that Crawley offers the right skills profile to cater for the needs of 
current and future employers. Through the council’s own research, it is estimated that 
£49 million GVA per annum is lost through skills shortages, and working to address 
the skills gap will help ensure that Cr awley continues to attract inward investment as 
a preferred location for business.  
9.63 The original  Crawley Employment and Skills Plan, launched in 2016, has made a 
significant impact. Its flagship projects, which include the borough having achieved 
Construction Industry Training Board ( CITB ) Skills Academy status, introducing the 
Developer and Partner Charter and  the council’s creation of Employ Crawley, are 
helping to address skills gaps in the local workforce to benefit local people and 
businesses.  In supporting different routes to education and higher value jobs, it has 
helped to empower some of Crawley’s most disadvantaged residents and has 
promoted and enhanced the council’s commitment to making Crawley a Living Wage zone. Through the updated Crawley Employment and Skills Programme 2019- 2024 
and joint working with stakeholders, the council is continuing its work to enable 
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 115 Crawley residents to access better quality  education and job opportunities within the 
borough.  
9.64 However, more needs to be done.  One of the challenges facing Crawley is the need 
to improve education, skills, employment and social mobility outcomes. Crawley’s 
people, location and assets make it an attractive investment and regeneration area, 
and it is important that the opportunities and proceeds of growth, regeneration and housing can be used to raise aspirations and reduce inequality. The economic 
implications of the Covid -19 pandemic have added further urgency, and with Crawley 
among the most exposed authorities in terms of employment, even greater support is 
needed to help impacted residents to retrain and re- skill. 
9.65 As Crawley’s population grows, the Local Plan has an important role to play in ensuring that development appropriately contributes to improving social mobil ity in 
the borough, through supporting access to training and learning for those residents who require assistance, and enabling access to the job market where residents 
require support.  
Policy EC5 : Employment and Skills  Development  
All m ajor developments  will be required to contribute to meeting the objectives of the most 
up-to-date Crawley Employment and Skills Programme  through:   
i. Committing at the Planning Application stage to prepare and submit a site- specific 
Employment and Skills Plan, the content of  which must be agreed by the council 
prior to the commencement of development . This will detail how the development , 
through its construction and (for commercial development where there is a known 
occupier) end user  phases , will support initiatives identif ied in the Crawley 
Employment and Skills  Programme. This commitment will form part of the 
obligations on a planning permission and will be secured by way of a S106 legal 
agreement.  
ii. The making of a proportionate financial contribution towards employment and 
skills initiatives in Crawley . 
The requirements of parts i. and ii. above should be satisfied in accordance with t he Local 
Plan Planning Obligations Annex .  
Reasoned Justification  
9.66 There is  a recognised disparity between the skills levels obtained on average by 
Crawley residents, and those of the in- commuting workforce.  Compared with the 
South East England (41.4%) average, and also those of neighbouring Horsham 
District (42.3%) and Mid Sussex District (4 6.3%), Crawley (33.2%) has a lower 
proportion of residents with higher -level qualifications (equivalent to NVQ4+).This is 
also shown in the proportion of Crawley residents (7.6%) who have no formal 
qualifications, which whilst comparing favourably to the S outh East England (10.5%) 
average, is significantly higher than corresponding figures for both Horsham District (3.8%) and Mid Sussex District (4.2%)
77. 
9.67 Reflecting the skills profile,  average weekly earnings for Crawley residents (£558.70) 
are signific antly lower than those for residents living in Horsham (£649.80) and Mid 
Sussex (£645.40), and remain below the South East England (£614.50) average. 
The average wage for someone working in Crawley (£632.80) remains higher than 
the average wage (£558.70) f or someone living in the borough, again demonstrating 
the practical issues arising from the skills gap in Crawley.   
                                                 
77 Source: ONS/Lichfields analysis, Northern West Sussex Economic Growth Assessment (2019)  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 116 9.68 Crawley is below its neighbours in terms of Gross Value Added (GVA)78, a measure 
of workforce productivity. Average GVA per Crawley worker is £51,300 , compared to 
£57,100 in Horsham District and £52,8 00 in Mid Sussex. Crawley’s GVA per worker 
is also lower than the average for South East England (£55,707) and that of the UK 
as a whole (£51, 700). Total claimant unemployment has  historic ally compared 
favourably with the national average but has been gradually increasing in Crawley 
since the start of the recession in early 2008 (1.3%) to 1.9% in January 2019, and 
2.8% in March 2020. However, since the Covid- 19 pandemic the Local Universal 
Credit claimant count has risen sharply to 7.5%, making Crawley the worst affected within the Coast to Capital LEP area and ranking 68
th highest out of the 380 local 
authorities in the UK . While the borough’s rate compares favourably with the national 
average (2.4%), it is slightly higher than the South East England region (1.6%), a 
pattern that has prevailed historically.  
9.69 Therefore,  Crawley residents are less likely to access higher -skilled, higher paid jobs. 
Through the c ouncil’s Employment and Skills P rogramme, identifying and creating 
apprenticeships, training and job opportunities for local residents will continue to be a 
key objective from which support is sought from developers on major development 
schemes.  A key priority for the council is helping local people and businesses benefit 
from the opportunities arising from development. This can be supported through the 
funding of skills, training and employment programmes and local employment and 
training obligations. Crawley Borough Council is c ommitted to residents, investors, 
developers and businesses and the council will do all it can to deliver growth, which 
is inclusive and sustainable for all. The aim is to support local residents, young and old, into employment and raise the skills of the workforce so that they can access the 
new jobs being created across the borough.  
9.70 As outlined by the Economic Development Strategy (2020), Crawley is classified as the most vulnerable area from Covid- 19, having the highest share of employees in 
the avi ation and aircraft manufacturing. Over half of all of Crawley’s jobs are at risk of 
being either furloughed or lost completely and, with the end of  the Job Retention 
Scheme in October 2020 , further economic implications are likely to occur. This will 
increase the need to provide the support and training to enable impacted residents to access new opportunities arising from economic diversification, helping to offset 
some of the Covid- 19 impacts on employment.  
9.71 The NPPF is clear that planning policies should help create the conditions in which 
businesses can invest, adapt and expand, with significant weight placed on the need 
to support economic growth and productivity, taking account of local business needs. 
It goes on to set out that the approach taken should allow each area to build on its 
strengths, counter any weaknesses and address the challenges of the future. The 
Gatwick 360
o Strategic Economic Plan79 identifies pockets of lower skills, specifically 
referencing Crawley, as a barrier to growth, and establishes the need to create skills 
for the future as one of its eight economic priorities.  
9.72 Significant forecast job growth in Crawley presents the opportunity to maximise skills 
development and employment opportunities for local people through s ecuring 
contributions from development. A better skilled local workforce can provide a pool of talent to both developers and end occupiers. This will also reduce the need to import 
skills, and in doing so reduce congestion and less sustainable travel to work journeys 
and reduce carbon emissions.  Conversely, an inability to effectively improve local 
skills levels will maintain the current skills gap, potentially inhibiting economic growth, and failing to address a recognised economic weakness for Crawley.  
                                                 
78 Source: ON S/Lichfields analysis, Northern West Sussex Economic Growth Assessment (2019)  
79 Strategic Economic Plan Gatwick 360o (2018) Coast to Capital Local Enterprise Partnership  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 117 9.73 Therefore, Policy EC5 requires all major  development , including residential and 
employment uses,  to contribute towards addressing the skills gap in Crawley, helping 
to support the social mobility of Crawley residents and also meet the requirements of 
business in providing local access to a more highly skilled workforce. The approach 
will support appr opriate social infrastructure through provision of employment and 
training initiatives on major development sites at demolition and construction, and for 
commercial sites where there is a known occupier, the end user  phases.  This will be 
demonstrated by wa y of a site specific Employment and Skills Plan, which should be 
prepared and submitted by the applicant, in liaison with the council, to demonstrate 
how the development will support initiatives identified in the Crawley Employment 
and Skills Programme. This will be secured through  a S106 agreement on a planning 
permission.  
9.74 A developer contribution will also be sought for all major  residential and employment  
applications. This will be used to support Employ Crawley in  the borough wide 
coordination of t raining and employment schemes support ing local people in gaining 
access to the job market.  Contributions will be agreed by the council and developer 
and secured through a S106 legal agreement.  
9.75 Further information on the preparation, content and outcomes required from part i, the Employment and Skills Plan, is set out in the Employment and Skills Provision 
Guidance Note
80. The Planning Obligations Annex sets out detailed guidance on the 
requiremen ts of Strategic Policy EC5, part ii. relating to the calculation and payment 
of a developer contribution towards employment and skills devel opment. Both parts 
of Policy EC5  should be satisfied in accordance with the Planning Obligations Annex.  
High Qualit y Office Provision  
9.76 Crawley is the Gatwick Diamond sub -region’s largest and most dominant office 
centre, and the market has increasingly gravitated to Crawley in order to benefit from 
its accessible location. Across the Northern West Sussex Functional Economic 
Market Area, the office market has been characterised recently by more challenging 
conditions, with lower levels of take -up. This is in part a result of the available supply, 
which is largely composed of older Grade B office stock that does not match the 
market demand which is for new Grade A stock, often bespoke rather than 
speculative, across a range of sizes.  This has resulted in the Crawley office market 
being somewhat suppressed, with the limited available Grade A stock quickly taken up, and l ower grade stock tending t o remain vacant.  This is very much a qualitative 
issue for Crawley’s office stock, and there is a growth opportunity for Crawley if the 
quality and configuration of office space being sought can be provided.  
9.77 The Local Plan identifies designated Main Employment Areas, which are protected 
and promoted as the focus for sustainable economic growth. These are long-
established employment destinations which make a significant contribution to the 
economy of Crawley, and also to that o f the wider sub -region. The NPPF
81 identifies 
offices as a main town centre use, requiring that these should in the first instance be 
directed to Town Centre locations in li ne with the sequential approach,  before edge -
of-centre or out -of-centre locations can be considered. Whilst the Town Centre 
remains an important employment  destination, including for office uses, it is important 
that sustainable economic growth is supported within the Main Employment Areas. For this reason, office development will be exem pt from the requirements of the 
NPPF sequential test where located within the designated Main Employment Areas, 
or at appropriate locations that are within 500 metres of a public transport 
interchange.  
                                                 
80 https://investcrawley.co.uk/employment- and-skills/employments -and-skills -programme   
81 National Planning Policy Framework, Glossary, page 68 (2019)  MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 118 Policy EC6 : High Quality Office Provision  
Development that adds to the  supply and variety  of high quality  Grade A office space in 
Crawley , including the r efurbishment and improvement of existing  office floorspace  and 
the provision of new office floorspace, will be supported in the Main Employment A reas.  
The sequential test will not be required where new Grade A office fl oorspace is proposed 
within the  Main Employment Areas, or where it is located within 500 metres of a public 
transport interchange.  
Within the Gatwick Airport  boundary , non -airport related office development should meet 
the requirements  of Policy GAT4 .  
Reasoned Justification  
9.78 Through the EGA , engagement with local property agents identifies that ‘pent up’ 
demand exists in the current market for new, high quality office stock across the full 
size and spectrum, with limited to no demand for the lower quality ‘Grade B’ space. 
This reflects the shifting focus amongst office occupiers, with most office activity and 
churn involving a move into upgraded accommodation. However, the av ailable 
portfolio of office space across Northern West Sussex, including Crawley, does not 
fully match this requirement, and in the absence of any significant quantum of new 
Grade A office accommodation, much of this demand cannot be satisfied by the 
existing stock on offer.  
9.79 Analysis presented within the emerging Coast to Capital Local Industrial Strategy 
evidence shows that  recent office take up (2013- 2018) across the Local Enterprise 
Partnership area has been for mid- to-lower quality office stock, dr iven by a lack of 
higher quality stock. For the same area, there have been fewer 4- 5 star office 
transactions than in more productive competitor areas. With Crawley providing little 
by way of new high quality office space, and the available lower grade spa ce not 
meeting market demands, Crawley’s office market has in recent years been 
characterised by an over -supply of lower grade office provision. Therefore, t he issue 
for Crawley is very much a qualitative one, and moving forward, the EGA  recognises 
the lac k of quality office stock as a key challenge facing the Northern West Sussex 
Functional Economic Market Area.  
9.80 The NPPF is clear that planning policies should create the conditions in which 
businesses can invest, adapt and expand, taking account of local business needs, 
and seeking to build on existing strengths, counter any weaknesses, and address the 
challenges of the future82. The EGA identifies that the Northern West Sussex office 
market is being supressed by an insufficient supply of high quality  new stock, and 
recognises that Crawley, as the main driver of the sub- region market, has an 
opportunity to support economic growth in the functional economic market area 
through making a ‘step- change’ intervention that supports delivery of the type and 
configuration of office provision sought by t he market. Therefore, Policy EC6 
supports, within the designated Main Employment Areas, the upgrade of existing 
offices and the delivery of new high quality office stock.  
9.81 Recognising the established role of C rawley’s Main Employment Areas as a focus for 
sustainable economic growth, and the significant role of these locations in promoting 
local and sub- regional economic growth, the Local Plan is positive in supporting 
economic development within the Main Employ ment Areas. The NPPF identifies 
offices as a Main Town Centre use, requiring through the sequential test that office 
development should in the first instance be located in the Town Centre, before edge-
                                                 
82 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 80 (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 119 of-centre or out -of-centre sites can be considered. Whi lst office development is 
supported within Crawley Town Centre, the national policy does not take account of 
the specific local circumstances in Crawley, specifically that the town has dedicated 
Main Employment Areas, including Manor Royal, which is the largest business 
location in the Gatwick Diamond.  
9.82 Therefore, to support economic growth in Crawley, and to help create conditions in 
which business can invest, where office development is proposed in the Main 
Employment Areas, it will not be necessary f or applicants to demonstrate that the 
sequential test83 is satisfied. For office development, the NPPF defines ‘edge- of-
centre’ as including ‘locations outside the town centre but within 500 metres of a 
public transport interchange’84. To support economic gr owth in Crawley, where office 
development is proposed within 500 metres of a public transport interchange, it will 
also not be necessary for applicants to demonstrate that the sequential test is 
satisfied.  
9.83 Office development at Gatwick Airport  is specifically considered under Lo cal Plan 
Policy GAT4  (Employment Uses at Gatwick).  
Visitor Accommodation 
9.84 Crawley is home to a number of hotels and other forms of visitor accommodation. These are located throughout the borough, but are particularly concentrated in the 
Town Centre and at Gatwick Airport. Hotels are identified by the NPPF as a main 
town centre use, and should be located in the town centre in the first instance. 
However, it is recognised that in Crawley hotels serve a particular airport -related 
need for passengers, air crew and other airport users, and therefore Gatwick Airport 
is also a sustainable location for hotels.  
9.85 Hotels can also provide supporting facilities for Manor Royal , but it will also be 
necessary to demonstrate that t he development will support the business function of 
Manor Royal, particularly given the evidenced business land supply constraints in 
Crawley and the need to maximise the use of the Main Employment Areas for 
business -led economic growth.  
9.86 Local Plan P olicy GAT3  outlines that the provision of airport -related parking will only 
be permitted within the Gatwick Airport boundary and must be justified by a 
demonstrable need in the context of proposals for achieving a sustainable approach 
to surface transport access to the airport. This applies to the provision of airport -
related vehicle parking at hotels . 
Policy EC7: Hotel and Visitor Accommodation 
Hotel and visitor accommodation will be supported where it meets the specific locational 
requirements set out below .  
Where hotel  and visitor accommodation is proposed outside of the Town Centre  or 
Gatwick Airport , it will be necessary to demonstrate, through the use of the sequential 
test, that no sequentially preferable sites are available.  
Where hotel and visitor accommodation is proposed within the Gatwick Airport boundary, 
it will be necessary to demonstrate that the development will not have a detrimental 
impact on the long -term ability of the airpo rt to meet its operational land and floorspace 
requirements as it grows. Car parking related to on- airport hotel development must meet  
the requirements of Policy GAT3 . 
                                                 
83 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 86 (2019) MHCLG  
84 National Planning Policy Framework, Glossary, page 66 (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 120 Where hotel and visitor accommodation is proposed in Manor Royal  it will be necessary to  
demonstrate that the development will cater specifically for the business needs of Manor 
Royal, including through the provision of business support facilities and staff amenities as 
per the requirements of Local Plan Policy EC3 (Manor Royal).  
Where hotel and visitor accommodation is located outside of the Gatwick Airport 
Boundary ( including in the Town Centre and Manor Royal ), parking provision shall be 
solely for the use of staff and guests in residence of the development and shall not be 
block parked or used by for any other purpose, including as off -airport car  parking.  
Reasoned Justification  
9.87 Hotels represent a main town centre use, and support Town Centre vitality and 
viability. The Town Centre is the preferred location for hotel and visitor 
accommodation, as it is here where linkages with shops, restaurants and other main 
town centre uses can best be facilitated. Gatwick Airport is also a sustainable 
location for hotels given the demand it generates, and whilst hotels do not represent an operational use (paragraph 10 .15 refers), they are supported at the airport 
provided current and future operational needs are not compromised. Where  hotel 
and visitor accommodation is proposed outside of the Town Centre or Gatwick 
Airport , it will be necessary to demonstrate that the requirements of the NPPF 
sequential test are satisfied.   
9.88 Where hotel and visitor accommodation is proposed in Manor Royal, applicants will 
be required to demonstrate how the development will provide business facilities and 
amenities for Manor Royal staff to ensure that the development supports the principal 
business function of Manor Royal. Given the recognised absenc e of a dedicated 
business hub at Manor Royal, there is scope for a hotel development, if carefully planned to incorporate an appropriate range of business -supporting facilities, to 
provide the business hub function that is currently lacking. To steer the t ype of 
business supporting facilities that may help to achieve this, applicants should refer to 
Local Plan Policy EC3 and its supporting text. The onus will be on the applicant to 
incorporate the necessary features into their scheme that would clearly demonstrate 
the complementary nature of the proposal to Manor Royal.  Applicants are also 
encouraged to liaise with the council and Manor Royal BID at an early stage to scope 
the type of facilities needed to enable any hotel proposal to appropriately support the 
Manor Royal business function.  
9.89 Airport parking should be located within the airport boundary and,  therefore,  Policy 
EC7 contains the appropriate text to ensure consistency with the approach of Local 
Plan Policy GAT3.  
Evening and Night -Time Economy  
9.90 The evening and night -time economy refers to those commercial activities that 
operate into the evening and night, at a time when retail and other daytime uses 
typically cease. It can include arts, culture and entertainment uses (such as cinemas, 
theatres, restaurants, bars and nightclubs) that can appeal to a wide cross -section of 
the population and a variety of age groups.  
9.91 In Crawley, the evening and night -time economy is focused in the Town Centre, 
particularly around the historic High Street, and also at neighbourhood centres and in some cases Manor Royal. When managed correctly, a successful evening and night -
time economy becomes part of a town’s character and atmosphere, extending vitality 
beyond regular working hours, creating jobs, and particularly for the Town Centre, 
increasing its attractiveness as a place to live and visit. However, where evening and 
night -time uses are inappropriately located or poorly managed, this can create or 
exacerbate negative impacts including nuisance, noise, odour, crime and anti -social CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 121 behaviour. Therefore,  it is important that evening and night -time uses are carefully 
planned so that they are complementary to, rather than conflict with, other uses.  
Policy EC8 : Evening and Night -Time Economy  
Development that adds to the vitality and viability of Crawley’s  evening and night -time 
economy will be supported, subject to demonstrating that:  
a) the design of development and management arrangements are appropriate in relation 
to public safety, crime prevention and t he reduction of anti -social behaviour where 
relevant;  
b) there will be no significant individual or cumulative negative impact  on the surrounding 
character of the area and residential amenity;  
c) arrangements for mitigating pollution including odour and noise, are provided in a way 
that minimises visual and environmental impact;  
d) the proposed evening or night -time use will not result in blank or inactive frontages 
onto the public realm during daytime hours.   
Flexible or late- night opening hours will be  a material consideration in favour of such 
development, where appropriate to the use proposed and subject to relevant amenity 
considerations.  Development will not be permitted where it would create or exacerbate 
existing problems when considered against t he criteria set out above. In all cases, the 
NPPF ‘agent of change’ principle will  form a material consideration . 
Reasoned Justification  
9.92 A successful evening and night -time economy can add vibrancy and vitality to a 
location, helping to generate activity whilst meeting local needs. In order to avoid 
conflict with existing amenity sensitive uses, proposals for evening and night -time 
economy uses should be sited in appropriate locations, and carefully planned to take 
account of cumulative impact on the character and function of the town, crime and 
local amenity.  
9.93 Crawley Town Centre, and particularly the historic High Street, represents an established focus for evening and night -time uses. Evening and night -time uses that 
add to the vibrancy of t he Town Centre, can help attract visitors to the Town Centre 
and also support the needs of its growing residential population. However, there is a need to ensure that such uses are carefully planned, having regard to the ‘agent of 
change’ principle, to avoid conflict with existing residential uses. There is also a need 
to ensure that where uses are proposed that would operate predominantly during the 
evening, this would not result in blank facades or frontages that fail to engage with 
the public realm and s treet scene during daytime hours.  
9.94 Crawley’s neighbourhood parades are situated in residential areas, and any evening or night -time economy uses in these locations will need to be carefully managed to 
ensure that there is not a negative amenity impact on nearby residential uses, nor on 
the function of the neighbourhood centre itself.  
9.95 Manor Royal is a 24- hour main employment area, with a number of commercial and 
business uses that operate through the night. It is recognised that some evening and 
night-time uses, subject to their scale and function, may be appropriate to support the 
principal business function of Manor Royal and to meet the needs of people working 
in Manor Royal, particularly those working night shifts. Where evening and night -time 
economy uses are proposed in Manor Royal, particular regard should be had to the 
requirements of Local Plan Policy EC3.   
Supporting the Creative Industries  
9.96 The creative industries sector, which makes up over five per cent of the UK economy 
and employs more than two million people, is one of the fastest growing, contributing CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 122 £87bn of GVA85 in 2017. Through its Gatwick 360o Strategic Economic Plan, the 
Coast to Capital Local Enterprise Partnership identifies the creative industries sector 
as a key competitive advantage for the area, outlining that highly innovative micro, 
small and medium -sized businesses are now increasing in number, not just in the 
traditional creative hubs of Brighton and Croydon, also in the towns surrounding 
Gatwick Airport. The LEP objective is to create the economic conditions for innovation to continue to flourish.  
Policy EC9 : Supporting the Creative Industries  
Within the Main Employment Areas the provision of new or improved business floorspace 
for use by the creative industries will be supported where:  
a) it would enhance the supply and range of employment floorspace, including start -up, 
incubation, and growth space,  in the borough;  
b) it woul d not result in a  significant individual or cumulative negative impact on the 
operation of the Main Employment Area;  
c) it makes provision for gigabit -capable full fibre broadband to ensure that fibre  or other 
cabling does not need to be retrofitted;  
d) the proposed use, if falling within the definition of ‘Main Town Centre’ uses,  satisfies  
the NPPF sequential and impact test s where these apply.  
Reasoned Justification  
9.97 Work undertaken by the Arts Council through its Active Lives survey shows that Crawley performs lower in terms of participation in the arts and creative sectors 
compared to neighbouring areas, with the borough falling within the bottom 33% 
nationally and being the only West Sussex authority ranked this low.  
9.98  The Crawley 2030  Local Plan applied  a flexible approach to support sustainable 
economic growth in Crawley, though it was not explicit in its support for the creative 
industries . Policy EC9  seeks to positively support the creative industries through the 
planning system. The creative industries sector captures a broad range of typologies, including Advertising & Marketing; Architecture; Arts & Crafts, Culture & Exhibitions; 
Markets and Food &  Drink Sales; Design (including digital, product, graphic and 
fashion design); Film, TV, video, radio and photography; IT Software and Computer 
services; Publishing; Museums, Galleries and Libraries; Music, Performing and 
Visual Arts; Arts/Crafts workplaces and studios.  
9.99 Many of the creative uses listed above fall within the business use sectors, and where this is the case, proposals will be supported in the Main Employment Areas. 
However, it is recognised that other uses will fall outside of the business sectors and 
within the Commercial, Business and Service E-Class, for example food and drink 
stalls or cultural uses. Where this is the case, development should be directed to the 
Town Centre in the first instance, and the NPPF sequential and (where required) 
impact tests will need to be satisfied where development of this nature is proposed at 
edge- of-centre or out -of-centre locations. The Hawth Theatre Main Employment Area 
represents a particular focus for arts, culture, performance and exhibitions.  
9.100 Gatwick 360
o identifies the need to support the creativ e industry sector through the 
provision of essential  technology, including the roll out of 5G connectivity to key 
locations including Gatwick Airport. To support this objective, it is important that new development takes the opportunity to incorporate provision for gigabit -capable full 
fibre broadband to ensure that fibre or other cabling does not need to be retrofitted . 
                                                 
85 UK Industrial Strategy: Building a Britain Fit for the Future ( 2017)  
 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 123 Flexible Temporary  Cultural  and Creative Uses  
9.101 Where sites and buildings have been long -term vacant, particularly where these are 
vacant before planning permission is implemented, it is recognised that certain uses 
within the cultural and creative industries sector, may be appropriate on a temporary 
basis. Such  temporary uses  can help stimulate activity and vibrancy, making efficient  
use of sites that would otherwise remain unused. Equally, in enabling vacant units to 
be taken up on a temporary basis by businesses seeking to test new business 
concepts, pop -up stores and event spaces, the approach can generate interest and 
footfall whi lst providing confidence for new and existing small and medium -sized 
enterprises (SME s) investing in Crawley.  
Policy EC10: Flexible Temporary Cultural  and Creative Uses  
Within the Main Employment Areas and neighbourhood centres, t he growth and evolution 
of Crawley’s cultural facilities and creative industries will be supported through the 
temporary ‘meanwhile’ use of vacant commercial premises  and public realm , provided 
that the proposed temporary use:  
a. would generate footfall and s timulate activity, including through the provision of active 
and engaging frontage where appropriate;  
b. would be appropriate to its location in terms of amenity and disturbance, having 
regard to the agent of change principle;  
c. would be sustainably located close to public transport links;  
d. where proposed on land or buildings that are subject to a Local Plan allocation or 
planning permission, would not prejudice the timely implementation of that site ; 
e. would  not result in an adverse impact on the economic function of the Main 
Employment Area .  
Reasoned Justification  
9.102 The use of buildings and spaces for temporary cultural and creative uses can help 
stimulate vibrancy, vitality and viability in town centres  and other areas  by creating 
social and economic  value from vacant properties.  Such ‘m eanwhile ’ uses can also 
help prevent blight in the town centre, maintain active frontages and reduce the risk 
of buildings falling into disrepair . The benefits of meanwhile use also include short -
term affordable commercial accommodation for SMEs and individuals, generating a 
short -term source of revenue for the local economy and providing new and 
interesting shops, cultural and other events and spaces, which can att ract longer -
term business investment. Parameters for any meanwhile use, particularly its 
longevity and associated obligations, should be established from the outset and 
agreed by all parties.  
9.103 Events and activities such as festivals, seasonal markets,  exhibitions, performances, 
outdoor concerts and busking are not always dependent on using a dedicated cultural facility or venue and can make use of a range of outdoor spaces  including 
streets, parks and other public areas. These may include street market s and ‘pop- up’ 
bars and food stalls. These types of activities  offer a way for everyone to experience 
and participate in Crawley’s rich cultural life. The opportunity to incorporate these uses should be identified and facilitated through careful design.  
Employment Development and Residential Amenity  
9.104 It is important that the relationship between employment and amenity sensitive uses, 
such as residential uses, is carefully managed in order to minimise the scope for 
conflict. Given Crawley’s limited av ailable land supply, it is vital that the employment 
function of the designated Main Employment Areas is not undermined by the inappropriate introduction of new residential or other amenity -sensitive uses. Equally, 
it is important that the amenity of exist ing residential or other sensitive uses is not CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 124 compromised by new employment development that would result in nuisance to 
existing occupiers. This scope for conflict can be reduced through applying the ‘agent 
of change’ principle, this being the position t hat development that would introduce a 
new land use (whether this is a noise sensitive use or a noise generating use), is 
responsible for managing the impact of that change.  
Policy EC11: Employment Development and Residential Amenity  
The relationship between employment and amenity sensitive uses, particularly residential, 
must be carefully planned, having regard to the ‘agent of change’ principle, to minimise 
the scope for nuisance.  
Where residential  or amenity -sensitive  development i s proposed adjacent to Main 
Employment Areas, the principal concern will be to ensure that the economic function of 
the area is not constrained. The proposed  use must be designed to mitigate any impact 
from the existing or future  employment use on the new residents.  Residential 
development within the Main Employment Areas , except the town centre,  will not be 
supported.  
Proposals for the development, redevelopment or change of use of sites for employment 
use within or  adjacent to residential areas will be permitted where there is no adverse 
harm to  the amenity , function and setting of nearby residential uses .  
Particular care should be taken within the Buffer Zones  at Manor Royal and Forge Wood , 
where employment  uses will be permitted provided that proposals do not adversely 
impact upon the amenity, function and setting of nearby residential uses.  
Reasoned Justification  
9.105 The Main Employment Areas are  designated to support economic growth in Crawley, 
with Manor Royal protected for business and business supporting uses, with a more 
flexible  range of employment generati ng uses  supported in the other Main 
Employment Areas . The role of the Main Employment Areas is to protect them  for 
employment use in order to help meet the economic land and floorspace needs identified in Policy EC1, and to ensure that the economic function (as existing or in 
the future) of these areas is not unduly constrained by the inapp ropriate introduction 
of amenity -sensitive uses.  
9.106 Some types of economic development may result in issues of noise or other forms of disturbance, which if located close to existing amenity -sensitive uses, could result in 
nuisance to occupiers. The Mai n Employment Areas are designated to support 
economic growth, though it is recognised that some Main Employment Areas are 
situated in close proximity to existing residential or amenity -sensitive uses, and in 
these cases it will be necessary for development  to ensure  that the amenity of local 
residents has been fully addressed and mitigated .  
9.107 This is most notably the case at the south- east and south -west of Manor Royal, and 
the employment land at Forge Wood, where there is little separation between nearby 
residential development and the Main Employment A rea. Recognising the scope for 
conflict in these areas,  Buffer Zones have been identified in Manor Royal at Tinsley 
Lane and Tushmore Lane,  and at the Forge Wood employment land,  as identified on 
the Local Plan Map. Within these areas, particular care should be taken to ensure 
that economic development proposals do not adversely impact upon the amenity and setting of nearby residential uses.  
9.108 Equally, it is recognised that the Main Employment Area s represent the key focus for 
economic development in Crawley, and the economic function of these areas should 
not be constrained by inappropriate  new residential  or other amenity -sensitive  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 125 development. This reflects the NPPF, which is clear that ‘existing businesses and 
facilities should not have unreasonable restrictions placed on them as a result of 
development permitted after they were established’86. This is expanded upon by 
PPG: Noise, which recognises that new development may represent an ‘agent of 
change’, and is clear that regard should be had ‘not only the current activities that 
may cause a nuisance, but also those activities that businesses or other facilities are 
permitted to carry out, even if they are not occurring at the time of the application 
being made’87. To promote the continued functionality of Main Employment Areas, 
where residential development is proposed within or adjacent to Main Employment 
Areas, regard will be had to the potential impact on the operati on of existing 
economic uses , as well as  future employment uses, to ensure that the economic 
function of the Main Employment Area is not undermined.   
Neighbourhood Centres  
9.109 As a New Town, Crawley has been built on the neighbourhood principle, with each 
neighbourhood  centre providing its own local shops  in a dedicated neighbourhood 
parade,  as well as  facilities and services  such as community centres,  public houses  
and local level employment  to support the day -to-day needs of residents. Although 
shopping habits have changed over time, the neighbourhood parades remain an important part of Crawley’s make -up; representing a key aspect of Crawley’s 
character, serving as sustainable locations for local retail and employment and acting 
as hubs for day -to-day community life.   
Policy EC12 : Neighbourhood Centres  
Crawley’s neighbourhood centres provide floorspace that contributes to the town’s wider 
employment function. These areas continue to be recognised as sustainable locations for 
smaller -scale employment use, and economic development will be supported where it 
meets the policy requirements of Local Plan Poli cies CL1, CL2, DD1, EC1 and EC11.  
In neighbourhood  parades , new floorspace and  ground floor change s of use will be 
supported provided that proposals:  
i) are appropriate to the established role of the neighbourhood centre in terms of scale 
and function; and  
ii) will not adversely affect the ability of the parade to cater for the day -to-day needs of  
local residents; and  
iii) will not result in an adverse impact upon the amenity and environment of the locality; 
and 
iv) will maintain and where possible enhance the vitality and viability of the parade.  
Reasoned Justification  
9.110 The neighbourhood principles contained within the original Crawley masterplan 
continue to reflect g overnment guidance, particularly in meeting local needs and 
reducing the need to travel by focusing shops, schools , small -scale employment uses  
and community services and faci lities in accessible locations. R esidents have 
highlight ed the important role of the neighbourhood parades and a desire to see their 
retail -led function maintained for future years. The role of neighbourhood centres in 
each neighbourhood will be protected to ensure this important function is maintained.  
                                                 
86 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 182 (2019) MHCLG  
87 Planning Practice Guidance: Noise, paragraph 009 Reference ID: 30-009 -20190722 (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 126  
9.111 The function of the parades has gradually changed over time, and in addition to 
shops that perform a local shopping function, many parades are now home to more 
specialist retailers (for example, bri dal wear or musical instruments) supported by a 
range of non -retail uses including takeaways and betting shops. Whilst non- retail 
uses can provide an important local function, there is risk that the presence of too 
many can undermine the ability of the par ade to meet local shopping needs and all 
are still anchored by at least one convenience retailer. It is vital, therefore, that each neighbourhood parade continues to offer a good balance of shops and services to 
support residents’ day -to-day needs, whilst providing flexibility to allow for other 
appropriate uses.  
Rural Economy  
9.112 Crawley is a predominantly urban borough,  though the countryside beyond its Built -
up Area Boundary contains some agricultural, commercial and recreational 
enterprises. The NPPF88 recognises that these rural businesses should be allowed to 
grow where this can be achieved in a manner that is sustainable and appropriate to the countryside setting. Therefore, i t is vital to ensure that t hese needs are balanced 
against the overall strategy to  protect the intrinsic value and beauty of the 
countryside, and  avoid inappropriate development that would have an urbanising 
effect .  
Policy EC13 : Rural Economy  
Beyond the Built-Up Area Boundary, development that enhances Crawley’s rural 
economy will be supported provided it:  
a) is of a scale and function that is appropriate to, and consistent with, the character of 
the countryside; and  
                                                 
88 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraphs 83-84 (2019) MHCLG  
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 127 b) would not result in an urbanising impact that would undermine the intrinsic character 
and beauty of the countryside; and 
c) would not result in the loss of valued landscapes, sites of biodiversity or geological 
value, trees and woodland, or the best and most versatile agricultural land; and 
d) would not result in the loss of connectivity or function of the green infrastructure 
network and/or sites of biodiversity value.  
Development proposals which would cause the permanent loss of the best and most 
versatile agricultural land (Grades 1, 2 and 3a in the DEFRA Agricultural Land 
Classification system) will not be permitted unles s it can be demonstrated to the 
satisfaction of the council that there are no appropriate alternatives and there are over -
riding sustainability benefits.  
Any development  must also mee t the requirements of Policy CL8: Development Outside 
the Built -Up Area.  
Reasoned Justification  
9.113 The NPPF supports the sustainable growth and expansion of businesses in rural 
areas, but is clear that this should be achieved in a manner that respects the 
character of the countryside.  The NPPF requires planning policies and decisions to 
contribute to and enhance the natural environment, including through protecting and 
enhancing valued landscapes, recognising the intrinsic character and beauty of the 
countryside, and preventing new development from contributing to unacceptable 
levels of pollution89. The NPPF is clear that planning policies and decisions should 
limit the impact of light pollution from artificial light on local amenity, intrinsically dark 
landscapes and nature conservation90. 
  
                                                 
89 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 170 (2019) MHCLG  
90 National Planning Policy Fra mework, paragraph 180 (c) (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 128 Gatwick Airport  
10.1 Gatwick Airport  lies within the b orough of Crawley and at peak times , prior to the 
Covid -19 pandemic, was  the busiest single runway airport in the world.  In 2018/19, 
Gatwick Airport handled 46.4million passengers . The presence and operation of an 
international airport within the borough generates specific planning issues which 
need to be addressed by local planning policies. The Airport generates a significant 
number of economic benefits both directly through its own employment requirements 
but also, indirectly,  through the wider benefits to the regional and local economy 
which make Crawley and the wider Gatwick Diamond area attractive to employers 
and businesses. However, it also creates significant environmental impacts 
particularly as a result of air traffic m ovements and surface access to the airport. The 
airport operator and the councils around the airport work together to seek to reduce 
any significant adverse effects.  
10.2 The council is consulted on any developments which the airport operator proposes to 
undertake under its permitted development rights. The council , as the Local Planning 
Authority , also determines any planning applications for more significant 
developments which are not classified as permitted development. Development 
required to support the growth in capacity of the airport over 10mppa, for example 
through the routine use of the northern standby runway, would be considered as a Nationally Significant Infrastructure Project under the Planning Act 2008, and as such 
would be determined by the Secretary of State for Transport, advised by the Planning 
Inspectorate through the Development Consent Order process.   
Chapter Content  
10.3 This chapter combines the planning policy considerations which are specifically 
relevant to the future development of Gatwick Airport.  
The Key Issues  
10.4 There are a number of key evidence based documents which need to be taken into 
account including the national policy background in terms of airport growth and 
runway issues.  
10.5 The main evidence based documents are:  
• Aviation Policy Framework (DfT, March 2013)  
• Aviation 2050;  The Future of UK Aviation Consultation (DfT, December 2018)  
• Beyond the Horizon;  The Future of Aviation; Making Best Use of Existing 
Runways ( DfT, June 2018)  
• Airports National Policy Statement: New runway capacity and infrastructure at 
airports in the South East of England (DfT June 2018)  
• Gatwick Airport Master Plan (Gatwick Airport Limited,  July 2019)  
• Gatwick Airport Surface Access Strategy (Gatwick Airport Limited, May 2018)  
• Gatwick Airport Interim Parking Strategy (Gatwick Airport Limited, February 2017)  
• April 2019 Legal Agreement between CBC, WSCC and the airport operator  
10.6 The National Aviat ion Policy Framework, 2013, makes  it clear in para. 5.9 that “ Land 
outside existing airports that  may be required for airport development in the future 
needs to be protected against incompatible development until the g overnment has 
established any relevant policies and proposals in response to the findings of the 
Airports Commission ”. Following the work of the Airports Commission to examine the 
scale and timing of any requirement for additional runway capacity in the south east, CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 129 the government  set out its preferred option for a new Northwest runway at Heathrow 
in the “Airports National Policy Statement, ( ANPS): new runway capacity and 
infrastructure at airports in the South East of England”, adopted in June 2018.  The 
ANPS was challenged through the Courts but the Supreme Court in December 2020 
concluded it was lawful . The ANPS also references the Airports Commission’s 
findings on the need for more intensive use of existing infrastructure at other airports. 
In its document, “Beyond the Horizon: T he Future of UK Aviation: Making best use of 
existing runways”, June 2018, the government recognises that the DfT’s latest aviation forecasts (2017) reflect accelerated growth at London’s main airports. This is 
putting pressure on existing infrastructure, despite significant financial investments by 
airports over the past decade. “Beyond the Horizon”, therefore, sets out the government’s support of airports beyond Heathrow making best use of their existing 
runways, provided that all relevant considerations,  particularly economic and 
environmental impacts and proposed mitigations are addressed.    
10.7 The government published its draft Aviation Strategy, “Aviation 2050;  The Future of 
UK Aviation” in December 2018  although this has not yet been progressed further. 
The draft document  aims to achieve a safe, secure and sustainable aviation sector 
that meets the needs of consumers and a global, outward- looking Britain. It supports 
the growth of aviation and the benefit s this would deliver, provided that growth takes 
place in a sustainable way, with actions to mitigate the environmental impacts. The 
draft document states that the government believes forecasted aviation demand up 
to 2030 can be met through expansion at Heathrow and other airports making best 
use of their existing runways subject to environmental issues being addressed. It notes that the Airports Commission recognised that whilst there may be a demand 
case beyond 2030, there is not necessarily a correspondi ng environmental or 
commercial case and that the g overnment is not at the point of making a decision on 
long term need. The document states that the government proposes to ask the 
National Infrastructure Commission (NIC) to include airport capacity in future national infrastructure assessments to determine whether there is a needs case for further 
runways. If a need is identified, the draft document  outlines ways in which the need 
can be determined including through a National Infrastructure Commission sect or 
study; an independent commission (like the Airports Commission); or an aviation 
NPS to either set out the criteria any development consent application would need to 
meet, or by naming airport(s). It suggests the government’s preferred approach is to 
set criteria but not name specific airports, and to let the industry decide whether and 
when to bring forward applications.  
10.8 With regard to the safeguarding of land for airport growth, however , the draft 
document does state in para. 3.66 that “it is prudent to continue with a safeguarding 
policy to maintain a supply of land for future national requirements and to ensure that 
inappropriate developments do not hinder sustainable aviation growth” . It refers to  
the NPPF which restates  the government’s commitment to “identify and protect, 
where there is robust evidence, sites and routes which could be critical in developing 
infrastructure to widen transport choice” and that the government believes this 
provides sufficient guidance for local authorities to consider the future needs of 
airports and their surface access requirements when developing local plans. The 
NPPF also requires local plans to provide for any large scale transport facilities that 
need to be located in the area, and for the infrastructure and wi der development 
required to support their operation, expansion and contribution to the wider economy. In doing so they should take into account whether such development is likely to be a 
nationally significant infrastructure project and any relevant national policy 
statements. Whilst NSIPs are subject to a separate planning process within the 
national planning regime, the policies set out within the Local Plan will inform any 
Local Impact Report submitted by the council to the Secretary of State in connecti on 
with the determination of an NSIP.   CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 130 10.9 An existing S106 Agreement signed between Gatwick Airport, WSCC and CBC in 
April 2019 supports the growth of the airport by making best use of its existing one 
runway, two terminal configuration, whilst ensuring that measures are in place to 
minimise its short and longer -term environmental impacts. It also considers how the 
councils around the airport work together to bring benefits to the Airport and the communities it serves and affects.  
10.10  The Gatwick Airpor t Master Plan (July 2019) anticipates capacity on its single runway 
could increase to between 58 and 61 million passengers per annum by 2032/33.  The 
Gatwick Airport Master Plan also sets out two further scenarios for growth of the 
airport, through  operatio nal use of the existing standby runway and through 
continuing to safeguard land for an additional runway to the south of the airport. The 
Master Plan states that Gatwick is no longer actively pursuing plans for an additional 
runway, but that there nevertheless rem ains the possibility that the airport may wish 
to build  and operat e one in the future. The document states that it is in the national 
interest to continue with the strategy of land safeguarding.  
10.11  The Covid -19 pandemic has had a  very significan t impact on airport operations, with 
a substantial reduction in flight and passenger numbers continuing at the current 
time. However, it is anticipated that passenger numbers will gradually return to pre -
Covid levels in the next few years and will continue to grow over t he Plan period, 
albeit perhaps at a slower rate in line with wider economic recovery .   
Local Plan Policies  
Development of the Airport  
10.12 Prior to the Covid- 19 pandemic, annual passenger  number s at Gatwick Airport were 
increasing each year, reaching 46.4million in 2018/19. This is due to a combination of more use of the airport in off -peak periods, larger aircraft and greater load factors, 
and more intensive use of the runway. The Gatwick Airport Master Plan ( July 2019) 
anticipates these factors , which are significantly able to take place outside the control 
of the planning system,  could increase capacity on its single runway to 53million 
passengers per annum (mppa) by 2023, and 61mppa by 2032 due to advances in air traffic managemen t technology. The Master Plan also sets out two further scenarios 
for growth of the airport, through use of the existing standby runway which could increase capacity to 70mppa by 2032, and through continuing to safeguard land for 
an additional runway to the south of the airport which could increase capacity to 
around 95mppa within 20 or 25 years  from opening the additional runway .  
Strategic Policy GAT1: Development of the Airport with a Single Runway  
Within the airport boundary as set out on the Local Plan Map, the council will support the 
development of facilities which contribute to the sustainable growth of Gatwick A irport as 
a single runway, two terminal airport provided that:  
i. The proposed use is appropriate within the airport boundary and contribut es to the 
safe, secure  and efficient operation of the airport; and 
ii. The impact s of the operation of the airport on the environment , including noise, air 
quality, flooding, surface access, visual impact , biodiversity  and climate change , are 
minimised, where necessary satisfactory safeguards are in place to ensure they are  
appropriately  mitigated and, as a last resort, fair compensation is secured; and 
iii. Adequate supporting infrastructure, particularly for surface access,  can be put  in 
place; and  
iv. Benefits to Crawley’s local economy and community are maximised.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 131 The control or m itigation  of impacts , compensation, infrastructure and benefits will be 
secured through appropriate planning conditions and/or  S106 obligations .  
Where development to enable sustainable g rowth at Gatwick Airport will be a Nationally 
Significant Infrastructure Project, such as the use of the northern runway, i-iv above will 
be expected to be met by the airport operator and secured through appropriate 
requirements or  S106 obligations .  
Reasoned Justification  
10.13 Much of the recent significant growth in passenger numbers at Gatwick Airport, 
through the use of larger aeroplanes and more flights at “off -peak” times and 
seasons, has not required new development to support it. The Airport O perator also 
has permitted development rights for new facilities to support rising passenger 
numbers. Measures are in place, through the S106 Agreement between CBC, WSCC 
and Gatwick Airport to mitigate some of the adverse impacts of airport growth, and 
where planning permission is required for new development at the airport, the council 
will need to ensure that it contributes to the safe and efficient operation of the airport 
and that its impacts are minimised or mitigated as required, sufficient supporting 
infrastructure can be put in place, and local benefits are maximised.  The c ouncil will 
also consider the cumulative impact o f numerous small developments. Planning 
conditions and further S106 obligations will be sought.  
10.14 Sections 14 and 23 of the Planning Act 2008 define Nationally Significant 
Infrastructure Projects to include the construction, extension or alteration of a runway 
or building at an airport expected to be capable of increasing by at least 10 million 
per year the number of passengers  for whom the airport is capable of providing air 
passenger transport services. Applications for such developments would,  therefore,  
be determined by the Secretary of State through the Development Consent Order 
(DCO) process. The Gatwick Airport Master Plan 2019 proposal to use the standby 
runway would increase capacity by over 10 mppa and will therefore be determined 
through a DCO  process . Gatwick Airport has formally commenced this process, 
publishing its Scoping Report in September  2019. Submission of the DCO has been 
delayed but is still currently anticipated  in 2021  with, should it be approved, 
operational use starting in 2026. Maximum capacity would be reached in 2038. The 
council would expect the environmental impacts to be mi nimised,  or mitigated, 
infrastructure  to be  provided and related benefits to the local area to be  maximised , 
and is working with neighbouring authorities to ensure these objectives are achieved across the wider area.  
10.15 Proposals that contribute to the safe , secure  and efficient operation of the airport are 
considered to include operational  uses such as  terminals , runway facilities, aircraft 
maintenance, freight handling facilities; directly related development including transport interchanges, admin off ices and parking; as well as less directly related 
development (e.g. hotels, conference and leisure facilities, offices and retail) where 
the relationship to the airport is explicitly justified and is of an appropriate scale 
relative to airport activities.  In all cases, proposals should have regard to the NPPF  
requirements for  promoting public safety through anticipating and addressing 
possible malicious threats, including through proportionate steps that can be taken to 
reduce vulnerability, increase resil ience and ensure public safety and security
91.    
Future Runway Development and Need for Safeguarding  
10.16  The Aviation Policy Framework (March 2013) outlines that land outside existing airports that may be required for airport development in the future needs to be 
protected against incompatible development until the government has established 
                                                 
91 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 95 (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 132 any relevant poli cies and proposals in response to the findings of the Airport 
Commission.  
10.17  The government established its policy and proposals in response to the findings of 
the Airports Commission when it published the ANPS  in June 2018, supporting a 
third runway at  Heathrow. The ‘Making the Best Use of Existing Runways’ 
government policy statement, also published in June 2018, also referred to the Heathrow decision and provided policy relating to all other airports, supporting the 
expansion of capacity on their exis ting runways. However, the draft national Aviation 
Strategy, Aviation 2050, which was published in December 2018, after the ANPS was published, as detailed in para. 10.8 above, states that it would be prudent to 
retain safeguarding policies at other airpor ts. There is  not, therefore, any certainty in 
government policy that land at Gatwick is no longer required to be safeguarded.  This 
means that it is considered land at Gatwick is still required to be safeguarded for a 
potential future runway, as the Local Plan must be consistent with national policy. 
Paragraph 1.33 confirms that a review of the Local Plan will be triggered should 
certainty be gained over national aviation policy on safeguarding.    
Policy GAT2: Safeguarded Land  
Safeguarding for a second runway  
The Local Plan Map identifies land that is safeguarded from development which would be 
incompatible with expansion of the airport to accommodate the construction of an 
additional wide spaced runway (if required by national policy) together with a 
commensurate increase in facilities that contribute to the safe and efficient operation of 
the expanded airport.  
Small scale development within this area, such as residential extensions, will normally be 
acceptable.  The airport operator will be consulted on all planning applications within the 
safeguarded area.  
Planning applications for noise sensitive development will be considered on the basis of 
Air Noise Map –  Additional Runway –  Summer Day –  2040 as shown at Plan 31 of the 
Gatwick Airport Master Plan and in the Local Plan Noise Annex.   
Reasoned Justification  
10.18  The original requirement to safeguard land for a second runway at Gatwick was 
contained in the 2003 Aviation White Paper. The Aviation Policy Framework (March 
2013) clarified the position, and  the draft Aviation Strategy, published after the ANPS, 
also refe rs to the need for safeguarding, as set out above. If national aviation policy 
on safeguarding provides certainty that safeguarding is no longer required at 
Gatwick, then a Local Plan Review will take place in order to assess the appropriate 
uses for the currently safeguarded area (para. 1.33).     
10.19  Incompatible development within safeguarded land is regarded as development 
which would add constraints or increase the costs or complexity o f the development 
or operation of an additional runway. The airport operator will be consulted on all 
applications within the safeguarded area for a second runway.  
10.20  As safeguarding of land provides the potential for a southern runway, it is important 
to ensure that noise sensitive development is not located in an area which could 
become unacceptably noisy in the future due to air traffic movements from a 
southern runway.  The potential future noise contours for this runway, set out in the 
Gatwick Airport Master Plan, will therefore be used to assess planning applications for noise sensitive proposals within the borough.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 133 10.21  The Gatwick Airport Master Plan requests that local planning authorities use the 
revised safeguarding boundary shown in the Master Plan.  The council has 
considered the Airport Layout: Additional Runway shown in Plan 20 of the Master Plan and has included within the Local Plan safeguarded boundary the land that 
would be required to accommodate a southern  runway, including the  diversion of the 
A23. However, the Local Plan safeguarded boundary has not included all the land 
east of the Balcombe Road which is  shown in the Master Plan as being utilised for a 
large area of surface car parking. Given the constrained land supply within the borough and its significant employment and housing needs, the council does not 
consider surface parking to represent an effici ent use of land. The Airport is already 
accommodating parking more efficiently through decked and robotic parking, and its 
Surface Access Strategy seeks to reduce  access to the airport by car. This area 
excluded from safeguarding is essential to meet Crawl ey’s employment floorspace 
needs and is allocated in Policy EC1 as a Strategic Employment Location.   
10.22  The issue of runway safeguarding should be distinguished from that of aerodrome safeguarding which considers the impact of proposals on the operation of aircraft. 
Policy DD5  relates to Aerodrome Safeguarding.    
 
Gatwick Related Car Parking  
10.23 Passengers that fly in and out of Gatwick need to be able to travel to and from the 
airport by a variety of means of surface transport. The airport operator  is required , 
through a S106 legal agreement, to prepare an Airport Surface Access Strategy 
(most recently published May 2018) to address and appropriately manage the 
surface access need of aircraft passengers  and staff . Controlling the extent of airport 
related parking helps encourage the use of alternatives whilst ensuring sufficient 
parking is available to passengers who have no other option.  
 
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 134 Policy GAT3: Gatwick Airport Related Parking 
The provision of additional or replacement airport -related  parking will only be permitted  
where:  
i) it is located  within the airport boundary ; and  
ii) it is justified by a demonstrable need in the context of proposals for achieving a 
sustainable approach to surface transport access to the airport.  
Reasoned Justificati on 
10.24 The 2019 S106 legal agreement  between Crawley Borough Council, West Sussex 
County Council, and Gatwick Airport Limited sets out an obligation for the airport 
operator to achieve  a target of 48 % of passengers travelling to the airport by public 
transport. Achieving this still requires the provision of significant parking facilities for 
those who choo se to drive to the airport by private car.  Airport -related car parking 
includes parking associated with hotel guests leaving cars whilst flying from the 
airport.  The Airport operator has updated its interim Car Parking S trategy (April 2017) 
to demonstrate the amount of car parking that needs to be provided as passenger throughput grows but is still commensurate with a target of 48 % of passengers 
travelling to the airport arriving by public transport.   
10.25 A significant number of these spaces are provided in on- airport locations within the 
airport boundary. There are also a number of well established businesses with the appropriate planning consents which provide long -stay Gatwick related parking in off -
airport locations.  
10.26 However, there are also a number of operators  which offer car parking services to 
airport passengers which use sites that do not have planning permission for ai rport 
related car parking. This  includes off -airport  sites, without the appropriate  planning 
permission, typically located in the countryside or previously developed land which 
has been used for employment or other purposes. Such off -airport sites are not in the 
most sustainable locations, may not be appropriate for parking and may lead to the 
loss of the countryside or  employment sites. 
10.27 It is considered that sites within the airport boundary provide the most sustainable location for the additional long stay parking which needs to be provided as passenger 
throughput grows whilst still supporting the public transport target. Sites within the 
airport boundary are close to the terminals and can help reduce the number and 
length of trips.  The Airport operator is responsible for meeting the modal split target 
for passengers and the level of provision of car parking spaces makes an important 
contribution to meeting this target. Therefore, i t is important that the provision of car 
parking spaces is appropriately managed in the most sustainable way.  
Employment Uses at Gatwick  
10.28 A number of office developments at the airport had conditions placed on them when 
they were permitted to restrict them to airport -related uses. These are uses which 
contribute to the safe and efficient operation of the airport such as  offices for  airlines, 
handling agents and the airport operator, who are involved in the direct provision of 
services relating to the operation of the airport.  
Policy GAT4: Employment Uses at Gatwick 
The loss of airport -related employment  floorspace within the airport boundary will be 
permitted  where  it can be demonstrated that  development  will not have a detrimental  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 135 impact  on the long term ability of the airport to meet the floorspace need necessary to 
meet the operational needs of the airport as it  grows .  
New non-airport related  employment  floorspace within the airport boundary will only be 
permitted where it can be demonstrated that :  
i. this will not have a detrimental effect on the long term ability of the airport to meet 
the land and  floorspace requirements  necessary to meet the needs of the airport 
as it grows ; and  
ii. it will not have an unacceptable impact  on the role and function of the other Main 
Employment Areas  within Crawley Borough  and town centres and employment 
areas beyond Crawley’s boundaries .  
Reasoned Justification  
10.29 Recent years have seen an increasing level of vacant office property at the airport, 
due in part to the changing needs of airlines and airport businesses which require 
less off ice space than previously. The council has recently allowed the temporary 
relaxation of conditions for a period of three years on some office developments at 
the airport. Whilst recognising the changing nature of airport operations and the 
economic growth needs of the borough, it is important that the airport continues to be 
able to cater for operational needs without requiring, in the future, the development of 
additional land beyond its boundary  to meet its operational needs as it expands.  
10.30 In addition to existing office floorspace,  on-going changes in airport operational 
trends and efficiencies  may also provide scope for other buildings and sites w ithin the 
airport boundary to be used for other purposes. It is important though that non- airport 
uses do not prejudice the current and future operational requirements of the airport as its passenger throughput increases. It is also important that the impact of non -
airport related commercial development at the airport does not have a detrimental impact on the policy objectives for Crawley Town Centre and Manor Royal , and town 
centres and employment areas in neighbouring areas which may be affected by such development . Any proposals would also be tested against all other relevant policies 
in the Plan for development of this nature . 
 
  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 136 Crawley Town Centre  
11.1 At the heart of Crawley is the Town Centre, originally planned as a retail, commercial 
and civic centre as part of the New Town.  Centred around Queens Square and 
County Mall shopping centre, i t extends to Memorial Gardens in the east, west to the 
historic High Street , north to Crawley Leisure Park  and south to Crawley Railway 
Station.  
11.2 The Town Centre performs a number of important roles. It is a leading sub-regional 
destination for retail and leisure, popular with Crawley residents and attracting 
visitors f rom a wider  catchment outside the borough. It is a place to work, designated  
as a Main Employment Area and employing 13,450 people (14% of all jobs in 
Crawley) across a range of sectors including retail, administrative and professional 
business services . It is also a sustainable place to live, with a residential population 
that has risen to approximately 1,150 people in recent years. Moving forward, 
significant new residential development  is planned and it is recognised that the Town 
Centre, as well as being a retail, leisure and employment destination, is  diversifying 
to becom e a neighbourhood in its own right.  
Chapter Content  
11.3 This chapter establish es the planning strategy for Crawley Town Centre, recognising 
its important role for local communities and applying a positive approach to support 
its growth, management and adaptation. The policies within this chapter pro- actively 
support the role and functi on of the Town Centre, seeking to build upon its existing 
strengths as a retail, leisure and commercial destination, and balancing these with its 
growing role as a place to live. The challenges facing town centres are also 
recognised, not least those posed by out -of-centre and online retailing, and as a 
result of economic impacts arising from the Covid- 19 pandemic. Therefore, the 
policies within this chapter seek to ensure that the vitality and viability of the Town 
Centre is supported, and that sufficient flexibility is in place to enable it to respond 
positively and effectively to changes in circumstance over the Plan period.   
The Key Issues  
11.4 Crawley Town Centre is  healthy, vibrant and competitive, offering a good mix of 
shops,  restaurants and leisure uses  and providing a pleasant environment for 
residents and visitors. It benefits from excellent sustainable transport links, and is 
well served by rail and bus. It also has a significant cluster of professional services 
employers, including those offering  legal, financial, recruitment, marketing and 
property services. These factors make an important contribution to the sustainabili ty 
of the Town Centre economy.  The Town Centre has  recently  undergone significant 
regeneration, with £5.4m of improvements made to the public realm in Queens 
Square  at the heart of the Town C entre, and the adjoining Queensway and The 
Pavement . Additional plans are well progr essed to further transform the Town C entre 
public realm through the Crawley Growth Programme.  
11.5 Like many town centres, Crawley also faces challenges , particularly from the growth 
of internet shopping , which  has significantly affected the retail sector  and, more 
widely, the immediate economic  impacts of COVID -19. Crawley Town Centre has 
needed to adapt , divers ifying its offer to include a greater range of leisure - and 
experience- focused main town centre uses, cafes and restaurants. There is an 
increasing contribution to be made to town centre vitality and viability by other uses 
including offices, community space,  and facilities to support a growing town centre CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 137 residential population. Recognising the Town Centre as a well -connected and 
sustainable location for people to live, the growing residential population is itself 
adding further footfall and vibrancy.  
11.6 The Crawley Retail, Commercial Leisure and Town Centre Neig hbourhood Needs 
Assessment (2020) has evaluated Crawley’s strengths  and weaknesses as a town 
centre, and has identified growth forecasts for the Plan period. The study finds that 
Crawley Town Centre has proven to be relatively robust to the challenges fac ing 
many town centres, retaining much of its market spend, as opposed to this being lost 
to other centres within the catchment area. Based on Crawley’s  full housing need 
being met within and close to Crawley , the study identifies capacity for between 
5,800sqm to 10,000sqm new convenience retail floorspace, and between 21,800sqm 
to 29,700sqm comparison retail floor space over the Plan period to 2036 . 
11.7 These are uncertain times for town centres, and it is vital that Crawley Town Centre is able to adapt and diversify in light of changing circumstances to help ensure its 
vitality and viability over the longer -term. It is not just retail that makes for a 
successful town centre, and a range of main town centre uses can help generate 
footfall and activity. Through positively planning for a range of main town centre uses , 
including  those which that support  the day -time and evening economy, and balancing 
this wi th opportunities for residential development and supporting neighbourhood 
facilities and services, the Local Plan puts in place a framework that will enable 
Crawley is able to  diversify and adapt over the Plan period, ensuring it is best placed 
to build upon its established role as a vibrant and competitive sub- regional town 
centre . 
Local Plan Policies  
Primary Shopping Area  
11.8 The Primary Shopping Area represents the heart of Crawley Town Centre, and is the 
location in which its retail offer is concentrated. It is divided into primary and 
secondary shopping frontages. The primary shopping frontages, including Queens Square, County Mall and The Martlets , provid e a retail -led mix of uses  and attract a 
significant footfall of customers. The secondary frontages, including The Broadway, The Boulevard, Broad Walk and High Street , are typically more peripherally located, 
and offer a  more diverse range of main town centre uses, including restaurants, 
drinking establishments, takeaways and offices.  Above ground floor level, upper 
floors present opportunities for a range of main town centre uses, residential, and 
neighbourhood facilities to support the growing Town Centre population.  
Strategic Policy TC1: Primary Shopping Area  
Development that enhances the vitality and viability of Crawley Town Centre as a 
competitive sub- regional town centre will be supported.  
Located within the Town Centre Boundary, the Primary Shopping Area comprises the 
Primary and Secondary shopping frontages as identified on the Local Plan Map.  
Within Primary Shopping Frontages at ground floor level, development within Use Class E 
(Commerc ial, Business and Service Use)    will normally be permitted.  
Within Secondary Shopping Frontages at ground floor level, development within Use 
Class E  (Commercial, Business and Service Use) , drinking establishments (Sui Generis), 
and hot food take aways (S ui Generis) will normally be permitted.  
Other main town centre uses  will normally be permitted within the Primary Shopping Area, 
provided it can be demonstrated through a proportionate Economic Statement, that the 
proposed use will support the overall vitality and viability of the Town Centre.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 138 The effective and efficient use of upper floors within the Primary Shopping Area for main 
town centre uses, town centre neighbourhood facilities, or residential use, is supported, 
subject to meeting the requirements o f Policy EC2 where a net loss of employment 
floorspace is proposed.  
The amalgamation or sub- division of units at ground and upper floor levels will be 
supported, subject to the requirements of Policy EC2 where loss of employment 
floorspace is proposed.  
Reasoned Justification  
11.9 Crawley is a leading Town Centre within the sub -region, popular with residents and 
visitors, and represent a key location for retail, leisure, employment, and increasingly 
residential uses. Crawley’s strong shopping offer is the  core factor that shapes the 
heart of the Town Centre, and will continue to be moving forward, supported by a 
range of other main town centre uses that provide interest and variety. However, in 
challenging times for the retail sector, it is vital that Craw ley Town Centre is planned 
for in a positive and flexible manner that enables it to respond effectively to change 
so that it is able to retain its long- term vitality and viability and continue to be a 
thriving and competitive town centre.  
11.10  On 1 Septem ber 2020 the Use Class Order was revised in order to allow for greater 
flexibility for changes of use. A newly created Class E ( Commercial, Business and 
Service Use)  includes shops, financial & professional services, restaurants &  cafes, 
gymnasiums, medical and health services, offices, research & development, and 
(subject to matters of amenity) light industrial use. Drinking establishments and hot 
food takeaway s are moved to the Sui Generis Use C lass. Each of these uses, 
particularly if designed with active and engaging frontages, can  contribute positively 
in generating footfall and creating a vibrant sense of place. First and foremost, the 
Town Centre is a main employment area, w ith a retail core at its heart.  Whilst 
continuing to  emphasise the importan t role of a strong retail  core within the Primary 
Shopping Area, P olicy TC1 supports a broad range of uses capable of diversifying 
Crawley’s o ffer that will help ensure the Town C entre remains a vibrant destination 
during the daytime and also through the evening into the night .  
11.11 The Primary Shopping Area contains the primary and secondary shopping frontages 
at ground floor level. The primary shopping frontages are a focus  for uses falling 
within Class E ( Commercial, Business and  Service Use ). The secondary frontages 
are more flexible, enabling the same uses as for the primary shopping frontages, but 
also supporting drinking establishments and hot food take -away uses. At ground floor 
level in both the primary and secondary shopping frontages, flexibility is afforded for 
other appropriate main town centre uses and town centre neighbourhood facilities 
provided it can be demonstrated through an Economic Statement that the proposed 
use would support the overall vitality and viability of the town centre. This flexible 
approach has historically helped secure the reuse of vacant units, helping  to 
generate footfall and activity . 
11.12  Within the Primary Shopping Area, the use of upper floors for main town centre uses, 
town centre neighbourhood facilities (Policy TC2) and residential use will be 
supported provided this is consistent with the ‘Agent of Change’ principle with 
regards to matters of residential amenity, and with Policy EC2 where a loss of 
employment floorspace is proposed.  
11.13  It is not the intention to support residential development at the expense of the Town 
Centre as a main employment area, and whilst the principle of residential is 
supported in many cases, it is vital that a balance is struck to ensure that the retail 
and economic role of the Town Centre is not undermined. Residential development 
will not be acceptable in locations where this would impact negatively on the vitality CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 139 and viability of the Town Centre, and residential development that would undermine 
the function of  the Town Centre as a main employment area will be refused. The 
Primary Shopping Area should retain a retail -led economic focus, particularly through 
promoting active frontages and an engaging street scene. Therefore, residential use 
will not be acceptable at ground floor level in the Primary Shopping Area.  
 
Town Centre Neighbourhood 
11.14 Crawley Town Centre is a sustainable location for residential development, as 
recognised through the mixed use allocations of Policy  TC3 (Key Opportunity Sites 
within the Town Centre Boundary) and also through its identification under Policy H2 
(Key Housing Sites) as a broad housing location. The Town Centre residential population has  grown significantly in recent years , both as a result of planned 
developments and also  through Permitted Development. This has meant the number 
of residents living in the Town Centre has increased significantly  and, from a starting 
point of 214 residential units in 2014, there are now  over 1,000 dwellings in the Town 
Centre, and a residenti al population of around 1,150 people. It is anticipated that, 
over the Plan period to 203 7, a further 2,200 dwellings will come forward in the Town 
Centre, bringing the total to just over 3,000 residential units.  
11.15  As a planned New Town, Crawley is des igned on the ‘neighbourhood principle’; that 
is, the town has been developed on the basis of planned neighbourhoods, each 
designed to provide its resident s with sustainable local access to the facilities and 
services that are required to meet the day -to-day needs. It is though recognised that 
the Town Centre , having increased its residential population over a relatively short 
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 140 timeframe, lacks some of the supp orting facilities that Crawley’s purpose- planned 
neighbourhoods benefit from.  The provision of neighbourhood facilities can support 
the needs of town centre residents, and if carefully planned, can help generate 
activity that enhances Town Centre vitality and viability, and can make for an efficient 
use of disused space, particularly at upper floor level.   
Policy TC2: Town Centre Neighbourhood Facilities  
To facilitate the changing role of Crawley Town Centre, development of town centre 
neighbourhood facilities to meet the needs of its growing residential population will be 
supported. Such Town C entre neighbourhood f acilities  fall broadly within Use Classes E 
(Commercial, business and service), F1 (non- residential institutions) and F2 (local 
community uses)  and may include:  
i. Local shopping facilities;  
ii. Community facilities, including community halls, flexible community space, and 
space for religious or faith activities;  
iii. Healthcare;  
iv. Education;  
v. Leisure provision;  
vi. Accessible  high quality green, open or recreational amenity space.  
Other uses that would demonstrably meet the needs of the Town Centre’s residential 
population, will also be supported.  
In all cases, Town Centre neighbourhood f acilities must support, and not undermine, the 
vitality and viabilit y of the Town Centre. Where the provision of town centre 
neighbourhood facilities would result in a net loss of employment floorspace, the 
requirements of Policy EC2 must be met.  
Reasoned Justification  
11.16  With an increasing residential population, the Town Centre is beginning to become a neighbourhood in its own right. However, the rapid nature of this growth, combined 
with a significant proportion of the residential coming forward through Prior Approval 
(and consequently  currently with no developer contributions), has meant that the 
Town Centre does not benefit from the same  range of supporting facilities and 
services as Crawley’s purpose- built neighbourhoods.  
11.17  The Crawley Retail, Commercial Leisure, and Town Centre Neighbourhood Needs 
Assessment (2020) has consider ed in further detail  whether sufficient supporting 
infrastructure, facilities and services are in place to support the growing Town Centre 
population.  The assessment finds that Crawley Town Centre currently provides local 
residents with good access to shops, services, leisure activities and community 
facilities, and does not identify  any pressing gaps within these sectors that are 
forecast to arise as a result of anticipated population growth within the Town Centre. 
Notwithstanding this, the study recognises that both leisure and community facilities 
can both play an active role in contributing to the functionality of the Town Centre and 
identif ies a growing need for health care facilities, including GP and dental services.  
11.18  The Town Centre is a main employment area, and in many cases town centre neighbourhood facilities will perform an employment function. However, where 
proposed town centre neighbourhood facilities would not provide an employment 
function, and would result in a loss of employment floorspace, it will be necessary to demonstrate through an Economic Statement that the requirements of Policy EC2 
are met. Where town centre neighbourhood facilities are proposed, these should not under mine the operation of existing uses, as per the NPPF ‘agent of change’ 
principle, and it will be necessary to demonstrate how the proposed use supports, CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 141 and does not undermine, town centre vitality and viability. Again, this should be set 
out through an Ec onomic Statement.  
Town Centre Key Opportunity Sites   
11.19 There are a number of under -utilised Key Opportunity S ites within the Town Centre 
Boundary  that present significant scope for development to help accommodate 
identified needs in sustainable and accessible locations. The Local Plan seeks to 
secure the regeneration and improvement of brownfield sites through  standalone and 
mixed -use development that  helps to support and diversify Crawley’s role as a sub -
regional centre, enhance s the vitality  and viability  of the Town C entre, provide 
facilities for new and existing residents, strengthens the town’s non retail employment 
base, improves links between different areas of the Town C entre, and creates a good 
living and working environment .  
11.20  Recognising the identified need for both  employment  and residential land, the Town 
Centre Key Opportunity Sites  should seek to deliver development comprising main 
town centre uses or mixed -use development that  comprises  residential use with 
either  main town centre uses  and/or  town centre neighbourhood facilities .   
Policy TC3: Town Centre Key Opportunity Sites 
The following  Town Centre Key Opportunity Sites  are identified for development that  
enhances town centre vitality and viability  and helps to  meet  the economic and housing 
needs of the borough:  
• Telford Place, Three Bridges ; 
• Crawley Sta tion and Car Parks ; 
• County Buildings ; 
• Land North of the Boulevard;  
• Crawley College (mixed use development with priority for education) ; 
• Cross Keys ; 
• MOKA .  
At these sites, development will be supported where it is for:  
a. main town centre u ses, or  
b. mixed use development for residential and main town centre uses and/or town 
centre neighbourhood facilities .  
It should be demonstrated that :  
i. the development positively contributes to the  vitality and viability of Crawley Town 
Centre and sustainable economic growth and job creation in the borough; and 
ii. where retail use is  proposed outside the Primary Shopping Area,  that the 
sequential and (where applicable) the impact tests (as per Policy TC5)  are 
satisfied ; and  
iii. where a net loss of employment land or floorspace is proposed, the requirements 
of Policy EC2 are satisfied; and  
iv. where no residential is proposed, the development will not undermine the delivery 
of a minimum of 1,500 net dwellings cumulatively across the sites, nor the delivery 
of the overall minimum housing figure set out in Policy H1; and 
v. where residential forms part of development, the requirements of Local Plan Policy 
H3c are satisfied.  
For the Crawley College site, any development must accord with an appropriate master 
plan agreed with the Local Planning Authority and covering the whole campus and will be 
require d to demonstrate that it can be achieved in a manner that prioritises the ongoing 
viability and fu nction of Crawley College as a Further E ducation facility.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 142 Reasoned Justification  
11.21 The council wishes to encourage the regeneration and efficient use of  under -utilised 
sites within the Town Centre B oundary , particularly where this will maximise the 
potential of outworn buildings and underused land . Development at the Town Centre 
Key Opportunity Sites should support and diversify Crawley’s role as a primar y sub-
regional centre, enhancing the vitality of the Town C entre, and  support ing economic 
and residential  growth. There is a real opportunity  to provide residential development 
in a highly sustainable location, and  to unlock modern commercial space 
development which  that will uphold the Town C entre’s role as a provider of significant 
business and professional services employment. There is also significant scope to 
maximise opportunities to provide neighbourhood  facilities for new residents, improve 
the links between different areas of the Town C entre and create a good living and 
working environment.  
11.22 The Town  Centre is needing to adapt and evolve to remain competitive in a changing 
economic climate. Policy T C3 applies a flexible approach to support a range of 
appropriate development typologies on the Town Centre Key Opportunity Sites. 
Development  at these sites  has significant potential to accommodate a mix of uses  
and take a balanced approach in meeting the  economic and housing need s of the 
borough. The Town C entre is  a highly sustainable location for residential 
development and, given Crawley’s significant level of housing need and constrained 
housing land supply, the Town Centre Key Opportunity Sites will make an important contribution to housing del ivery. At least 1,500 dwellings are anticipated across all of 
these sites, as part of mixed use proposals. A mix of uses on these sites will ensure 
the Town C entre’s economic function is retained and enhanced, whilst provid ing the 
opportunity to accommodate town centre neighbourhood facilities and, where located adjacent to public realm or road frontages, ensure active frontages are provided. 
Requirements set out in Policy H3c must also be adhered to when designing a 
scheme which includes  a residential element within the Town C entre.     
11.23 Some proposals, which would be of significant benefit to the vitality  of the Town 
Centre and help to meet other needs within the borough, may not be able to 
accommodate residential into schemes for operational or viability reasons. In these 
cases, information will be required to demonstrate how the proposals will deliver 
wider social and economic benefits and that the development as propos ed would not 
impact unacceptably on the ability of the council to meet objectively assessed 
housing need.  B1 office uses would also meet an identified need, and leisure uses 
would also support the regeneration of the Town C entre.  The council, working with 
WSCC and Crawley College through One Public Estate, has aspirations to create a 
commercial eastern gateway with significant new office presence on the Town Hall  
and County Buildings sites. The Employment Land Trajectory anticipates 
approximately 14,000sq m Civic and B1 floorspace on the Town Hall site, and 
5,000sqm B1 floorspace on the County Buildings site.   
11.24 This Policy identifies  specific Key Opportunity Sites where mixed- use development is 
promoted. Policy H2 identifies other sites within the Town Centre that are specifically 
for residential development, and identifies the whole Town Centre as a broad location 
for future housing in the anticipation that other sites may come forward over the Plan 
period.   
Active and Engaging Frontages  
11.25  The role of Crawley Town Centre is changing, and to help support  its ongoing 
competitiveness, the Local Plan is positive in encouraging a range of main town 
centre uses, neighbourhood facilities, residential , and mixed- use development. 
These uses can all contribute to the vitality and viability of the Town Centre, but new CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 143 development must be carefully planned and designed to ensure that it engages and 
interacts positively with the public realm.  
11.26  The use of active frontages, where there is an active visual engagement between the 
public realm and the ground floors  of buildings , generates  vibrancy and can 
encourage footfall. Active frontages can be incorporated into a range of mai n town 
centre developments to ensure that ground floor development adjacent to the public realm contributes positively to the Town Centre’ s overall sense of place and its role 
as a location for people to visit, live and enjoy.  
11.27  Conversely, poorly designed development that does not appropriately engage with 
the public realm can undermine the Town Centre environment. Inactive frontages,  
such as blank façades  or closed window displays,  can create a hostile and 
unwelcoming aesthetic that reduces legibility and vibrancy, and should be avoided.  
Policy TC4: Active and Engaging Frontages  
Within the Town Centre Boundary, development at ground floor level will be required to 
achieve active frontages that engage positively with the public realm to promote a sense 
of vibrancy. Blank façades , or the appearance of blank façades , onto the public realm 
should be avoided.  
Developments directly adjacent to public open space, whether street, form al or informal 
open space, must:  
a) Provide a positive interface;  
b) Improve the visual and environmental qualities of a place;  
c) Improve  the legibility of a place;  
d) Consider the rhythm, pattern and harmony of openings relative to its enclosure;  
e) Pay careful attention to the architectural expression of entrances, corners and 
projections ; and 
f) Consider durability, maintenanc e, colour and pattern of façades.  
Reasoned Just ification  
11.28  As the range of Town Centre uses becomes more diverse, the incorporation of active frontages  into development  can play a key role in ensuring that a positive interaction 
is retained with the street scene. Carefully designed frontages will help generate 
activity and interest, supporting the overall vitality and vibrancy  of the Town Centre . 
Development that is adjacent to the public realm  (whether the street, or 
formal /informal public space, including parks) must provide a positive interface to the 
public realm.  
11.29  In doing so, the positive relationship between a development and its adjacent public 
realm will better integrate developmen t into the urban fabric, promoting activity, 
interest and a sense of safety to its setting. This quality is assisted where the front 
façade of buildings, including the main entrance, face and open towards the street. 
The objective of achieving active front ages can be realised through a variety of 
means. Overall, the desirable outcome is avoiding blank walls to increase visual 
interest, generate activity and improve surveillance.  As residents will seek privacy, 
ground floor dwellings with windows fronting onto public realm or streets , unless 
carefully designed, could result in a blank façade as residents use blinds or curtains 
permanently. The incorporation of other uses attracting visitors at ground floor level 
can help create activity.   
Town Centre First  
11.30  The Local Plan vision recognises the vital role of Crawley Town Centre in providing a 
social, employment, cultural, entertainment and retail focus for people and CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 144 communiti es within Crawley and the wider area, and supports its evolution as a 
healthy and competitive centre.  As recognised by national planning policy, it is 
important to support the function of t own centres, directing the development of main 
town centre uses to the Town Centre in the first instance, and ensuring that where 
main town centre uses are proposed outside the Town C entre or neighbourhood 
centres, that these do not result in a significant adverse impact on the Town Centre 
itself, or other centres within the retail catchment. The Local Plan responds to these 
national objectives by setting out requirements for the NPPF sequential and impact 
tests within a local context.  
Policy TC5: Town Centre First  
Proposals for main town centre uses in Crawley will follow the NPPF ‘ town centre first’ 
approach, with development directed to the most sequentially preferable and sustainable 
locations.  
Development of main town centre uses in edge- of-centre or out -of-centre locations will be 
permitted where it can be demonstrated that:  
a) the proposed development cannot be met on more sequentially preferable sites, 
having applied the sequential test; and  
b) for retail or leisure use, the development will not have a significant adverse impact on 
the vitality and viability , including local consumer choice and trade,  of Crawley Town 
Centre, Neighbourhood Parades,  or other centres within the retail catchment , as 
existing and planned.  
In assessing the impact of edge- of-centre or out -of-centre retail development under part 
b), an impact assessment will be required for development of 500sqm gross floorspace or 
greater.  
Existing out -of-centre retail locations at County Oak  Retail Park and London Road Retail 
Park have an established retail warehouse function and should remain the foc us for any 
out-of-centre retail proposals . These locations are not designated  retail centres, and 
therefore any retail or leisure development will be required to satisfy the sequential impact 
tests as per parts a) and b) above.  
Neighbourhood Parades are Local Centres in Crawley’s retail hierarchy. Development at 
the Neighbourhood Parades will not be subject to the NPPF sequential or impact tests, 
though must meet the requirements of Local Plan Policy EC11.  
Reasoned Justification  
11.31  Both retail and leisure uses represent a key focus of Crawley ’s Town Centre offer, 
and edge- of-centre and out -of-centre proposals have the potential to impact  
negatively  upon town centre vitality and viability. Therefore, where main town centre 
uses  are proposed in either  edge -of-centre or out -of-centre locations, it  will be  
necessary to demonstrate that the requirements of the NPPF sequential test are 
satisfied, with development first directed to town centre locations before other, less 
sequentially preferable, locations can be considered.   
11.32  For the purposes of policy interpretation, for retail uses Town Centre sites are 
defined as those locations falling within the Primary Shopping Area as identified on 
the Local Plan Map. Sites falling outside of the Primary Shopping Area, though within 
the Town Centre Boundary, are defined as edge -of-centre sites and these  are the 
next most sequentially preferable sites.  With the exception of the Neighbourhood 
Parades, all locations beyond the Town Centre Boundary, in retail terms, represent 
out-of-centre lo cations. All other main town centre uses,  unless otherwise stated  
should be directed to sites within the Town Centre Boundary, before edge- of-centre CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 145 (within 300 metres of the Town Centre Boundary) or out -of-centre locations are 
considered.   
11.33  Crawley’s  Neighbourhood Parades perform an important local function, offering a 
range of shops and services to meet the day -to-day needs of residents. Each 
neighbourhood centre serves a localised catchment in the region of 2,500 homes, 
and their operation is akin t o that of a local centre. Given the important local role of 
the Neighbourhood Parades, Policy EC5 recognises these as appropriate locations 
for retail, and the NPPF sequential and impact tests will not apply at the 
Neighbourhood Parades. Development will however be required to comply with Local 
Plan Policy EC11 (Neighbourhood Centres).  
11.34  County Oak Retail Park and London Road Retail Park provide a significant out -of-
centre retail warehouse offer. These locations are not designated as centres, and applic ations for main town centre uses in these locations will be required to satisfy 
the requirements of the NPPF sequential, and as required, impact tests.  
11.35  As identified through Policy EC5, office development within the designated Main 
Employment Areas, and at sites outside the Town Centre Boundary that are within 
500 metres of a public transport interchange, will be exempt from the sequential test. 
This reflects the approach of protecting and supporting the established economic 
function of the Main Employment Areas as a focus for economic growth. As per 
Policy EC6, hotel and visitor accommodation development within the Gatwick Airport 
boundary will also be exempt from the sequential test.  
11.36 There is capacity for up to 10,000sqm convenience retail floorspace and up to 
29,700sqm comparison retail floorspace over the Plan period to 2036 . Where retail or 
leisure development is proposed outside of the Town Centre Boundary, impact on 
the vitality and viability of Crawley T own Centre, Neighbourhood Centres,  and other 
centres within the retail catchment as existing and planned, will be a material 
planning consideration.   
11.37  Notwithstanding the relative strength of Crawley Borough as a whole, the Town 
Centre specifically has suffered a fall in market share of overall spending at physical 
stores in the last decade as shoppers have turned to online shopping and out -of-
centre retailers. This trend has potential to ‘chip away’ at the vitality and viabi lity of 
the Town Centre. Edge -of-centre and out -of-centre retail development, even where 
this is of a quantum that falls beneath the NPPF threshold of 2,500sqm, has the 
potential to impact negatively on the health of the Town Centre. Therefore, for retail 
development, a locally specific threshold of 500sqm gross floorspace is set as the 
point at which a proportionate retail impact assessment will be required. For leisure 
development, the NPPF threshold of 2,500sqm as the trigger for undertaking an 
impact as sessment will apply.  
11.38  Retail planning applications may take a number of forms, including for standalone 
development , extensions that would result in a gross  retail  floorspace increase, or 
applications to vary the range of goods sold from an existing retail unit. In all cases, it 
will be important that matters of impact on the Town Centre , Neighbourhood Parades  
and other centres within the retail catchment are appropriately  considered and 
evidenced by the applicant to ensure there is not a significant adverse effect arising 
from the proposed development.   
11.39  The impact of edge -of-centre or out -of-centre retail or leisure development will be 
determined by a number of factors, including (but not limited to) forecast trade draw and the extent to which the type of development proposed is considered to compete 
with or complement existing and planned town centre uses on a like- for-like basis. As 
such, where the relevant impact threshold is triggered, edge- of-centre or out -of-
centre retail or leisure proposals will be required to demonstrate that the CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 146 development will not result in a significant adverse impact on the T own Centre or 
deliverability of planned investment, particularly at the Town Centre Key Opportunity 
Sites identified by Policy TC3. Applications should be accompanied by a 
proportionate impact assessment to demonstrate that the proposal is acceptable in 
impact terms, making clear how the proposed  development would complement, 
rather than compete with, the current/future town centre , neighbourhood centre offer , 
and the offer of other centres in the retail catchment . 
11.40  The Town Centre Supplementary Planning Document  (2016) provides  further 
guidance on the application of the sequential  and impact test s in Crawley.  This 
document will be updated as set out in the Local Development Scheme.  
 
  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 147 Housing   
 
 
Delivering Housing to meet Local Needs and Affordable Homes for Crawley and 
Reducing Homelessness: Housing  
By 2037 , 5,300  new homes will have been built to support the needs of the growing 
population. A mix of new homes will be designed for residents in all stages of life. These will 
be built in locations which respect the town’s unique development and design principles and 
preserve the most valued of the town’s environmental features.  
 
 
  
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 148 Housing Delivery  
12.1 The population of Crawley has been rising significantly over the past three decades, 
increasing by about 22% from 88,750 in 1991 to 106,600 in 2011 , it now stands at 
approximately  113,500 residents . In Crawley, population growth has been driven 
strongly by natural change (i.e. births outnumbering deaths), due to the typically 
younger population structure reflecting its New Town history. Crawley also sees a 
notable level of international migration and net out -migration  compared  to other parts 
of the country. Crawley’s population is expected to grow by  over 16%  over the period 
2019- 203992 to reach  135,262 residents.   
12.2 The Northern West Sussex Housing Market Area overlaps closely  with the Crawley 
Travel to Work Area and is charac terised by a high level of self -containment , 
reflecting the strength of Gatwick Airport and Manor Royal . However, whilst the 
labour market area extends to include Horley, Redhill, Leatherhead and Dorking 
(essentially extending north to the M25), there is a significant difference in house prices in the authorities north of this  Housing Market Area .    
12.3 Crawley is a compact borough, with developable land suitable for housing  further 
constrained by the presence of the  airport in  the north of the borough. The town’s 
recent  history as a twentieth century New T own means the area was 
comprehensively planned and built out on a neighbourhood basis. A further 
neighbourhood was added in the 1990s (Maidenbower), and the most recent  
neighbourhood,  Forge Wood,  located to the North East of the built -up area,  is now 
under  construction to provide around 1,900 dwellings supported by  neighbourhood 
community facilities. In addition to these neighbourhood developments and limited intensification of the small areas of unconstrained land within the built -up area , a 
further new neighbourhood beyond the borough boundary to the west (Kilnwood Vale)  in Horsham District  is also under construction.   
Chapter Content  
12.4 This chapter identifies policies that  support appropriate residential development 
within the borough in line with the vision and priorities of this Local Plan  Review . It 
sets the housing provision target for the projected Plan period and identifies key sites 
and policies to support the delivery of housing within the borough.  
The Key Issues  
Past House Building:  
12.5 The number of dwellings built each year has varied considerably in Crawley . 
Following a peak in house building in 2007/08, there was a significant reduction in 
completions, despite  a considerable number of planning permissions granted. This 
was largely due to the national economic downturn. Since the preparation and 
adoption of the current Crawley Borough Local Plan in 2015, delivery has been 
increasing, and completions have signifi cantly exceeded the average annual 
requirement set out in the adopted Plan (340 dwellings per annum). Consequently, Crawley comfortably passed the government’s national Housing Delivery Test in 
2018 and 2019 , scoring 181%  and 235% respectively . 
12.6 Notwithstanding this, delivery fell short of the 2015 Local Plan Housing Trajectory. 
This predicted a peak in delivery in 2017/18, whereas  that year actually saw delivery 
                                                 
92 2014-Based Population Projections, Northern West Sussex S trategic Housing Market Assessment (2019) Iceni 
Projects  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 149 fall in comparison with 2016/ 17. Failure to achieve the levels of delivery detailed i n 
the Housing Trajectory has primarily  been due to delays in the coming forward of a 
number of key site allocations.  Windfalls on the other hand have been higher than 
anticipated, particularly in the form of developments benefiting from permitted 
development rights for the conversion of offices to dwellings. Of the 2,490 gross 
completions  over 2015- 20 32%  came from developments benefiting from these 
permitted development rights , where extraordinary densities  have been achieved that 
would not otherwise have been approved through a formal planning application.  
 
Fig 5: Gross Housing Comp letions  in Crawley 2007/8 –  2019/20  
Housing Need:  
12.7 The NPPF requires local authorities to demonstrate that they are meeting the full, 
objectively assessed needs for housing providing  that this is consistent with the 
policies of the Framework. Key sites which are critical to housing delivery should be 
identified alongside an annual supply of ‘deliverable’ sites to provide a five -year 
supply of housing measured against the local authority’s housing requirement. Local 
authorities are also required to ensure choice and competition in the housing market. 
A supply of specific, ‘developable’ housing sites or broad locations for growth, for 
years  6-10, should also be identified and, where possible, for years 11- 15.  
12.8 Crawley’s total annual housing need , based on the Standard Method,  is 75 0 
dwellings per year.  
MHCLG Standard Method Housing Need Calculation  
Households 202 1 48,516 
Households 20 31 54,218 
Change in Households  5,702 
Per Annum Change  570 
Affordability Ratio (2020 ) 9.05 
Affordability Uplift to Household Growth  31.56 % 
Total Need (dwellings per annum)  750 
 
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 150 Housing Land Supply:  
12.9 Local authorities are encouraged to deliver a wide range of high quality homes, to 
widen opportunities for home ownership and to create sustainable, inclusive and 
mixed communities. In doing so, planning authorities should plan for a mix of housing 
based on current and future demographic trends, market trends and the needs of 
different groups in the community (i.e. families, elderly , and people with disabilities).  
12.10  Using a flexible approach, empty hous es and buildings should be brought back into 
residential use and where appropriate, powers of compulsory purchase used more widely. Planning policies should avoid the long term protection of sites and land 
allocations should be regularly reviewed. Proposals for mixed tenure residential 
development should generally be approved where there is an identified need for 
additional housing provided there are no reasons why development would be 
inappropriate.  
12.11  Crawley’s development as a series of comprehensive neighbourhoods, many of which have also accommodated a significant amount of infill housing in the last 
decade, means that the capacity of the built up area to accommodate further housing 
is limited. The planned areas of open space (both formal and informal) within the 
neighbourhoods are clearly highly valued by local residents for their amenity and 
recreational value. The tight relationship between the Built -Up Area Boundary and 
the borough’s administrative boundary further limits capacity. The need to safeguard 
land for a potential second runway at Gatwick Airport, together with the noise 
contours associated with both a single and potential southern runway sc enario, limit s 
the potential for additional housing in the northern parts of the borough. In line with 
Policy EP4, h ousing development will not be permitted in noise contours above the 
60dB LAeq 16hr noise threshold both for the existing and potential sout hern runway.  
Areas on the periphery of Crawley, both within and outside the borough boundary, 
will continue to be assessed in partnership with the adjoining authorities.  
12.12  As the land within Crawley is constrained, it is anticipated that the adjoinin g 
authorities will be asked to meet  approximately 5 0% of Crawley’s housing need. 
However, this is predominantly in the form of market housi ng, where the market has 
choice. Duty to Cooperate discussions will include reference to the need to address 
meeting Crawley’s critical affordable housing need,  in particular where developments 
are close to Crawley’ s boundaries, although t his is unlikely to meet Crawley’s full 
unmet affordable need. This places a greater emphasis on the need to secure 
affordable housing from those schem es within the borough, whereby the council’s 
percentage  affordable requirement achieves significantly less if also accounting for 
the out of borough housing provision. Therefore , the c ouncil intends to robustly 
defend its affordable housing  policy on residential developments , particularly through 
on-site provision of affordable housing,  within the borough.  
Crawley’s Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment  
12.13 To de termine a realistic assumption for the quantum of housing land supply  within 
the borough, a Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) has been 
undertaken93, and forms part of the evidence base for the Local Plan. The primary 
role of the SHLAA is:  
• The identification of sites potentially suitable for housing devel opment;  
• An assessment of the housing potential and the capacity of these sites;  
• An assessment of their suitability, availability and achievability; and 
• An assessment of the likely timeframe for development of these sites.  
 The SHLAA does not determine whet her a site should be progressed through the 
Local Plan process as a housing allocation, nor does it automatically mean that 
planning permission is certain. It merely carries out an assessment of sites that could 
                                                 
93 Crawley Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (September 2020) CBC  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 151 be suitable for housing development , and whether and when such sites could be 
developed.   
12.14  Taking into account the suitability, availability, achievability and deliverability of 
housing sites within the borough, the SHLAA has identified a housing land supply  
which provides a total of  6,461 net dwellings  including windfalls  over the period 2019-
3794. Over the Plan period (i.e. excluding those built during 2019/20 and 2020/21) 
this amounts to 5,316  net dwellings.  
Crawley’s Windfall Allowance  
12.15 The NPPF states that local planning authorities can make an allowance for windfall 
sites in the housing land supply, if compelling evidence is put forward that such sites have and will consistently become available. This allowance should be realistic, having regard to the Strategic Housing Land Availabilit y Assessment, hi storic windfall 
delivery rates, and expected trends.  
12.16 It is anticipated that  an average of 90  dwellings per annum  will come forward through 
windfall sites  over the period 2021- 37, amounting to 1,440 dwellings altogether 
during the Plan period , as detailed in the council’s Housing Trajectory .  
Urban Extensions: ‘At Crawley’  
12.17  Over recent years, increasing numbers of houses are being built on the peripheries of Crawley’s urban and administrative boundaries. Whilst, in some cases, this has 
been promoted through joint planning between Crawley and neighbouring authorities 
to come forward as comprehensive new neighbourhoods, such as Kilnwood Vale 
(2,650 new dwellings
95), in most other cases this has come forward in piecemeal 
individual developments of between 30 and 600 new dwellings at a time, tacked on to 
the existing urban infrastructure.  
12.18  Well planned urban extensions which provide comprehensive, sustainable new 
neighbourhoods with local facilities and services, relate well to their rural landscape 
character and protect the setting of Crawley’s neighbourhoods could form an 
important way to meet Crawley’s housing needs. Therefore, the  Local Plan 
acknowledges that other potential urban extensions to Crawley outside its 
administrat ive area could be explored in the future in order to meet the arising 
housing need of the borough. This work will need to test whether this approach is agreed as a sustainable location in the context of the wider Housing Market Area and 
travel to work area,  and whether the existing infrastructure and environmental 
constraints can be resolved
96.  
12.19  In these cases, developments should be laid out and designed to be reflective of their 
location as part of Crawley and should not result in harm  to the setting of the m aster  
planned New Town n or result in urban sprawl n or unplanned merging of settlements. 
They should protect the setting of Crawley’s existing neighbourhoods at the edge of 
the countryside. New development, by its very nature, will always have a si gnificant 
impact on the sense of place, space and open setting of an area, both perceived and 
tangible. Careful analysis is therefore required to assess whether certain elements of 
landscape structure, form, or character are a major component of or contributor to an 
established, recognised and enjoyed rural landscape setting. Not all areas have the 
same capacity to accommodate change without harm to the landscape setting. For 
example, where wide tracts of non- enclosed open fields or grassland exist, there i s 
                                                 
94 Figure is based on the period as shown within the full Housing Trajectory  (1 September  2020 ) to the end of the 
Plan period: 203 7.  
95 The Joint Area Action Plan allocated this neighbourhood for 2,500 new dwellings. The additional 150 dwellings 
is due to planning permissions granted to change the initial use of the land within the allocation boundary.  
96 Consultation Draft Crawley Borough Local Plan Review, paragraph 2.32, Policy H1 and paragraph 12.11 
(2020) CBC  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 152 very limited capacity for change to the rural setting without impacting on the 
character of the area, and the setting of the areas adjacent to it. The proportion, 
scale and extent of these areas provides a sense of space and far reaching and 
expansive vi stas. They provide a perceived and real sense of tranquillity due to the 
extensive absence of buildings and human presence and are important close to Crawley where such areas are very limited. In contrast, areas where the setting is characterised by woodla nds or enclosed country lanes or hedgerow corridors provide 
contained views and a sense of enclosure.    
12.20  In considering urban extensions, t he shared evidence base including the Strategic 
Housing Market Assessment and Economic Growth Assessment should  be referred 
to. Whilst located within Mid Sussex or Horsham Districts, any urban extension on 
the edge of Crawley should be meeting the unmet housing needs arising from 
Crawley, and should therefore meet Crawley’s specific needs for affordable housing, 
housing mix, type, and tenure. The scale of urban extensions could also provide the 
opportunity to meet unmet employment needs, or infrastructure requirements such as 
education and health, and could provide strategic leisure facilities serving the wider 
area.  
12.21  All infrastructure impacts should be considered cumulatively.  Urban extensions 
should meet their own infrastructure needs on site to serve their new residents. It is inevitable that these residents will also access larger scale existing facilities in 
Crawley, including the town centre, leisure facilities and transpor t networks. These 
will also be affected by development within Crawley and it is important that cumulative impacts are assessed and developments fund improvements to ensure 
there is no adverse impact on Crawley’s residents.  In particular, the need for a 
Western Link Road for Crawley has been recognised but it has not yet come forward 
despite the development of Kilnwood Vale. If further urban extensions are proposed to the west of Crawley the route, design and delivery options for this road will need to 
be addressed. Policy ST4 provides more details for the section which would extend 
through Crawley Borough and connect with the A23.   
12.22  Whilst these developments will be outside Crawley’s boundary, the following criteria 
set out below will be used to infor m discussions with neighbouring authorities, 
including through establishing Statements of Common Ground, and potential developers, and the council’s  responses to emerging policies and planning 
applications. Development should only come forward through a Pl an-Led process, 
supported by clear cross -boundary and site- specific Local Plan policies. Where 
appropriate, Joint Area Action Plans would provide the most robust way to ensure 
Crawley’s needs and concerns are fully addressed. Proposals should be supported 
by a comprehensive Masterplan agreed by the relevant authorities (including the 
county council).  
‘At Crawley’ Urban Extensions Key Considerations  
12.23  Housing development through urban extensions on or close to Crawley’s 
administrative borough boundaries will be supported by Crawley Borough Council 
where it can be shown that:  
i. Cumulative infrastructure needs are clearly identified and programmed for delivery in coordination with new development, and the proposal would not result in severe 
cumulative impacts  of the development for existing residents in Crawley, including in 
terms of traffic and transport, flooding and drainage, air quality, town centre and 
community and social facilities;  
ii. If development is proposed to the western side of Crawley, the scoping , design and 
delivery of the comprehensive Western Link Road (connecting from the A264 to the A23, north of County Oak, Policy ST4) should be agreed and provided prior to the CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 153 completion of properties unless otherwise agreed by the three local authorities: 
Horsham District, Crawley Borough and West Sussex County Councils;  
iii. Crawley’s character as a compact town within a countryside setting, developed on a neighbourhood principle which maximises the use of sustainable transport is 
maintained;  
iv. The design of the urban form and infrastructure is of high quality design which is not 
unnecessarily prominent in the existing landscape setting;  
v. Developments are designed and progressed as comprehensive neighbourhoods 
rather than incremental ad hoc development;  
vi. Neighbourhood centres containing local facilities and services are provided in order 
to meet the day -to-day needs of residents;  
vii. The development helps address unmet development needs arising from Crawley, 
including in relation to housing mix, type, tenure and affordability (including meeting 
the 40% affordable housing levels and agreements in relation to the nomination 
rights for those on the Crawley housing register); complementary employment and 
economic growth needs; social, education and health needs; and strategic  recreation 
and leisure requirements;  
viii. Linkages are maintained from Crawley’s neighbourhoods through new development to the countryside beyond (both in terms of active transport and visual links) as well 
as prioritising sustainable modes of transport links  (public transport, cycling and 
walking routes)  into existing Crawley neighbourhoods and the town centre, making 
car journeys a longer, more circuitous option;  
ix. A landscape character, setting and heritage appraisal has been undertaken which:  
a. identifies the scale, extent and spatial characteristics of the existing 
landscape structure and grain, including natural and man -made features, field 
patterns, views, landscape structure, tranquillity and sense of space or 
enclosure, and provides an understanding of how  they are experienced, used 
and perceived; and this  
b. has led to an assessment of the impact of the development on the landscape character, setting and heritage of the area, and the setting of Crawley’s 
neighbourhoods and development is planned to ensure the key landscape 
features, character areas, areas of tranquillity and settings are protected, and 
the way they can be experienced is enhanced.  
x. Development has been designed and planned to carefully address both its 
connections to existing Crawley neighbourhoods as well as the wider countryside 
beyond, providing defensible boundaries which both prevents inappropriate merging 
of settlements or the effects of urban sprawl and ensures the careful stitching 
together of existing and new built form where appropriat e; 
xi. Ancient woodland or veteran trees would not be damaged or lost and an appropriate 
buffer, in accordance with national guidance, is provided between any such trees and 
the edge of the development’s construction. Any TPO protected trees should be 
retained where possible and measures to avoid damage and root compaction should 
be implemented. Where the loss of existing trees is unavoidable, appropriate replacement trees are to be provided;  
xii. Development must incorporate strategic Green Infrastructure throughou t, providing 
ecological linkages, in particular to support pollination, and result in a Net Gain to biodiversity;  
xiii. Development must be designed to exemplar sustainability standards, taking 
advantage of the potential of a masterplanned approach and economies  of scale, CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 154 and must design in tight energy and water efficiency targets from the outset in order 
to futureproof developments for a zero carbon future and a changing climate;  
xiv. Development proposals use bespoke Area Wide Design Assessment tools from the outset which will aim to set out and enable development proposals to identify, 
understand and fit in with the overall form and layout of their surroundings.   
Housing for Older People and those with Disabilities:  
12.24 Although Crawley has a greater proportion of younger people than the rest of the 
south east, with 60% of its population under 45 years of age, the need to provide 
housing for older people is an increasingly important issue for Crawley, with 14% of 
the population aged over 65
97. The number of people aged 65 and over has been 
increasing mor e quickly than other age groups  with projected growth in this age 
group predicted to increase by  63%, over the 20 year period to 2039. It accounts  for 
35% of the total projected change, with a growth of 9,600 persons between 2019- 39 
aged 65+98.   
12.25 Housing elderly people, and meeting their needs through either support or care, is a 
complex matter. Many older people may not want or need specialist accommodation 
or care and may wish to stay or move to general housing that is already suitable, 
such as bungalows, or homes which can be adapted to meet a change in their needs. New dwellings, as set out in Policy D D2, should be designed to accessibility 
standards which allow for future adaptation as the circumstances of the occupiers change, allowing for longer supported independent living.  
12.26 Providing suitable and alternative housing for older people to move into  can free up 
houses that are under occupied. New housing built to more modern standards of 
sustainability is also attractive to older people as this offers lower maintenance and 
running costs. While housing for older people may require special consideration with 
regards to design, proximity to facilities and security, it is usually considered to be the 
least intrusive form of new housing development, with a lower impact on traffic, often resulting in a reduced parking requirement, and is thereby more readily accepted by 
existing local communities. For this reason, provided the densities of any proposals 
ensure the capacity of the site is maximised, any site considered appropriate for 
housing development would be positively considered for older people’s 
accommodation through the decision- making process , where this also offers to meet 
the required affordable housing and affordable care needs (for both C2 and C3 Use 
Class development) .  
12.27  The Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA)
99 considers the accommodation 
needs of older people and those with disabilities together, due to the clear links 
between age and disability. The 2011 Census indicated that 29% of households 
within Crawley contained someone with a long term health problem or  disability. Of 
these, 52.6% were aged 65 and over, and a further 21.3% were aged between 50 
and 64. This is projected to increase by around 7,000 (41%) in Crawley between 
2019 and 2039.  In particular, there is projected to be a large rise in the number of  
people with dementia (68%) and those with mobility problems (63%).   
12.28  Evidence identifies a need for an additional 1,027 units (51 per annum) to meet the population’s specialist accommodation need for older people (retirement/sheltered 
housing; enhanc ed sheltered and extra- care housing) and an additional 1,029 
residential and nursing care bedspaces over the 20 year period from 2019 to 2039. 
Of these, 56% are anticipated to be in the market sector, with the remaining 44% 
needed in affordable tenures.  
                                                 
97 2018- based subnational population projections (March 2020 ) ONS , Figures for 2020  
98 Northern West Sussex Strategic Housing Market Assessment ( 2019) Iceni Project  
99 Northern West Sussex Strategic Housing Market Assessment, Chapter 10 (2019) Iceni Projects  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 155  
12.29  Supporting working- age adults who have care and support needs to be as 
independent as possible is equally important. Extra Care Housing can again 
contribute to meeting the housing and care requirements of some of these adults.  
West Sussex County Council sees E xtra Care Housing  as an all age housing solution 
and is keen to see barriers (such as aged over 55) removed from the criteria for this type of housing going forward.  On this basis, specific allocations for housing for older 
people will also apply for the provision of Extra Care Housing for all ages.  
12.30  West Sussex County Council  has a target of 500 new E xtra Care Housing homes  
across West Sussex by 2025. T his target requires a development programme of at  
least 100 new homes each year, work ing in partnership with Districts and Boroughs, 
and with housing providers such as Registered Providers with experience of 
development of E xtra Care Housing . Although there are exi sting Extra Care Housing 
schemes in Crawley , there is still,  by the available measures, an undersupply of 
Extra Care Housing. T herefore , there is a need  for further development in C rawley  in 
order to meet the estimated demand for two schemes of 60 homes ea ch over the 
Plan period.  
12.31  Extra Care Housing schemes can additionally offer services to the local community 
and develop as a community resource, as well as offering employment and training 
opportunities in the local communities they serve.  Mixed tenure schemes of E xtra 
Care Housing located in areas where the care and support provider could recruit, and 
which are well located in terms of local available facilities , will be supported.  
12.32  As Care Home stock forms a very specific part of the housing needs market, it is 
considered this falls within the definition set out in the CBLP for ‘Infrastructure’ which 
confirms that: “infrastructure includes a wide range of services and facilities such 
as”… “health, social infrastructure, community facilities” … Policy IN1: Infrastructure 
Provision, therefore, applies in relation to the protection of existing Care Home 
facilities. Under this Policy the loss of such provision through the redevelopment of 
sites for alternative uses would be prevented unless an equivalent replacement or 
improvement is provided, or there is sufficient alternative offer in the area.  
Local Plan Policies  
Housing Provision 
12.33 The Local Plan provides a supply of housing sites  to support delivery towards 
meeting the needs of present and future generations, whilst reflecting the physical 
constraints of the borough and the other policy objectives within this Plan.  
12.34  These constraints include Local Green Space, designated her itage assets (Listed 
Buildings, Conservation Areas and Scheduled Monuments) , Local Wildlife Sites , 
ancient woodland, structural landscaping, possible airport expansion/aircraft noise,  
and open space and floodplains. These constraints,  together with the tig ht 
relationship between the Built -Up Area Boundary and the borough’s administrative 
boundary , significantly  limit capacity. The exception to this are  the potential 
opportunities which may be found for higher density schemes within a greater mixed 
use Town Centre.  
12.35 It is, therefore , recognised that continued cross -boundary working to understand the 
nature of the wider housing market area is essential to ensure that housing needs 
are being met in an appropriate and functional manner. There  is already a long-
established means of working through  numerous joint evidence base documents, a 
joint Development Plan Document for the West of Bewbush neighbourhood (with 
Horsham District Council), and the Gatwick Diamond Local Strategic Statement and 
Memorandum of Understanding.   CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 156 Strategic Policy  H1: Housing Provision  
The council will positively consider proposals for the provision of housing to meet local 
housing needs, taking a pro- active approach to identifying suitable sites for housing 
development and working to overcome constraints wherever possible, whilst ensuri ng 
against detrimental town -cramming or unacceptable impacts on the planned character of 
the existing neighbourhoods or on residential amenity.  
Proposals that result in a net loss of dwellings will be resisted.  
All reasonable opportunities will be considered including: brownfield sites; surplus green 
space; town centre living; and opportunities on the edge of Crawley, where these are 
consistent with the other policies and proposals in this Local Plan and the principle of 
sustainable development.  
The Local  Plan makes provision for the  development of a minimum of 5,320 net dwellings 
in the borough in the period 202 1 to 2037100.  
This minimum requirement will be broken down into an annual average requirement on a 
stepped basis as follows:  
• Years 1 -5 (2021- 26): 350 dwellings per annum (dpa)  
• Years 6 -10 (2026- 31): 450dpa 
• Years 11 -16 (2031- 37): 220dpa.  
After this supply is deducted from the i dentified housing need of 12,000 over the period 
2021- 37, there will be a remaining unmet housing need, of approximately  6,680 dwellings,  
arising from Crawley over the Plan period. This will arise as follows:  
• Years 1 -5 (2021- 26): 400dpa 
• Years 6 -10 (2026- 31): 300dpa 
• Years 11 -16 (2031- 37): 530dpa 
The council will continue to work closely with its neighbouring authorities, partic ularly 
those which form the Northern West Sussex Housing Market Area, in exploring 
opportunities and resolving infrastructure and environmental constraints in order to meet 
this need in sustainable locations. This will include continued assessment of potential 
urban extensions to Crawley.  
Reasoned Justification  
12.36 The housing figure identified in Policy H1 represents a ‘supply -led’ requirement, and 
reflects the compact nature of the borough, its limited land availability and significant 
environmental, potential airport  expansion and  noise constraints.  
12.37 The majority of housing delivery (against the borough’s housing requirement) will take place in the Years 1 –10 of the P lan period,  beyond which capacity, and 
therefore identified delivery, is expected to be significantly lower (as illustrated in the 
Housing Trajectory). This is primarily  due to the development of Crawley’s new 
neighbourhood of up to  1,900 dwellings , Forge Wood, which forms a major part of 
housing delivery  in the fi rst ten years of the P lan period and is the last remaining 
large area of relatively unconstrained land in the borough (1,038  dwellings of which 
remained outstanding as of April 2020) . The varied nature of housing land supply 
(and associated housing delivery) over the Plan period makes it difficult to identify an 
annual housing delivery target within Policy H1.  Howev er, whilst  an annualised 
average delivery of  332.5 dwellings  per annum is anticipated , a stepped trajectory is 
reflected in the Policy to account for the higher delivery  in the early  and middle part of 
                                                 
100 This includes the additional 10% buffer within Years 1-5 as required by paragraph 73 of the National Planning 
Policy Framework (2019) as detailed in the council’s Housing Trajectory, 1 September  2020  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 157 the Plan period and the lower anticipated levels towards the end . On this basis, 
monitoring of the housing delivery within the borough w ill reflect the planned 
approach taken, rather than suggesting “over delivery” followed by “under delivery”.   
12.38 The council has endeavoured to ensure that every opportunity for residential 
development within the borough has been fully considered through the Local Plan 
process . Additional sites  were proposed through t he council’s “Call for Sites” and t he 
council’s Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment  has been updated following 
the early engagement consultation. A ll sites  have been reassessed to consider those 
which are considered to be suitable for development and either ‘deliverable’ in Years 
1–5 or ‘developable’ in Years 6– 10 or 11– 16, and density levels of allocated sites 
have been reassessed in light of Policy CL4  and the council’s commitment to making 
effective use of land. The SHLAA also identifies a number of sites which are considered suitable for residential development but unlikely to come forward due to 
factors such as ownership and viability, and these sites cannot reasonably be 
expected to count towards housing land supply. However, the council will continue to 
work proactively with landowners to address the key barriers to bringing these sites 
forward. The supply figure should therefore be considered as a minimum.   
12.39 The constrained nature of Crawley’s land supply means that  approximately 44% of 
the borough’s predicted housing need over the 16 years 2021  – 2037  can be met  
within the borough boundaries. The remaining unmet housing need from Crawley, of 
6,680
101, will need to be considered through Duty to Cooperate discussions as part of 
the Local Plan Reviews for the other authorities within the Housing Market Area (primarily Horsham and Mid Sussex along with a small part of  Reigate and Banstead , 
particularly an overlap with Horley ). Currently, the adopted Local Plans for Horsham 
and Mid Sussex districts are anticipated to provide an additional  3,000 dwellings
102, 
above their objectively assessed housing needs, in order to meet Crawley’s unmet 
need. However, through the Local Plan Reviews this figure is likely to change, 
particularly as the Standard Method increases their own housing requirements to above their current adopted Plan commitments (see paragraph 2.28).   
12.40 Opportunities for urban extensions immediately adjoining Crawley’s borough 
boundaries will continue to be explored with Crawley’s neighbouring authorities , 
taking into account the issues set out in paragraphs 12.17 -12.23 above . Efforts will 
be made to include affordable housing provision to meet Crawley’s needs outside of the borough, wherever possible, particularly if these are close to the borough 
boundary.  
Housing Monitoring and Delivery  
12.41 Housing delivery will be continually monitored and reported at least annually through 
the Authority’s Monitoring Report. Delivery will be assessed against the expectations 
of the Local Plan Housing Trajectory, and against the annually updated Housing 
Trajectory . The council will also be monitored through the government’s national 
Housing Delivery Test. This will be based on the annualised average housing target 
set by the Local Plan (where the Plan remains up- to-date)  over a preceding rolling 
three -year period. As the anticipated higher delivery in the first part of the Plan period 
would not be considered as part of the Housing Delivery Test towards the end of the 
Plan period, a stepped target is established in Policy H1, to ensure the borough is 
measured against the realistic position of a constrained and reducing land supply.  
                                                 
101 12,000 dwellings housing need (Standard Method 750 x 16 years) –  5,320 dwellings total supply 2021 – 2037 
(CBC Housing Trajectory, September 2020) = 6,680 dwellings unmet need  
102 1,500 dwellings to be provided in Mid Sussex district (between April 2024 and March 2031: Policies DP4 and 
DP5, Mid Sussex District Plan 2014 – 2031, 2018) and 1,50 0 dwellings to be provided in Hors ham district 
(between April 2021 and March 2031, Horsham District Planning Framework, 2015)  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 158 12.42 Whilst the scope for the council to deliver private development, once planning 
permission is granted, is limited, the council has a history of intervening and 
supporting delivery of stalled development. In addition, the council has a robust own -
build programme. Should delivery rates fall below 95% of the housing requirement, 
through the Housing Delivery Test, the council will be required to prepare an Action 
Plan. This will assess the causes of under -delivery and identify actions to increase 
delivery in fu ture years. However, even where delivery is exceeding or meeting the 
Housing Delivery Test, as part of the council’s monitoring the implementation of 
policies, the progress of key development sites identified by the Plan will be 
assessed and, where these are not coming forward in line with the anticipated 
Housing Trajectory timescales or delivery rates, the council will seek to identify the causes and whether there is scope for support or intervention.  
12.43 However, early delivery will not override the need for a scheme to be policy compliant and meet the expectations of the Local Plan as a whole  for good design and high 
quality schemes.  Furthermore , the limited land supply of the borough makes on- site 
affordable housing delivery imperative , and viability claims suggesting this is slowing 
delivery will not automatically result in a reduction of the council’s expectations for 
this to be provided.  
Key Housing Sites  
12.44 New housing is considered integral to the creation of sustainable neighbourhoods in 
Crawl ey. The council will ensure that new housing opportunities are identified 
according to both land availability and the characteristics of individual neighbourhoods. This approach will respect the town’s unique neighbourhood 
development and design principles  and preserve the most valued of the town’s 
environmental features such as open space and strategic landscaping.  
Policy H2: Key Housing Sites  
The following sites are identified as key housing sites and allocated on the Local Plan 
Map. These are considered to be critical to the delivery of future housing in Crawley and 
are identified as being ‘deliverable’ within the first five years of the Plan ( 2021/22 – 
2025/2 6) or ‘developable’ in years 6– 16 (2026/27  – 2036/3 7)103. To ensure the delivery of 
the overall minimum housing figure set out in Policy H1, as supported by the Housing 
Trajectory, indicative capacity figures for each site are shown in brackets below.  
Deliverable  
• Forge Wood Masterplan Area, Pound Hill ( 1,083  dwellings  outstanding in April 2020)  
• Zurich House, East Park, Southgate ( 53 dwellings)  
• Former TSB site, Russell Way, Three Bridges ( 90 dwellings)  
• Upper Floors, 7 –  13 The Broadway & 1 -  3 Queens Square, Northgate (25 dwellings)  
• Land Adjacent to Sutherland House, Russell Way, Three Bridges ( 30 dwellings)  
• Shaw House, Pegler W ay, West Green ( 33 dwellings)  
• Longley House, Southgate ( 100 dwellings)  
Developable  
• Land at Steers Lane, Forge Wood (185 dwellings) (subject to implementation of 
outline planning permission of CR/2018/0894/OUT, or any amendment thereof, and 
associated Reserved Matters approval(s))  
• Land adjacent to Desmond Anderson, Tilgate (150 dwellings)  
• Land to the southeast of Heathy Farm, Balcombe Road,  Forge Wood (150  dwellings)  
 
                                                 
103 Crawley Borough Council Housing Trajectory,  31 Decem ber 2019  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 159 Housing and Neighbourhood Facilities Site  
• The Imperial, Broadfield Barton (deliverable), 19 dwellings. Development of this site 
must include a drinking establishment (A4 use) and two retail (A1 use) units.  
Town C entre Key Opportunity Sites ( 1,500 net dwellings ); comprising:  
• Telford Place, Three B ridges (deliverable)  
• Crawley Station and Car Parks (deliverable)  
• County Buildings (developable)  
• Land North of the Boulevard (deliverable /developable)  
• Crawley College (d evelopable)  
• Cross Keys ( developable)  
• MOKA (deliverable)  
Housing and Open Space Sites  
• Tinsley Lane, Three Bridges (deliverable)  120 dwellings , mixed use 
recreation/residential. Development of this site must  include:   
i. the replacement of Oakwood Football Club;  
ii. senior  football pitch and facilities;  
iii. a junior 3G football pitch;  
iv. community use arrangements  for the sports pitch facilities ;  
v. enhancement and management for public access of Summersvere Woods;  
vi. on-site publicly accessible pl ay space and amenity greenspac e; 
vii. the provision of allotments.  
Development must also be carefully planned, laid out and designed to minimise potential 
future conflicts and constraints on the  important minerals  function of the adjacent 
safeguarded minerals site.  
Full details of the requirements relating to this site are set out in the Tinsley Lane 
Development Brief .    
• Breezehurst Drive Playing Fields, Bewbush (deliverable ) 65 dwellings , mixed use 
recreation/residential . Development of this site must include:   
i. the retention of good quality pitch provision to the south of the pavilion;  
ii. provision of enhanced pitch dr ainage off -site;  
iii. new or retained provision of changing facilities to be directed towards 
Skelmersdale Walk Playing Fields or other suitably located provision to meet future 
fluctuations in demand for pitch sports ; 
iv. the provision of allotments.  
These requirements are set out in full in the Breezehurst Drive Playing Fields  
Development Brief.  
• Henty Close, Bewbush ( deliverable) 24 dwellings. Development of this site must :  
i. provide a replacement play area of equivalent or better quantity and quality in a 
suitable location.  
• Rushetts Road Play Area, Langley Green (developable) 14 dwellings. Development of 
this site must:  
i. provide a replacement play area of equivalent or better quantity and quality in a 
suitable location.  
Housing, Biodiversity and Heritage  Site 
• Land east of Balcombe Road/ Street Hill, Pound Hill (deliverable) 15 dwellings. The 
design and layout of the development of this site must :  
i. respect its setting outside the built up area and the rural character of the Worth 
Conservation Area ;  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 160 ii. concentrate the residential element and associated infrastructure  towards the  least 
sensitive areas, where possible, and to be located within the southern section of 
the housing, biodiversity and heritage  site; 
iii. reflect, enhance and ensure no significant harm to the local ly designated historic 
parkland;   
iv. allow a suitable unbuilt margin around the archa eologically sensitive Moat;   
v. avoid harm to the species -rich meadow grassland which contributes to the  Local 
Wildlife Sites (LWS) ;  
vi. maintain the woodland vegetation buffer  between the development and the church , 
to retain the historic significance of the context of Worth Church; and  
vii. be accompanied by a long -term commitment to the ecological  enhancement and 
positive management of the remainder of the LWS  (excluding the ponds and 
woodland in the centre and north- east in separate ownership)  for the benefit of 
biodiversity .  
Detailed  and up- to-date ecological and archaeological assessment s must be carried out . 
Where impacts cannot be avoided adequate mitigation and compensation measures will 
be provided to offset any harm caused to the site’s important assets.   
These requirements will be set out in full in a Development Brief.  
Housing for Older People and those with Disabilities  
• Oakhurst Grange, Southgate (developable) 55 dwellings as  residential Class C3 use  
for older people or up to 120 residential rooms as  Class C2 (Residential Home) use.  
• St. Catherine’s Hospice  (developable)  as residential Class C3 use for older people (60 
dwellings)  and/or residential rooms as Class C2 (Residential Home) use.  
Development of each of these sites should specifically  meet the needs of older people, 
either as a care facility  in the form of Extra -Care or Residential Care  or to provide general  
housing desig ned to meet particular  needs of older people and those with disabilities , 
including being wheelchair adapted dwellings meeting Building Regulations Part M, 
Category 3 accessi bility standards.  
Broad Locations  
The remainder of the land within the Town Centre Boundary outside  the identified Town 
Centre Key Opportunity Sites (above) , and Land East of London Road, Northgate  are 
identified as broad locations for housing development in years 6 –10 and 11–15 with the 
capacity to deliver a minimum of 112 and 84 net dwellings respectively.  
Reasoned Justification  
12.45 This Policy demonstrates how the Local Plan make s provision for the delivery of  a 
minimum of  5,320  net additional dwellings in the borough between 2021  and 2037 . 
This includes the  10% additional buffer required within the first five years of the Plan 
to ensure greater competition and choice in the supply of housing land. The council 
has undertaken a Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) which 
identifies land that has th e potential for residential development in the borough. The 
results of the SHLAA are used to demonstrate an annual five- year housing land 
supply and to identify sites that are likely to come forward for residential development 
over the lifetime of the Local Plan.  
12.46 Through the SHLAA process, the council has been able to identify a number of 
deliverable and developable sites to meet the housing target for the Local Plan 
period. In this regard, the council can demonstrate that it can satisfy the 
government’s requirement to identify specific ‘deliverable’ sites to meet the first five 
years housing supply and specific ‘developable’ sites or broad locations for years 6–
10 and 11 -16. It is considered that the additional 10% buffer requirement  is capable 
of being delivered in the period 2021/22  – 2025/26.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 161  
Forge Wood  
12.47 The new neighbourhood of Forge Wood is currently under construction. A large 
proportion of the area allocated on the Local Plan Map benefits from outline planning 
permissio n and an approved masterplan. This is bringing forward up to 1,900 new 
dwellings in addition to a new neighbourhood centre, employment land and social facilities including a primary school and formal areas of public open space and sports 
pitches. The outstanding  1,038  dwellings are anticipated by the Housing Trajec tory to 
be delivered within the Plan period; to be completed by 2030/31.  
12.48 A further developable housing site is identified outside the Mast er Plan area, at 
Heathy Farm (in the south- east corner of the allocation). The site is located close to 
Crawley  Avenue  (A2011) , M23 and Junction 10.  This site is formed of two parcels of 
land, which are joined by a woodland area. Much of the woodland area is ancient 
woodland. Therefore, this site is constrained by noise levels and an ecological buffer 
zone associat ed with the ancient woodland, which must be determined by the 
appropriate surveys. In addition, the site is also likely to need to incorporate on- site 
open space, including allotment provision, which should be designed into a scheme 
from the outset to ensure its satisfactory accommodation.  
12.49 Land at Steers Lane forms a further site which has historically been identified as 
residual land for residential development at Forge Wood. Outline pl anning permission 
for up to 185 dwellings with supporting access, parking, landscaping and open space 
on this site was granted on appeal in February 2020 (CR/2018/0894/OUT), and this 
provides a basis for the bringing forward of the site. At the same time i t is noted that 
this application was assessed against the 2015 Local Plan, and any review of the principle of the acceptability of the site through a new planning application would 
need to be considered against the policies in this plan, including Policy E P4: 
Development and Noise.   
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 162 12.50  Beyond this, there may be opportunities within the masterplan area to consider 
further smaller -scale housing development, as infill opportunities, subject to 
considerations of infrastructure capacity, open space and ameni ty requirements, 
biodiversity and ancient woodland, and the requirements of Policy EP4 relating to 
noise affected areas. Development of residential uses in land affected by the noise 
contours104 above 60dB would not be in accordance with Policy EP4 and would be 
refused.   
Town Centre Housing Sites  
12.51 A number of sites within the Town Centre boundary have been identified as Key 
Opportunity Sites in Policy H2 and TC3. These sites have the capacity to deliver a 
minimum of 1,500 net dwellings cumulatively through mixed -use main town centre 
uses and residential development. Proposals for mixed- use (including non -
residential) development on these sites will be considered favourably providing they 
can demonstrate the delivery of wider vitality and viability benefits to the Town 
Centre, and that their development would not undermine the delivery of a minimum of 
1,500 net dwelling s in the period 2020/21 to 2035/37 and support delivery of the 
overall minimum housing figure set out in Policy H1  (in accordance with Policy TC3). 
The council’s delivery against these targets will be subject to ongoing monitoring and 
identified in the Authority’s Monitoring Report.  Residential proposals coming forward 
within the Town Centre boundary must als o adhere to the location- specific  
requirements set out in Policies TC4: Active Frontages and H3d: Housing Typologies  
Town Centre Residential Sites, in addition to satisfying the other general policies in 
the Plan.     
Housing and Open Space Sites  
12.52 In determining how far Crawley can meet its own housing needs , detailed 
assessments have been carried out to ensur e the town balances  competing land 
uses in a sustainable manner. This includes  landscape character assessments, open 
space and economic growth as sessments  alongside the Urban Capacity Study and 
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessments. Four  sites have been identified and 
allocated on the Local Plan Map for ‘Housing and Open Space’. These are Tinsley Lane, Three Bridges (Developable) , Breezehurst Drive, Bewbush ( Deliverable ), 
Henty Close, Bewbush ( Developable) and Rushetts Road, Langley Green 
(Developable) . The layout of these sites has been considered in more detail to 
ensure they can deliver the quantum of housing within the constraints identified by 
the open space study for meeting recreation al open space needs
105. A development 
brief has been  prepared for two of these sites  (Tinsley Lane and Breezehurst Drive)  
to ensure their development adheres to the requirements of the Open Space, Sport 
and Recreation Study and Playing Pitch Study  (2014) ; critical elements of these are 
set out in the Policy106.  
12.53 Tinsley Lane is located in close proximity to Crawley Goods  Yard which is a 
safeguarded minerals site. Development must be carefully planned, laid out and 
designed to minimise potential future conflicts and constraints on its important 
minerals function.  
12.54 A small housing site to the west of Henty Close  could  enable improved linkages  and 
enhanced urban design and principles of designing out crime, into the new Kilnwood 
Vale neighbourhood at the point of the proposed bus, pedestrian and cycle 
connection. This would result in the need to replace the loss of a  small play area, but 
                                                 
104 As associated  with an additional runway to the south of Gat wick Airport unless otherwise determined.  
105 In accordance with paragraphs 96 and 97 of National Planning Policy Framework (2019) MHCLG  
106 Tinsley Lane Development Brief (April 2017)  and Breezehurst Drive Playing Fields Development Brief.  
 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 163 would include the retention of the two sports pitches and a pavilion associated with 
the playing fields.  
12.55 Rushetts  Road Play Area will also need to provide a replacement play area of better 
quality either within the site’s layout or in an alternative suitable location in order to 
meet the access to play facilities needs for this area of Langley Green. The design 
and l ayout should enhance and improve this site without creating significant harm on 
the amenity of adjoining properties.  
Housing, Biodiversity and Heritage Site  
12.56 Land east of Balcombe Road/ Street Hill has a number of heritage and environmental 
constraints  which must be carefully considered and addressed through the design 
and layout of a development scheme. These include (but are not limited to) : 
i. Forming part of the historic countryside setting of the Grade I listed Church;  
ii. Its allocation within the Worth Conservation Area;  
iii. Its Local Wildlife Site designation (with species -rich meadow grassland as its 
important ecological attribute) ; 
iv. Containing an archaeological sensitive asset: the Moat;  
v. Forming part of an Historic Park and Garden;  
vi. Being located outside th e Built -Up Area Boundary of the town.  
12.57  To ensure an appropriate balance between the need for housing and the important 
heritage and environmental assets and characteristics of the site, a maximum  
capacity of 15 dwellings is considered likely to  be appropriate , subject to careful 
layout and design which clearly addresses the constraints associated with the site, 
including those covered by other policies in this Local Plan and national legislation 
and policy,  and which result in a high quality, sensitive scheme . The maximum 
capacity figure should not be considered a “target”  at the expense of meeting policy 
and design expectations .  
12.58  Harm to the character of the Worth Conservation Area must be minimised by a scale 
and design of development whi ch respects the rural nature of the Conservation Area, 
as a loose -knit low density layout clearly distinct from the suburban character of 
Maidenbower. The potential impact of the development and long- term degradation of 
the valuable habitat on the site and the harm to the Moat can be mitigated against 
through the appropriate high quality enhancement of the remainder of the site. Therefore, an unbuilt margin around the archaeological asset and its appropriate 
management must be retain ed and an appropriate scheme for its future 
management , and that of  the two -thirds of the  LWS  not affected by development  and 
controlled by the landowner , will be required  as part of the development.  To protect 
the valuable nature of the site, m easures mus t be incorporated within the 
development, and management proposals, to control the p ressures created from the 
development  on the remaining ecological assets, including informal recreati on, dog 
walking and fly tipping.   
12.59  Due to the complex character and assets associated with this site, it is shown on the 
Local Plan Map as a housing, biodiversity and heritage site, with the area most likely 
to be suitable for housing indicated within the southern part of the site.  
Housing for Older People and those with Disabilities  Sites  
12.60 It can be difficult for developers of specialist housing for older people to compete with 
other developers for land, particularly in a land constrained borough such as 
Crawley. To support the delivery of specialist accommodation, and to seek to provide 
a greater number of affordable units within the borough in order to meet the growing 
needs  of the aging population, the Local Plan has allocated two sites for specialist 
housing for older persons  and/or Extra Care Housing for all ages .  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 164 12.61 Oakhurst Grange is  a vacant site formerly occupied by  a residential care facility . As a 
secluded and discrete site, the particular characteristics of the site and its location in 
close proximity to Crawley Hospital support its continued contribution towards 
meeting the local housing needs of older people. Appropriate development of this site 
could be as an Extra -Care or Residential Care facility; or as a bespoke development 
which may incorporate mixed units designed to meet the needs of older people; or for 
housing designed to provide more general accommodation for older people, and to 
contribute to the overarching principle of places to live that assist older people to 
retain their independence for as long as possible. This may include: accessible 
mainstream housing such as bungalows and step -free apartments designed and built 
to wheelchair adaptable access standards; sheltered or extra care housing; and/or 
retirement housing.  
12.62 The existing St. Catherine’ s Hospice site is to become vacant following the move to a  
new facility in Pease Pottage. This site offers the council and St. Catherine’s Hospice 
the opportunity to identify a further site for older people’s housing and/or residential 
care home.  The site’ s location and constraints including its size, changes in levels 
and location adjacent to a Conservation Area make it particularly appropriate for this 
type of housing.  
Broad Location Housing Sites  
12.63  Given that the council is required to ident ify 16  years housing supply, it is considered 
that there is additional housi ng potential in the Town Centre and Land East of 
London Road that will arise in the  mid to  latter part of the Plan period. These could 
contribute to housing land supply from Year 6 onwards  (i.e. fr om 2026/27 to 2036 /37) 
and are identified as broad locations for  medium to long- term residential 
development. This is in accordance with the overall spatial approach as set out in the 
Local  Plan Vision to 203 7, by helping to minimise the impact on important biodiversity 
and landscape features and offers the greatest scope to reduce the need to travel by private vehicle because of the proximity to existing services, jobs and public 
transport.   
Housing Typologies  
12.64  In order to support Local Plan Policy H1 and seeking to maximise the delivery of new 
dwellings to meet as far as possible Crawley’s emerging housing needs, the following 
land typologies have been identified for their potential suitability for housing 
development:  
• Estate Regeneration;  
• Densification;  
• Infill opportunities;  
• Small sites;  
• Town centre;  
• Upward extensions;  
• Conversions from commercial/non- residential uses;  
• Open spaces;  
• Garden sites;  
• Urban Extensions on/outside the borough boundaries  (covered in paragraphs 
2.30- 2.33 and 12.17 -12.23, along with Policy CL8, above) . 
Policy H3: Housi ng Typologies  
Housing development in Crawley will be supported where it meets the following criteria, 
along with the specific requirements set out associated wit h each o f the housing typology 
sub-policies  below  (H3a -H3f inclusive) : CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 165 i. The principles of Good Urban Design are followed;  
ii. The principles in relation to Local Character and Design are followed;  
iii. The presumption in favour of sustainable land use is followed;  
iv. Local Design Standards and wider borough standards in relation to landsc ape and 
urban form are followed;  
v. A good standard of amenity for all existing and future occupants of land and buildings 
is provided or retained, including maintaining privacy and preventing overlooking; and 
avoiding dominance or overshadowing.  
vi. The scheme would not result in an unacceptable impact on car parking for existing 
and new residents and occupiers.  
vii. The scheme meets the internal and external space standards expected by the Local 
Plan, including being accessible and adaptable, and proposals ensure that rooms 
within buildings receive adequate daylight.  
Reasoned Justification  
12.65 The Plan’s windfall allowance recognises that opportunities exist  within the borough 
for residential schemes to come forward on sites not  currently  identified in the 
Housing Trajectory and , therefore,  unable to be allocated in Policy H2. To provide a 
positive and pro- active planning approach, Policies H3 and sub- Policie s H3a -f offer 
the planning policy framework for such proposals to be considered against in relation 
to their location and land typology.  
12.66  Where residential development is proposed outside of the Built -Up Area Boundary , it 
must address the general r equirements set out in Policy CL8 , as well as those which 
relate to the character area or edge in which the site is located.  
Estate Regeneration  
12.67 In Crawley, due to the planned Twentieth Century New Town history, a significant 
proportion of housing was provided at a similar time, between the 1950s and 1990s . 
This may mean that opportunities for estate regeneration could arise as part of the promotion of improvements to housing stock , particularly where the construction 
methods of certain types of prope rties are causing maintenance problems or have 
poor energy efficiency. It can be a successful way to improve the quality of housing and increase numbers in an area whilst at the same time improving the local 
environment, but is also potentially disruptive to existing residents. Therefore, this 
would need careful planning . Local Authorities are encouraged by the NPPF
107 to 
consider the social, economic and environmental  (including improved sustainability)  
benefits of estate regeneration.  
12.68 At this stage, there are no  estate regeneration projects  planned in Crawley . Should 
this approach be progressed ahead of the next Local Plan Review, there are a 
number of specific planning policy considerations to be taken into account in early 
scoping and design.  
Polic y H3 a: Estate Regeneration  
Housing development as part of Estate Regeneration will be supported where this is in 
conformity with the other policies and requirements of this Local Plan, and where it can be 
shown that:  
                                                 
107 National Planning Policy Framework, p aragraph 93 (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 166 i. The proposals are supported by, and in  conformity with, an agreed comprehensive 
Masterplan for the new and remaining areas , including detailed phasing and 
relocation proposals ; 
ii. The proposals will provide high quality new development  in keeping with the 
character of the neighbourhood, maximisin g the efficient use of land whilst 
protecting residential amenity  and providing appropriate open space ; 
iii. Local communities and affected individuals have been engaged extensively, 
positively and with genuine opportunities to participate and are supportive of  the 
proposals.  
Reasoned Justification  
12.69 The policy is consistent with the requirement in the National Planning Policy 
Framework that planning policies ‘should consider the social, economic and 
environmental benefits of estate regeneration’ and that ‘Local planning authorities 
should use their planning powers to help deliver estate regeneration to a high 
standard’108. 
Densification, Infill Opportunities and Small Sites  
12.70 Within the urban neighbourhoods, opportunities for densification through infill  and 
small sites may arise as part of the windfall housing delivery anticipated through the Housing Trajectory.  The Policy below sets some general principles which should be 
considered alongside any Area- Wide  Character and Design Assessments  and local 
design standards associated with the location of any proposals.
 
                                                 
108 National Planning Policy Framework, p aragraph 93 (2019) MHCLG.  Policy H3b : Densification, Infill Opportunities and Small Sites  
Densification and development on infill and small sites  in Crawley will be supported where 
it meets the criteria set out in Policy H3 , and Policy CL2, along with the specific 
requirements set out below, and where it is in conformity with the other policies and 
requirements of this Local Plan.  
Densification  
Housing development through densification schemes will be supported where it can be 
shown that:  
i. The site is located in a sustainable location which would be appropriate for higher 
densities, such as close to transport interchanges, town c entre and neighbourhood 
centres, as outlined in detail in P olicies CL2 – CL4.  
For large developments, with medium to high density ranges, applicants are particularly 
encouraged to deliver residential schemes which meet the amenity standards outlined in 
policy DD3, section i to v .     
Small Sites  
Housing development on small urban sites will be supported where it can be shown that:  
ii. It would not unduly restrict the development potential of adjoining land, nor 
prejudice the proper planning and phasing of development over a wider area;  
iii. It maximises the potential capacity of the site, taking on boa rd the character of the 
site and its context,  and uses the land efficiently, through a careful and high quality 
design- led approach  appropriate to the character of the neighbourhood ; 
iv. It is based on a thorough understanding of the immediate and wider contex t and is 
designed to respond to and enhance the existing character.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 167 Reasoned Justification  
12.71 National planning guidance requires Local Planning Authorities to support 
development that makes efficient use of land. However,  impacts on character and the 
importance of securing well -designed, attractive and healthy places  must be 
considered109. 
Town Centre Residential Sites  
12.72 Although there is limite d housing at present, the Town C entre represents a highly 
sustainable location for residential development with immediate access to facilities, 
services, and transport links. Residential develop ment also adds vitality to the Town 
Centre, bringing life into the centre and supporting the evening economy. Therefore, 
housing dev elopment is encouraged in the Town C entre, either as mixed use or 
wholly residential schemes  (where agreed)  or as conversions of the upper floors of 
existing retail premises, particularly where these bring forward balanced tenur es and 
owner -occupation in t he Town C entre.  
12.73  However, this must be balanced with the need to maintain sufficient floorspace for 
retail, commercial and social facilities and services which should be provided in a 
central location. In addition, the needs of the residential populat ion must be 
adequately catered for, through sufficient infrastructure provision. Residential 
proposals within the Town Centre must comply with the policies set out in the 
Crawley Town Centre Chapter (Policies TC1 –  TC4).  
Policy H3c : Town Centre Sites  
Housing development in Crawley Town Centre, except at ground floor level within the 
Primary Shopping Area (Policy TC1)  will be supported where it meets the criteria set out 
in H3 , along with the specific requirements set out below, and where it is in confo rmity 
with the other policies and requirements of this Local Plan:  
i. It would not result in a net loss of employment or retail land or floorspace unless it 
otherwise clearly meets the full requirements of Policy EC2;  
ii. The scheme  should provide active frontages on the ground floor level  in 
accordance with Policy TC4;  
iii. The scheme should achieve t he correct housing mix for the Town C entre, as set 
out in Policy H4, particularly preventing an over -supply of small dwellings, and 
should create a balance in tenure, inc luding through encouraging owner -
occupation, encouraging affordable tenures, and monitoring the ratio of private 
rented accommodation;  
iv. The development will be designed to be integrated effectively with existing 
businesses and community fac ilities and to ad equately address  existing and 
                                                 
109 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 122 d) and e) (2019) MHCLG  Infill Opportunities  
Housing development through infill opportunities will be supported where it can be shown 
that: 
v. It maximises the potential capacity of the site, taking on board the cha racter of the 
site and its context,  and uses the land efficiently, through a careful and high quality 
design- led approach;  
vi. It is based on a thorough understanding of the immediate and wider context and is 
designed to respond to and enhance the existing character.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 168 potential noise and nuisance arising from the mix of town centre uses through 
suitable mitigation before the development is occupied;  
v. Cumulative infrastructure needs of the increasing  residential population in the 
Town C entre  are clearly identified and met, and the proposal has been justified 
and is adequately supported by sufficient social facilities and inf rastructure located 
within the Town C entre or accessible from the development;  
vi. Where a lower car parking provision is anticipated, alternative transport proposals 
must be justified, agreed and implemented;  
vii. It maximises the potential capacity of the site and uses the land efficiently, through 
a careful and high quality design -led approach;  
viii. Cycle parking and waste/recycling storage must be adequately designed into the 
scheme from the start and t he site will meet the requirements necessary for 
access, circulation and manoeuvring, loading and unloading and the collection of 
waste/recycling , including the servicing requirements of existing and new 
commercial and retail floorspace.  
Reasoned Justification  
12.74  Policies contained within the Town Centre chapter are particularly relevant when 
considering residential opportunities within the Town Centre B oundary. In addition, 
Policies CL3 and CL4 set out policy expectations in relation to the effective use of 
land. The Urban Design and Town Centre SPDs also provide additional supporting 
guidance which should be considered when preparing schemes.  
12.75 Policy H4 sets out the expected future housing mix from developments across the 
borough. However, it is recognised that the Town C entre provides a different offer to 
the overall requirements. Notwithstanding this, evidence110 has identified concerns 
regarding the over -provision of  smaller  bedsit and  one bed units coming forward in 
Town C entre schemes leading to a distorted market  without sufficient provision of 
family -sized units . As the Town C entre residential population grows, it is essential to 
cater for a better mix of communit ies to also cater for small families (two- bed units) 
as well as larger families (three - and four -bed units) . On this basis, schemes  within 
the Town Centre B oundary  should seek to  meet the Town C entre housing mix . 
Justification will be required for a housing mix which significantly differs from that modelled. Schemes which provide only the small units will not be considered 
acceptable on the basis of a rguments which do not accept a need for a mix of units in 
Town C entre.  
Upward Extensions  
12.76 National policy encourages Local Planning Authorities to support opportunities to use 
the airspace above existing residential and commercial premises for new homes, 
where these would be consistent with the prevailing height and form of neighbouring 
properties and the overall street scene, are  well designed, and can maintain safe 
access and egress for occupiers.  Certain upward extensions are now permitted 
development but, as much of Crawley lies within 3km of an aerodrome, many  will still 
require planning permission.   
 
 
                                                 
110 Market Housing Mix, paras 5.17-5.19, page 47 (November 2016) Chilmark Consulting:  
https://crawley .gov.uk/sites/default/files/documents/PUB311637.pdf  and the Strategic Housing Market 
Assessment (November 2019) Iceni Projects: https://crawley.gov.uk/sites/default/files/do cuments/PUB354604.pdf   CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 169 Policy H3d : Upward Extensions  
Housing development through upward extensions  will be supported where it meet s the 
criteria set out in Policy  H3 and is  in conformity with the other policies and requirements of 
this Local Plan, and where it can be shown that:  
i. The proposed  height, including construction cranes, has been agreed with Gatwick 
Airport Ltd  in relation to aerodrome safeguarding and NATS En Route  LTD in 
relation to technical sites safeguarding;  
ii. It is based on a thorough understanding of the immediate and wider context and is 
designed to respond to and enhance the existing character , and take into 
consideration the expectations set out in Policy C L2; 
iii. It would not unduly restrict the development potential of adjoining land, nor 
prejudice the proper planning and phasing of development over a wider area;  
iv. It would not cause unreasonable harm to the amenity of the surrounding area by 
way of overshadowing , dominance or overlooking;  
v. Where a lower car parking provision is anticipated, alternative transport proposals 
are justified, agreed and implemented;  
vi. The development will be designed to be integrated effectively with existing 
businesses and community faci lities and adequately address existing and potential 
noise and nuisance arising from the adjoining uses through suitable mitigation 
before the development is occupied;  
vii. Cycle parking and waste/recycling storage are  adequately designed into the 
scheme from the start and t he site will meet the requirements necessary for 
access, circulation and manoeuvring, loading and unloading and the collection of 
waste/recycling.  
Reasoned Justification  
12.77 Crawley neighbourhoods are predominantly characterised by low -rise, domestic 
scale developments, of two and sometimes three -storeys. In such cases, clear 
guidance will be provided by the Area- Wide Design Assessments. For Crawley T own 
Centre there may be more scope for upward extensions, where this is well -designed.  
12.78 For any developments proposing an increase in height, liaison with Gatwick Airport 
Limited, with respect to Aerodrome Safeguarding (see Policy DD5)  will be essential 
at an early stage. This  will include consideration of height of cranes and construction.  
Conversions from Commercial/Non- Residential Uses  
12.79 National planning policy encourages the conversion of commercial properties, 
especially vacant or underused buildings, to residential. Commercial properties within 
Crawley’s  Main Employment Areas are not considered suitable for residential, due to 
the need for employment floorspace and the impacts of residential developments  on 
commercial operations  in such locations. However, the town centre may provide 
opportunities for some conversions to residential where this has been considered 
against the Policy requirements of EC1 and EC2.  
Policy H3e : Conversions from Commercial/Non- Residential Uses  
Housing development through conversion of existing buildings from non -residential uses 
will be supported where it meets the criteria set out in Policy H3 and is in conformity with 
the other policies and requirements of this Local Plan, and where it can be shown that:  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 170 i. It would not result in a net l oss of employment or retail land or floorspace, unless it 
clearly meets the requirements of Policy EC2;  
ii. Where this is located adjacent to one of the borough’s Main Employment Areas, 
the scheme would not result in an adverse impact on the economic role or f unction 
of the Main Employment Area, and the wider economic function of Crawley;  
iii. Where this is located within one of the borough’s Neighbourhood Parades, the 
scheme would not adversely affect the ability of the Neighbourhood Parade to 
cater for the day -to-day needs of local residents;  
iv. The scheme provides active frontages at  ground floor level, where the site is  within 
the town centre or appropriate other locations;  
v. The development will be designed to be integrated effectively with existing 
businesses and community facilities and adequately address existing and potential 
noise and nuisance arising from the mix of uses through suitable mitigation before 
the development is occupied;  
vi. Cycle parking and waste/recycling storage will be adequately designed into the  
scheme from the start and the site will meet the requirements necessary for 
access, circulation and manoeuvring, loading and unloading and the collection of 
waste/recycling. Where a lower car parking provision is anticipated, alternative 
proposals must be justified, agreed and implemented;  
vii. It maximises the potential capacity of the site and uses the land efficiently, through 
a careful and high quality design -led approach;  
viii. It is based on a thorough understanding of the immediate and wider context and is 
designed to respond to and enhance the existing character . 
Reasoned Justification  
12.80 Conversions can increase the supply of residential properties but it is important to 
ensure no conflicts arise by introducing a residential population into a commercial 
area. Policies in the Economic Growth and Crawley Town Centre chapters apply.  
Open Spaces  
12.81  Where open space can be shown to be surplus to open space requirements or 
sufficient alternative new provision is to be provided, in ac cordance with Policy OS1, 
the following specific criteria must be satisfied in considering new housing development on existing open space sites (including residential garden sites).   
Where an improvement on quality, usage and surveillance would be achieved 
through design and layout of new development this will be positively considered.  
Policy H3f : Open Spaces 
Housing development on surplus open spaces  within the Built -Up Area Boundary  in 
Crawley will be supported where it meets the criteria in Policy H3, along with the specific 
requirements set out below, and where it is in conformity with the other policies and 
requirements of this Local Plan.  
Open Spaces  
Housing development on open s paces will be supported where it can be shown that:  
i. The site has been shown to be surplus to requirements for open space needs 
through the Open Space, Sport and Recreation Study or otherwise clearly meets 
the requirements established by Policy OS1 ; CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 171 ii. Replace ment and/or enhancement of open space is provided elsewhere in a 
suitable location to mitigate against the loss of the open space and to address the 
increased demand arising from the associated new population;  
iii. The urban and landscape character and environm ental values of the site are 
outweighed by the benefits of the development and any harm mitigated and 
addressed, with an enhancement, through design and layout;  
iv. Mitigation measures would ensure that the scheme would not block or harm the 
strategic Green In frastructure network and would be designed to provide new links 
to Green Infrastructure where possible and clearly result in Net Gain for 
biodiversity (based on up -to-date and professional ecological and arboricultural 
surveys);  
v. Flood risk will not be exac erbated elsewhere as a result of the development, and 
surface water drainage is maintained at greenfield runoff rate levels, as a 
minimum.  
Garden Sites  
Housing development on garden sites will be supported where it can be shown that:  
vi. It is based on a thorough understanding of the immediate and wider context and is 
designed to respond to and enhance the existing character;  
vii. Ancient woodland or aged trees would not be damaged or lost and an appropriate 
buffer is provided between any such trees and the edge of the development’s 
construction.  Any TPO protected trees should be retained where possible and 
measures to avoid damage and root compaction should be implemented.  
Reasoned Justification  
12.82  Policies set out in the Wellbeing and Communities  (Chara cter, Landscape and 
Development Form ; Design and Development Requirements; and Open Space, 
Sport and Recreation)  and Environmental Sustainability  (Green Infrastructure  and 
Biodiversity and Environmental Protection)  Sections  are particularly relevant when 
considering applications in relation to housing on existing open space sites.  In 
relation to flooding, Policy EP1 will apply to development of open spaces. Wherever 
possible,  further reduction of surface water runoff beyond the greenfield runoff rate 
levels, and additional storage introduced as part o f any development proposal,  
should be sought in order to offer a greater reduction in runoff rates from new 
development.  
  
 
  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 172 Meeting Housing Needs  
13.1 Crawley p rovides a critical role in the N orthern West Sussex Housing Market Area 
(comprising Crawley Borough, Horsham and Mid Sussex Districts and a small part of 
Reigate and Banstead Borough) offering a substantial s tock of affordable, well -
designed, family accommodation. In comparison to the other districts within the 
Housing Market Area, Crawley has a housing mix skewed towards smaller and 
cheaper housing, but with a high proportion of three- bedroom terrace properties built 
as a key component of the New Town housing stock. It also has higher levels of social tenure  accommodation, made available to those unable to access private 
housing (rental or purchase) , in contrast to other parts of the Housing M arket  Area . 
Chapter C ontent  
13.2 This chapter establishes the policies to secure the appropriate type and mix of  
residential development within the borough to meet the needs of specific groups in 
the community  and sets policies to support the delivery of the types of housing  
needed within the borough.  
The Key Issues  
Existing Housing:  
13.3 There are approximately 46 ,000 dwellings in Crawley. 60% of the town’s housing is 
owner -occupied with 24% being affordable properties (social  rent or affordable rent 
or part ownership). The number of people living in privately rented accommodation 
has increased significantly,  and accounted for over  15% of households in 2011 
compared with 6% in 2001. Almost 97% of the affordable housing stock is rent ed, 
with the remainder being part -owned (shared- ownership or shared- equity ). Terraced 
housing makes up the largest share of the stock (42%), with the rest comprising flats (23%), semi -detached (21%) and detached housing (14%).   
13.4 Overall, the housing st ock appears well suited to younger working people (single 
households and those with young families) seeking to enter the housing market , but 
the supply of larger housing and high -end market housing is more limited.  
Northern West Sussex Strategic Housing Market Assessment : 
13.5 The Northern West Sussex Strategic Housing Market Assessment  (SHMA) has 
recently been updated.  The updated study takes into account the latest data 
(including the Standard Method for calculating housing needs) and the latest national policy in relation to Crawley borough and Horsham district. It has assessed local 
housing needs and identifies  the needs of particular groups within the population 
including:  
→ Those who require affordable housing;  
→ Families with children;  
→ Older people;  
→ Students;  
→ People with disabilities;  
→ Service families;  
→ People who rent their homes; and  
→ People wishing to commission or build their own homes.  
Key messages and detailed evidence from this study have been taken on board 
through the policies in this Plan.  The need for specialist housing for older peopl e is 
covered in paragraphs 12.24- 12.32 above, along with specific allocations in Policy CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 173 H2: Key Ho using Sites (Housing for Older People) and supporting text in 12.60-
12.62.  
Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople:  
13.6 The Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Accommodation Needs 
Assessment (2013) identified a need to find a reserve site suitable for 
accommodating ten Gypsy and Traveller pitches to meet potential accommodation needs arising from the existing communi ty currently living within Crawley over the 
whole Plan period.  
13.7 The assessment identified approximately 30 Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling 
Showpeople households living within Crawley; with 77 individuals identifying 
themselves as a ‘White Gypsy or Iri sh Traveller’ within the 2011 Census.  
13.8 The completed questionnaires identified a demand for pitches, particularly through:  
• the aspiration for Gypsy and Traveller children to live on a pitch;  
• desire to move out of their current bricks and mortar accom modation owing to 
preference; and  
• the anticipation of new family formations expected to arise from the existing 
households within Crawley.  
13.9  It is considered that none of the participants in bricks and mortar accommodation 
demonstrated an immediate ‘need’ in terms of having a proven psychological 
aversion to bricks and mortar accommodation. However, a growth rate of 3% has 
been applied to the number of households currently living within Crawley for the 
purposes of estimating the potential future need which may arise from the current 
population over the Plan period (beyond the first five years). This resulted in a Local 
Plan need for a reserve si te suitable for accommodating up to ten Gypsy and 
Traveller pitches. This Accommodation Needs Assessment has been reviewed in 
2020, with the same conclusion being reached.   
13.10 None of the surveyed Gypsy and Travellers indicated that they owned land whi ch 
they wished to be considered for a Gypsy and Traveller site.  
13.11 The borough is heavily constrained by its administrative boundaries, which in most 
parts of the borough do not extend significantly beyond the Built -Up Area. The 
presence of Gatwick Airp ort also renders a significant amount of land in the north of 
the borough unsuitable for residential development (particularly Gypsy and Traveller 
accommodation) due to noise constraints; and other areas of land are constrained by 
flood risk. These factors  limit the opportunities for providing a suitable site for 
permanent caravan accommodation but a location for a possible reserve site has 
been identified.   
Local Plan Policies  
Future Housing Mix  
13.12 Different households require different types and sizes of housing. It is important that an appropriate choice and mix of housing is provided across the borough in order to 
create balanced and sustainable communities. Widening housing choice broadens 
the appeal of an area and assists in meeting the needs of exi sting residents as well 
as attracting new residents to the borough.  The council’s  Strategic Housing Market 
Assessment  (SHMA)  and its  updates , provides the baseline evidence against which 
housing mix should be considered.  
Strategic Policy H4 : Future Housing Mix 
All housing development should provide a mix of dwelling types and sizes to address the 
nature of local housing needs and market demand . The appropriate mix of house types CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 174 and sizes for each site will depend upon the size and characteristics of the site and the 
viability of the scheme . However,  consideration should be given to the evidence 
established in the Strategic Housing Market Assessment  and its updates  for market 
housing needs  and demand in Crawley .  
In delivering the affordable housing element of residential schemes, in line with Policy H5 , 
the need for one, two and three bedroom affordable dwellings in Crawley, as identified in 
the council’s Strategic Housing Market Assessment and its updates, should be addressed 
in meeting the housing needs of those considered to be in greatest need.  These should 
include smaller dwellings designed to meet the needs of families.  
The expected starting point for the market  housing mix, both for schemes of owner 
occupation and private market rent , and the a ffordable housing mix  is set out in the table 
below. Applications should explain how they have sought to meet this mix  (or any 
subsequent delivery -adjusted update published with the council’s Authority Monitoring 
Report)  and provide strong justification for schemes which fail to provide a reasonable 
balance of property types and sizes, to promote mixed communities.  
Housing Mix Test:  
In order to avoid an excessively distorted dwelling mix, major residential development s 
will be required to meet the followi ng test:  
• Step 1: where applicable, divide the scheme into separate tenures.  
• Step 2: for each tenure  exceeding 4 units within the development , identify the ‘median’ 
size of unit on a notional  development of equivalent  tenure,  scale and location whose 
mix ma tches that stated in the table below or any subsequent delivery -adjusted 
position published in the council’s Authority Monitoring Report . 
• Step 3: compare the notional median to the proposed scheme and ensure that neither 
the proportion of units smaller , nor the proportion of units larger than the  notional  
median,  exceeds 90%.  
Reasoned Justification  
13.13 Ensuring that new housing takes account of local need to create neighbourhoods 
where there is genuine choice of the right housing in terms of size, type,  tenure,  and 
affordability,  both at neighbourhood and borough wide level, is essential. Therefore, 
the council will encourage a mix of housing that will be appropriate to the n eeds of 
the community  taking account of the information within the SHMA and its updates , to 
provide a range of types, sizes,  tenures  and affordability  including housing for the 
elderly, lifetime homes and other specialist housing needs.   
13.14 The recommended mix across all priority bandings and affordable tenures, and 
private ownership and private rent is set out below:  
 Market Housing Element  
(Private Sale and Private Rent)  Affordable Housing Element  
(Intermediate and Rental Tenure) 
Town Centre  Borough -Wide  
1 Bed  25% - 30% 10% 25% - 30% 
2 Bed  40% - 45% 25% 30% - 35% 
3 Bed 25% 40% 25% - 30% 
4+ Bed  5% 25% 5% - 10% 
13.15 The council will expect new residential schemes to reflect the latest evidence of need, subject to density and character considerations. For larger developments , in 
particular , clear justification will be expected to support a  proposed housing mix 
which significantly differs from that modelled in the SHMA and shown in the table above, or as updated through monitoring as part of the Authority’s Monitoring Report .      CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 175 13.16 Town Centre mixed use developments will be expected to be built at higher densities 
whilst  including family accommodation, in accordance with Policy H3c . However, this 
may not necessarily be s uitable for all sites.  
13.17 In meeting the appropriate housing mix, the design and layout of buildings and the 
expected standards for residents must be considered in parallel at the earliest design 
stage, to ensure viability and suitability of a scheme. Policy DD2  establishes the need 
for all new development to be designed inclusively, including for residential units to 
demonstrate they are able to meet  Building Regulations Part M Category 2111 and 
Policy DD3  identifies the required internal space standards for all new dwellings. 
Further guidance, including for external space, is  provided in the Urban Design SPD.   
13.18  The council will particularly seek to achieve a mix of dwelling sizes to meet local  
affordable  housing need. The 2019 SHMA has found that the demand for new homes 
for those in local affordable housing need is reasonably evenly split between one-
bedroom , two-bedroom  and three- bedroom  units. Howev er, this does not justify 
under -provision of the family -sized accommodation, including the provision of  smaller 
two-bedroom houses , in appropriate schemes . 
Affordable Housing 
13.19 All Local P lans are required by the NPPF to make provision for meeting affordable 
housing needs in their area. Failure to address affordable housing needs would have 
detrimental implications on the economic and social health of the town. Therefore, it 
is important to secure an appropriate mix of housing types and tenures within 
developments that come forward over the P lan period.  
Strategic Policy H5 : Affordable Housing  
40% affordable housing will be required from all residential developments  across the 
borough which fall outside the Town C entre.  
The council will expect a minimum of  75% of the affordable housing to be So cial Rent 
and/or Affordable Rent  and up to 25% as Shared -Ownership.  This equates to  30% of the 
total scheme for Affordable/Social Rent and  10% of the total scheme as Shared-
Ownership, resulting in a 75/25 tenure split . 
For sites of 10  dwellings or less , a commuted sum towards off -site affordable housing 
provision will be sought , unless on- site provision is preferred, with the on -site tenure mix 
to be agreed  as appropriate.  
Crawley Town Centre  
For residential developments within the Town Centre, 25% affordable housing will be 
required.  
The council will expect 60% of the affordable housing in the Town Centre to be Social 
Rent and/or A ffordable Rent, and up to 40% as Intermediate Tenure, to include either 
Shared- Ownership, Shared- Equity or Af fordable Home Ownership tenures. This equates 
to 15% of the total scheme for Social Rent and/or Affordable Rent and 10% of the t otal 
scheme as Intermediate Tenure,  resulting in a 60/40 tenure split.  
Exceptions  
Except for sites of 10 dwellings or less, payments in lieu will only be accepted in 
exceptional circumstances where it can be demonstrated that there are robust planning 
reasons for doing so and provided that the contribution is of equivalent financial val ue. 
                                                 
111 Approved Document M: access to and use of buildings, volume 1: dwellings (2016) MHCLG 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/access -to-and-use-of -buildings -approved-document -m  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 176 For high density schemes, as defined in Po licy CL4 (i), falling outside the Town C entre, 
should viability evidence be provided to justify similar levels of affordable housing to that 
required in the town centre, this will be considered with claw -back mechanisms in place to 
secure higher levels of affordable housing provision, up to the Policy level of 40% , should 
viability improve during the per iod of development construction.  In exceptional 
circumstances an off -site commuted payment in lieu may be considered.  
The council will only consider relaxing this affordable housing requirement, in part or in 
full, in exceptional circumstances, where a scheme is clearly subject to abnormal costs, 
not including land costs, and not otherwise envisaged by the Local  Plan Viability 
Assessment.  This must be evidenced by robustly assessed viability appraising various 
permutations of affordable housing provisions to best address local affordable housing 
needs which will be independently assessed. Should concessions be ag reed by the 
council then claw -back mechanisms will be expected to be put in place and independently 
monitored.  The scheme must also evidence that it addresses a demonstrative and 
immediate housing need.  
Build to Rent will also be considered as an exception while all units  remain for rent. This  is 
further detailed in Policy H6, which will revert back to Policy H5 should such schemes 
cease to be predominantly private rental.  
Rent to Buy is considered as an exceptional Intermediate Tenure that may be consider ed 
only in exceptional circumstances where it can be evidenced to address local housing 
needs, and will not be considered as a rental tenure.  
Reasoned Justification  
13.20 The cost of market housing for both sale  and rent in Crawley is significant, with 
median house prices  in 2018 at £295,000 and median rents of £975 per month. The 
median house prices now stand at 9.1 times median earnings in Crawley.  The 
significant costs of market housing, and the difficulties facing the younger households 
and those on low to moderate  incomes in being abl e to afford housing in the private 
market , directly  influence s the need for affordable housing in the borough . The 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment ( 2019)  analysis indicated a net need for 739 
affordable homes per year in Crawley , of which 563 dwellings per year are needed 
as rented affordable housing.  This supports a split of 75% rented and 25% shared -
ownership homes in Crawley.   
13.21 Affordable housing refers to  properties  that are offered  by the local authority or 
Registered Providers for rent or part -ownership at affordable levels  to eligible 
households whose needs are not met by the housing open market. The council 
expects rentals to be  offered below market rent levels  preferably as Social Rent at 
target rent levels, otherwise at Affordable Rent levels  that shall not  exceed 80% of 
open market rent values. Rent levels  shall not exceed Local Housing Allowance rent 
levels (or its equivalent ) where Affordable Rent shall be inclusive of service charges,  
and provided that there are provisions in place for those homes to remain affordable for future eligible households.  The c ouncil will always pursue perpetuity in affordable 
housing provision to ensure the abi lity to serve future households over the long- term.  
 
  
  
 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 177  Borough -wide  Town Centre  
Market -led 
Housing 
Schemes  Affordable 
Rent  Intermediate 
Tenure  Private 
Market Sale  Affordable 
Rent  Intermediate 
Tenure  Private 
Market Sale  
30% 10% 60% 15% 10% 75% 
@ 50% OMV  @ 60% OMV  @ OMV  @ 50% OMV  @ 80% OMV  @ OMV  
Build to 
Rent 
Housing 
Schemes  Affordable 
Private Rent  Intermediate 
Tenure Private 
Market 
Rent  Affordable 
Private Rent  Intermediate 
Tenure Private 
Market Rent  
30% (deferred)  70% 20% (deferred)  80% 
@ 80%  
OMRV  n/a @ OMRV  @ 80% 
OMRV  n/a @ OMRV  
Rental Tenure  
13.22 Borough- wide t he council requires  40% affordable housing of which 75% is to be 
rental tenure, and in the Town Centre the council requires 25% affordable housing of 
which 60% is to be rental tenure. W hile Social Rent at target rent levels  is preferred  
as being more affordable to those in housing need, the council  accepts that this form 
of tenure requires  higher  levels of cross- subsidy. In the absence of sufficient  subsidy, 
Affordable Rent tenure, as defined by the NPPF,  will be acceptable and will be the 
minimum expectation in every instance.  
13.23 Affordable Rented properties are to be made available to Registered Provider s at 
their best consideration. Only i n the event that a Registered Provider cannot be 
secured for the affordable rent units then after reasonable and evidenced 
endeavours , the council may explore alternative tenures at a similar level of discount, 
and only in exceptional circumstances may the  council consider accepting a 
commuted payment in lieu of on- site affordable housing at the equivalent of  50% of 
Open Market Value.  
Intermediate Tenure  
13.24  While Crawley’s predominant requirement is for affordable rented accommodation, 
Crawley also has a need for “intermediate” affordable housing. The Strategic 
Housing Market Assessment (2019) identifies that there is evidence to support the need for 25% of all affordable housing to be provided as affordable home ownership 
provision within Crawley , while the NPPF stipulates a minimum requirement of 10% 
of all residential dwellings  to be made availabl e for affordable home ownership. This  
shall remain the council’s minimum requirement in every instance with off -site 
commuted payment in lieu only accepted in exceptional circumstances . 
13.25 The intermediate housing market is identified as an emerging housing market; made 
available to households who are unable  to buy a home on the open market. 
Intermediate housing includes S hared Ownership, Shared Equity and Discounted 
Market Sale, while  Rent to Buy  and First Homes  may also be considered as an 
Intermediate Tenure if evidenced to address local housing needs . In all 
circumstances the council will seek to secure an element of perpetuity to address 
affordable hous ing needs into the long- term. 
13.26 The council recognises that for the smaller sites, this tenure split may sometimes be 
impractical in management terms. In such cases , the composition of affordable 
housing will be agreed having regard to site specific circumstances and the particular 
needs of the locality, with rental accommodation remaining the first choice of tenure. 
The split between affordable housing for rent and other intermediate affordable 
housing will be kept under review through Supplementary Planning Documents, as 
appropriate, reflecting changes in local needs.  
13.27 Shared ownership properties, where required, are to be made available to a 
Registered Provider at their best consideration. In the event that a Registered CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 178 Provider cannot be secured for the Shared- Ownership properties following 
reasonable and evidenced endeavours, then Shared Equity or Discounted Market 
Sale may be consider ed at 40% discount to market value, which shall be structured 
in perpetuity. In certain settings where a lower affordable housing require ment is 
permitted, such as the Town C entre, then there may not be the need to secure a 
Registered Provider and Shared- Equity or Discounted Market Sale may be 
considered in the first instance, where a minimum of 20% discount to market value will be expected, and secured in perpetuity. In either instance, the discounted equity 
shall either remain locked- in by way of a Covena nt on Title, or transferred to the 
council by way of a Second Charge on Title. Only in exceptional circumstances will a commuted payment be considered in lieu of on- site affordable housing.  
Policy Context  
13.28  The NPPF establishes an expectation that major development involving the provision 
of housing should include at least 10% of the homes to be available for affordable 
home ownership112. However,  exceptions to this element  are allowed where this 
would “exceed the level of affordable housing required in the area or significantly prejudice the ability to meet the identified affordable housing needs of specific 
groups”
113. Whilst Crawley  has an affordable home ownership need, the intermediate 
tenures (such as shared ownership) are a more appropriate form of affordable home 
ownership for Crawley . Furthermore , because there is a clear and acute need for 
rented affordable housing from lower income households, it is important that a supply 
of rented housing is maintained to meet the needs of this group.  Where affordable 
home ownership is agreed, securing perpetuity to ensure housing remains at a 
discount for future eligible households will be the council’s priority. More detail will be 
provided in the updated Affordable Housing Supplementary Planning Document in 
due course.  
13.29 Private Market Rent  reflects open market rental values and, therefore,  falls outside of 
the definition of affordable housing. However, this form of tenure is emerging through the Build to Rent programme  on dedicated market rent schemes and this  rental  
tenure may play a part in meeting affordable housing need where  rent levels are 
contained to within Local Housing Allowance rates  with nominations offered to the 
council . The c ouncil’s policy approach to af fordable housing provision in Build to Rent 
schemes is detailed further  in Policy H6  below.  
13.30  Crawley Town C entre is expected to deliver high density residential schemes as 
defined in Policy CL4 , where,  due to the form of high density construction  and higher 
land values in the Town C entre, viability is kn own to be a significant challenge to 
delivery.  
13.31 Section 106 Planning Agreements  (or Unilateral Undertakings)  will be required to 
secure the delivery of  affordable housing. T he council will expect affordable housing 
to receive free serviced land as a starting point , whereby the Registered Provider 
receives transfer of the built -out units  at a price commensurate with the affordable 
tenure  or under special circumstances receives free transfer o f serviced land at an 
equivalent aggregate value. The S106 Agreement will require applicants to provide 
an Affordable Housing Scheme setting out the provisions of affordabl e housing in 
keeping with this P olicy requirement .  
13.32 Information regarding the expected contributions associated with this Policy is set out 
in the Planning Obligations Annex attached to this Local Plan. This has been subject 
to scrutiny through the Whole Plan and CIL Viability Study (2020) and meets the 
requirements of the national Planning Practice Guidance. Viability will not be an 
                                                 
112 As defined in the NPPF Glossary, National Planning Policy Framework, page 64 (2019) MHCLG  
113 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 65 (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 179 argument for not meeting the Policy requirements for 40% affordable housing, with a 
75%/25% tenure split between rental and shared- ownership in most cases , or 2 5% 
affordable housing on a 60%/40% tenure split in the Town Centre.  National 
guidance114 is clear that where up -to-date policies have set out the contributions 
expected from development, planning applications that comply with them should be assumed to be viable. The weight given to any viability assessment submitted alongside a planning application which seeks to differ in the affordable housing 
contribution from the Policy position of 40% with the 75/25 tenure split , or 25% on a 
60/40 tenure split,  will be a  matter for the Local Planning Authority and will only be 
considered where there are costs associated with a particular site which could not 
have been envisaged at the Plan- making stage or where circum stances have 
changed since the P lan was brought into fo rce.  
13.33 In such exceptional circumstances , the council may be required to consider viability, 
where schemes may be faced with abnormal costs, and in such instances a detailed 
viability assessment will need to be submitted. This will need to reflect the 
recommended approach in national planning guidance, including standardised 
inputs . Where this is agreed it will also be necessary for the viability assessment to 
undertake  modelling of various affordable housing options  rather than relying on an 
assumption that no aff ordable housing can be provided.  This viability assessment  
shall be independently assessed at the developer’s expense, and where any 
concessions are agreed for viability reasons the S106 Agreement will be expected to 
include claw -back provisions, and an independent assessor appointed at the 
developer ’s expense to monitor the scheme against the claw -back provisions.   
13.34 In any case, the national expectation,  as set out by the NPPF, is that major housing 
developments will make at least  10% of the homes available for affordable home 
ownership, unless this would significantly prejudice the ability to meet the identified 
affordable housing needs of specific groups
115. For sites in Crawley,  therefore, and 
only where exceptional  viability  circumstances exist,  the minimum of 10% affordable 
home ownership is expected to be provided as an absolute minimum on any 
particular housing scheme. The council will also consider negotiations in relation to 
rental tenure for this proportion as a preferr ed alternative, due to the significant 
affordable rental needs arising from the borough.   
Build to Rent  
13.35 Build to Rent is considered to be a distinct asset class within the private rented sector 
in Planning Practice Guidance, and has been defined in the NPPF glossary in order 
to simplify its treatment within the planning system. According to the NPPF, Build to 
Rent means ‘purpose built housing that is typically 100% rented out’116. 
Policy H6: Build to Rent  
A proposal including Build to Rent housing will be supported where it is in conformity with 
the other policies and requirements of this Local Plan.  
Build to rent sc hemes are regarded as an exception to Policy H5, whereby Policy H5 will 
be deferred for as long as  the scheme remains all -rental, during which time Affordable 
Private Rent is expected on the following basis:  
i. Schemes shall incorporate an element of Affordable Private Rent comprising:  
• 20% of d wellings in schemes within the Town C entre, or   
                                                 
114 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 57 (2019) MHCLG  
115 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 64 (2019) MHCLG  
116 National Planning Policy Framework, Glossary (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 180 • 30% of dwellings in schemes elsewhere in the borou gh.   
In both settings rentals will not exceed either 80% of market rent values or Local 
Housing Allowance rates, and shall be offered to the council for qualifying 
nominations on an Assured Shorthold Tenure (AST) basis. Under no 
circumstances will less than 20% Affordable Private R ent be provided in line with 
NPPF guidance.  
ii. A deferred Affordable Housing Scheme is to be identified, for future provision in 
the event that the scheme ceases to be all -rental, in accordance with the 
requirements of Policy H5 ( as applicable to the location of the development).  
iii. The deferred Affordable Housing Scheme will be triggered and delivered in the 
event that the scheme ceases to be all -rental, and shall be disposed of to a 
Registered Provider at their best consideration.   
In order to qualify as Build to Rent for the purposes of this Policy, schemes must adhere 
to the Build to Rent definition in the Glossary to the NPPF and will be required to enter 
into a S106 A greement which will include provision regarding the following issues:  
a) Securing the status of the units as Build to Rent for at least 15 years;  
b) Securing the unified ownership and unified management across the Build to Rent 
scheme, embracing both Market Rent and Affordable Private Rent units;  
c) Affordable housing requirements (including review mechanisms where appropriate) 
and regular provision of evidence of compliance by the scheme operator;  
d) Securing council nomination rights in respect of the affordable units through an agreed 
Deed of Nomination;  
e) Clawback me chanisms to secure compensation in the case of the loss of Market Rent 
homes before the expiry of the covenant period, or in the event that the affordable 
housing does not fully meet the policy requirement ; 
f) Scheme management arrangements.  
Reasoned Justification  
13.36 Planning Practice Guidance states: ‘ As part of their plan making process, local 
planning authorities should use a local housing need assessment to take into 
account the need for a range of housing types and tenures in their area including 
provisions for  those who wish to rent.’ It further states that ‘If a need is identified, 
authorities should include a plan policy setting out their approach to promoting and 
accommodating build to rent.’  
13.37 To accommodate this particular investment model, and where ongoing management 
is to be provided in a fully rented scheme, the council will not require a Registered 
Provider to take on the affordable units, and council is prepared to defer the full 
applicat ion of the requirements of Policy H5 for as long as the scheme remains all -
rental.  
13.38 In such circumstances , the council will require the rentals to be made available at 
affordable rent levels, not exceeding 80% of the equivalent open market values and 
not exceeding Local Housing Allowance rates, and the council will enter into a 
Lettings Agreement to allow for qualifying nominations to be made into the affordable 
private rented units.  
13.39 The scheme will be expected to enter into a S106 Agreement that will remain with the 
land, and in the event that the scheme ceases to be all -rental the S106 Agreement 
will require the affordable units, including the deferred shared ownership/intermediate 
tenure properties, to be made available to Registered Providers in line with the CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 181 council’s affordable housing policy, which shall include any claw -back provisions in 
the event that council allows any concess ions to the affordable housing P olicy H5 
requirements.  
Self and Custom Build 
13.40 Self-build and custom -build housing is defined in the NPPF as ‘housing built by an 
individual, a group of individuals, or persons working with or for them, to be occupied 
by that individual. Such housing can be either marke t or affordable housing’117. 
Planning Practice Guidance states that ‘in considering whether a home is a self -build 
or custom build home, relevant authorities must be satisfied that the initial owner of 
the home will have primary input into its final design and layout’ . 
Policy H7: Sel f and Custom Build  
A proposal including self -build and/or custom -build housing to be provided on a serviced 
plot of land will be supported where it is in conformity with the other policies and 
requirements of this Local Plan.  
Subject to the exceptions listed below a residential ( Use Class C3) development including 
50 or more units will be required to provide 6% of the total area occupied by residential 
plots in the form of serviced plots for self -build and custom housebuilding.  
The exceptions are:  
i. Deve lopments providing a proportion of affordable housing over and above the 
proportion required in accordance with Policy H5, may offset this additional 
proportion against the self -/custom -build requirement by reducing the requirement 
by one percentage point for each additional percentage of units delivered as 
affordable housing;  
ii. Developments containing only flatted development;  
iii. Developments on sites whose total area is at least 50% brownfield;  
iv. Developments where the residential element consists solely of conv erted 
floorspace.  
Self- and custom -build plots must have access to the public highway and connections to 
electricity, water, wastewater and telecommunications services, or be capable of being 
provided with them before the expiry of any planning permission or permission in principle 
granted in relation to them.  
Self- and custom -build plots provided in accordance with the 6% requirement detailed 
above will be subject to a legal agreement requiring that they be marketed for 12 months, 
after which they may be developed as speculative housing in accordance with the other 
policies and requirements of this Local Plan.  
Any proposal (either in the form of an outline or full application) for more than one 
dwelling which includes an element of self - or custom -build housing must  be identified as 
a phased development and supported by a phasing plan.   
Reasoned Justification  
13.41 The Self -build and Custom Housebuilding Act 2015 requires Local Authorities to 
maintain a register of individuals and associations who are seeking to acquire 
serviced plots of land for the purpose of building homes for their own occupation. The 
same A ct requires councils to have regard to the demand demonstrated by their 
                                                 
117 National Planning Policy Framework, Glossary (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 182 Register when carrying out their functions with regard to planning, housing, the 
disposal of council land, and regeneration.  
13.42 As of 1 April 2019, there were 71 individuals and no associations entered on Crawley 
Borough Council’s Self -build and Custom Housebuilding Register. The Register is 
divided into Part 1 and Part 2, with only applicants who pass a Local Connection Test being included in Part 1. As of 1 April 2019 there were 59 individuals on Part 1 of the Register and 12 on Part 2.  
13.43 The Self -build and Custom Housebuilding Act 2015 (as amended by the Housing and 
Planning Act 2016) further introduces a ‘Duty to Grant Planning Permission’. This 
requires the council to grant ‘suitable development consent’ in respect of a sufficient 
number  of serviced plots of land to match the number of entries on Part 1 of the 
Register. Entries are divided into annual ‘base periods’, according to their date, with 
the corresponding suitable development consents being required to be granted within 
three years after the end of each base period.     
13.44  The acute affordable housing need in the borough justifies offsetting affordable 
housing delivery against Self -build and Custom build units.  Much of Crawley’s future 
housing delivery is envisaged as flatted schemes on brownfield sites, with some as 
converted building, where it is recognised it would be impracticable to require Self or 
Custom -build units.   
Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople  
13.45 The Housing Act 2004 requires all local authorities to  assess the accommodation 
needs of Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople, take account of their needs 
in accommodation assessments , and outline how identified  needs will be met. 
Furthermore, the National Planning Policy for Traveller Sites requires  that local 
planning authorities make an assessment of their accommodation needs  for the 
purposes of planning and to develop fair and effective strategies to meet this need 
through the identification of land for sites.   
Policy H8: Gypsy, Traveller and Trav elling Showpeople Sites  
Site Provision  
The following site is allocated on the Local Plan Map as a reserve Gypsy and Traveller 
site for up to ten pitches  to meet the future needs of the existing population within 
Crawley. This site is considered to be critical to the delivery of future Gypsy and Traveller 
pitches in Crawley and is identified as being ‘developable’ in years 6- 10 or 11- 15 (2026/27  
– 2036/3 7) of the Plan, dependent on when the ‘need’ arises.  
• Broadfield Kennels, southwest of the A264  
Accept able development of this site will include adequate highway  and pedestrian and 
cycle  access being achieved, along with appropriate design, layout and landscaping to 
ensure the requirements of the AONB Management Plan are satisfied and the impacts of 
development adjacent to the country park are mitigated. Both the landscape character 
and ecological value of the Broadfield Kennels site will be assessed, and any harmful 
impacts will be adequately mitigated if required.  
Ongoing monitoring of Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople accommodation 
needs within Crawley will ensure that any identified ‘need’ for a Gypsy and Traveller pitch 
is accommodated on the reserve site.  
Criteria for Assessing other Proposals  
Proposals for a new permanent or transit Gypsy, T raveller and Travelling Showpeople site 
will only be considered suitable if the proposed site:  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 183 a) is not subject to existing or predicted air, road and/or rail noise in excess of 57 
decibels for permanent sites, 60 decibels for long term temporary sites of up to one 
month, and 66 decibels for temporary sites ; 
b) does not create a design and amenity impact that is incompatible with the surrounding 
area, particularly when located within residential areas or on land beyond the Built -up 
Area Boundary;  
c) is not located in areas at high risk of flooding, including functional floodplains, given 
the particular vulnerability of caravans;  
d) is in a sustainable location that reduces the need for long distance travelling, and to 
reflect traditional lifestyles, whereby some travel lers live and work in the same 
location;  
e) avoids placing undue pressure on infrastructure and community services; and 
f) meets an identified local need for Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople 
accommodation.  
Where proposals are located in areas predicted  to be noise affected at some point in the 
future, temporary planning permission may be appropriate.   
Reasoned Justification  
13.46 Crawley is a constrained urban environment and is in a position where difficult 
prioritisation of new development is required as the last undeveloped or 
underdeveloped sites are allocated for future uses. This situation results in high land 
values and limited opportunities for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople to 
bring forward si te provision themselves. There are currently two authorised Gypsy 
and Traveller sites  in Crawley , for four  pitches  in total , and one authorised site for 
Travelling Showpeople with three plots, but there is a more substantial local 
population living within bricks and mortar accommodation.  
13.47 The Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Accommodation Needs 
Assessment  (2020)  for Crawley  indicates a potential future need of  up to ten  pitches 
for Gypsies and Travellers arising from the existing population within Crawley. Whilst 
the survey work completed for those in bricks and mortar accommodation has not 
identified any immediate need for additional si tes, it is inherently improbable that 
within the next 15 year period there will be no new households formed requiring additional site provision.   
13.48 This need will be met by the provision of a site at the former Broadfield Kennels , 
southwest of the A264.  This site is located within the High Weald AONB  and outside 
the current Built -Up Area Boundary (BUAB). Therefore , the site will need to be well 
planned and soft landscaped to ensure that the visual impact on the AONB is negligible and that the natural landscape is, where possible, positi vely enhanced. 
Mitigation measures for the potential impact on the natural environment will be sought where appropriate. The council will continue to search for and analyse the 
potential for alternative sites as factors change over the Local Plan period, m ost 
critically in relation to the future expansion of Gatwick Airport. The council will continue to work cooperatively with its neighbouring authorities to maintain 
constructive joint working across the Gatwick Diamond.    
13.49 In addition, this P olicy also outlines the criteria upon which any other Gypsy, 
Traveller and Travelling Showpeople proposals will be assessed to ensure site 
provision occurs in locations that offer a suitable living environment for future 
inhabitants and protects existing neighbours from inappropriate development.  
13.50 To deal with sites brought forward privately on unallocated land, land ordinarily considered suitable for housing development will be considered suitable for traveller 
accommodation subject to the proposal being compatible in design and amenity 
terms with the surrounding area, especially where proposals include employment CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 184 based activities within their proposals. However, caravans offer a much lower level of 
acoustic attenuation than bricks and mortar accommoda tion and the long term 
exposure to noise would affect the residents’ health. Exposure to noise in excess of 57 decibels on a permanent  basis, 60 decibels for long term temporary sites of up to 
one month and of 66 decibels for temporary sites would not be i n the long term 
interest of future inhabitants.   
Houses in Multiple Occupation  
13.51 A house in multiple occupation (HMO) is a property that is occupied by a number of 
individuals who share facilities, or do not have exclusive occupation of the whole 
property. HMO s generally comprise accommodation where three  or more individuals 
share basic amenities (b ath/shower, WC or kitchen). HMO s can commonly be 
occupied by a group of individuals (e.g. students, young professionals, etc.) sharing a 
house or flat, individuals living in sub -divided bed- sit accommodation, and some 
properties converted into several flats. Bed and breakfast and hostel accommodation 
occupied by individuals as their permanent addres s are also considered to be HMO s.  
Policy H9: Houses in Multiple Occupation  
Proposals for the development of, and change of use of an existing property to a House in 
Multiple Occupation will normally be permitted provided that:  
i) The location, design and layout of the development is appropriate for the proposed 
occupiers;  
ii) The proposal, by virtue of its intensity of occupation and activity or due to its 
cumulative impact in the area, would have no adverse impact upon the character of 
the area and the amenity and privacy of neighbouring properties;  
iii) Development can meet its operational needs (e.g. parking, servicing) including 
Crawley Borough Council’s adopted HMO Standards.  
Reasoned Justification  
13.52 HMOs  provide a much -needed source of housing supply in Crawley, particularly for 
people employed in the service sector.  However, a large number of HMO s in one 
area can change the physical character of that area and this can lead to conflict with 
the existing c ommunity. Tenants equally can suffer from poor conditions and 
mismanagement of the properties by landlords.  
13.53 There continues to be a need for this type of accommodation in Crawley since it provides affordable and convenient accommodation for a wide range of groups, 
including young single people and those requiring care in the community. Whilst 
shared accommodation is normally appropriate within residential areas close to 
shops and services, it can also cause problems due to the intensity of occupation 
and activity. Accordingly, regard must be had to the standard of this accommodation, 
traffic, and parking implications together with its impact upon the amenity and privacy 
of neighbouring properties and the general character of the area. Appropriate 
measures may be required to minimise the transmission of noise and generally to 
avoid causing a nuisance to neighbouring properties.  
13.54 Policy H4  (Future Housing Mix ) recognises that the planning system can assist in 
achieving a mix of households within the  town’s neighbourhoods by meeting different 
housing needs whilst protecting the interests of other residents, landlords and 
businesses. This can best be delivered by preventing the development of excessive 
concentrati ons of HMO s and encouraging a more even distribution across the town. 
Some neighbourhoods, including Furnace Green, Ifield, Langley Green,  Southgate  
and West Green have si gnificant concentrations of HMO s, particularly in areas with 
larger semi -detached and detached dwellings  and townhouses . CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 185 13.55 The main concern with HMO s is that a large number of individuals can occupy one 
property, all living independently and creating more disruption to surrounding areas 
than a group of people living together, in terms of noise, parking and general 
disturbance associated with daily routines. Inadequate parking leading to 
unauthorised parking is a significant issue in many neighbourhoods in Crawley, with the early New Town neighbourhoods planned with one car parking space per nine houses . It is important to have policies which can control issues such as this  and to  
ensure that permission is only granted for those properties that have adequately sized rooms and suitable communal facilities for its occupants as well as being in 
appropriate locations, in terms of proximity to public transport routes.  
13.56 Given that councils no longer have control over the loss  of dwellinghouses to small 
HMO s, there is a high risk of concentrations of HMO s. It is  considered that, where 
possible, new HMO s should be monitored by location and concentration. 
Consideration may need to be given to the need to introduce Article 4 Directions removing Permitted Development Rights for the conversion of dwellings to small 
HMO s. 
13.57  In assessing the acceptability of a proposed HMO in terms of cumulative impact and 
the local concentration of HMOs, the council will operate in accordance with the 
following principles:  
• The proportion of residential dwellings within any area subject to an Article 4 Direction in respect of change of use to a  HMO, including the application 
property, which are HMOs should not exceed 20%;  
• Proposals for new HMOs will be resisted where they would result in a 
neighbouring residential property which is not an HMO being bounded by HMOs 
on both sides within a street f rontage;   
• HMOs should not form continuous frontages of more than two residential 
dwellings.  
13.58  The council will introduce further supplementary guidance on the application of this 
Policy in due course.   
 
  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 186 Environmental Sustainability  
 
 
 
Protecting the Environment: Sustainability  
By 2037, in response to the Climate Emergency, significant progress will have been made 
towards Crawley becoming a carbon neutral town. Crawley will be seen as a place where 
green growth is the driver of the economy and wher e green technology and businesses can 
thrive. Active travel and public transport will be significantly improved and supported by a 
road network that prioritises sustainable transport modes. Electric Vehicles will be promoted 
along with, and through, e- car clubs. A sustainable road network will be complemented by a 
good public transport system, giving people choice about how they travel. As a modern 
town, the technological and communication infrastructure will be in place to ensure residents 
and businesses have the support needed to develop and grow.  
 
Conserving natural resources to support future growth will be vital to the longevity of the 
town. Air, noise and water pollution will be reduced. The borough will prepare for the 
increasing effects of climate c hange, through adaptation measures including lower water 
usage standards and delivering a net gain in biodiversity. Losses to protected and priority 
species and habitats will have been avoided and the delivery of vital ecosystem services, 
including pollination, flood alleviation and carbon capture, will have been enhanced in order 
to facilitate a sustainable and resilient future.  
 
 
 
  
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 187 Green Infrastructure & Biodiversity  
14.1 Crawley’s natural environment is critical for  wildlife conservation,  adapting to and 
mitigating the effects of climate change  as well as being of great importance to the 
health and wellbeing of the people who live, work and visit Crawley.  
14.2 Throughout the borough there is a wide range of sites important for nature 
conserva tion and biodiversity, including extensive areas of woodland, local nature 
reserves , public parks  and smaller areas within the neighbourhoods. This network of 
green space s support natural  processes , such as flood mitigation and carbon capture 
and suppor ts the health and quality of life of the population.  Crawley’s waterways 
also have an important biodiversity role, albeit that many are culverted underneath the urban area.  
Chapter Content  
14.3 This chapter sets out policies to guide the relationship between development 
proposals and local, national and global environmental protection and enhancement 
of the borough’s green infrastructure.  
The Key Issues  
14.4 With an increasing population and the consequent need for development, the impact 
on the natural environment is a key issue. The planning policies in this chapter will 
ensure that Crawley’s natural and semi -natural environment is enhanced as Crawley 
grows and changes over the next 16 years.   
14.5 As a New Town, Crawley was originally designed with many green spaces and 
landscaping  integrated within the developed area. These serve to separate and give 
identity to the neighbourhoods. Increasing levels of development present a potential threat to the amenity  and biodiversity  value of green infrastructure in Crawley. There 
is a risk that this becomes further fragmented and that the quantity and quality of 
green space is reduced.  
14.6 The Natural Environment White Paper (DEFRA, 2011) highlighted that nature in 
England is highly fragmented and unable to respond effectively to pressures such as 
climate and demographic change. Crawle y has an extensive network of green 
spaces , many of which have or are capable of increased biodiversity value to help 
the town adapt to climate change and create an overall net gain in biodiversity. It is important  that the Local Plan ensures that developm ent does not compromise the 
ability of the town to achieve the above aims and where possible that enhancement is encouraged.   
Local Plan Policies  
Green Infrastructure  
14.7 Green infrastructure is the network of multi -functional green space and waterways 
both new and existing, and both rur al and urban which supports natural and 
ecological processes and is integral to the health and quality of life of the population.  
14.8 It consists of useable spaces for both people and wildlife and ranges from large -scale  
areas of public open space and recreational space, including accessible countryside 
to smaller scale provision in the form of street trees, private gardens and allotments. 
The term ‘multi -functional’ refers to the various functions for example, local char acter, 
functional linkages, recreation, meeting community needs, visual amenity, CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 188 biodiversity and/or local food or energy crop production. Crawley’s g reen 
infrastructure network extends into the countryside beyond the Built -Up Area 
Boundary and beyond the borough’s administrative boundaries. These links should 
be maintained, enhanced and created as development in  the town continues.  
14.9 Green i nfrastructure can also offer benefits  as a “Natur e Recovery Network”. This is 
a joined- up system of places important for wild plants and animals. It allows plants, 
seeds, nutrients and water to move from place to place and enables the natural world 
to adapt to change. It provides plants and animals with places to live, feed and breed. 
It can only do so effectively if, like the  road network, it is treated as a joined- up whole.  
14.10 The provision of safe and accessible green infrastructure is acknowledged as being 
one of the  key ways to achieve healthy, inclusive  and safe places which enable and 
support healthy lifestyles118. In particular for Crawley, as a Dementia- Friendly town, it 
is vital that people with dementia stay as active as they can –  physically, mentally 
and socially. People with dementia need meaningful activities they enjoy, which can 
maintain their confidence. Access to green space and nature has particular benefits 
for people with dementia, including better mood, memory and communication and 
improved concentration119. 
Strategic Policy GI1: Green Infrastructure 
Any growing urban area will place additional stress on the natural environment, including 
the aquatic environment. Crawley’s multi- functional green infrastructure network will be 
conserved and enhanced through the following measures:  
i. Development which protects and enhances green infrastructure will be supported;  
ii. Development proposals should take a positive approach to designing green 
infrastructure, utilising the council’s supplementary planning documents to integrate 
link and enhance the network  of green assets ; 
iii. Development proposals which reduce, block or harm the functions of green 
infrastructure  should be avoided. Any loss  or impact  will be required to be 
adequately justified, minimised, mitigated or, as a last resort , compensate d for, to 
ensure the integrity of the green  and blue infrastructure network is maintained;  
iv. The strategic green infrastructure network is afforded the highest protection due to 
its high value from existing or identified potential multiple functions, for example as 
recreation, routeways, access to the countryside, wildlife and climate mitigation;  
v. Development proposals should maximise the opportunity to maintain and extend 
green infrastructure links to form a multi -functional network of open space, providing 
opportunities for walking and cycling, and connecting to the urban/rural fringe and 
the wider countryside beyond;  
vi. Cross -boundary matters relating to green i nfrastructure should be considered and 
incorporated at the early stage of an application;  
vii. Large development proposals will be required to provide new and/or create links to 
green infrastructure  as well as take into consideration the use of SuDS and methods 
that incorporate  blue infrastructure into development designs to improve the visual 
amenity of the dev elopment, to account for Policy EP1 and to aid in reducing 
surface water run- off.  
viii. Householder developments and small non- residential extensions should take into 
account Policy  EP2 and innovative solutions that incorporate green and blue 
infrastructure i nto designs at an early stage.  
                                                 
118 National Planning Policy Framework, para. 91c (2019) MHCLG  
119 Dementia and Town Planning RTPI Practice Advice 2017, page 4 (2017) RTPI  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 189 ix. Where possible, Natural England’s Accessible Natural Green Space Standard 
recommendations and the Woodland Trust’s Woodland Access Standard  should be 
used to assess a development proposal’s location  in relation  to existing  accessible 
natural green space and woodland. A s a minimum , developments should seek to 
ensure new development proposals meet the Crawley local standards  for natural 
greenspace set out in paragraphs  7.13 and 14.16  relating to quantity, accessibility, 
quality and value.  
Reasoned Justification  
14.11 Plans should take a strategic approach to maintaining and enhancing networks of 
habitats and green infrastructure and plan for the enhancement of natural capital at a 
catchment or landscape scale across local authority boundaries120. 
14.12 Proposals for development will increase pressures on the borough’s landscapes and 
green spaces, presenting opportunities for enhancing and extending Crawley’s green 
infrastructure. For the town to develop and grow in a sustainable manner, it is 
important to ensure that green infrastructure is embedded in the planning process at 
the earliest stage.  
14.13 Green infrastructure should not just be considered as an adjunct to new 
development. Connected networks of green spaces around  new development should 
be treated as integral to the planning and design process conscious of its place within wider green infrastructure networks. This is assisted by an integrated review of 
existing green infrastructure functions (biodiversity, flood management, rights of way, 
open space, etc.). The Green Infrastructure Study  (2016)  identifies deficiencies and 
need in relation to future growth and the desires of the town’s residents to determine 
where improvement should be focused.  An Ecological Services  study  (2020)  has 
been undertaken for Crawley, which identifies the opportunities of Cra wley’s green 
infrastructure to meet a wide range of positive functions, including air quality, noise 
mitigation and ecological connectivity. This baseline evidence will  be used to 
consider opportunities for improving and extending these functions through new 
landscaping and open space provision through new development schemes and to 
assess the cumulative and wider impact of development proposals on the green 
infrastructure network.    
14.14 The NPPF requires local authorities to plan strategic development considering the impacts on existing infrastructure and the need for new infrastructure to service that 
development and also to contribute to and enhance the natural and l ocal 
environment. The Local Plan evidence base, including consultation responses, 
provides a clear message that Crawley’s green infrastructure is fundamental to 
residents’ quality of life and the wider environment. The Green Infrastructure P olicy 
and design, landscape, open space and biodiversity policies seek to reflect that 
importance.  
14.15 Through a range of Local Plan policies, the council will seek to achieve the provision, 
retention and/or enhancement of the specific functions of green infrastructure:  
a. Publicly accessible open space including formal sports facilities and informal 
amenity space;  
b. The High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty;  
c. Beyond the built up area where landscape character areas have been defined;  
d. Value of existing soft landscaping –  character and appearance, structure, 
screening or softening;  
                                                 
120 National Planning Policy Framework, para. 171 (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 190 e. Requirements of development –  amenity spaces including private gardens, 
landscape schemes, street trees, green roofs and walls and links to and between 
areas of public open space and accessible countryside;  
f. Areas of biodiversity value such as Local Wildlife Sites , Local Nature Reserves, 
adjacent SSSIs, Biodiv ersity Opportunity Areas and Ancient Woodland;  
g. Waterways and water bodies;  
h. Heritage Assets ; 
i. Opportunities to meet open space, sport and recreation needs;  
j. Green spaces for flood storage, conveyance, and S uDS. 
14.16 The table below sets out Natural England’s  Accessible Natural Greenspace 
Standards and the Woodland Trust’s Access Standard. I deally, both sets of 
standards should be met  for all new development to be located within the distance 
criteria for each size of accessible natural greenspace and woodlands . However, it is 
recognised that  in an urban area such as Crawley , where there is a lack of available 
land for large new provision,  a pragmatic approach is necessary . The table below 
also sets out the local standards for natural greenspace established by C rawley’s 
Open Space, Sport and Recreation Assessment  (2020).  
Natural England’s 
Accessible Natural 
Green Space 
Standards121 
recommend that all 
people should have 
accessible natural green 
space:  • Of at least two hectares in size, no more than 300m (five 
minutes ’ walk) from home.  
• At least one accessible 20 -hectare site within 2km of home.  
• One accessible 100 -hectare site within 5km of home.  
• One accessible 500 -hectare site within 10km of home.  
• A minimum of one hectare of statutory local nature 
reserves per 1,000 people.  
• That no person should live more than 500m from at least 
one area of accessible woodland of no less than 2ha in 
size.  
• That there should also be at least one area of accessib le 
woodland of no less than 20ha within 4km (8km round trip) 
of people’s homes.  
The Woodland Trust’s 
Woodland Access 
Standard122 aspires that:  • No person should live more than 500m from at least one 
area of accessible woodland of no less than 2ha in size; 
and 
• There should also be at least one area of accessible 
woodland of no less than 20ha within 4km (8km round trip) 
of people’s homes.  
Crawley Open Space, 
Sport and Recreation 
Local  Standards for 
Natural Greenspace  • Quantity Standard : 1.8ha per 1,000 popu lation.  
• Accessibility/Walkability Standard: 720m (15 minutes’ 
walk).  
• Quality Standard: Green Flag Quality Score of 70% to 
achieve a Good Quality Score or above.  
• Value Standard: Value Score of 60% and above to achieve 
a High Value Score.  
14.17  Existing n atural green space provision within Crawley compares , as follows,  against 
the local standards:  
• Quantity Standards: The Open Space Assessment identified 93 Natural Green 
Spaces in Crawley, covering 296.62ha. This equates to 2.64ha per 1,000 
population, currently exceeding the quantity standard borough- wide. However, 
the Assessment has shown that in some urban areas , such as Langley Green, 
                                                 
121 Accessible Natural Green Space Standards in Town and Cities (2011) Natural England  
122 Space for People, Targeting Action for Woodland Access (2017) Woodland Trust  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 191 Southgate and West Green,  the provision is already lower than this standard. The 
borough- wide provision is predicted to fall to 2.25ha per 1,000 population over 
the Plan- period, as the population increases (wi thout new provision being made). 
Whilst for the borough as a whole this remains above the overall Quantity 
Standard of 1.8ha per 1,000 population, existing deficiencies in some areas  are 
increased and  deficiencies in provision will occur  in Northgate and Three Bridges.  
• Accessibility Standards:  Whilst the Assessment shows that almost all of Crawley 
meets the local accessibility standard for natural greenspace ac ross the borough, 
the analysis  looked at provision of Natural Green Space by including and 
excluding large natural green space sites which are 40ha or more. The larger 
sites te nd to be in the countryside on the edge of the borough, and whilst 
publicall y accessible, may not be as accessible to all, compared to smaller urban 
open spaces equivalent to parks, gardens and amenity spaces.  
• Quality Standards: For the natural greenspace sites audited as part of the 
Assessment, quality scores ranged from 36 –  82% (Poor to Very Good) 
averaging 55% (Fair). The greatest number of sites fall into the Poor and Fair category.  
• Value Standards: Value scores for the borough’s natural greenspace sites ranged 
from 14% –  60% (Low to High).  
14.18  In light of these findings and c onsistent with  Policy OS2 and GI3, new developments 
should ensure they mitigate against placing greater pressures on existing natural 
greenspace. Ideally developments should be located close to areas of accessible 
natural greenspace. Therefore, new on-site natural greenspace provision in order to 
provide wildlife value should be considered where this is practical and can be designed in to minimise future management and maintenance concerns.  
Alternatively, contributions towards  access improvements to larger areas of natural 
green space; improvements to existing natural open space close to t he development ; 
or to convert other types of open space for wildlife value will be sought in accordance 
with the Planning Obligations Annex . 
14.19 Policy GI2  sets out the policy position i n relation to development which is close to , or 
may affect , ancient woodland and/or veteran trees . 
14.20 The council ’s Green Infrastructure SPD and Planning and Climate Change SPD  
provide further guidance  to help applicants make successful applications and to aid 
the delivery of green infrastructure where required.   
Biodiversity Sites  
14.21  To protect and enhance biodiversity and geodiversity, it is important to gain a 
thorough understanding of habitats and ecological networks. Developers can support 
an in- depth understanding of local biodiversity sites by : 
a. Identify ing, mapping  and safeguard ing components of local wildlife- rich habitats 
and wider ecological networks, including the hierarchy of international, national, 
and locally designated sites of importance for biodiversity; wildlife corridors and 
stepping stones that connect them; and areas identified by national and local 
partnerships for habitat management, enhancement, restoration or creation; and  
b. Promot ing the conservation, restoration and enhancement of priority habitats, 
ecological networks and the protection and recovery of priority species; and identify ing and pursuing  opportunities for securing measurable net gains for 
biodiversity.   
 
 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 192 Strategi c Policy GI2 : Biodiversity Sites 
Up-to-date habitat and species surveys and associated reports will be required to 
accompany planning applications which may affect the areas listed below or sites 
showing likely ecological value based on past ecological surveys.  
If significant harm to biodiversity resulting from development cannot be avoided, 
adequately mitigated or as last resort compensated then planning permission should be 
refused.  
Hierarchy of Biodiversity Sites  
To ensure a net gain in biodiversity, the following areas and their supporting and 
connecting habitat will be conserved and enhanced and the council will support their 
designation and management through Management Plans : 
1. Nationally designated sites:  
• Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)  
SSSI will receive the highest level of protection for habitat conservation value in line with 
national legislation, policy and guidance.  
2. National Planning Policy Framework Sites : 
• Ancient Woodland, and aged or veteran trees  
Development resulting in the loss or deterioration of irreplaceable habitats (such as 
ancient woodland and ancient or veteran trees) should be refused, unless there are 
wholly exceptional reasons and a suitable compensation strategy exists. A buffer zone 
between development and ancient woodland will be required in line with Natural England 
Standing Advice.   
3. Locally designated sites , and habitats and species outside designated sites:  
• Local Nature Reserves  (LNR) ; 
• Local Wildlife Sites (LWS) ; 
• Nature Improvement Areas ; 
• Habitats of Principle Importance identified in S41 of the Natural Environment  and 
Rural Communities Act 2006 or  Biodiversity Action Plans;  
• Biodiversity Opportunity Areas ; 
• Where Protected Species are present ; 
• Where Species of Principal Importance are present , as identi fied in S41 of the 
Natural Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006.  
Reasoned Justification  
14.22 As a public body, Crawley Borough Council has a duty to have regard to the 
conservation of biodiversity through the proper exercising of all its functions. This is a 
statutory function set out in S ection 40 of the Natural Environment and Rural 
Communities Act, 2006.  
14.23  This means that the consideration of biodiversity must be embedded in planning policy which should be making a contribution to the commitments set out in 
Biodiversity 2020: A Strategy for England’s Wildlife and Ecosystems Services. The 
ambition is to halt overall loss of England’s biodiversity by 2020 and in the longer 
term, move from a position of net biodiversity loss to net gain.  
14.24  To support this ambition the Local Plan Map identifies components of Crawley’s 
ecological network. This  ensures that biodiversity is considered, from protection of 
habitats and species to identifying opportunities to enhance biodiversity.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 193  
14.25  The Sussex Biodiversity Partnership works together towards achieving biodiversity 
targets. Biodiversity Opportunity Areas have been identified throughout the south 
east and are the regional priority areas of opportunity for restoration and creation of 
Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP) habitats. Within the borough, this includes the Urban 
Habitat Action Plan (HA P) which highlights the rich biodiversity in Sussex’s urban 
areas as well as the Deciduous Woodland, Lowland Heathland, and Lowland 
Meadows HAPs.  The council will continue to work  collaboratively with partners  to 
protect and improve the natural environment  based on locally identified priorities and 
evidence.  
14.26 Ancient Woodlands are valuable as  a biodiversity resource for their  diversity of 
species and longevity as woodland. Areas of ancient woodland are identified on the Local Plan Map and protected by national policy. As ancient woodland and ancient or 
veteran trees are irreplaceable, discussions over possible compensation should not 
form part of the assessment to determine whether the exceptional benefits of the 
development proposal outweigh the loss.  The presumption in favour of sustainable 
development does not apply where the plan or project is likely to have a significant 
effect on a habitat site (either alone or in combination with other plans or projects), 
unless an appropriate assessment has concl uded that the plan or project will not 
adversely affect the integrity of the habitat site
123. A minimum 15 metre buffer should 
be maintained between a development and the ancient woodland (as advised by a 
full ecological survey) , including through the construction phase, in accordance with 
the Natural England Standing Advice. A larger buffer may be required for particularly significant engineering operations, or for after -uses that generate significant 
disturbance.  
14.27 Ancient  wood pasture and historic parkland should receive the same consideration 
as other forms of ancient woodland. The protection of the whole habitat is necessary 
                                                 
123 National Planning Policy Framework, para. 177 (2019) MHCLG  
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 194 even though tree cover may be comparatively sparse. Development on open space 
between trees in an area of ancient wood pasture or historic parkland should not be 
permitted.  
14.28  Where it is deemed that there is going to be unavoidable residual damage or loss to 
ancient woodland, the measures taken to compensate for this must be of a scale and 
quality  commensurate with the loss of this irreplaceable habitat. Where ancient 
woodland is to be replaced by new woodland, this should aim to create 30 hectares 
of new woodland for every hectare lost.  
14.29  The borough has 12 designated Local Wildlife Sites, formerly known as Sites of 
Nature Conservation Importance (SNCIs) covering 329.79 hectares in total. Eight 
sites are borough- owned while four are privately -owned and managed. As of 2018, 
ancient woodland covers 197.68 ha (4.40%) of the borough, Deciduous woodland 
478.56 ha (10.64%), Ghyll woodland 25.49 ha (0.57%), lowland heathland 0.83 ha 
(0.02%), traditional orchard 0.32 ha (0.01%) and wood- pasture & parkland covers 
41.74 ha (0.93%).  
Biodiversity  Net Gain  
14.30 The c ouncil is committed to halting the overall decline in biodiversity by ensuring that 
development minimises impacts on biodiversity and provides net gains including 
establishing coherent ecological networks that are more resilient to current and future 
press ures.  
14.31 Through the 25 Year Environment Plan (2018) , the government is introducing a “net 
gain” principle into statutory policy. In assessing progress, a baseline needs to be 
set, and metrics and natural capital accounts developed to record progress s o that 
accountability is embedded into the planning system. Natural capital is recognised to 
be at least as important as physical and human capital in producing economic 
outputs and hence economic well -being. In 2011, the government committed to 
working wi th the Office for National Statistics (ONS) and the Department  for 
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs ( Defra)  to incorporate natural capital into the UK 
Environmental Accounts by 2020.  
14.32  In 2019, draft guidance to support the implementation of the Environment Bill (2019) was published in the form of the Defra Metric 2.0. This has been prepared for : 
developers who have commissioned a biodivers ity assessment using the M etric;  
communities wanting to understand the impacts of a local development; planni ng 
authorit y decision- makers interpreting M etric outputs included in a planning 
application;  or land owners wishing to provide biodiversity units from their sites to 
others. The Metric is designed to be used with Ecological Survey’s to acknowledge 
pre, cur rent and post development biodiversity baselines  and is anticipated to be 
finalised in December 2020.  
Tree and Landscape Character Planting  
14.33  Trees and soft landscaping makes an important contribution to the character and 
appearance of the borough and are beneficial in other ways including supporting 
biodiversity. Additional tree and/or landscape planting will be required to mitigate the visual impact of the intensification of buildings, hard surfacing parking and boundary 
treatments  as well as support  the net gain in biodiversity targets . General policy 
requirements for all new developments regarding landscaping is set out in Policy 
DD1.    
14.34  Good quality tree and landscape planting can secure multiple benefits, wider than 
visual improvements, parti cularly where this involves habitat creation, through 
providing one or all of cover, food or water to a targeted species; choosing species for their air quality improvement properties; and where species provide mitigation and 
adaptation for the impacts of climate change. To maximise the multiple benefits from CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 195 landscape planting,  detailed consideration is necessary as part of the landscape 
design of development schemes  and sufficient funding for initial planting and ongoing 
maintenance is required.  
14.35  The preservation of existing sites is preferable to the development of new habitat – 
this is covered by Policies  GI1, and GI2 . The protection and enhancement of 
Structural Landscaping is covered by Policy CL6.  The retention or replacement of 
existing trees is  covered by Policy DD4 . 
Policy GI3: Biodiversity  and Net Gain  
Development whose primary objective is to conserve or enhance biodiversity will be 
supported.  
All development proposals will be expected to incorporate features to encourage 
biodiversity and enhance existing features of nature conservation value within and around 
the development.   
Development  proposals  will b e required to demonstrate how the scheme will meet the 
government’s requirement for securing a ‘net gain’ in biodiversity , including information 
calculating the current biodiversity value of the site. As a minimum, all development 
proposals will need to achieve a net gain for biodiversity in accordance with government 
expectations124, currently a 10% increase in habitat value for wildlife compared with the 
pre-development baseline.  
Applications should include consideration to securing benefits for the purposes of 
pollination and biodiversity as part of their on- site landscaping schemes. This can include 
consideration for green roofs and gr een walls, where soft landscaping at ground level is 
limited. Discussions with Gatwick Airport Limited in relation to planting and management 
to minimise  the risk of bird strike should be held at an early stage of landscape desig n, in 
accordance with Policy DD5. 
Developers may be required to commit to providing  an Ecological Management 
Plan/Biodiversity Offset Management Plan for the development site. This will usually 
apply to larger developments or where a development site is cl ose to a Local Wildlife Site.  
Landscape proposals for residential development should contribute to the character and 
appearance of the town by including at least one new tree, or equivalent soft landscaping, 
for each new dwelling, of an appropriate species  and planted in an appropriate location.  
The tree and soft landscaping planting requirements would normally be expected to be 
met within the development site. Where the local planning authority agrees that this is not 
feasible or desirable, commuted sums will be sought in lieu on a per tree, or equivalent 
alternative habitat basis, taking account of constraints to planting. The approach would 
enable the green character and appearance of the borough to be maintained through tree 
and soft landscape planting on appropriate and available land.  
Proposals which would result in significant harm to biodiversity will be refused unless:  
i. this can be avoided by locating the development  on an alternative part of the site 
with less harmful impact; or  
ii. the harm can be adequately mitigated, or, as a last resort, compensated for.  
Compensation should consider losses of all the benefits provided by the natural 
environment.  
Reasoned Justification  
14.36 Much biodiversity is outside designated areas. The government’s proposal within the 
25 Year Environment Plan to introduce a net environmental gain requirement for new 
                                                 
124 Government’s Environmental Bil l (2019)  Defra  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 196 development offers a potential source of long- term investment in the delivery of an 
improved natural environment. The Environment Bill 2019 is in the process of  being 
finalised (2020), Clauses 90 to 94 in Part 6, Schedule 14 and Schedule 7A relate to 
Biodiversity Net Gain.  Planning policies and decisions should encourage multiple 
benefits from both urban and rural land, including through mixed -use schemes and 
taking opportunities to achieve net environmental gains –  such as developments that 
would enable new habitat creation or improve public access to the countryside.  
14.37 It is important that planning decisions take into account biodiversity by ensuring that decisions are based on sufficient information. It’s important to note that the pre -
development biodiversity value (baseline) is noted as the baseline before any onsite activity is carried out.  Detailed ecological assessments based on the latest ecological 
records and up to date surveys must be carried out on all new developments and the 
impacts on the loss of biodiversity must be assessed. Proposals need to be put forward that will either result in gains to biodiversity so that developments will deliver 
an overall net gain in biodiversity, or mitigation proposals ( including where  involving 
another site) need to be put forward that will achieve a net gain in biodiversity. 
Moreover, the proposals need to ensure that the net gains in biodiversity will be 
permanent, all other things being equal. For example, if planting to increase pollinator plants is proposed,  it is essential that plans are included to maintain and renew the 
plants over the long term.  
14.38  Simple definitions of environmental loss as being just the impact upon wild species or 
biodiversity are inadequate. Development can generate multiple impacts either directly on environmental assets or mediated through environmental impacts: wild 
species, recreation and related physical and mental health benefi ts; water quality and 
flooding;  air pollution emissions and greenhouse gases , etc. It is the loss of benefit 
value generated by development which should be compensated for. Those whose 
activities give rise to the environmental damage should pay the associated costs of 
compensation.  
14.39 In order to calculate the net gain in biodiversity required by new development, it will 
be necessary to quantify  the financial resources needed for the maintenance, 
restoration and enhancement of ecosystems and natural capi tal in order to deliver 
multiple objectives for biodiversity, landscape, the historic environment, water, soil, 
climate, air quality, flood management and other ecosystem services. The Defra 
Biodiversity Metric 2.0 as outlined in the Environment Bill presents an option for 
quantifying biodiversity value.  The Planning Obligations Annex confirms the 
government’s guidance and best practice from Natural England will be used to 
implement this requirement to development proposals in Crawley. Off- site financial 
provision,  or alternative , will be delivered via an identified strategic mechanism for 
net gain, anticipated to be set out in national guidance.  
14.40 In directing contributions  and recommendations for enhancements and 
improvements for achieving biodivers ity net gain a t a local  and county  level and for 
individual site proposals , advice and recommendations may include future West 
Sussex action plans or strategies, those produced by or on behalf of the Sussex Biodiversity Record Centre, Crawley Borough Counc il, and/or the Local Nature 
Partnership (LNP ). The council will work closely with the LNP  covering Crawley to 
prioritise resources towards the improvements and habitat creation which offers the most benefits for Crawley and the Sussex High Weald.  
14.41  The Defra Metri c 2.0 lists different types of u rban habitat types . The most appropriate 
types of habitats for  developers to provide in landscape schemes from the out set or 
through compensation where an appropriate number of biodiv ersity units is provided, 
include: allotments, artificial lake or pond, bioswale, brown roof, cemeteries and 
churchyards, extensive green roof, façade- bound green wall, ground based green CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 197 wall, ground level planters, intensive green roof, introduced shrub, amenity 
grassland, open mosaic habitats on previously developed land, orchard, rain garden, 
street tree , suburban/mosaic of developed/ natural surface, vegetated garden, 
woodland.  The government’s National Pollinator Strategy for England (2014) sets out 
a 10 year plan to help pollinat ing insects survive and thrive across England. There 
are at least 1500 species of insect pollinators in the UK. Pollinators face many 
pressures that with good management can be mitigated against including:  
• Habitat loss ; 
• Pests and diseases ; 
• Extreme weather ; • Competition from invasive species;  
• Climate change; and  
• Use of some pesticides.  
Some of these management measures could be incorporated into landscape 
schemes for new development.  
14.42  There may be an overlap with on -site tree planting and tree/landscape habitat 
contributions for each new dwelling, as covered by this Policy, and this can be considered as part of the net gain calculations where the species chosen are agreed 
as appropriate for this purpose. The D efra Biodiversity Metric 2.0 enables soft 
landscaping and trees to be quantified into Biodiversity Units.  However, replacement 
trees (Policy DD4)  will not count towards the net gain; indeed they may involve a net 
loss of biodiversity due to the loss of important habitats provided by mature trees, 
and the potential for new trees to fail.  
14.43 When planting a tree, the existing sewerage and water supply infrastructure should 
be taken into account, as well as the choice of appropriate tree species for the 
ground conditions and environment. The Green Infrastructure SPD (Appendix 6) lists 
appropriate species that could be planted in Crawley. Where possi ble, UK sourced 
and grown tree stock should be used to support biodiversity and resilience. Site -
specifics such as ground conditions, light/sunlight and proximity to buildings and 
paving/footpaths must be taken into account to ensure the correct species is  used for 
the location and purpose and does not result in nuisance or early removal of the tree. 
In addition, other matters for consideration include climate change resilience, 
pollination opportunities, carbon storage, air quality management, street use and 
appropriate species to avoid bird strike on aircraft .  
14.44  Where character landsca pe planting as part of the biodiversity net gain is to be 
provided on- site in lieu of on- site new tree planting, the planting scheme should be 
agreed with the council as constituting an equivalent visual contribution to a one tree 
per dwelling, and must be justified on a case- by-case basis considering the context 
and design of the scheme, taking into account the multiple benefits provided by trees (including air quality, carbon storage, shading, character, maturity and biodiversity).  
14.45  The cost of off -site planting by the council, in lieu of provision on- site, will be based 
on the cost of a  sixteen to eighteen centimetre girth tree measured at 1.5m off the 
ground, planting, sundries and watering over a five year period to ensure that the tree 
becomes established. This is set out in the Planning Obligations Annex.  The council 
will direct this  contribution toward provision of new tree planting within a suitable 
location in the borough or an equivalent alternative landscape habitat.  
14.46  The Manor Royal Design Guide SPD sets out tree planting requirements for sites in 
Manor Royal.  
14.47  The developer and/or site manager must ensure the relevant management plan is 
handed over and explained to any maintenance company or staff responsible for 
maintaining landscaping and/or gardens and buildings. A simplified version should 
also be provided for householders and other occupiers, explaining how biodiversity is 
being protected and encouraged on the site. This commitment will form part of the 
obligations on a planning permission and will be secured by way of a S106 legal 
agreement and/or planning condition.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 198 Local Green Space  
14.48 The NPPF empowers local communities to promote the designation of green areas of 
particular importance for special protection as a Local Green Space.  
Strategic Policy GI4: Local Green Space  
The following area is designated as Local Green Space:  
Ifield Brook Meadows and Rusper Road Playing Fields  
This area is designated due to its value to the local community and local significance in its 
function as an area for enjoyment of recreation,  visual amenity,  tranquillity, wildlife, 
heritage, and highly accessible countryside close to the urban area.  
The above area will be safeguarded from development other than in very special 
circumstances or where the development is to enhance Local Green Space functions , for 
example,  through improvements to access, recreation and wildlife.  
Reasoned Justification  
14.49 Public c onsultations have consistently shown that Ifield Brook Meadows and Rusper 
Road Playing Fields should be protected because of their special value to the local 
community. The Meadows are an important site of nature conservation with distinctive vegetation and wildlife. The northern part of the Meadows is of historic 
importance, forming part of the Ifield Village Conservation Area, contributing to the 
setting of the village and church. These elements make this area unique and local in 
character.  
14.50 The presumption in favour of sustainable development does not apply to Local Green 
Spaces.  Proposals affecting the designated Local Green Space should be consistent 
with national Green Belt Policy.  
 
 
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 199 Sustainable Design & Construction  
15.1 Crawley is committed to supporting our legally binding national carbon reduction 
targets and being carbon neutral by 2050; this is to be achieved by aligning with the 
national zero carbon agenda in planning policies and by engaging with local 
businesses and communities.  
Chapter Content  
15.2 This chapter sets out policies to guide the relationship between development 
proposals and l ocal, national and global environmental protection.   
The Key Issues  
15.3 Crawley as a dense urban area has a high level of carbon emissions and anticipated 
development, which will contribute towards the causes of climate change. In addition, 
it is also ide ntified as an area of radiant energy and subject to serious water stress. 
Therefore, its adaptation towards climate change will provide opportunities to harness and threats to be addressed.   
15.4 A Compact Urban Borough:  The town was developed as a new town in the 1950s, 
and all development followed the neighbourhood principle which provides a 
sustainable pattern. This ethos is stil l central to the way the town is  planned today 
and provides an increased opportunity for local energy production on a network 
basis.  However , the compact nature of the borough and changing climate patterns 
are expected to increase the frequency and severity of heatwave events. Such 
events are likely to be of increased severity in Crawley due to the relatively high 
levels of radiant energy the area receives, combined with the urban heat island effect 
typical of compact urban areas.   
15.5 Water Stress:  The South East, including Crawley, is an area of  serious  water stress. 
It is among the worst areas in the UK. Therefore, more stringent water efficiency 
measures should be required from housing and commercial property development.  
15.6  Gatwick Diamond:  Crawley and its surrounds have been identified as an area of 
significant change and growth. Gi ven its geographical location at  the heart of the 
Gatwick Diamond and the significant amount of both commercial and residential 
growth expec ted throughout the life of the Local P lan, there is a need to consider the 
impact on the local environment and to plan f or sustainable growth. This is 
exacerbated by the resultant in- commuting to the area and regional focus of growth 
that would otherwise be experienced across a number of authorities. This is also 
supported by the fact that the main commercial  area, Manor Royal is currently 
responsible for 28% of the town’s carbon emissions. This will increase if growth for 
the Gatwick Diamond area is focused in this area . 
15.7 Gatwick Airport: Given the proximity of the international airport, there are a number 
of local impa cts that would affect how climate change is dealt with. From the increase 
in traffic movements in the local area, to the restrictions in terms of building heights 
and consideration of potential future airport expansion, the operation of the airport 
require s the Local Authority to act differently than it would otherwise. For example, 
Crawley has a reduced opportunity of using wind turbines in the countryside adjacent 
to the airport and other renewable technologies must be considered. Gatwick 
Airport’s publis hed Scope 1 and 2 emissions contribute 24% of the business and 
commercial emissions in Crawley borough and 13% of total emissions (excluding aircraft movement, as these are considered on a national level).  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 200 15.8 Crawley Borough Council declared a Climate Emergency by a unanimous vote of Full 
Council on 17 July 2019. The motion declared that the council ‘should commit to aim 
for zero carbon emissions as soon as possible and, in doing so, to encourage local 
residents and businesses to do the same’. The motion further included a pledge ‘to 
aim to reduce carbon emissions generated by Crawley Borough Council activities by 
at least 45% by 2030 and to zero by 2050’. It included a commitment to work with ‘other councils and partners to determine and implement best practice methods to 
reduce carbon emissions and so limit Global Heating to less than 1.5 degrees 
Celsius’
125. 
Local Plan Policies  
Sustainable Design and Construction 
15.9 The government has pursued progressive improvements to the environmental 
sustainability  and energy efficiency of dwellings through changes to the building 
regulations and  the development of national  technical  standards. The council has a 
long term aspiration to be carbon neutral by 2050 and, therefore , supports the 
introduction  of national standards through Building R egulations . In line with the 
March 2015 Ministerial Statement , the council recognises Crawley as having the 
spatial characteristics in place that warrant the stipulation of specific policies in regard to energy  and water efficiency  and, in regard to water targets,  to be able to 
trigger  the use of the  tighter operational s tandards
126. The need to address climate 
change at a local level has also been supported throughout consultations for the Local Plan and in its evidence base.  
15.10 Crawley’s compact urban nature combined with the significant levels of development 
expected over the coming years present an opportunity for Crawley to minimise its 
carbon emissions in an efficient manner. Choices made in relation to the layout and 
scale of new development strongly influences energy consumption. Policies  CL3 and 
CL4 in particular, require  major new development use land more sustainably by 
integrating  land uses and transport networks. Currently e nergy use in buildi ngs 
makes up a significant portion of the carbon emissions generated within Crawley. 
Domestic buildings accounted for 22.7% of Crawley’s overall emissions in 2018, and 
industrial and commercial buildings for 35.7%, with transport accounting for the 
remaini ng 41.6%
127. Even before this energy has reached the consumer, energy 
wasted in the form of transfer and distribution losses has resulted in additional 
emissions.  However, due to the borough’s characteristics this wasted energy can be 
captured for the benefit of others, and this will result in  Crawley’s  overall emissions  
being reduced.  
15.11 Crawley was mainly constructed between 1950 and 199 0, when sustainable 
development was not a priority, and many of the town’s buildings consequently perform poorly in terms of their energy efficiency . Added to this fuel  poverty has 
affect ed between one in twenty and one in twelve Crawley households between 
2011- 16. The improvement of existing buildings to ensure everyone has access to 
affordable warmth is , therefore,  a high priority.  
15.12 Actions to reduce emissions from energy use in buildings are most cost effective 
when undertaken during construction or renovation works. As such , development 
projects present the most appropriate and effective opportunity to mitigate the climate 
change impact of the borough.  Therefore, the following hierarchy should be adopted 
by all development within the borough:  
                                                 
125 ‘Climate Emergency Declaration’ (2019) CBC  
126 Planning Update March 2015: Written Ministerial Statement (March 2015)  
127 UK local authority and regional carbon dioxide emissions national statistics: 2005 to 2018 (2020) Department 
for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy (hereafter BEIS) . CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 201 Be Lean –  use less energy  
Be Clean –  improve efficiency of energy supply  
Be Green –  use renewable and low carbon  energy  sources . 
This hierarchy is widely recognised, and reflects the fact that some aspects of a 
building’s environmental performance are more  fundamental and harder to retrofit at 
a later date, while others are more amenable to change during the life of the building.  
15.13 A number of objectives have been established that all developments are expected to achieve to ensure the borough remains a sustainable place in the coming years.   
Strategic Policy SDC1 : Sustainable Design and Construction  
The following requirements and standards set the strategic framework for the mitigation 
and adaptation of climate change as part of the development process within Crawley.  
CLIMATE CHANGE MITIGATION  
Development will be required to mitigate climate change in accordance with the 
following hierarchy:  
  Be Lean 
Where new-build dwellings may be subject to Part L of the 2013 Edition of the 2010 
Building Regulations for the purposes of Building Regulations compliance, the relevant 
Target Emission Rate (TER) should be achieved using building fabric and energy 
efficiency measures alone.  
The ‘Be Green’ requirement set out below will require further emissions reductions, 
which may be achieved using low/zero carbon technologies.  
Residential developments including 10 or more new homes or incorporating a 
site area of 0.5 hectares or more  will also be required to implement a recognised 
quality regime to ensure that ‘as built’ environmental performance matches the 
calculated design performance.  
New building s other than dwellings  which may be subject to Part L2A of the 2013 
Edition of the 2010 Building Regulations for the purposes of Building Regulations 
compliance should achieve the relevant Building Emission Rate (BER) through fabric 
and energy efficiency measures alone.  
The ‘ Be Green’ requirement set out below will require further emissions reductions, 
which may be achieved using low/zero carbon technologies.  
Other developments meeting the thresholds for submission of a Sustainability 
Statement (detailed below) should detail t heir consideration of the potential for building 
fabric and energy efficiency measures, and any specific measures proposed.  
These proposals will usually trigger building regulations requirements, and proposals 
for meeting these should be set out.  
All dev elopments required to submit a Sustainability Statement should detail 
measures proposed to minimise the amount of carbon emitted throughout the 
implementation and construction process and to retain any existing embedded carbon 
onsite.  
  Be Clean  
Developments should consider and respond to the potential to supply their energy 
needs, particularly for electricity, heating and cooling, by means of decentralised 
energy generation in accordance with Policy SDC2 . CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 202 Be Green  
All developments required to submit a Sustainability Statement should use 
renewable and low carbon energy technologies, where appropriate, or where required 
to meet specific emissions standards for new buildings. This should include use of 
available roof -space for solar PV  where possible.  
New-build dwellings  will be required to meet whichever of the following standards is 
more efficient in respect of carbon dioxide emissions:  
a)         a reduction of at least 19% against the Target Emission Rate (TER) set by the 
2013 Edition of the 2010 Building Regulations (Part L);  
b)         a new mandatory national emissions standard, introduced via Building 
Regulations or otherwise.  
New buildings  other than dwellings will be required to undergo BREEAM 
certification and achieve the ‘minimum standards’ for BREEAM Excellent within the 
Energy and Water categories, except where it is demonstrated that this is not 
technically feasible.  
CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION  
All develo pments required to submit a Sustainability Statement should contribute to 
the tackling of the serious water stress in the borough in accordance with Policy SD3 . 
New dwellings, other new building s, and material changes of use (as defined by 
the Building Re gulations) will be required to cope with future temperature extremes, 
and mitigate the potential of the development to increase the impact of heatwave 
effects, in accordance with the cooling hierarchy:  
• Minimise internal heat generation through energy efficient design;  
• Reduce the amount of heat entering a building in summer through orientation, 
shading, albedo, fenestration, insulation and green roofs and walls;  
• Design to enable passive ventilation (e.g. cross ventilation);  
• Provide mechanical ventilation;  
• Provide active cooling (ensuring they are the lowest carbon options).  
SUSTAINABILITY STATEMENT THRESHOLDS  
All proposals involving the types of development listed below must be supported by a 
Sustainability Statement detailing the performance of the development against these 
requirements, including proposed approaches to achieving relevant Building 
Regulations requirements, and the avoidance of overheating:  
• Creation of a dwelling (including by conversion);  
• Creation of 100sqm or more of new -build floor space;  
• Extension of a building which already comprises 1000sqm or more;  
• The following changes of use, where cumulatively affecting 100sqm or more:  
- Non-E-class to E -class;  
- Non-C-class to C -class;  
- Non-F-class to F -class.  
Further details on how these objectives can be  addressed can be found in the Planning 
and Climate Change SPD.  
Reasoned Justification  
15.14 The NPPF  highlights the need for planning to address and adapt to climate change, 
encourage the transition to a low carbon future, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, 
and support renewable and low carbon energy128. In addition, it  also requires local 
                                                 
128 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraphs 148- 151 (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 203 plans to pursue ‘opportunities for  net gains ’ across the economic, social and 
environmental  objectives which define sustainable development129.  
15.15 A number of borough- wide issues and opportunities have been identified in the 
evidence base and these form the objectives that all development is expected to 
address in this Policy.  
15.16 In accordance with the ‘Be Lean’ element of the energy hierarchy, the P olicy requires 
development to take an active approach to minimising  a development’s need to 
consume energy. This is paramount to tackling climate change and intrinsically linked 
with the NPPF.  It also reflects the government’s understanding – set out in the Future 
Homes Standard consultation – that primary energy consumption will increasingly 
become the key metric for new buildings, as emissions move closer to net zero130. 
15.17 The construction of new buildings represents the best and most economical 
opportunity to achieve advanced standards in energy efficiency. In recognition of this 
the P olicy requires new buildings to be designed so as to be capable of meeting 
current Building Regulations emissions standards even before any low or zero 
carbon technologies have been included in the design. In order to address the 
recognised ‘performance gap’ between the modelled performance of buildings and 
their actual performance, the policy further requires applications for major residential 
developments to demonstrate that they have acted to ensure that sustainability and 
construction standards specified at the design stage are carried through in the 
implementation of the development.  
15.18 Existing buildings within the borough are responsibl e for a large proportion of carbon 
emissions so improvements to all of these bui ldings are essential to curb Crawley’s  
emissions over the Plan period. Therefore, the P olicy requirement to consider and 
detail energy efficiency measures relates to all development s meeting certain 
thresholds,  including alterations and extensions to existing buildings . This will also 
help to tackle the high level of local fuel poverty by ensuring affordable warmth within 
the borough.  
15.19 Existing buildings contain embedded c arbon; this is carbon that was emitted to 
construct it. It is vital that this already emitted carbon is not wasted through the needless demolition of structures so applications will be required to demonstrate how 
onsite embedded carbon has been retained.  
15.20 Due to Crawley’s compact urban nature, the use of district energy networks  as part of 
the ‘Be Clean’ element of the energy hierarchy,  can ensure a low carbon future for 
the borough as required by the NPPF. Ensuring development utilises these networks  
is of particular importance to ensure they are a success.  
15.21 Crawley Borough Council has assess ed
131 the likely opportunities and constraints of 
a number of technologies across the borough. High radiant energy, a plentiful supply 
of a biomass fuel, and district energy network s have  been identified as the most 
suitable renewable energy resources available.  Therefore,  renewable and low carbon 
energy technologies  should be utilised  where appropriate.  
15.22 In order to provide a focus for climate change mitigation measures within new 
developments, the policy sets out baseline environmental performance standards as 
part of the ‘Be Green’ element of the energy hierarchy. New -build dwellings will be 
required to achieve standards for CO 2 emissions equivalent to Level 4 of the 
discontinued Code for Sustainable Homes, pending the introduction of a more stringent Future Homes Standard, which is to be introduced by 2025 as part of the 
                                                 
129 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraphs 8 and 32 (2019) MHCLG  
130 The Future Homes Standard -  2019 Consultation on change s to Part L (conservation of fuel and power) and 
Part F (ventilation) of the Building Regulations for new dwellings (2019), MHCLG.  
131 Decentralised Energy Study (2011) HurleyPalmerFlatt  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 204 government’s ‘mission to at least halve the energy use of new buildings by 2030132’. 
The Code Level 4 equivalent represents a recognised standard which is consistent 
with the Ministerial Statement of 25 March 2015, and with the government’s policy for 
national technical standards133. New non -residential buildings are meanwhile 
required to meet the minimum standards for BREEAM ‘excellent’ within the Energy 
category.  
15.23  The P olicy further provides a framework for adaptation to the effects of climate 
change. The borough is identified as falling within an area of serious water stress and 
as such development is expected to address this issue by achieving a better than 
standard level134.  
15.24 Crawley is  also expected to experience increased  frequency and severity of 
heatwave events. Therefore, ensuring that new buildings will be fit for purpose under 
greater temperature extremes and minimising the contribution that new 
developments have towards the urban heat island effect will help manage t his 
impact.  
15.25 This Policy will make a substantial contribution to addressing the requirements set 
out in the NPPF in respect of climate change, thereby contributing towards the social 
and environmental objectives defining sustainable development. It wi ll also positively 
contribute towards the economic  objective,  as buildings with better environmental 
performance will have lower energy costs, reduced requirements for retrofitting 
arising from tighter regulations in the future, and increased marketability135. They will 
also promote investment and employment opportunities in green industries.  
District  Energy Supply  
15.26 A large proportion of Crawley’s energy is currently supplied from the National Grid  as 
a centralised system. Power stations generate and distribute this energy across long 
distances to homes and businesses.  This is an inefficient and carbon intensive 
process due to waste heat and distribution losses. Thus only 45 per cent of the 
energy used to generate electricity in the UK in 2017 reached end users in the form 
of electricity136. At the same time,  nearly half of the energy used  in the UK is for 
heating137. Therefore, the use of waste heat from electricity production can help shift  
energy supply to more affordable lower carbon sustainable sources.  
15.27 District Energy Networks are designed to distribute energy, such as heating, cooling 
and electricity across a local area. Networks typically consist of underground pipes 
and/or cables connecting local energy sources to buildings. Energy sources can 
include plant that generates electricity and uses the waste heat from this process to 
supply the network. This is known as Combined Heat and Power (CHP) and is a form 
of efficient “decentralised” energy production. District Energy Networks  can be 
supplied with many fuel sources, including renewables or waste heat. Energy 
supplies to District Energy Networks can, therefore, be flexible in regard to using 
different sources and different technologies both now and in the future.   
15.28 Crawley, due to its relatively dense and compact urban character, its neighbourhood-
based layout, and the quantity of new development expected over the coming years 
has a significant opportunity to develop D istrict  Energy Networks.  Such networks 
                                                 
132 The Future Homes Standard (2019), MHCLG.  
133 Planning Update March 2015: Written Ministerial Statement, March 2015; Government Response to the draft 
Revised National Planning Policy Framework consultation, p.48 (2018) MHCLG  
134 Water Stressed Areas –  Final Classification (July 2013) Environment Agency   
135 The Business Case for Green Building: A Review of the Costs and Benefits for Developers, Investors and 
Occupants (2013) World Green Building Council; Capturing the value of sustainability: Identifying the links 
between sustainability and business value (2018) UK Green Building Council  
136 Digest of UK Energy Statistics (DUKES) 2018, p.112 (2018) BEIS  
137 Energy Consumption in the UK (ECUK) 2018, Data Table 1.04 (2018) BEIS  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 205 could provide affordable warmth to residential and commercial buildings , tacklin g fuel 
poverty and improving the borough’s  energy security. S tudies commissioned by the 
council  and other stakeholders  have identified a number of Priority Areas within the 
borough where District Energy Networks are likely to be most viable in the short 
term138. Other strategic developments also provide significant opportunities for the 
development and implementation of District Energy Networ ks. 
Policy SDC2 : District Energy Networks  
The development of district energy networks and associated infrastructure is encouraged 
and should be approved unless it results in significant adverse impacts on the environs.  
Priority areas for the delivery of District Energy Networks  (DEN)  are identified on the 
Local Plan Map.  
Any major development within the borough, and all development proposals within a 
priority area for  District Energy Networks that would involve the creation of  a new dwelling  
or the creati on of over 1000sqm of internal floorspace,  must incorporate an energy 
strategy developed in accordance with the following hierarchy:  
i. where a network is in place in the immediate area: connect to an existing District 
Energy Network;  
ii. where a network is not y et in place:  
a) incorporate within the development a system for supplying energy to any 
surrounding existing or planned buildings. Any system installed should be 
compatible with a wider district energy network and developments should ensure 
that connection to a wider network is facilitated in the future through good design 
and site layout ; or 
b) include site-wide communal energy systems ; or  
c)   demonstrate that the development will be “network ready” , i.e. optimally 
designed to connect to a District Energy  Network on construction or at some 
point after construction.   
iii.     where a development has  demonstrated that the preceding options cannot be 
achieved, due to technical feasibility, or due to site or development specifics, an 
alternative approach to inc orporating low - or zero -carbon technology energy may be 
justified, on a case- by-case basis. These developments will be required to supply a 
proportion of their energy needs from low - or zero- carbon sources located on or 
near the site as follows:  
a) For major developments within a DEN priority area: at least 20%;  
b) For major developments outside a DEN priority area, or minor developments 
within a DEN priority area including the creation of a new dwelling: at least 
10%.  
Where a connection to an existing District Energy Network is proposed, the council may 
secure the implementation of this by means of a planning obligation.  
All development  within the categories identified above must be support ed through the 
submission of a Sustainability S tatement in compliance with the Planning and Climate 
Change SPD.  
 
                                                 
138 Decentralised Energy Study (2011) HurleyPalmerFlatt; BISEPS Re-Energise: Strategic Energy Opportunities 
(West Sussex County Council and Manor Royal Business District, 2018); Crawley Civic Centre DHN Concept 
Design Report (Ramboll, 2018).  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 206 Reasoned Justification  
15.29 Crawley Borough Council has conducted a thorough assessment of the potential use 
of decentralised energy networks across the borough. This has included work by 
West Sussex County Council, the Energy Centre for Sustainable Communities, and 
Hurley Palmer Flatt consultancy.  
15.30 When considering the opportunities for reducing CO 2 emissions through the supply of 
low carbon heat, District Heating (DH) was identified as an alternative method of 
supplying heat to buildings, using a network of super insulated pipes  to deliver heat 
to multiple buildings from a central heat source, such as a Combined Heat and Power (CHP) plant. A CHP plant is essentially a local, smaller version of a traditional 
power station but by being combined with heat extract, the overall effici ency is much 
higher (typically 80% -  85%). Whilst the electrical efficiency of smaller CHP systems 
is lower than large scale power generation, the overall efficiencies with heat use are 
much higher resulting in significant CO
2 reductions.  
15.31 A ‘heat map’ for Crawley has been created that identifies density of heat demand 
across the borough, the assessment identified a number of areas where the 
development of district heating schemes should be actively encouraged : 
• Town Centre/Three Bridges corridor: the council is taking advantage of opportunities in this area, including through the creation of a new energy centre 
on the Town Hall site which will supply heat and power to a number of nearby 
developments and locations.  
• Manor Royal: there is high demand fo r process heating/cooling as well as space 
heating in this area and potential to generate and supply low/zero carbon energy 
locally is being pursued by local stakeholders and businesses as part of the Re-Energise Manor Royal project.  
• Forge Wood: there is network potential within this area due to proposals for 
additional large- scale development and possible linkages with Manor Royal.  
• K2 Leisure Centre and Land Adjacent to Desmond Anderson Primary School: 
there is potential to expand the Combined Heat and Pow er provision at K2 to 
supply heat and power to the adjoining allocated housing site.  
• In addition,  Policy EC4 allocates land at Gatwick Green, for the development of a 
Strategic Employment Location predominantly comprising industrial (B2) and 
storage and distribution (B8) floorspace. This strategic allocation provides a significant opportunity for the masterplanning of energy generation and 
consumption, notably through potential for the decentralised supply of heat, 
cooling and electricity.  
These areas are identified as Priority Areas on the Local Plan Map. However, District Energy Networks are encouraged throughout the borough,  including outside of the 
identified areas . 
15.32  The NPPF directs local plans ‘to identify opportunities for development to draw its 
energy supply from decentralised, renewable or low carbon energy systems’. This 
further applies to the goal of ‘co- locatin g potential heat customers and suppliers’. 
Further, local planning authorities should ‘expect new developments to comply with 
any development plan policies on local requirements for decentralised energy supply, 
unless it can be demonstrated by the applicant, having regard to the type of 
development involved, that this is not feasible or viable’
139. Given the complexity of 
decentralised energy, the council encourages early pre -application discussions.  
                                                 
139 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraphs 151 and 153 (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 207 15.33  The approach of seeking to make new dwellings capable of connecting to future 
DENs is consistent with the approach outlined in the government’s Clean Growth 
Strategy of April 2018, which announces the intention ‘to consult on strengthening 
energy performance standards for new and existing homes under building 
regulations, including futureproofing new homes for low carbon heating systems’.  
 
Tackling Water Stress 
15.34 The South East, including Crawley, is an area of serious water stress140. Water 
stress is a measure of the level of demand for water (from  domestic, business and 
agricultural users) compared to the available freshwater resources. It can cause 
deterioration of the water environment in both the quality and quantity of water, and 
consequently restricts the ability of a waterbody to achieve ‘good’ status under the 
Water Framework Directive.  
15.35 Changing climate conditions are expected to further aggravate water stress in 
Crawley. Drought is expected in increased frequency and severity and will put additional strain on reservoir and groundwater levels. Extreme rainfall events are also 
expected to become more frequent and to be more severe. Although seemingly 
counter -intuitive: increased risk of extreme rainfall can actually further aggravate 
water stress as most of this water does not soak throug h to recharge groundwater 
reserves but instead becomes surface water run -off – increasing the risk of flooding.  
15.36 Water efficiency measures can make a significant contribution to the reduction of 
water stress. Southern Water, South East Water and Sutt on & East Surrey Water are 
responsible for water supply in Crawley. In response to the severe water stress, 
Southern Water has committed through its Water Resource Management Plan to 
‘Target 100’, an objective of achieving a per capita consumption of 100  litres per 
person per day  (l/p/d) by 2040. This approach is more ambitious than the Building 
Regulations optional target of 110 l/p/d, and is supported by the other water supply 
                                                 
140 Water Stressed Areas –  Final Classification (July 2013) Environment Agency   
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 208 companies serving Crawley, and the Environment Agency. The Local Plan supports 
this pro -active approach to meeting the challenge of water stress.  
Policy SDC3 : Tackling Water Stress  
Crawley is situated within an area of serious water stress . Therefore, development should 
plan positively to minimise its impact on water resources , including protecting against 
deteriorating water quality,  and promote water efficiency.  
Proposals involving the creation of residential dwellings will be required to meet an 
advanced water efficiency standard of 100 litres/person/day. This standard will be 
required unless superseded by any tighter national standard introduced during the Local 
Plan period that is applicable in an area of serious water stress.  
New non- residential buildings will be required to meet the minimum standards for 
BREEAM ‘Excellent’ within the Water category.  
Non-residential extensions and changes of use which are required to submit a 
Sustainability Statement in accordance with Policy SDC1  will be required to achieve water 
efficiencies equivalent to the minimum Water standards for BREEAM ‘Excellent’, unless 
this is shown to be unfeasible.  
Applicants must demonstrate how they have achieved  the requirements of this Policy 
within their Sustainability Statement as required by Policy  SDC1 .  
Reasoned Justification  
15.37 The NPPF requires local planning authorities to take ‘ a pro- active approach to 
mitigating and adapting to climate change, taking into account the long term 
implications for… water  supply’141. Ensuring that new development is highly water 
efficient  and that , where appropriate , it makes use of rainwater harvesting and/or 
grey water recycling for uses which do not require water to be potable (such as WC 
flushing), will help to minimise the impact of development on water stress in the 
region.  
15.38 The Environment Agency defines a water stressed area as a location where ‘the 
current household demand for water is a high proportion of the current effective 
rainfall which is available to mee t that demand or where the future household 
demand for water is likely to be a high proportion of the effective rainfall available to 
meet that demand’. Crawley Borough Council is one of many local authorities in the 
country to have declared a climate emer gency. Climate change is predicted to 
increase pressure on water resources, increasing the potential for a supply -demand 
deficit in the future, and making environmental damage from over abstraction of 
water resources more likely. The delivery of water and wastewater services and the 
heating of water in the home require high energy inputs, and water efficiency can reduce energy use and carbon emissions. It is equally important that development 
does not cause an unsustainable increase in water abstraction.   
15.39  Crawley’s water supply is largely provided by Southern Water, and the borough is 
located within its Sussex North supply area. During certain supply conditions, 
groundwater abstraction at Hardham in Horsham District makes a significant 
contribution to  Crawley’s supply. Natural England has advised that based on recent 
evidence, an adverse effect on the integrity of the Arun Valley  Special Area of 
Conservation (SAC), Special Protection Area  (SPA) and Ramsar features could not 
be excluded with certainty. The Environment Agency and Natural England are 
working with Southern Water to try to identify a long term more sustainable water 
supply. In the meantime, whilst the adverse effect remains or is uncertain, 
                                                 
141 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 149 (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 209 development in the Sussex North part of the Gatwick  sub-region must be certain not 
to add to this adverse effect. The council will continue to engage with Southern Water 
in relation to groundwater extraction at Hardham, and will retain its ongoing 
relationships with water infrastructure companies, providing an annual profile of 
projected growth to support them in planning for the provision of sufficient water 
supply and infrastructure.  
15.40  Crawley’s planning policy on water efficiency requires all new dwellings, including the 
subdivision of existing buildings into multiple dwellings, to achieve stringent water 
efficiency requirements, recognising that it is an area of serious water stress and 
reflecting the ambitions of the council and water supply companies to respond to this 
challenge. The current optional requirement set out in Building Regulations142 is 110 
l/p/d (105 l/p/d with an additional 5 l/p/d for external use). However, the Building 
Regulations were last updated some time ago, and are designed to apply nationally. 
They do not  specifically  take into account the situation in the South East  nor the 
particular circumstances in the Sussex North Water Resource Zone . Given the 
pressing issue of water stress, the Gatwick Water Cycle Study, with  support from the 
Environment Agency,  makes a clear recommendation that  a tighter water efficiency 
standard, of  at least  100 l/p/d, is considered the necessary level for Crawley.  
However, given the significant water supply challenges faced in Sussex North Water 
Resource Zone, and the potentially significant ecological impacts of groundwater 
abstraction at Hardham, Crawley is working with other local authorities, Southern 
Water, Environment Agency and Natural England to assess the in- combination 
impacts of planned growth, and to consider, having regard to technical feasibility and 
viability, if greater water efficiency standards (tighter than 100l/p/d) is required to 
achieve water neutrality.  
15.41 This can be achieved in a number of ways, from reducing the water demand from new houses, through to achieving “wat er neutrality” in a region by offsetting a new 
development’s water demand by improving efficiency in existing buildings. The 100 
l/p/d target can be achieved at minimal cost through a ‘fittings approach’ to 
compliance with the 110 l/p/d standard, but with the additional measure of a shower 
flow rate reduced from 8 litres per minute down to 6 litres per minute. The additional cost of implementing this specification, going beyond the 110 l/p/d target to achieve 
consumption of 100 l/p/d would be just £14 per d welling
143. Other sustainability 
measures can be incorporated into development to contribute towards the achieving 
of water neutrality, including water efficiency measures for taps and toilets, reduced 
volume baths, rainwater harvesting and grey water recycling.  
15.42  For non -domestic development there is currently no nationally applied standard for 
water efficiency of buildings (only minimum performance requirements for individual 
water using fixtures). However, BREEAM sets out standards for minimum water 
performance  of such buildings. This is done using the BREEAM water calculation 
method to assess the percentage reduction in internal potable water usage of the proposed building performance as compared to that of a notional building, using 
standardised assumptions fo r occupant behaviour.  
15.43 Given the findings of the council’s Water Cycle Studies and the work undertaken in 
partnership with the Environment Agency as an area of serious water stress, non -
domestic developments are required to install water meters and to  meet the highest 
water efficiency requirements. The Policy requires non- residential development to 
equal or exceed BREEAM Excellent requirements, which require that there is a 25% 
reduction in potable water use.  
                                                 
142 Building Regulations Approved Document G (Sanitation, Hot Water Safety and Water Efficient)  
143 Housing Standards Review (2014), Department for Communities and Local Government  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 210 15.44 The EU Water Framework Directive144 establishes a framework for the protection of 
inland surface waters (rivers and lakes), transitional waters (estuaries), coastal 
waters and groundwater. The government has stated that the environmental 
protections arising from this and other EU legal inst ruments will remain in place after 
the UK leaves the European Union, and the 2018 ’25 year Environment Plan’ has announced the intention to improve ‘at least three quarters of our waters to be close 
to their natural state as soon as practicable’
145. The council supports this work 
through the proper and sensible management of water in all new development.  
15.45 The council will continue to work alongside developers, key stakeholders and the 
Environment Agency with regard to water supply and demand considerati ons, as well 
as any infrastructure requirements, and will assist in ensuring that the highest 
standards for water efficiency are considered for all development within the borough. 
Further information is  provided in the Planning and Climate Change SPD.    
                                                 
144 The Water Framework Directive, European Union (Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of 
the European Council of 23 October 2000)  
145 A Green Future: Our 25 Year Plan to Improve the Environment, p.25 (2018)  Department of the Environment, 
Food and Rural Affairs  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 211 Environmental Protection 
16.1 Crawley is distinct in comparison to other districts and boroughs in the sub- region. It 
is mainly urban in character, is well linked to the motorway network, and contains a 
major international airport at Gatwick. The borough is home to one of the largest 
employment areas in the south east at Manor Royal and County Oak. These 
attributes have contributed to Crawley becoming a leading economic driver in the 
sub-region, and a focus for growth, but can also result in pollution impa cts which 
need to be mitigated and managed. With further economic and residential growth required to meet identified needs over the Plan period to 2037, it is vital that 
development is carefully and sustainably planned with the environment in mind.  
Chapter  Content  
16.2 The NPPF is clear that planning policies and decisions should contribute to and 
enhance the natural and local environment, including by preventing new and existing 
development from contributing to, being put at unacceptable risk from, or being 
adversely affected by soil, air, water or noise pollution. This chapter sets out policies 
to guide the relationship between development and local, national and global environmental protection requirements. At its heart is the objective to ensure that 
new and existing development does not contribute to, nor that it is put at 
unacceptable risk from or adversely affected by, unacceptable levels of flood risk or 
pollution.  
The Key Issues  
16.3 Like many urban areas, Crawley is home to major transport hubs and networks, 
industrial and commercial uses, as well as more sensitive uses including residential 
areas, green infrastructure, and also countryside outside the built up area boundary. 
It is important that the relationship between different land uses is approp riately 
managed, and that development is carefully planned, to ensure that it does not result 
in, nor expose its users to, unacceptable environmental impacts.  
16.4 Crawley is fortunate in having few areas that are subject to serious environmental or pollut ion issues, though the predominantly urban nature of the borough, and the 
variety of different land uses within it, means that the relationship between development and the environment is an important consideration in planning 
decisions.  
16.5 Flood risk is a key issue for Crawley. Falling entirely within the River Mole catchment, 
parts of the borough are significantly affected by fluvial flood risk, but flood risk can 
come from a range of other sources including surface water (pluvial), sewer and 
ground water. High profile flood events serve as a reminder of the need to 
appropriately manage flood risk, and it is vital that development is planned with flood 
risk in mind, both in terms of protecting users of development, and ensuring that 
development does not u nacceptably increase flood risk elsewhere.  
16.6 The presence across the borough of a range of other noise generating uses, and 
also noise- sensitive uses, means that the relationship of development and noise 
must be carefully managed. Aviation noise is a significant consideration, with a large 
extent of the borough falling within the noise contours of Gatwick Airport. Noise from 
surface transport can also be significant, with the M23 motorway located to the east 
of Crawley and a number of busy roads running within the borough. Given the CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 212 borough’s signific ant economic function, noise from commercial and other sources 
must also be taken into account.  
16.7 Air Quality is a significant issue in places, particularly in areas where surface 
transport is concentrated. This is recognised through the designation of Hazelwick Air 
Quality Management Area (AQMA) in 2015, with plans in place to extend this area 
following recent exceedances of the annual objective for Nitrogen Dioxide close to Three Bridges Station. Pollution can also take other forms, including land based 
contamination which can be harmful to the environment and sensitive uses, and the 
effect of light pollution which can be harmful to the night -time environment and may 
have an urbanising effect that undermines amenity and setting if not carefully designed.  
16.8 It is important that development protects, and where possible, improves the 
environment and amenity of existing and future residents and occupiers of land. To address these issues and ensure they are not worsened, development will be 
required to dem onstrate that it will not give rise, or be subject to pollution that would 
cause unacceptable harm to health, safety, quality of life, amenity, biodiversity or the environment. Where development is likely to generate significant pollution impacts, 
the council will require that the impacts are minimised and/or mitigated to an 
acceptable level. Through the policies set out in this Chapter, the relationship between development and environmental factors will be appropriately managed to 
ensure that the sustainability objectives of the Crawley Vision are met.  
Local Plan Policies  
Development and Flooding 
16.9 Crawley’s water environment  is an important planning consideration, particularly from 
the perspective of managing flood risk, and will continue to remain so in plan ning for  
Crawley’s future. The borough falls entirely within the upper reaches of the River 
Mole catchment, and the town’s  location within the catchment has meant that several 
areas are identified as being at risk of flooding. The northward flow  of the Upper Mole 
towards the Thames also has flood implications for Gatwick Airport and neighbouring authorities, in particular Reigate and Banstead Borough.  River  (fluvial)  flooding is not 
the only source of flooding;  Crawley is  at the highest risk of surface water  (pluvial)  
flooding in West Sussex. S ewer and groundwater flooding are also important  
planning  considerations.   
16.10 It is vital that development is planned sustainably with flood risk  from all sources  in 
mind  to protect  the current and future users of development , and ensur e that 
development  does  not increase flood risk elsewhere.  The NPPF and supporting 
PPG: Flood Risk and Coastal Change categorise different development types 
according to their  vulnerability  to flood risk , and the extent to which these  uses are 
compatible or otherwise with the level of flood risk at the development site . Through 
applying the sequential test, and where required the exception test, the most 
vulnerable development types should be directed to the areas of lowest flood risk.  
Policy EP1: Development and Flood Risk  
Development must avoid areas which are exposed to an unacceptable risk from flooding, 
and must not increase the risk of flooding elsewhere. To achieve this, development will:  
i. be directed to areas of lowest flood risk  having regard to its compatibility with the 
proposed location in flood risk terms, and , where required,  demonstrating that the 
sequential and exceptions tests are satisfied;  
ii. where located in Flood Zones 2 or 3, and for all major development in Flood Zone 1 , 
demonstrate through a Flood Risk Assessment how appropriate mitigation CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 213 measures will be implemented to ensure that over the lifetime of the development 
and taking climate change into account, that flood ris k is acceptable on site, and is 
not increased elsewhere as a result of the development ; 
iii. demonstrate that peak surface water run- off rates and annual volumes of run- off will 
be reduced through the effective  implementation,  use and maintenance of SuDS, 
unless it can be  demonstrated  that these are not technically feasible or financially 
viable ; 
iv. make appropriate provision for surface water drainage to ground, water courses or 
surface water sewer s. Surface water will not be allowed to drain to the foul sewer ; 
v. not be permitted to take place within 8 metres from the top of any Main River or 12 
metres from any Ordinary Watercourse without prior consent from the Environment 
Agency, nor within 3 metres of any Thames Water sewer system without prior 
consent fr om the sewerage undertaker;  
vi. post construction , provide to the council certification of the drainage works from a 
third party professional. This should not be the consultant who designed the 
drainage features. This will be to ensure that the drainage details and design 
submitted for planning application has been constructed in line with the submitted 
documents.  
Reasoned Justification  
16.11 Flooding is a natural process that can happen at any time in a wide variety of 
locations, potentially posing a risk to life, property and livelihoods. The risk of flooding 
posed to properties within Crawley arises from a number of sources including river 
flooding, localised runoff and sewer flooding.  
16.12 Development has the potential to increase the likelihood of flood risk if it is not 
carefully  planned and  managed. There are areas which are particularly at risk from 
fluvial flooding as Crawley is crossed by a number of designated main river watercourses that form part of the River Mole catchment. Climate change, and the 
predicted alterations to weather patterns this will bring, will place additi onal need to 
ensure development  can be considered as safe for its lifetime. Therefore, to ensure 
that people and places are not exposed to unacceptable flood risk, it is essential that 
planning decisions are informed by, and take due consideration of, the flood risk 
posed to (and by) development.  
16.13 Flash flooding from surface water run- off is frequently  an issue across the borough 
following heavy localised rainfall events. It is a specific issue in Crawley as the 
underlying clay soil and density of urban development reduces permeability and 
increases the levels and speed of surface water run- off. This can result in localised 
surface  flooding, and can lead to rivers exceeding their storage capacity m ore 
quickly, often resulting in ‘flash flooding’.  It is the responsibility of the developer to 
make proper provision for surface water drainage to ground, water courses or 
surface water sewer s. It must not be allowed to drain to the foul sewer, as this is the 
major contributor to sewer flooding.  
16.14 The NPPF requires local planning authorities to take a pro- active approach to 
managing impacts associated with climate change, including flood risk. The risk of a flood event is a function of both the probabil ity that the flood will occur and the 
consequence to the community as a direct result of the flood. To minimise risks to 
property, development should be avoided in areas which are at greatest risk of flooding, and directed to sequentially preferable areas of lowest risk. Where, having 
applied the sequential test, it is not possible for development to be located in areas of 
lower flood risk, then the NPPF exceptions test should be applied and satisfied.   
16.15 To guide the location of development, Planning Practice Guidance: Flood Risk and 
Coastal Change (DCLG, 2019 ) identifies the different levels of flood risk, ranging CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 214 from Flood Zone 3b (functional floodplain), the land at greatest probability of flooding 
to Flood Zone 1, the lowest probability. Table 2 o f the Planning Practice Guidance 
categorises different development types according to their vulnerability to flood risk, with Table 3 outlining which development types are suitable within each flood zone.  
16.16 To identify the extent to which land is at ri sk of flooding, applicants will be required to 
refer to the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA, 2020). Based on the SFRA mapping, Crawley is delineated into the following Flood Zones:  
• Flood Zone 1: Low probability: less than a 0.1% chance of river and sea flooding 
in any given year  
• Flood Zone 2: Medium probability: between a 1% and 0.1% chance of river 
flooding in any given year or 0.5% and 0.1% chance of sea flooding in any given 
year 
• Flood Zone 3a: High probability: greater or equal to a 1% chance of river 
flooding in any given year or greater than a 0.5% chance of sea flooding in any 
given year.  Excludes Flood Zone 3b.  
• Flood Zone 3b: Functional Floodplain: land where water has to flow or be stored 
in times of flood. The identification of functional floodplain set out in the SFRA 
takes account of local circumstances and has been agreed with the Environment 
Agency. Only water compatible and essential infrastructure are permitted in this 
zone and should be designed to remain operational in times of flood, resulting in 
no loss of floodplain or blocking of water flow routes. Flood Zone 3b is defined as 
land within the defended 5% AEP flood extent but excludes land within existing 
building footprints.  
16.17 The SFRA mapping is based on the most recent (2020) update of the Environment 
Agency River Mole modelling, though does inevitably represent a point in time. To ensure that the most up- to-date information is considered, applicants should refer, in 
addition to the SFRA, to the most recent  Environment Agency Flood Map for 
Planning, and should consult with Environment Agency and Lead Local Flood 
Authority to understand if more recent data is available.   
16.18 The NPPF designates residential development as a ‘more vulnerable’ use which 
should be directed to Flood Zone 1  in the first instance, and then  Flood Zone 2, 
subject to demonstrating compliance with the sequential test and the acceptability of 
development through a  site-specific  Flood Risk Assessment.  The Flood Risk 
Assessment will need to demonstrate how flood risk will be managed now and over 
the development’s lifetime, taking climate change into account and with regard to the 
vulnerability of its users.  Residential development on land falling within Flood Zone 
3a will only be acceptable where it can be demonstrated  through a site- specific Flood 
Risk Assessment, that firstly the requirements of  the sequential test  are met, and 
secondly that the exception test is satisfied.  
16.19 All housing sites identified in Local Plan Policy H2 are considered to be appropriate locations in terms of flood risk. This assessment follows early engagement on the 
Local Plan with the Environment Agency and West Sussex County Council (WSCC). 
Of the sites allocated by the Local Plan for residential development, two are situated 
in areas partially affected by Flood Zone 2 and/or Flood Zone 3a; these being: Henty 
Close, Bewbush and  Land adjacent Desmond Anderson, Tilgate. Land West of 
Balcombe Road/Street Hill, Pound Hill S outh and Worth, identified as a housing, 
biodiversity and heritage site, is subject to a small area of Flood Zones 2 and 3. The principle of residential development at each of these sites is accepted, subject to 
applicants demonstrating, through a Flood Ri sk Assessment, that the development 
has been carefully planned to ensure it is acceptable in terms of flood risk.  
16.20 West Sussex County Council (WSCC) is the Lead Local Flood Authority (LLFA), 
meaning it is a statutory consultee on planning applications  where flood risk is a CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 215 consideration. In its capacity as LLFA, WSCC has published West Sussex Lead 
Local Flood Authority Policy for the Management of Surface Water (updated 
November 2018), which sets out the requirements for drainage strategies and 
surface  water management provisions associated with applications for development. 
In responding to flood risk as part of the planning application process, applicants should meet the requirements set out by WSCC , demonstrating the extent, position, 
function and future management arrangements for the sustainable drainage system 
for a proposed site. This information will be required for all development, except for 
those development types identified within Local Plan Policy EP2 and at Paragraph 
16.17, and should be submitted to the Local Planning Authority at the time that an 
application is made. Further guidance is provided in the SFRA (2020) and the Climate Change Supplementary Planning Document.   
16.21  The provision of buffer strips is important in preserving wate rcourse corridors, flood 
flow conveyance and for future watercourse maintenance and improvement. It also 
enables the avoidance of disturbing ecology and the structural integrity of riverbanks. 
The buffer distances set out in the Policy are to ensure the pr eservation of the 
watercourse corridor, wildlife habitat, flood flow conveyance and future watercourse 
maintenance or improvement.  
16.22  Whilst individual development with appropriate site mitigation measures should not 
result in measurable local effects w ith respect to hydrology and flood risk, the 
cumulative effect of multiple development may be more severe at downstream locations in the catchment. Development should therefore incorporate Sustainable 
Drainage Systems (SuDS) to manage surface water, with t he primary aim of reducing 
flood risk. SuDS represent the most effective approach to reducing flood risk for 
relatively high intensity, short and medium duration events, and are particularly 
important in mitigating potential increases in surface water flooding, sewer flooding and flooding from small and medium sized watercourses resulting from development. 
SuDS can deliver wider sustainability benefits, enabling surface water to be collected 
for use in homes and gardens, adaptation to climate change through recharge of the 
watercourse and underlying aquifers, and biodiversity and habitat enhancements. Use of SuDS can also support the management of diffuse pollution generated by 
urban areas through the sequential treatment of surface water, reducing the 
pollu tants entering lakes and rivers, resulting in lower levels of water supply and 
wastewater treatment being required. This treatment of diffuse pollution at source 
can contribute to meeting Water Framework Directive water quality targets, as well 
as national  objectives for sustainable development.  
16.23  Scope may exist to incorporate natural flood management approaches to protect, 
restore and re -naturalise the function of catchments and rivers to reduce flood risk by 
emulating the natural regulating functions  of catchments, rivers, and floodplains. A 
wide range of techniques can be used that aim to reduce flooding by working with natural features and processes in order to store or slow down flood waters, including 
offline storage areas, restoration of rivers o r removal of redundant structures, re-
meandering streams, targeted woodland planting, and reconnection and restoration of functional floodplains.  
Flood Risk Guidance  for Householder Development  and Small Non -Residential 
Extensions  
16.24 Some existing residential dwellings  and non- residential buildings  in Crawley are 
situated in areas of flood risk, falling within Floo d Zone 2 (medium probability),  Flood 
Zone 3a (high probability)  or Flood Zone 3b (functional floodplain) . It is recognised 
that the occupiers of these properties may  seek  to apply for planning permission to 
undertake  small -scale  development that is associated with the use of the existing 
building, such as  householder applications, or small ground floor extensions. This CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 216 type of development, though of a relatively small -scale, still has potential to take up 
flood storage, and will itself  be vulnerable to flooding.  
16.25 In these situations,  it is recognised that  a detailed Flood Risk Assessment  would not 
be proportionate to the nature and scale of development being proposed. Therefore, 
for the development typologies identified in Policy EP2, and defined at paragraph 
16.27, a proportionate Flood Risk and Resilience Statement  will be required to 
support planning applications. This will be required to  demonstrate how any lost flood 
storage will be mitigated, and how the proposed development will be made resilient in flood risk terms.  
Policy EP2 : Flood Risk Guidance  for Househol der Development, Small Non-
Residential Extensions  
Withi n Flood Zone 2 (medium probability), Flood Zone 3a (high probability)  and Flood 
Zone 3b (functional floodplain)  a detailed Flood Risk Assessment  will not be required  for: 
i. Householder development  
ii. Minor  non-residential extensions with a footprint of less than 250m2 
iii. Minor alterations to property .  
Instead, a Flood Risk and Resilience Statement must be provided. This will be required 
to, on a proportionate basis, demonstrate  how: 
i) any loss of flood storage resulting from the development will be appropriately  
mitigated; and  
ii) the development has been designed to ensure that , over its lifetime and taking 
climate change into account , it is resilient to the level of flood risk posed.  
Reasoned Justification  
16.26 Some existing buildings within Crawley Borough are situated within Flood Zones 2 
and 3a/b , and are , therefore,  subject to an existing level of flood risk. In individual 
cases where small -scale development is proposed to existing buildings that are 
already affected by fl ood risk, this is unlikely to result in a significant increase in flood 
risk. However, cumulatively, such developments will have an overall impact of 
reducing flood storage capacity in the borough, unless carefully planned to ensure 
that any loss of flood storage is appropriately mitigated. Equally, it is recognised that the development proposed will, as is the case for the existing building, be at a risk of 
flooding.  Therefore,  it is important that development is designed to ensure that any 
loss of flood storage is appropriately mitigated, and that development is resilient to 
the level of flood risk posed.  
16.27 Local Plan Policy EP2 applies to the following development typologies:  
i. Householder Development: For example, sheds, garages, games r ooms etc. 
within the curtilage of the existing dwelling, in addition to physical extensions to 
the existing dwelling itself. This definition excludes any proposed development 
that would create a separate dwelling within the curtilage of the existing dwelli ng, 
e.g. subdivision of houses into flats.  
ii. Minor Non- Residential Extensions: For example, industrial, commercial, leisure 
extensions with a footprint less than 250 square metres.  
iii. Minor Alterations to Property: Minor development that does not increase the s ize 
of buildings, such as alterations to external appearance. This definition excludes 
changes of use that would increase  flood risk as a result of a changed flood risk 
vulnerability classification.  
16.28  The nature and scale of these development types can be problematic to consider as 
part of a detailed Flood Risk Assessment, sometimes resulting in delay to the CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 217 decision- making process. To simplify the planning process for small -scale 
development, whilst still ensuring that matters of flood storage and resi lience are 
adequately addressed, a proportionate Flood Risk and Resilience Statement will be 
required. This will need to demonstrate how any loss of flood storage resulting from 
the development will be appropriately mitigated, and how the development has been 
designed to ensure that it is resilient, now and over its lifetime, to the level of flood risk posed. In doing so, the statement will be expected to show how appropriate flood 
storage mitigation such as green infrastructure or SuDS has been incorporated into 
the development, and will need to explain how the development will be designed and 
constructed to reduce impacts in the event of flood water entering the building.  
Land and Water Quality  
16.29  Generally land and water quality in Crawley is good. Most land contamination is 
derived from existing or historic activities, and the potential for contamination is 
largely, but not exclusively, confined to the existing Main Employment Areas. H istoric 
rural activities which are likely to have been present in the area also have the 
potential to give rise to land contamination. As a result, it is possible that 
development may be proposed on land that is already subject to existing land 
contamination, or which may propose a use that could, if not carefully planned, 
impact negatively on land or water bodies. In these cases, it will be necessary to 
ensure that land quality  is investiga ted and  remediated.  
Policy EP3 : Land and Water Quality  
People’s health and quality of life, property and the wider environment will be protected 
from unacceptable risks of, and adverse effects associated with, radioactivity, chemical 
substances and biological agents in land.  
Development will adhere to the appropriate local and national standards, procedures and 
principles to ensure that, having undertaken appropriate land quality assessment, 
remediation, and protection, the land is suitable for the proposed use.  
A. Sensitive Development  
Development on land that is affected by the above pollutants will be permitted where i t 
can be clearly demonstrated that the development, its future occupiers and the wider 
environment will not be exposed to unacceptable risk from, or be adversely affected by, 
land contaminati on. 
B. Development With Potential For Causing Land Contamination  
Development that has the potential to cause land contamination will only be permitted 
where the applicant demonstrates that:  
i. adequate measures will be put in place to protect land quality and any receiving 
waters;  
ii. there will be no adverse impacts to occupiers of neighbouring land or the wider 
environment as a result of the development.  
There are complementary pollution control regimes that also have this effect, and 
therefore the planning reg ime is only relevant where these pollution control regimes do 
not exist.  
Reasoned Justification  
16.30 The NPPF recognises that development may be proposed on land that is subject to 
existing land contamination, or may take the form of a use that could impact 
negatively on land or water bodies. The NPPF also requires that Local Plans aim to minimise pollution and other adverse effects on the natural environment and CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 218 encourage re- use of despoiled, degraded, or contaminated brownfield land,  where 
appropriate, through remediation and mitigation.  
16.31 The re -use of brownfield sites is encouraged in order to reduce the need to develop 
greenfield sites, and remove or reduce the risks posed by contamination to health, 
safety and the environment.  In doing so , it offers a sustainable approach to 
redevelopment by allowing regeneration of specific areas as well as potentially 
delivering environmental benefits. After remediation land should be appropriate for 
the proposed use and as a minimum should not be capable of being determined as 
contaminated land under Part IIA of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 (or as 
revised).  
Development  and Noise  
16.32 Due to the urban nature of Crawley noise sources and exposure vary. There are 
relatively tranquil areas, such as within Crawley’s large parks, ranging to much 
noisier areas close to the M23, Main Employment Areas, and land close to Gatwick 
Airport. Where exposure to noise becomes noticeable or significant, this can result in 
changes to people’s behaviour. Should the level of noise exposure become 
unacceptable the impacts can become far -reaching, fundamentally affecting quality 
of life, and potentially resulting in serious health and stress related problems, amenity 
issues, and negative impacts on produc tivity and learning. For these reasons, it is 
fundamental that the relationship between noise sources and noise sensitive 
development is effectively and appropriately managed through the Local Plan.  
Policy EP4 : Development and Noise  
People’s quality of life will be protected from unacceptable noise impacts by managing the 
relationship between noise sensitive development and noise sources. To achieve this, 
Policy EP4  should be read in conjunction with the Local Plan Noise Annex , and 
development will be required to adhere to the noise standards identified within it . 
A. Noise Sensitive Development  
Residential and other noise sensitive development will be permitted where it can be 
demonstrated that users of the development will not be ex posed to unacceptable noise 
impact from existing , temporary  or future uses.  
Noise sensitive uses proposed in areas that are exposed to noise above the Lowest 
Observed Adverse Effect Level (LOAEL) or  at the Significant Observed Adverse Effect 
Level  (SOAEL) from existing or future industrial, commercial or transport (air, road, rail 
and mixed) sources will be permitted where it can be demonstrated good acoustic design 
has been considered early in the planning process, and  that all appropriate mitigation, 
through careful planning, layout and design, will be undertaken to ensure that the noise 
impact for future users will be made acceptable. Noise sensitive uses proposed in areas 
that are  exposed to noise at the U nacceptable  Adverse Effect  level will not be per mitted.  
For surface  transport  noise sources, the Unacceptable Adverse Effect  Level  is considered 
to occur where noise exposure is above 66dB L Aeq,16hr (57dB L Aeq,8hr at night).  
For aviation transport sources the Unacceptable Adverse Effect is considered to occur 
where noise exposure is above 60dB L Aeq,16hr . (57dB L Aeq,8hr at night).  
B. Noise Generating Development  
Noise generating development will be permitted where it can be demonstrated that nearby 
noise sensitive uses (as existing or planned) will not be exposed to noise impact that will 
adversely affect the amenity of existing and future users . Proposals will adhere to 
standards identified in the Local Plan Noise Annex to establish if the proposal is 
acceptable in noise impact terms, and  where  required  will, through good acoustic design,  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 219 appropriately mitigate noise impacts through careful planning, layout and design. Noise 
Generating Development that would expose users of noise sensitive uses to 
Unacceptable Adverse Effect  noise will not be permitted.  
C. Noise Impact Assessment  
A Noise Impact Assessment will be required to support applications where noise sensitive 
uses are likely to be exposed to significant or unacceptable noise exposure. The Noise 
Impact Assessment will:  
i. assess the impact of the proposal as a noise receptor or generator as appropriate; 
and  
ii. demonstrate in full how the development will be designed, located, and controlled to 
mitigate the impact of noise on health and quality of life, neighbouring properties , and 
the surrounding area.  
In preparing a Noise Impact Assessment, applicants will adhere to Planning Noise Advice 
Document: Sussex  (2020 or latest revision)  and ProPG (Professional Practice Guidance 
on Planning & Noise for New Residential Developments)  for further guidance.  
D. Mitigating Noise Impact  
Where proposals are identified as being in the Lowest Observed Adverse Effect Level 
(LOAEL) or the Significant Observed Adverse Effect Level (SOAEL) categories,  either 
through noise exposure or generation,  all reasonable mitigation measures  must be 
employed to mitigate noise impact s to an acceptable level  that is as low as is reasonably 
achievable.  Appropriate mitigation must be delivered as part of the development to ensure 
that the impacts of existing or k nown potential future noise sources are acceptable on the 
use being applied for by the applicant.  
Reasoned Justification  
16.33 Key to the Local Plan approach is a methodology of separating noise sensitive 
developments and noise generating sources, whilst ensuring that the PPG ‘agent of 
change’ principle is adhered to. For the purpose of interpreting and applying Local 
Plan Policy  EP4, reference should be made to  the Local Plan Noise Anne x. The 
Local Plan Noise Annex outlines specific noise metrics that define when noise impact 
becomes observed (Lowest Observed Adverse Effect Level –  LOAEL), significant 
(Significant Observed Adverse Effect Level –  SOAEL), and unacceptable 
(Unacceptable Adverse  Effect). It also details the appropriate noise contours that 
need to be taken into account  in the preparation and determination of planning 
applications , and provides wider guidance and evidenc e relating to noise in Crawley. 
Development will therefore be expected to adhere to the guidelines set out in the 
Local Plan Noise Annex.   
16.34 Crawley is one of 65 large urban areas  in England to which the Environmental Noise 
Directive applies, and the Local Plan approach to managing noise has regard to 
Noise Action Plans produced by DEFRA to promote good health and good quality of life. Given Crawley’s unique noise environment, it is considered that locally -specific 
guidance is needed to ensure that national objectives are met, whilst ensuring that an approach that is consistent with adjoining local planning authorities is progressed.  
16.35 The NPPF requires that planning policies and decisions avoid noise giving rise to 
significant adverse impacts on health and quality of life. New development must be 
appropriate to its location taking into account the likely effects (including cumulative 
effects) of pollution on health, living conditi ons and the natural environment.  Potential 
adverse impacts should be mitigated and reduced to a minimum. To ensure that the 
Local Plan appropriately manages and mitigates against issues of noise on a 
consistent basis, the policy approach draws on evidence base work.   CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 220 16.36 Planning Practice Guidance:  Noise  expands upon the noise guidance of the NPPF. 
Specifically, it outlines the ‘agent of change’ principle; this being the position that 
development that would introduce a new land use (whether this is a noise sensitive 
use or a noise generating use)  is responsible for managing the impact of that 
change. Paragraph 007 of PPG: Noise continues to recognise that Local Plans may include specific noise standards to apply to various forms of proposed development  
and locations in their area.  
16.37 However , it is still recognised that the revocation of PPG24 (Planning and Noise) has 
resulted in an absence of technical guidance relating to noise. Whilst PPG24 
provided guidance, through specific noise metrics,  in relation to situations in which 
the onset of noise impact becomes significant, neither PPG: Noise, nor the Noise 
Planning Policy Statement for England (2010)  provide technical noise metrics that 
define the different levels at which noise represents a planning consideration.  
However, given the diverse range of noise sources in Crawley (including the airport, motorway, and Manor Royal) detailed technical guidance is required to facilitate the 
interpretation of Local Plan Policy EP4.  
16.38 ProPG : Planning & Noise – New Residential Development (May 2017) sets out 
principles of good acoustic design. It recognises the importance of designing out the 
adverse effects of noise at an early stage, using a holistic design process that 
creates places that are both comfortable and attractive to live in, where acoustics are  
considered integral to the living environment.  
16.39 Technical guidance on noise impact is set out in the Local Plan Noise A nnex.  This 
draws upon evidence and the PPG24 Noise Exposure Categories as a technical 
starting point,  to provide guidance in assessing the acceptability of development 
proposals in noise terms.  
16.40 Where a Noise Impact Assessment is required , consideration should be given to 
Planning Noise Advice Document, Sussex  (2020 or latest revision) which has been 
produced on a joint basis by East and West Sussex local authorities. This has been produced to provide clear and consistent guidance as to the level of information that 
should be submitted with planning applications  for noise generating developments or 
noise sensitive developments, including guidance on when it is appropriate to submit 
a noise report and the requir ed content of such a report.  
Air Quality  
16.41 As an urban borough, Crawley experiences relatively low pollution, and is fortunate in 
having no seriously polluted areas. Air Quality in the borough is mainly good, with 
national targets being met for all pollutants with the exception of nitrogen dioxide 
(NO 2) at a small number of locations including the desig nated Hazelwick  Air Quality 
Management Area (AQMA) along the A2011 at Crawley Avenue and surrounding 
areas146. Following exceedance of the objective levels for NO 2 close to Three Bridges 
Station, it is anticipated that Hazelwick Road AQMA will be extended to incorporate 
this newly identified area. A key contributor to poor air quality in these areas is emissions from all types of vehicles along busy roads and commuter routes.  
16.42 In addition to traffic, air quality can be affected by a number of pollutant sources, 
including industrial , commercial and domestic . New development  can contribute to 
local emissions and have an impact on local air quality. Therefore, it is  important that 
opportunities are taken t o improve local air quality conditions, and as a minimum, 
mitigate the impacts of the development through good design and sustainable 
building measures that promote good air quality. It is important to ensure that 
development that is intended to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and fuel 
                                                 
146 Air Quality Annual Status Repor t (Crawley Borough Council, 2019)  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 221 consumption is not unintentionally detrimental to local air quality. Development in or 
close to an AQMA should prioritise generation of heat and power through means that 
do not influence air quality and minimise emissions to air from combustion.  
16.43 Therefore, it is vital that the maintenance and where possible improvement of air 
quality is appropriately factored into the location, design and operation of 
development. The overarching objective is to prevent new and existing development from contributing to, being put at unacceptable risk from,  or being adversely affected 
by air pollution. To help achieve this, the Local Plan draws upon national and local 
guidance, including any subsequent Air Quality Supplementary Planning Document 
(SPD).  
16.44 The ‘Air Quality & Emissions Mitigation for Susse x Authorities’ ( 2019 or latest 
edition), is a local guidance document produced by Sussex Air  Quality Partnership 
and signed up to by East and West Sussex local authorities  to ensure that a 
consistent cross- authority approach is applied to the consideration of air quality in 
planning applications . The document identif ies situations in which planning 
applications should be supported by an Emissions Mitigation Assessment and/or an 
Air Quality Impact Assessment , and details the provision and type of mitigation that 
will be required . 
Policy EP5 : Air Quality  
People’s health, quality of life and the wider environment shall be protected from the 
significant adverse effects of atmospheric pollution.  
Development should help to improve air quality and enhance the environment. New and 
existing development will be prevented from contributing to, being put at risk from, or 
being adversely affected by  atmospheric  pollution. To achieve this, development will be 
required to prevent, or where this is not practicable, minimise the generation of pollutants 
that would result in a deterioration in air quality and to prevent exposure to poor air 
quality.  
To ensure that ai r quality is appropriately taken into account in the planning of 
development, applicants will adhere to national and local guidance, including the  Local 
Plan Planning Obligations Annex and Air Quality and Emissions Mitigation Guidance for 
Sussex (2019 or l atest version) which should be used to identify if:  
a) an Emissions Mitigation Statement is required as part of a planning application;  
b) an Air Quality Impact Assessment is required as part of a planning application.  
To reduce the overall background levels o f pollution, sustainable design principles shall 
be incorporated into the development to ensure that the residual local emissions of air 
pollution are prevented or , where this is not practicable,  minimised. This shall include high 
standards of insulation, the selection of low emission technology for heating and power; 
and the provision of facilities for sustainable transport including electric vehicle charge 
infrastructure and charge points.  
Planning permission will only be granted where it can be demonstr ated that the 
development:  
i. has appropriately factored air quality into the location, design and operation of 
development, and where necessary, pr ovided appropriate mitigation; and  
ii. will not result in a deterioration of air quality within an AQMA;  and 
iii. will not lead to  the declaration of a new AQMA; and 
iv. does not conflict  with the requirements of an air quality action plan;  and 
v. will not result in an increase exposure within an AQMA.  
 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 222 Odour  
Where amenity sensitive development is proposed within 800 metres of a Waste Water 
Treatment Works an Odour Impact Assessment will be required as part of the planning 
application. This should confirm that either there will be no adverse amenity impact for 
occupiers of the proposed development, or demonstrate how appropri ate mitigation will 
be provided to ensure the development is appropriate in amenity terms . 
Development of Industrial and Commercial Use  
Development that includes industrial and commercial land uses must submit appropriate 
detailed evidence to enable assess ment of potential significant adverse air quality 
impacts. Mitigation measures should be included in proposals where evidence suggests a 
likely significant adverse effect.  
Reasoned Justification  
16.45 The council has responsibility to ensure that poor air quality does not negatively 
affect the  public health or the environment, both within and beyond the borough 
boundary, and for this reason it is important that the Local Plan is  pro-active in 
supporting the improvement of air quality.  
16.46 The NPPF is clear that planning decisions must contribute to and enhance the 
natural and local environment, and ensure that development is appropriate to its 
location, taking into account the likely effects (including cumulative effects) of 
pollution on health, living conditions and the natural environment. This is expanded 
upon through the Planning Obligations Annex and Planning Practice Guidance: Air 
Quality (2019), which outlines how Local Plans may consider air quality, having 
regard to the type of development and where it is proposed, and measures for 
offsetting air quality impacts that may arise from new development.  
16.47 Air Quality & Emissions Mitigation for Sussex enables the Local Plan to apply a pro -
active approach to ensure that development is appropriately planned to take account 
of air quality, and provides suitable mitigation where air quality is a material 
consideration. Applicants will be required to refer to the checklists contained within 
the Guidance to identify if the development being proposed will require supporting 
information in the form of an Emissions Mitigation Statement, and if required, an Air 
Quality Impact Assessment. Through this approach, the Local Plan will be able to 
ensure that development has regard to the air quality impacts that may arise from it, 
having regard to its scale and location.  
16.48 The purpose  of the Emissi ons Mitigation Statement is  to quantify  the additional 
transport emissions created by the development to determine the appropriate level of mitigation that  is required to avoid, minimise or offset the impact of the development 
on air quality. T he emissions calculator contained within the documen t enables the 
estimation of the  monetary value of potential damage from the development caused 
by nitrogen dioxide and particulate  pollutants. The identified figure is the minimum 
sum that must be spent on practical mitigation measures, which will be implemented as part of the development, following agreement with the Local Planning Authority.  
The pre ference will be that mitigation is provided on- site by the developer. If it is not 
feasible to provide on- site mitigation, an equivalent financial contribution will be 
sought, to be secured by way of a S106 Agreement.  
16.49 The purpose  of the Air Quality Impact Assessment is  to determine the significance of 
the predicted impact of the development. Where an Air Quality Impact Assessment is 
required, applicants are expected to complete the assessment in accordance with the 
Institute of Air Quality Management  (IAQM) Planning Guidance available at 
http://www.iaqm.co.uk/text/guidance/air -quality -planning- guidance.pdf
 and should 
liaise direct with the council’s Environmental Hea lth team.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 223 16.50  Where development is proposed in close proximity to an existing Waste Water 
Treatment Works, it is important that consideration is given as to whether the 
proposed development is appropriate, due to the risk of odour nuisance. The Odour 
Impact Assessment should be undertaken by the developer in liaison with the water 
infrastructure provider. It should determine if the proposed development would 
expose future occupiers to an unacceptable amenity impact, and if necessary, detail how mitigat ion will be provided as part of the development to ensure an appropriate 
amenity environment for occupiers.  
External Lighting 
16.51 Crawley is identified as having one of the highest levels of light pollution in Sussex147. 
As a predominantly urban area with a major international airport and a number of 
employment locations , it is necessary that urban areas of the borough are 
appropriately lit, particularly given the number of shift workers living in the borough.  
However,  it is important to ensure that Crawley ’s green infrastructure and countryside 
areas outside the built up area boundary are not exposed to inappropriate light 
pollution, in order to retain the intrinsic character and beauty of these locations.  
Policy EP6 : External Lighting  
Development must demonstrate how it will minimise light pollution so as to prevent sky 
glow, glare, light spillage and unnecessary energy usage.   
Development will normally be permitted where:  
1. The minimum amount of lighting necessary to achieve its purpose is specified; and  
2. The means of lighting would be unobtrusively sited or well screened by landscaping or 
other site features; and  
3. The design and specification of the lighting minimises sky glow,  glare and light 
spillage in relation to local character, the visibility of the night sky, the residential 
amenities of adjoining occupiers, and public safety; and 
4. Low energy lighting is used; and  
5. Where lighting of a landmark feature is proposed, the level and type of illumination 
would enhance the feature itself.  
Further information on lighting is provided in the Urban Design Supplementary Planning 
Document.  
Reasoned Justification  
16.52 The NPPF requires that planning policies and decisions should, amongst other 
things, “limit the impact of light pollution from artificial light on local amenity, 
intrinsically dark landscapes and nature conservation”148. Within Crawley it is 
essential  that an appropriate balance is struck between ensuring that development is 
appropriately lit to maximise principles of good design and reducing the fear of crime, 
whilst avoiding poorly thought out or obtuse  angled lighting that would detract from 
the night -time environment. Particular caution should be applied where lighting is 
proposed within and adjacent to Crawley’s countryside or where this could negatively impact upon the setting of green infrastructure within Crawley’s built up area, where 
unsympathetic lighting can have an urbanising effect that detracts from the asset.  
16.53 Crawley is also committed to reducing carbon emissions. High energy lamps and 
poorly designed lighting schemes result in overconsumption of energy with 
consequent unnecessary c arbon emissions . 
  
                                                 
147 Campaign to Protect Rural England (Representation to Local Plan, 2019)  
148 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 180 (c) (2019) MHCLG  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 224 Sustainable Transport  
17.1 The retention of existing transport  infrastructure and the provision of additional 
facilities and services to support new development is a key objective of the planning 
system. It is important to retain, and where possible enhance,  opportunities  in the 
borough for increasing active travel and public transport us e, as an alternative to the 
car, taking into account new innovations and the need to respond to climate change.  
17.3 It is important that the council continues to work closely with West Sussex County 
Council and Highways England to en sure that the necessary  physical  transport 
infrastructure is in place for the lifetime of the P lan. 
Chapter Content  
17.4 This chapter sets out the Local Plan policies and approach to ensure sufficient 
transport infrastructure  is in place  to meet the needs of the existing and future 
population. General, social and green infrastructure  are covered in separate chapter s 
earlier in this Local Plan.  
The Key Issues  
17.5 Crawley’s population is still growing, two new neighbourhoods are being added to the town  and additional housing sites are proposed in this Local Plan. Growth in 
employment numbers and at Gatwick Airport is also anticipated . Therefore,  it is 
important to ensure that the key transport  network is  improved and if necessary 
expanded to meet the needs of the town.  
Local Plan Policies  
Sustainable Transport  
17.6 Developments normally generate additional traffic and create new access 
requirements. The location of development and the intensity of the usage are the two 
crucial variables that will ultimately determine whether developments are sustainable 
in terms of th e local or regional transport network. Therefore, developments, if 
positioned in sustainable locations, can provide tangible opportunities to improve the 
wider transport network.  
17.7 Furthermore, the NPPF states that plans should endeavour to minimise the need to 
travel and maximise the use of sustainable transport modes. In Crawley, the public 
transport system is accessible  and extensive, and moreover, the distances needed to 
travel are relatively short, owing to the compact nature of the town. This provides an 
opportunity for cycling and walking to be an attractive form of transport.    
Strategic Policy ST1: Development and Requirements for Sustainable Transport  
Development should be located and designed so as to encourage travel via the walking 
and cycling network and public transport routes, while reducing dependency on travel by 
private motor vehicle (also see Policy CL3 and CL4) . This should include:  
i. Designing developments to prioritise the needs of pedestrians, cyclists and users 
of public transport  over ease of access by the motorist;  
ii. Providing an appropriate amount and type of parking in accordance with Policy 
ST2;  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 225 iii. Phasing the development process so that walking and cycling infrastructure 
forming part of the development is in place and usable at the point of first 
occupation;  
iv. For development which generates a significant demand for travel, and/or is likely 
to have other transport implications: contributing to improved sustainable transport 
infrastructure  off-site, including, where appropriate, bus priority measures, 
enhanced passenger information, and routes identified in the council’s Local 
Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan;  
Developments should meet the access needs they generate and not cause an 
unacceptable impact in terms of increased traffic congestion or highway safety.  
Developments will be considered acceptable in highways terms unless there would be an 
unacceptable impact on highway safety, or the cumulative impact on the transport 
network is severe and cannot be satisfactorily mitigated.  
In order to consider such impacts, developments that generate a significant amount of 
movements (thresholds as outlined in the Local List  of Planning Requirements ) should be 
supported by a:  
a) Transport Statement, whic h assesses the impact of a development with relatively 
small transport implications , and  a Travel Plan Statement , which identifies how the 
development will maximise the usage of sustainable modes of transport as 
opposed to the private motor vehicle; or a  
b) Transport Assessment, which assesses the impact of a development when there 
are significant transport implications, and:  
• for large developments (for example, large- scale major residential 
developments  or any strategic developments ), a Mobility Strategy; or,   
• for other developments, a Travel Plan.  
The Mobility Strategy or Travel Plan will identify:  
• how the development will optimise the usage of sustainable modes of transport 
as opposed to the private motor vehicle;  
• appropriate improvements to sustainable modes, or the introduction of new 
infrastructure that is required to adequately mitigate development impacts and 
detail how this will be delivered and operated.  
The applicant should view the Local List of Planning Requirements (or any subsequent 
document) to ensure that they submit an appropriate Transport Statement or Transport 
Assessment w ith their planning application.   
Reasoned Justification  
17.8 In line with the current NPPF, this P olicy reflects the approach that developments 
which generate a signifi cant amount of movement should be situated in sustainable 
locations. Sustainable locations are defined as sites which minimise t he need to 
travel, such as the Town C entre, and also takes advantage of the opportunities to 
utilise and enhance public transport and both the cycling and walking network. As a 
consequence, it is considered appropriate that large retail, commercial, employment 
or leisure developments should be concentrated in locations where an existing 
transport infrastructure can sustain such developments for the long- term. It is 
envisaged that such a policy will encourage modal change, particularly to public transport, cycling and walking which will subsequently reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions and the use of private motor vehicles.  
17.9 In order to promote sustainable development , the Policy further supports the national 
policy objectives of identifying and pursuing opportunities to promote walking, cycling 
and public transport use; providing for high- quality walking and cycling networks; and CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 226 ensuring that the design and access arrangements of new developments give priority 
first to pedestrian and cycling movements. National policy objectives are further 
outlined in Department for Transport’s: Gear Change: A bold v ision for cycling and 
walking which expects  “sustainable transport issues to be considered from the 
earliest stages of plan- making and development proposals, so that opportunities to 
promote cycling and walking are pursued.”149 Planning policies are to provide for high 
quality cyclin g and walking networks, green spaces and green routes, and supporting 
facilities such as cycle parking (drawing on Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure 
Plans). The design requirements to achieve this are set out in Policy CL 3.  
17.10 For major developments with operational transport needs a planning obligation will be sought towards identified sustainable transport infrastructure schemes in accordance with Policy IN1 and the Planning Obligations Annex to the Plan. 
Additional obligations may be sought in relation to Travel Plan/Mobility Strategy 
measures.  
17.11 Where required a Mobility Strategy should seek to plan in a positive and integrated manner for the full access requirements of a development according to Mobility as a 
Service (MaaS) principles.  
17.12 Starting from this basis and with the support of Travel Plans and Mobility Strategies, 
where required, developments should mitigate transport impacts according to the 
following hierarchy:  
• reduce overall travel demand;  
• minimise mode share by private car;  
• seek to spread or time shift demand away from peak hours;  
• offset residual impact through highways improvements, which must be 
achieved with no adverse impact on highway safety or to users of sustainable 
modes.  
Parking  
17.13 Parking standards are essential in terms of ensuring that  developments have a 
satisfactory provision of car parking spaces and cycle parking spaces, but also to 
ensure that the more sustainable modes of transport are still prioritised .  
17.14 In addi tion, the older residential neighbourhoods, where modern parking needs of 
residents were not foreseen when the neighbourhoods were first developed, have 
limited on -street car parking spaces available. However, owing to the limitations of 
the highway networ k and the ever increasing need to retain environmental assets 
and open space, it is consider ed that policies contained within the Local Plan should 
continue to  concentrate on more sustainable modes of transport in order for the town 
to accommodate a growing travel demand.   
17.15 Where parking is provided, it is important that it should be of a type appropriate to the 
anticipated demand. This should include meeting anticipated demand for Electrical 
Vehicle (EV) Charging Infrastructure, which is set to increase in light of the 
Government’s ‘Road to Zero’, and plans to phase out petrol and diesel cars by the 
middle of the century150. The provision of EV charging infrastructure in Crawley is 
further supported by West Sussex County Council’s 2019 Guidance on Parking in 
New Developments and emerging EV Strategy151. 
 
                                                 
149 Gear Change A bold vision for cycling and walking, Page 26, (2020) DFT  
150 The Road to Zero: Next steps towards cleaner road transport and delivering our Industrial Strategy (2018) 
DFT 
151 Guidance on Parking at New Developments (2019) WSCC  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 227 Policy ST2: Car and Cycle Parking Standards  
Development will be permitted where the proposals provide the appropriate amount and 
type of car and cycle parking (including electric vehicle charging infrastructure) to meet its 
needs when it is assessed against the borough council’s car and cycle parking standards. 
These standards are contained in the Parking Standards Annex to this Plan.  
Car parking standards for residential development are based on t he accessibility of the 
area, the levels of car ownership, and the size of any new dwellings.  
Parking standards for other types of developments will be based on the particular usage 
of the premises, which will take account of the intensity and requirements  of each use and 
the accessibility of an area by public transport and other sustainable modes.  
Reasoned Justification  
17.16 In accordance with the NPPF, Local  Authorities are encouraged to ensure the 
appropriate levels of parking are provided, and to  seek to enhance the quality of 
parking, particularly  in the Town Centre,  to ensure that it i s convenient, safe and 
secure. This P olicy will seek to improve parking throughout the town via  the 
assessment of parking standards for  developments (or existing developments that 
increase floor space and/or intensify the permitted usage), which ensures that the 
appropriate level of cycle and car parking will accompany all planning applications 
that are permitted.  
17.17 Parking standards for both residential and non -residential development are set out in 
the Parking Standards Annex to the Plan.  In line with the NPPF, the parking 
standards take into account the accessibility of the development through the use of 
zones and reflect the ability of certain areas  to accommodate further parking spaces. 
In addition, the particular type, mix and usage of the site will have a bearing on the 
number of parking spaces that any planning application will require. With these 
parking standards, an appropriate number of both cycle and car parking spaces will 
be provided, alleviating congestion.  
Rail Stations  
17.18 The main rail stations provide highly sustainable opportunities for major development 
and are fundamental to ensuring that sustainable modes of transport are utilis ed. 
However, it is important that such development opportunities should reflect the 
function and operation of the particular stations concerned. The key stakeholder 
operating the rail stations, Network Rail, is also committed to improving Gatwick 
Airport and Three Bridges  rail stations over the P lan period, with major improvements 
being progressed for both.  Improvements are planned at Crawley station.   
Policy ST3: Improving Rail Stations  
Any improvements or developments at or within the vicinity of railway  stations will be 
expected to enhance the specific roles of the individual stations, the sustainable access to 
individual stations, and:  
a) at Gatwick Station, support its function as an airport -related interchange and provide 
opportunities for broadening the function of the station as an interchange for surface 
travellers using rail, coach, Fastway and other buses  consistently with the safe and 
efficient operation of the airport ; 
b) at Three Bridges Station, support its role as a potential parkway station and as  a 
major interchange between the rail, bus , highway , cycle and pedestrian network;  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 228 c) at Crawley Station, support its role as a major gateway to the Town Centre and 
improve its integration with the main shopping area and bus station and accessibility 
by cycle  and pedestrians ; 
d) at Ifield Station, strengthen its role as a local suburban station meeting the needs of 
current and future residents in the west of the town.  
For further policy guidance relating to land close to the borough’s rail stations, please see 
Policy CL4 . 
Reasoned Justification  
17.19 This policy endeavours to ensure that the specific function of each rail station within 
the borough is enhanced:   
• Gatwick rail station is in a highly strategic location for transport, not only within 
the borough, but for the wider South East region. A major i mprovement project 
commenced in 2020, and it  is important to continue to  seize opportunities for any 
further  improvements for broadening the function of the station as an interchange, 
to include additional surface travellers, particularly those who use sustainable 
modes of transport, such as rail or buses. Further improvements to the  station’s 
concourse and access may be necessary to support any increases in passenger 
numbers at the air port in the future.  
• Three Bridges rail station is a major rail junction for both the Brighton main line 
and the Bognor Regis/Southampton rail line. A s a major transport interchange fo r 
commuters, it is envisaged that the station can better serve those using buses, 
cycles and the highway network. An improvement project is being progressed.  
• Crawley rail station acts as a major gateway into the Town Centre, and thus, it is important to support the station’s integration into the main shopping area  and with 
the bus station through environmental improvements and high- quality urban 
design. Residential -led redevelopment of the station and car parks has planning 
permission and public realm improvements to both the rail and bus station are being progressed.    
• At Ifield rail station, the development of the Kilnwood Vale neighbourhood  and 
any future proposals  to the west of the town (in Horsham district) means it is 
important to strengthen the role of this suburban rail station in order to meet the 
needs of any increases in rail patronage.  
17.20 The NPPF states that Local Plans should allow authorities to identify priority areas for 
infrastructure provision and/or environmental enhancements to support  sustainable 
economic growth . It is integral for both Crawley and Three Bridges rail stations to 
have improvements or developments within the locality, in order to ensure that opportunities are exploited for the use of sustainable transport, which coincides with 
Policy  ST1.  
Alignment for New  Link Road  
17.21 The Transport Modelling undertaken for the Crawley Borough Local Plan Review has identified a number of junctions within the borough which are already at capacity or 
require  mitigation following new development. This i s based on the quantum of 
development already coming forward in Crawley, and that being delivered through the adopted Mid Sussex District Plan,  Horsham District Planning Framework  and 
Reigate and Banstead Core Strategy . Further major development is being promoted 
to the west of Crawley,  through the Horsham District Local Plan Review  and Gatwick 
Airport’s Master Plan 2019 anticipates significant growth in passenger numbers at 
the airport,  even just on a single runway. The cumulative impact of these 
developments will exacerbate existing capacity issues on roads within Crawley .  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 229 17.22  Therefore,  it is considered necessary to undertake further strategic transport 
assessment considering the cumulative impacts of development across the area. 
Due to the potential levels of development , it is considered appropriate  that the 
council  identifies  and safeguards the potential corridor of land within Crawley for a  
potential  full Western  Link Road, in partnership with West Sussex County Council . 
This will need to connect  to a route corridor within Horsham District , identified by 
Horsham District Council, to the west.     
Policy ST4: Safeguarding of a Search Corridor for  a Crawley Western Link Road 
The Local Plan Map identifies a Search Corridor for a Crawley Western Link Road linking  
the A264 with the A23. This Search Corridor will be safeguarded from development which 
would be incompatible with the future delivery of a full Crawley Western  Link Road.    
The design and route of the Western  Link Road must take account of :  
a. its impact on  (but not limited to):   
• residential and commercial properties close to the route;   
• the flood plain;   
• the rural landscape ;  
• local biodiversity ;  
• sports pitch provision and recreation facilities; and  
• heritage and heritage landscape assets and visual intrusion.  
b. the desirability and requirements of bus priority measures (including future 
proofing for forecast traffic growth and congestion).  
Connectivity by non- vehicular modes of transport between Crawley’s urban 
neighbourhoods and t he wider Sussex countryside should be maintained and enhanced.    
Reasoned Justification  
17.23 The Western  Link Road should provide a new strategic road link for traffic from the 
west, and from Kilnwood Vale and any new development west of Crawley t o link 
directly with the A23 north of County Oak serving Manor Royal and Gatwick. This will 
remove the need for this traffic to come further east into Crawley and  travel around 
all the roundabouts  accessing Crawley’s western neighbourhoods  to link with the 
A23, a route which is known to be increasingly congested at peak times.  
17.24 The provision of a full Western  Link Road between the A264, west of Kilnwood Vale, 
and the A23 (North of County Oak) is necessary to reduce existing congestion on the A2220 and A23, remove through traffic from the neighbourhood junctions and 
residential roads, reduce inappropriate usage and increased levels of traffic  on rural 
routes to Gatwick Airport, and reduce pressure on the M23 Junctions 10 and 11. It will also help mitigate the surface access impacts of growth at the Airport, provide 
alternatives to help address the impacts from permitted new developments (Kilnwood 
Vale, Pease Pottage and North Horsham) and from potential future developments on 
the western side of Crawley.  It is anticipated that detailed impacts of further 
development onto the Crawley road network would be modelled through the Horsham District Local Plan Review process.  
17.25 Without commitment to the construction of a full Western Link Road between the 
A264 and A23 (North), all the traffic from any development to the west of Crawley , 
from permitted schemes and any future proposals which could emerge through the 
Horsham District Plan Review and/or through planning applications permissions 
granted as windfalls,  is likely to feed into residential roads in Ifield and/or Langley 
Green and onto the already congested A23 junctions, particularl y the  Ifield 
Avenue/A23 junction  in the long term . New highways  crossing the Ifield Brook CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 230 Meadows and R usper Road Playing Fields Local Green  Space would be wholly 
unacceptable, given the impact this would have on ancient woodland, the biodiversity 
in the LWS  and LNR , the character of Ifield Village Conservation Area, the flood plain 
and the recreational use  of the Local Green Space.   
17.26 A Western  Link Road would enable the prioritisation of connectivity by more direct 
routes for public transport, cycling and walking into Crawley from any new 
development to the west, with vehicular traffic having to take a longer route along the  
Link Road. Existing P ublic Rights of Way should be designed into the road, with safe, 
accessible and convenient road crossing opportunities provided. New opportunities 
for walking, cycling and horse riding links should be explored.  
17.27 Land was previously safeguarded for a Craw ley Western  Link Road as part of the 
West of Bewbush Joint Area Action Plan (Policy WB23) because, whilst the Transport Assessment for Kilnwood Vale did not demonstrate it was necessary to 
serve that development alone, it was considered that it might be needed to serve 
future development west of Crawley, or wider sub regional objectives.      
17.28 The current Search Corridor is located at the southern edge of land safeguarded for a potential future  southern runway at Gatwick Airport but the council is seeking to 
engage with Gatwick Airport about the  detailed alignment of the route, with the aim of 
minimising the impact on residents living close to the route and reducing the need for 
land to be compulsorily purchased.  
 
  
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 231 Appendix A: Susta inability Objectives  
1. To minimise climate change, by taking actions to reduce the concentration of greenhouse gasses 
in the atmosphere.  
2. To adapt to the effects of climate change, by reducing the negative consequences of changes in the climate on people and the environment, or by achieving a positive outcome from the effects of 
climate change.     
3. To protect and enhance the valued built env ironment and character within the borough through 
high quality new design and the protection of culturally valuable areas and buildings.  
4. To ensure that everyone has the opportunity to live in a decent and affordable home.  
5. To maintain, support and promote a diverse employment base that can serve the local and sub-
regional and regional economy.  
6. To conserve and enhance the biodiversity habitats, key landscape features, fauna and flora within 
the borough.  
7. To reduce car journeys and promote sustainable and alter native methods of transport, whilst 
ensuring sufficient transport infrastructure is delivered to meet the requirements of the borough.  
8. To ensure the provision of sufficient infrastructure to meet the requirements of the borough.  
9. To promote healthy, active,  cohesive and socially sustainable communities.  To ensure everyone 
has the opportunity to participate in sport and to encourage active lifestyles.  
Local Plan 
Policy  SA Objective  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
SD1 ++ ++ ++ + + ++ ++ ++ ++ 
SD2 +? 0 0 0 0 + + + + 
CL1 + + ++ ++ + + ++ ++ ++ 
CL2 ++ ++ ++ ++ + ++ ++ + ++ 
CL3 ++ ++ ++ ++ + + ++ ++ ++ 
CL4 ++ ++ + ++ + + ++ ++ ++ 
CL5 + + + ++ + + ++ + ++ 
CL6 +? ++ ++ + + ++ + + ++ 
CL7 / + ++ / / ++ + + + 
CL8 +? / + / / + + / + 
CL9 / / + / / ++ / + + 
DD1 ++ ++ ++ + +? + ++ + + 
DD2 0 0 +? ++ +? 0 +? / ++ 
DD3 +? +? + + 0 +? 0 0 + 
DD4 ++ ++ ++ / / ++ + / + 
DD5 0 0 ++ + + 0 0 0 ++ 
DD6 0 0 ++ 0 + ++ 0 0 + 
DD7 ? - ? 0 0 + - 0 0 
HA1 0 ? ++ 0 / 0 0 0 + 
HA2 0 ? + 0 / 0 0 0 + 
HA3 0 ? ++ 0 0 + 0 0 + 
HA4 0 ? + 0 / 0 0 0 + 
HA5 0 ? ++ 0 / 0 0 0 + 
HA6 0 0 ++ 0 / + 0 0 + 
HA7 0 +? + 0 / + 0 0 + 
OS1 + + + + + ++ + + ++ 
OS2 + ++ + 0 / + + ++ ++ 
OS3 + 0 + 0 0 + ++ + ++ 
IN1 + + 0 + + + + ++ + 
IN2 + + / 0 + + + + + 
IN3 + + + + + +? + ++ + 
EC1 ? ? + + ++ +? + + ++ 
EC2 + + + + ++ + + + ++ CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 232 Local Plan 
Policy  SA Objective  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
EC3 +? +? ++ 0 ++ 0 + + + 
EC4 ? +? +? +? ++ - +? + +? 
EC5 + + + + ++ 0 + 0 + 
EC6 + ? + 0 ++ 0 0 0 + 
EC7 + + + 0 + 0 ++ 0 0 
EC8 0 0 0 0 + 0 +? 0 0 
EC9 0 0 0 0 ++ 0 0 0 + 
EC10  0 0 + 0 + 0 0 0 + 
EC11  0 0 ++ ++ ++ 0 ? ? + 
EC12  + + ++ ? + 0 ++ ++ ++ 
EC13  + 0 + 0 + - 0 + 0 
GAT1  -? ? 0 0 ++ +? +? +? 0 
GAT2  +? +? +? +? ++ -? +? + +? 
GAT3  - - 0 0 / -? - / 0 
GAT4  0 0 0 0 + 0 + 0 0 
TC1 0 0 +? + ++ 0 ++ + ++ 
TC2 + +? + + + 0 + ++ ++ 
TC3 + + ++ ++ ++ 0 ++ + ++ 
TC4 +? +? ++ 0 0 0 0 0 ++ 
TC5 ++ + ++ 0 ++ 0 ++ + + 
H1 0 + + -? + + / 0 + 
H2 0 + + + 0 + + + ++ 
H3 0 +? ++ + 0 ++ 0 ? ++ 
H3a + + ++ ++ 0 / 0 0 ++ 
H3b 0 / ++ + 0 ++ 0 0 + 
H3c 0 / ++ + ++ 0 ++ / ++ 
H3d 0 0 ++ ++ 0 0 ++ ++ + 
H3e ++ 0 + ++ ++ 0 + 0 ++ 
H3f 0 + + + 0 ++ 0 ++ ++ 
H4 0 0 0 + 0 0 0 0 + 
H5 0 0 0 ++ ++ 0 0 0 ++ 
H6 0 0 0 ++ ++ 0 0 0 ++ 
H7 + + + ++ + 0 0 0 + 
H8 0 0 ? + 0 - 0 0 + 
H9 0 0 0 + 0 0 0 0 + 
GI1 ++ ++ ++ 0 0 ++ ++ ++ ++ 
GI2 ++ + + / / ++ / / + 
GI3 ++ ++ ++ / / ++ 0 + + 
GI4 + +? 0 0 0 ++ 0 ++ ++ 
SDC1  ++ ++ +? ++ ++ +? 0 0 ++ 
SDC2  ++ 0 0 + + 0 0 + +? 
SDC3  + ++ 0 + 0 ++ 0 0 + 
EP1 0 ++ ++ ? ? ++ 0 + + 
EP2 / + 0 0 0 + 0 + + 
EP3 ++ ++ ++ + 0 + 0 0 ++ 
EP4 0 0 0 ++ + 0 0 0 ++ 
EP5 ++ ++ 0 0 0 ++ 0 0 ++ 
EP6 ++ ++ ++ + 0 + 0 0 ++ 
ST1 + + + +? + +? ++ + + 
ST2 + / + + + +? ++ ++ + 
ST3 + +? + 0 +? 0 ++ + +? 
ST4 - - / + + - - ++ - 
 Significant Positive Impact on the sustainability objective (++)  
 Positive Impact on the sustainability objective (+)  
 Possible Positive or Slight Positive Impact on the sustainability objective (+?)  
 No Impact on the sustainability objective (0)  
 Neutral Impact on the sustainability objective (/)  
 Uncertain Impact on the sustainability objective (?)  
 Possible Negative or Slight Negative Impact on the sustainability objective ( -?) 
 Negative Impact on the sustainability objective ( -) 
 Significant Negative Impact on the sustainability objective ( --) 
  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 233  
Appendix B: Supporting Guidance Documents  
 
Crawley Borough Council Documents  
Crawley 2030: Crawley Borough Local Plan 2015 –  2030, 2015  
Crawley Local Plan Map, 2015  
Crawley CIL Charging Schedule, 2016  
Crawley Regulation 123 List, 2016  
Manor Royal Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document, 2013 
Manor Royal Public Realm Strategy,  2013 
Planning and Climate Change Supplementary Planning Document, 2016 
Green Infrastructure Supplementary Planning Document, 2016  
Town Centre Supplementary Planning Document,  2016  
Urban Design Supplementary Planning Document, 2016  
Affordable Housing Supplementary Planning Document, 2017  
CIL Supporting Document: Instalments Policy, 2016  
CIL Supporting Document: Discretionary Social Housing Relief, 2016  
CIL Supporting Document: Developer Contributions Guidance Note, 2016 
Guidance Note : Energy and Water Efficiency for Alterations and Extensions to 
Buildings,  2016  
Affordable Housing: Summary Guidance Document for Small Residential 
Developments,  2017  
Tinsley Lane Development Brief , 2017  
Breezehurst Drive Playing Fields Development Brief , 2018  
Brighton Road Conservation Area Statement , 2018 
Dyers Almshouses Conservation Area Statement , 2018  
Forestfields and Shrublands Conservation Area Statement , 1998   
Hazelwick Road Conservation Area Statement , 2019  
High Street Conservation Area Statement , 1998  
Ifield Village Conservation Area Statement , 2018 
Malthouse Road Conservation Area Statement , to be prepared  
St Peter’s Conservation Area Statement , 2005  
Southgate Neighbourhood Centre Conservation Area Statement , to be prepared  
Sunnymead Conservation Area Statement , 2004 
Worth Conservation Area Statement , 2018  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 234 Air Quality Management Plan, anticipated 2021  
HMO Space Standards, 2013  
Employment Land Trajectory Base Date: 1 September 2020, January 2021 
Housing Trajectory, 1 September 2020   
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment, 2020  
Local Plan Noise Annex, 2020  
Local Plan Planning Obligations Annex,  2020  
Local Plan Parking Standards Annex,  2020 
New Directions Crawley Transport Strategy,  2020 
2019 Legal Agreement between CBC, WSCC  and the airport operator  
Crawley Economic Development Strategy , under preparation 2020  
Other Professional Guidance Documents  
European Directive 2001/42/EC  
Localism Act 2011 
Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004  
Town and Country Planning Act 1990 The T own and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations 2012  
Environmental Assessment of Plans and Programmes Regulations 2004 
National Planning Policy Framework  MHCLG, 2019 
Planning Practice Guidance MHCLG, 2014 and subsequent updates  
Gatwick 360
o Strategic Economic Plan Coast to Capital Local Enterprise Partnership,  
2018 
UK Industrial Strategy: Building a Britain Fit for the Future 2017  
Local Industrial Strategy Coast to Capital , 2020  
Gatwick Diamond Local Strategic Statement 2017 
West Sussex Waste  Local  Plan WSCC, 2014  
West Sussex Joint Minerals Local Plan WSCC  and SDNP , 2018  
Living with Beauty: Final report of the Building Better, Building Beautiful 
Commission, MHCLG, 2020  
Technical Housing Standards –  Nationally Described Space Standards MH CLG, 2015  
The Building Regulations 2010: Access to and use of buildings M Volume 1: Dwellings 
MHCLG , 2016  
Planning Practice Guidance: Housing and Economic Needs Assessment  MHCLG , 
2019 
Planning Policy for Traveller Sites MHCLG, 2015 
West Sussex Joint Strategic Needs Assessment (JSNA) “People and Places”  WSCC 
2019 
National Design Guide: Planning practice for beautiful, enduring and successful 
places MHCLG 2019  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 235 By Design –  Urban Design and the Planning System  DETR  
Secured By Design  
Building for Life Criteria  CABE at the Design Council, Design for Homes and Home 
Builders Federation , third edition, 2015  
Creating successful masterplans, a guide for clients 2008/09 CABE  
Understanding Historic Buildings: A G uide to G ood Recording Practice Historic 
England,  2016  
Historic Environment Good Practice Advice Planning Note 3: The setting of Heritage 
Assets Historic England , 2017  
Active Design Guidance Sport England and Public Health England , 2015 
Essex Design Guide Essex Local Authorities Essex Planning Officers Association, 2018  
Residential Developments and Trees : A Guide for Planners and Developers The 
Woodland Trust , 2019  
AOA Technical Aerodrome Safeguarding Advice Notes  Airport Operators Association 
Safely Landed? Is the current aerodrome safeguarding process fit for purpose? 
Lichfields , 2018  
Dementia and Town Planning RTPI Practice Advice RTPI , 2017  
Accessible Natural Green Space Standards in Town and Cities Natural England, 2011  
Space for People, Targeting Action for Woodland Access The Woodland Trust , 2017  
Natural England Standing Advice  
Natural Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006 
Biodiversity 2020 Defra  
Planning & Energy Act 2008 
Housing Standards Review Consultation Department for Communities and Local 
Government , 2013  
Housing Standards Review Technical Consultation  Department for Communities and 
Local Government , 2014  
The Business Case for Green Building  World Green Building Council . 2013 
Technical Guidance to the National Planning Policy Framework Department for 
Communities and Local Government , 2012  
Zero Carbon Homes –  Impact Assessment Department for Communities and Local 
Government , 2011  
Building Regulations Part L  
BREEAM New Construction: Non- Domestic Buildings Technical Manual BRE  Global 
Ltd, 2014  
LEED 2009 for New Construction and Major Renovations Rating Systems U.S. Green 
Building Council, 2009  
EU Water Framework Directive 
Water Stressed Areas –  Final Classification Environment Agency , 2013 
Environment Agency Flood Map for Planning Environment Agency, updated quarterly  
Delivering Sus tainable Drainage Systems DEFRA , 2014  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 236 Local Flood Risk Management Strategy WSCC, 2013  
West Sussex LLFA Policy for the Management of Surface Water WSCC , 2018  
Planning Noise Advice Document : Sussex East a nd West Sussex Authorities, 2020  
Air Quality and Emissions Mitigation Guidance for Sussex Sussex A ir, 2019  
West Sussex Energy Study  AECOM Limited, 2013 
The Road to Zero: Next St eps towards cleaner road transport and delivering our 
Industrial Strategy 2018 
Guidance on Parking at New Developments WSCC, 2019  
Gear Change A Bold Vision for Cycling and Walking, DfT , 2020  
Aviation Policy Framework , DfT, March 2013  
Aviation 2050 –  the Future of UK Aviation,  December 2018  
Beyond the Horizon: The Future of UK Aviation –  making best use of existing 
runways,  DfT, June 2018 
 
  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 237 Background Studies & Evidence Base Documents  
 
Development Strategy  
Gatwick Diamond Local Strategic Statement (2017) Surrey County Council, West Sussex 
County Council, Crawley Borough Council, Horsham District Council, Mid Sussex District 
Council, Mole Valley District Council, Reigate and Banstead District Council.  
Gatwick Diamond Local Strategic Statement M emorandum of Understanding (2016) Surrey 
County Council, West Sussex County Council, Crawley Borough Council, Horsham D istrict 
Council, Mid Sussex District Council, Mole Valley District Council, Reigate and Banstead 
District Council, Tandridge District Council.  
Draft Infrastructure Plan (2020) Crawley Borough Council  
Crawley Local Pla n draft Sustainability Appraisal (2020)  Crawley Borough Council  
Crawley Local Plan Sustainability Appraisal Scoping Report  and Draft Report  (July 2019) 
Crawley Borough Council  
Crawley draft Local Plan Habitat R egulations Screening Report (2020 ) Crawley Borough 
Council  
Local Plan draft Consultat ion Statement (2020) Crawley Borough Council  
Crawley Borough Council’s Local Pl an Local Development Scheme 2020 – 2023 (2020) 
Crawley Borough Council  
Crawley’s Statement of Community Involvement (2020) Crawley Borough Council  
Viability Assessment for the Crawley Borough Local Plan Review: Whole Plan Policies & 
Community Infrastructure Levy (2020) DixonSearle Partnership 
Crawley Borough Council Whole Plan & Community Infrastructure Levy Viability Assessment 
(April 2015) Nationwide CIL Service 
Community Infr astructure Levy, SHLAA and Affordable Housing Viability Assessment (2013) 
Nationwide CIL Service 
WELLBEING & COMMUNITIES  
West Sussex Joint Strategic Needs Assessment (JSNA) “People and Places ” WSCC 2019  
Building for Life – Evaluating Housing Proposal Step by Step  
Crawley Baseline Character Assessment (2009)  
Crawley Extensive Urban Survey (2008) English Heritage, West and East Sussex  
By Design –  Urban Design and the Planning System, DETR  
Secure by Design  
PPS5 Good Practice Guide 
Crawley  Built-Up Area Boundary Review (2015) Crawley Borough Council  
Crawley Landscape Character Assessment (2012) Crawley Borough Council  
Urban Rural Fringe Study for Crawley (2006)  
A Strategy for West Sussex Landscape (2005) West Sussex County Council  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 238 West Suss ex Landscape Character Assessment (Land Management Guidelines for Northern 
Vales, High Weald Forests and adjacent High Weald) (2003) West Sussex County Council  
Trees in the Townscape: A Guide for Decision Makers (2012) Trees and Design Action 
Group  
High We ald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty Management Plan 2019 – 2024 (2019 ) 
AONB Unit  
Crawley Conservation Areas and Non -Designated Assets Review  (2020) Place Services  
Crawley ASEQs and Locally Listed Buildings Heritage Assessment (2010) Alan Baxter  
Historic Parks and Gardens Review (2013) Sussex Gardens Trust  
Crawley Open Space, Sport and Recreation Assessment: Open Space Study (2020) The Environment Partnership  
Crawley Open Space, Sport and Recreation Assessment: Indoor Sport Facilities Study 
(2020)  Strategic Leisure Limited (SLL)  
Crawley Open Space, Sport and Recreation Assessment: Playing Pitch Strategy (2020) 
4Global  
Crawley Open Space Study (2013) JPC Strategic Planning and Leisure Limited 
Crawley Playing Pitch Assessment (2013) JPC Strategic Planning and Leisure Limited  
Crawley PPG17 Open Space, Sport and Recreation Assessment (2008) PMP  
Crawley Borough Play Strategy and Development Plan 2007- 2010 Crawley Borough Council  
Crawley Borough Playing Pitch Strategy for Outdoor Sports (2005) Crawley Borough Council  
West Sussex Rights of Way Improvement Plan 2018 –  2028 (2018)  
Draft Infrastructure Plan (2020) Crawley Borough Council  
ECONOMIC GROWTH & SOCIAL MOBILITY  
Northern West Sussex Economic Growth Assessment (2020 ) Lichfields  
Northern West Sussex Economic Growth Assessment: Focused Update for Crawley (2020) 
Lichfields  
Crawley Economic Growth Assessment Update (2015) NLP  
Northern West Sussex Economic  Growth Assessment (2014 ) NLP  
Northern West Sussex Economic Growth Assessment: Crawley Emerging Findings Paper 
(2013) NLP  
Employment Land Review Part 1 (2009) GL Hearn 
Employment Land Review Part 2 (2010) GL Hearn 
Employment Land Availability Assessment Base Date 1 September 2020 (January 2021) 
Crawley Borough Council  
Employment Land Trajectory Base Date 1 September 2020 (January 2021) Crawley 
Borough Council  
Manor Royal Economic Impact Study (2018) Lichfields  
Manor Royal Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document and Public Realm Strategy 
(2013) Crawley Borough Council  
Manor Royal Master  Plan (2010) GVA  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 239 Crawley Manor Royal: Final Report (2008) Regeneris  
Crawley Employment and Skills Programme 2019 –  2024  
Discussion Paper 05: Aviation Noise (2013) Airports  Commission  
Gatwick Airport Interim Parking Strategy (April 2017)  
Gatwick Airport Surface Access Strategy (May 2018)  
2019 Gatwick Airport Master Plan  
Crawley Retail, Commercial Leisure and Town Centre Neig hbourhood Needs Assessment 
(2020) Nexus  
Retail Capacity Update (2013) DTZ  
Crawley Retail Capacity and Impact Study (2010) DTZ  
HOUSING  
Northern West Sussex Strategic Housing Market Assessment (2019) Iceni   
Market Housing Mix (2016) Chilmark Consulting 
Starter Homes Needs and Implications (2016) Chilmark Consulting 
Northern West Sussex Housing Market Area ‘Affordable Housing Needs Model U pdate’ 
(2014) Chilmark Consulting Ltd.  
North West Sussex – Crawley: Strategic Housing Market Update (2012) GVA  
Northern West Sussex Strategic Housing Market Assessment (2009) GVA Grimley  
Identifying the Local Housing Markets of South East England (2004),  DTZ Peida Consulting 
on behalf of South East Regional Assembly and Homes and Communities Agency  
Objective Assessment of Crawley’s Housing and Employment Needs –  Updated Report 
(March 2015) Chilmark Consulting Ltd.  
Crawley Borough Council Locally Generated  Housing Needs Assessment (2011) Nathaniel 
Lichfield & Partners  
Crawley Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment  (2020) Crawley Borough Council  
Crawley Housing Trajectory , 1 September (2020) Crawley Borough Council  
Windfall Allowance Review 2020- 2036 (2020) Crawley Borough Council  
Establishing a Windfall Allowance for the Local Plan Period 2015 -2030 (2014) Crawley 
Borough Council  
Crawley Borough Council Urban Capacity Study (2013) Crawley Borough Council  
Crawley Borough Council Urban Housing Potential  Study (2004) Baker Associates  
New Market Town Study (2010)  
West Sussex Bio City (2010) Bio City Development Company  
At Crawley Study (2009) GL Hearn  
Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Accommodation Needs Assessment  Review  
(2020) Crawley Borough Council  
 
 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 240 ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY  
Green Infrastructure Map (2019) Crawley Borough Council  
South East Green Infrastructure Framework (2009)  
Review of CBC’s Sites of Nature Conservation Importance Management Plans (2010) 
Crawley Borough Council  
Biodiversity Action Plans –  Woodland, Urban (Sussex Wildlife Trust)  
West Sussex Energy Study (2013)  
Crawley Carbon and Waste Reduction Strategy  (2012) Crawley Borough Council  
Decentralised Energy Study for Crawley (2011) Hurley P almer Flatt  
Policy Review Document (2009) Energy Centre for Sustainable Communities  
Crawley Borough Council Corporate Climate Change Strategy (2008) Crawley Borough 
Council  
Planning and climate change in Crawley (2007) Energy Centre for Sustainable Communities  
West Sussex LLFA Polic y for the Management of Surface Water (2018)  
Environment Agency Flood Map for Planning,  Environment Agency  
Water Stressed Areas –  Final Classification (Environment Agency, July 2013)  
Crawley Borough Council Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) (2020)  JBA 
Site Allocations and Flood Risk Background Paper (2020) Crawley Borough Council  
Gatwick Sub- Region Water Cycle Study (2020)  JBA 
Gatwick Su b-Region Water Cycle Study Crawley update (2013) Entec UK Limited 
Gatwick Sub- Region Water Cycle Study (2011) Entec U K Limited  
Gatwick Sub Region Joint Water Cycle Study Scoping Study (2010)  Crawley Borough 
Council, Horsham District Council, Mid Sussex District Council, and Reigate and Banstead 
Borough Council  
The Environmental  Noise Directive (2002/49/EC)  
Environmental  Noise (England) Regulations 2006, as amended  
Noise Policy Statement for England (2010) DEFRA  
DEFRA Noise Action Plan: Agglomerations (2014)  
Environmental Noise and Health in the UK (2010) Ad hoc Expert Group on Noise and 
Health, Health Protection Agency, Dept. of Health and DEFRA  
Report to Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government: Land North East Sector (2009) Inspector Martin Pike  
Annex 1 PPG24: Planning and Noise  
Planning Noise Advice Document: Sussex  (2020) East and West Sussex Authoriti es  
PROPG: Planning and Noise (2017)  
BS8233: Guidance on Sound Insulation and Noise Reduction for Buildings (2014)  
BS4142: 2014 + A1: 2019: Method for Rating and Assessing Industrial and Commercial 
Sound 
Air Quality and Emissions Mitigation Guidance for Sussex  (2018) Sussex Air  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 241 2019 Air Quality Annual Status Report (ASR)  
Transport Modelling (2020) Stantec  
Transport Modelling Part 1 (2012) Amey Consulting  
Transport Modelling Part 2 (2014) Amey Consulting 
West Sussex County Council Transport Strategy  
  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 242 Glossary  
 
Definitions  
Active Frontages  Street frontages where there is an active visual 
engagement between those in the street and those on the 
ground floors of buildings. This quality is assisted where 
the front facade of buildings, including the main entrance, 
face and open towards the street . The objective of 
achieving active frontages can be realised through a 
variety of means. Overall, the desirable outcome is 
avoiding blank walls and increasing visual interest and 
activity and improving surveillance.  
Active Travel  Active travel means mak ing journeys by physically active 
means such as walking or cycling.  These are usually 
shorter journeys, like walking or cycling to the shops, 
walking the kids to school, cycling to work, or cycling to the 
station to catch a commuter train.  For many people this 
offers a convenient and accessible way to build physical activity into their lives.  
Affordable Housing Social rented, affordable rented and intermediate housing, 
provided to eligible households whose needs are not met 
by the market.  Eligibility is de termined with regard to local 
incomes and local house prices. Affordable housing should include provisions to remain at an affordable price for 
future eligible households or for the subsidy to be recycled 
for alternative affordable housing provision.  
See also: Affordable Rented Housing; Intermediate 
Housing; and Social Rented Housing.  
Homes that do not meet the above definition of affordable 
housing, such as “low cost market” housing, may not be 
considered as affordable housing for planning purposes.  
Affordable Rented Housing Affordable rented housing is let by local authorities or 
private registered providers of social housing to 
households who are eligible for social rented housing. 
Affordable Rent is subject to rent controls that require a 
rent of no more than 80% of the local market rent (including service charges, where applicable).  
Air Quality Management Area  An area designated by the council because it is likely not 
to achieve national air quality objectives by the relevant 
deadlines.  
Airport -Related Parking Parking that is provided for those who travel to the airport 
by private vehicle for flights. Airport -related parking 
includes parking associated with hotel guests leaving cars 
whilst flying from the airport.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 243 Ancient Woodland  An area that has been wooded continuously since at least 
1600AD . 
Area Action Plan  An optional development plan document. An AAP provides 
specific planning policy and guidance for a particular 
location or an area  of significant change.  
Areas of Special Local 
Character  Designated areas that are considered to be of disti nctive 
character or quality and  therefore worthy of protection 
through rigorous control of new development, yet do not 
quite comply with the criteria for designation as 
Conservation Areas.  
Article 4 Direction  A direction which withdraws automatic planning permission 
granted by the General Permitted Development Order.  
B Use Classes/Business floorspace/ Business Uses Business: B1a, B1b, B1c; General Industry: B2; and 
Storage or Distribution:  B8, as defined in the Town and 
Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as 
amended).  
BRE Environmental Assessment Method 
(BREEAM)  A BREEAM assessment uses recognised measures of performance, which are set against established 
benchmarks, to evaluate a building’s specification, design, 
construction and use. The measures used represent a 
broad range of categories and criteria from energy to 
ecology. They include aspects related to energy and water 
use, the internal environment (health and well -being), 
pollution, transport, materials, waste, ecology and 
management processes . 
Building Regulations  National Standards, separate to the planning system 
designed to uphold standards of public safety, health, and 
construction.  
Built-Up Area Boundary  This is the boundary around the area defined in the Local 
Plan as being built up , distinguishing it from the 
countryside.  
Carbon Neutral  The term given to achieving net zero carbon emissions by 
balancing the amount of carbon released with an 
equivalent amount sequestered or offset.  
Climate change adaptation Adjustments to natural or human systems in response to 
actual or expected climatic factors or their effects, 
including from changes in rainfall and rising temperatures, 
which moderate harm or exploit benefi cial opportunity.  
Climate change mitigation  Action to reduce the impact of human activity on the 
climate system, primarily through reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 244 Commission for Architecture 
and the Built Environment 
(CABE)  The organisation was the government’s advisor on 
architecture, urban design and public space in England. Its 
function was to influence and inspire those making 
decisions about the built environment. It championed well -
designed buildings, spaces and places;  ran public 
campaigns; and provided expert, practical advice. In April 2011 the Design Council and CABE came together as one 
organisation.  
Community Infrastructure 
Levy  A levy allowing local authorities to raise money  from 
owners or developers of land undertaking new building 
projects in their area  in order to fund improvements to local 
infrastructure .  
Conservation (for heritage 
policy)  The process of maintaining and managing change to a heritage asset in a way that sustains and, where 
appropriate, enhan ces its significance.  
Conservation Area  Areas of special architectural or historical interest, the character or appearance of which it is important to 
preserve or enhance.  
Core Strategy  The central planning document in the Local Development 
Framework. This system of planning policy was replaced when the NPPF was published.  
Countryside The area outside of the built up area boundary.  
Council  Where the “council” or the “borough council” is used it 
generally relates to Cr awley Borough Council, unless it is 
specified otherwise.  
COVID -19 The highly contagious respiratory Corona Virus Disease 
2019, declared a pandemic by the World Health 
Organisation on 11 March 2020, meaning it had spread 
worldwide.  
Crawley  Where "Crawley"  is used, it generally relates to the area 
that is within Crawley Borough Council's administrative 
boundary.  
Crossovers  A vehicular access from the highway over a pavement or 
verge to the curtilage of a property.   
Decentralised/District Energy 
Networks  Local renewable energy and local low -carbon energy 
usually but not always on a relatively small scale 
encompassing a diverse range of technologies.  
Development  For the purposes of policy interpretation, all reference to 
“Development” that is made within the Crawley Local Plan, 
including reference to “Development Proposals”, “Development Schemes”, “Proposals” or “Schemes”, is as 
per the statutory definition of development set out in 
Section 55 of the Town and County Planning Act 1990.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 245 District Heating Priority 
Areas  Designated areas within Crawley that have particular potential for the establishment of decentralised energy 
networks.  
Edge of centre  For retail policy purposes, edge- of-centre sites are locally 
defined as those sites falling outside of the  Primary 
Shopping Area, though within the Town Centre Boundary, 
as identified on the Local Plan Map.  For all other Main 
Town Centre Uses, the NPPF definition of edge of centre applies.  
Exceptionally significant 
development  Development which is of national importance.  
Embedded carbon/ 
greenhouse gasses  The carbon emissions generated in the supply chain for that item/product, in order to both create it and move it to 
where it will be used or sold. It includes the emissions 
created in extracting and transporting the raw materials 
required to make the product, the emissions from the 
manufacturing process, and sometimes also the emissions 
generated in transporting the final product to the point of 
sale or use.  
Employment Uses  Uses as defined within the Use Classes Order that 
generate employment such as leisure, retail and all B use 
class development. This does not include any residential 
uses.  
Exception Test  The Exception Test should be applied if, following 
application of the Sequential Test (Flood Risk), it is not 
possible for the development to be located in zones with a lower probability of flooding. For the Exception Test to be 
passed it must be demonstrated that:  
1. The development provides wider sustainability benefit s 
to the community that outweigh flood risk; and  
2. That the development will be safe for its lifetime taking 
account of the vulnerability of its users, without increasing 
flood risk elsewhere, and, where possible, will reduce flood 
risk overall.  
Frontag es These have been identified locally to help maintain the 
balance between retail and non- retail uses in the town 
centre.  
Fuel Poverty  A fuel poor household is one that cannot afford to keep 
adequately warm at reasonable cost.  This is generally 
defined as households that need to spend 10% or more of 
their annual income on energy to keep their home 
adequately warm.  
Functional Floodplain 
Undeveloped land and open space that falls within Zone 3 of the Environment Agency Flood Map. Any areas of the 
borough that are identified as Functional Floodplain are at CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 246 the greatest risk of flooding, and fairly regular inundation 
should be expected.  
Gatwick Airport Boundary  The boundary within which airport -related uses are 
appropriate . 
Green  Infrastructure  A network of multi -functional green space and waterways 
and waterbodies , urban and rural, which is capable of 
delivering a wide range of environmental and quality of life 
benefits for local communities.  
Greenhouse Gas  Gases that act to trap heat within the earth's atmosphere, 
they are produced by burning fossil fuels but do also occur 
naturally.  
Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Gypsies and Travellers are persons of nomadic habit of life whatever their race or origin, including  such persons who 
on grounds only of their own or their family’s or 
dependants’ educational or health needs or old age have 
ceased to travel temporarily, but excluding members of an 
organised group of travelling showpeople or circus people 
travelling toget her as s uch.  
Travelling Showpeople are members of a group organised 
for the purposes of holding fairs, circuses or shows 
(whether or not travelling together as such). This includes 
such persons who on the grounds of their own or their 
family’s or dependan ts’ more localised pattern of trading, 
educational or health needs or old age have ceased to 
travel temporarily, but excludes Gypsies and Travellers as 
defined above. 
 
Gypsy, Traveller and 
Travelling Showpeople 
Accommodation Needs 
Assessment  The Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Accommodation Needs Assessment (GTAA) is a technical 
study that forms part of the evidence base for the Local 
Plan. As required by the Housing Act (2004) this document 
assesses the accommodation needs of Gypsi es, 
Travellers and Travelling Showpeople and outlines how 
their needs will be met.  
Gypsy and Traveller “Pitch”  A ‘pitch’ refers to a pitch on a Gypsy and Traveller site that provides for residential uses. As a general guide and, in 
line with national gui dance recommendations, the average 
family pitch must be capable of accommodating an 
amenity building, a large trailer and touring caravan, a 
parking space for two vehicles and a small garden area. 
The amenity building must include, as a minimum, ‘hot and 
cold water supply; electricity supply; a separate toilet and hand wash basin; a bath/shower room; a kitchen/dining 
area’. Taking into account the requirements listed above, 
and, considering the space standards of the borough in 
relation to the amenity building, an approximate figure of 
160 m
2 for each pitch has been established.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 247 Travelling Showpeople “Plot”  A ‘plot’ refers to a pitch on a Travelling Showpeople site 
(often called a yard) and refers to a mixed- use site suitable 
for both employment and residential activities.  
Heritage Assets  A building, monument, site, place, area or landscape 
identified as having a degree of significance meriting 
consideration in planning decisions, because of its 
heritage interest. Heritage asset s include designated 
heritage assets  either above or below ground and assets 
identified by the local planning authority (including l ocal 
listing) . 
Heritage Impact Assessments  A document that is required as part of a planning 
application when the development affects a heritage asset , 
these were previously known as Heritage Statements . 
Historic Parks and Gardens  Areas that encompass  aesthetic, philosophical, botanic 
and scientific heritage and embody shared values of landscape and place.  
House in Multiple 
Occupation A house in multiple occupation (HMO) is a property that is 
occupied by a number of individuals who share facilities, or 
do not have exclusive occupation of the whole property. 
HMO’s generally compromise accommodation where two 
or more individuals share basic amenities (bath/shower, 
WC or kitchen).  
Housing Market Area  This is a geographical area which is relatively self -
contained in terms of reflecting people's choice of location 
for a new home i.e. a large percentage of people settling in 
the area will have sought a house only in that area.  
Important Views  Specific long or panoramic views of the town as identified 
through a character assessment of the Borough.  
Infrastructure  Includes transport facilities; su ch as roads, rail stations 
and bus stations; utility services, including water supply and wastewater and its treatment; waste management and 
disposal; telecommunications  infrastructure; social and 
community infrastructure such as educational facilities and 
health facilities, cultural facilities, sports and recreational 
facilities and open space, parks and play space, libraries, 
cemeteries, and places of worship; emergency services; 
and flood defences . 
Infrastructure Plan  Local Planning Authorities are expected to work with other 
Local Authorities and infrastructure providers to assess the 
quality and capacity of infrastructure within the area, and 
its ab ility to meet forecast demands. The Infrastructure 
Plan will confirm the capacity of infrastructure required to meet the demands of growth within the town anticipated 
through the Local Plan, and moreover, any mitigation that 
may be required.      CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 248 Infrastr ucture providers  Organisations responsible for the provision of certain types 
of infrastructure.  
Intermediate Housing Intermediate housing is homes for sale and rent provided 
at a cost above social rent, but below market levels subject 
to the criteria in the Affordable Housing definitions. These 
can include shared equity (shared ownership and equity 
loans), other low cost homes for sale and intermediate 
rent, but not affordable rented housing.  
Large Developments  Thresholds for larger development , as refe rred to in 
Policies  CL3 and ST1 , include new residential 
development in excess of 80 units, or other types of 
development as per the thresholds outlined in the Local 
Validation Checklist: for example, hotels, 100 beds or 
more, 50+ bed hospitals, B1 2500sqm , B2 4000sqm and 
B8 5000sqm.  
Listed Buildings  Buildings which appear on a national list due to their 
special architectural or historic importance. The buildings 
are protected by law.  
Local Biodiversity Action Plans  Each individual Species or Habitat Action Plan has a number of objectives, and details actions to be carried out 
in order to conserve and enhance populations of particular 
animal and plant species, or to protect and enhance 
valuable habitats.  
Local Plan Is the term given to this document. In law this is described 
as a development plan document  adopted under the 
Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004.  It guides development of the local area for the future and was drawn 
up by the local planning authority in consultation with the community . 
Local Planning Authority  The public authority whose duty it is to carry out specific 
planning functions for a particular area. In this document it 
tends to refer to Crawley Borough Council.  
Local Wildlife Sites  Locally Designated, by independent expert panel, Sussex -
Wide sites of particular value for wildlife; previously known as Sites of Nature Conservation Importance. Adopted by 
local authorities for planning purposes and identified in the 
Local Plan.  
Locally  Listed Buildings  Buildings, or structures worthy of protection in the local 
context due to their historic interest, architectural interest, 
group and townscape value, intactness, and/or communal 
value.  
Low Carbon Energy  A term attributed to energy genera ted in a way that 
produced very low levels of carbon per unit in relation to 
conventional energy generation techniques.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 249 Low/Zero Carbon 
Development  Zero carbon developments achieve no net emissions by reducing carbon emissions through use of on -site 
renew able energy generation, and balancing any imports 
with exports to the National Grid to achieve a zero 
balance. Low carbon developments are similar to zero 
carbon developments, the only difference being that they need to achieve at least a 50% reduction in emissions 
(where this applies specific ally to energy use in buildings ). 
Main Town Centre Uses  
As defined by the NPPF: retail development (including 
warehouse clubs and factory outlet centres); leisure, 
entertainment facilities , the more intensive sport and 
recreation uses (including cinemas, restaurants, drive-
through restaurants, bars and pubs, night -clubs, casinos, 
health and fitness centres, indoor bowling centres, and 
bingo halls); offices; and arts, culture and tourism 
development (including theatres, museums, galleries and 
concert halls, hotels and conference facilities).  
Major Development  As defined by the Town and Country Planning 
(Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 
2010, ‘major development’ means developm ent involving 
one or more of the following:  
(a) the winning and working of materials or the use of land 
for mineral -working deposits;  
(b) waste development;  
(c) the provision of dwellinghouses where –   
      (i) the number of dwellinghouses  to be provided is 10 
or more; or  
      (ii) the development is to be carried out on a site 
having an area of 0.5 hectares or more and it is not 
known whether the development falls within sub-
paragraph (c)(i);  
(d) the provision of a building or buildings w here the 
floorspace to be created by the development is 1,000 
square metres or more; or  
(e) development carried out on a site having an area of 1 
hectare or more.  
Manor Royal  Manor Royal is the Gatwick Diamond’s leading business 
district. For the purposes  of the Crawley Local Plan, 
reference to Manor Royal relates to the area defined as 
Manor Royal (Policy EC3) on the Local Plan Policies Map. 
As such, reference within the Local Plan to Manor Royal 
includes the areas known as Manor Royal Business 
District ( as identified by the Manor Royal Business Group), 
County Oak (and surrounding employment land), and City 
Place.  
Manor Royal Business 
District  This is the area of Manor Royal that is represented by the 
Manor Royal Business Group. This forms part of the wider CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 250 Manor Royal Main Employment Area, alongside County 
Oak and City Place.  
Modal change /shift  The switch  between different forms of transport.  
National Planning Policy 
Framework  Sets out the g overnment's planning policies for England 
and how these are expected to be applied to produce 
distinctive local and neighbourhood plans that reflect the 
needs and priorities of their communities.  
Nationall y described 
standards  A series of standards that will be introduced at the national level for Local Authorities to adopt.  
Neighbourhood  Crawley has grown up on a neighbourhood -by 
neighbourhood basis known as the neighbourhood 
principle. Each neighbourhood is a large planned 
development, predominantly consisting of housing with a 
central shopping parade, supported by other facilities, 
services, and open space to meet the day -to-day needs of 
the people who live and work there.  
Neighbourhood Centres  The area  at the centre of a neighbourhood that forms a 
small economic and cultural core providing facilities for the 
residents of that neighbourhood.  
Neighbourhood Plans  A plan prepared by a Neighbourhood Forum for a 
particular neighbourhood area (made under the Planning 
and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004). At present, there are 
no neighbourhood plans being progressed in Crawley.  
Network Ready  Network ready, in relation to Decentralised Energy 
Networks, means that the development is optimally 
designed to connect to  a District Energy Network on 
construction or at some point after construction, and include the incorporation of site- wide communal energy 
systems to serve all demand.  
New Town  Crawley is known as a New Town, a product of the New 
Towns Act 1946. The New T owns consisted of a new 
community that was carefully planned from its inception 
and is typically constructed in previously undeveloped 
areas, or by merging several smaller built up areas. This 
contrasts with settlements that evolve over a long time 
period.   
Noise Sensitive Development  Any dwelling, hotel or hostel, health building, educational establishment, place of worship or entertainment, or any 
other facility or area of high amenity, which may be 
susceptible to noise.  
Also referred to as: Noise Sensit ive Receptor.  
Northern West Sussex  Primarily consisting of the three administrative areas of 
Crawley Borough, Horsham District and Mid Sussex 
District.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 251 As a Housing Market Area a small area of the southern 
part of Reigate and Banstead Borough also falls within this 
description.  
Objectively Assessed 
Housing Need  The amount of new housing required over the Plan period 
which meets household and population projections and 
takes account of migration and demographic change 
(births and deaths).  This previously was a process 
undertaken by individual local authorities. However, it is now calculated using the government’s national Standard 
Method.  
Older People  “Older people” is usually the term for people ages 65+ 
years  
Older People’s Housing Specialist housing to meet the needs of older people; 
including: sheltered, enhanced sheltered, extra care, 
registered care, as well as bungalows and general 
housing, including step -free apartments, adapted to meet 
the needs of maximising the opportunities  for assisting 
older people to retain their independence for as long as possible, including through meeting accessibility standards 
set out in Part M, category 3 of the Building Regulations.  
Open Space Study  An assessment of the needs for open space, spo rts and 
recreation facilities and opportunities for new provision.  
Open Spaces  Open space of public value, including not just land, but 
also areas of water (such as rivers, canals, lakes and 
reservoirs) which offer important opportunities for sport 
and recreation and can act as a visual amenity.  
Out of centre  Locations that are situated beyond the Town Centre 
Boundary, as identified on the Local Plan Proposals Map, are defined as out -of-centre.  
Planning Condition A condition imposed on a grant of planning permission (in 
accordance with the Town and Country Planning Act 1990) 
or a condition included in a Local Development Order or 
Neighbourhood Development Order.  
Planning Obligations  A legally enforceable obligati on entered into under section 
106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 to mitigate the impacts of a development proposal.  
Playing Field  The whole of the site that encompasses at least one 
playing pitch as defined in the Town and Country Planning 
(Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 
2010.  
Pollution  Anything that affects the quality of land, air, water or soils, which might lead to an adverse impact on human health, 
the natural environment or general amenity. Pollution can 
arise from a range of emissions, including smoke, fumes, 
gases, dust, steam, odour, noise and light.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 252 Previously developed sites  A site which is or was occupied by a permanent structure, 
including the curtilage of developed land (although it 
should not be assumed that the whole of the curtilage 
should be developed) and any associated fixed surface 
infrastructure. This excludes land that has been occupied 
by agricultural or forestry buildings; land that has been developed for minerals extraction or waste disposal by 
landfill purposes where provision for restoration has been 
made through development control procedures; land in built-up areas such as private residential gardens, parks, 
recreation grounds and allotments; and land that was 
previously -developed but where the remains of the 
permanent structure or fixed surface structure have blended into the landscape in the process of time.  
Primary Shopping Area  A defined area where retail development is concentrated. In Crawley, this comprises the Primary Shopping 
Frontages, and Secondary Shopping Frontages which are 
adjoining and closely related to the Primary Shopping 
Frontage.  
Public transport  The term used to refer to trains and buses and other 
communal forms of transport.  
Radiant energy  The term is used particularly when radiation is emitted by a 
source into the surrounding environment. In this document 
it refers to the energy from the sun.  
Renewable & low carbon 
energy  Includes energy for heating and cooling as well as generating electricity. Renewable energy covers those 
energy flows that occur naturally and repeatedly in the 
environment – from the wind, the fall of water, the 
movement of the oceans, from the sun and also from 
biomass and deep geothermal heat. Low carbon 
technologies are those that can help reduce emissions 
(compared to conventional use of fossil fuels).  
S106 Agreement  An agreement under Section 106 of the Town and County 
Planning Act which contains legally enforceable 
obligations to mitigate the impact of development proposals.  
Safeg uarded Land  Land that was required to be safeguarded by the Airports White Paper 2003, the Aviation Policy Framework 2013 
and referred to in the draft Aviation Strategy: Aviation 2050 
for the building of a wide spaced runway to the south of 
Gatwick Airpor t.   
Safeguarded Zone  An area defined in Circular 01/03: Safeguarding of 
aerodromes. This enables the potential impact of 
development proposals on navigation systems and the 
safe operation of aircraft to be assessed.  
Sequential Test (Flood Risk)  
A national planning policy requirement that seeks to steer 
new development to areas with the lowest probability of CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 253 flooding. In demonstrating that the requirements of the 
sequential test have been met, proposals should refer to 
the NPPF and Planning Practi ce Guidance, and the 
Environment Agency Flood Map.  
Sequential Test  (Main Town 
Centre Uses)  This applies to planning applications for main town centre 
uses that are not in an existing centre and are not in 
accordance with an up- to-date Local Plan. The test  
requires applications for main town centre uses to be located in town centres, then in edge- of-centre locations 
and only if suitable sites are not available should out of centre sites be considered.  
Sites of Nature Conservation 
Importance  Locally import ant sites of nature conservation adopted by 
local authorities for planning purposes and identified in the 
local development plan.  Now known as Local Wildlife 
Sites.  
Social Rented Housing Social rented housing is owned by local authorities and 
private registered providers (as defined in section 80 of the 
Housing and Regeneration Act 2008), for which guideline target rents are determined through the national rent 
regime. It may also be owned by other persons and 
provided under equivalent rental arrangements to the above, as agreed with the local authority or with the 
Homes and Communities Agency.  
Standard Method  The government’s expected approach to calculating the 
unconstrained local objectively assessed housing need for 
an area. The Method is set out in national Planning 
Practice Guidance. It involves setting a baseline, based on 
household growth projections and includes an adjustment for affordability. This does not produce the housi ng 
requirement.  
Standing Structures  In the context of Heritage Assets these can be any type of 
built historic structure standing above ground including all 
types of building whether domestic, agricultural, industrial, 
military or transport -related and in whatever condition 
whether habitable, in use or ruined and only partially 
surviving.  Such structures can also include street furniture 
(for example a historic lamp- post), monuments, 
headstones and war memorials.  
Strategic Housing Land 
Availability Assessm ent The Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) is a technical study that forms part of the 
Evidence Base for the Local Plan. It identifies potential 
housing sites and assesses whether these sites are 
developable, how many housing units could be 
accommodated on them and when they could be 
delivered.  
Strategic Housing Market 
Assessment  
The Strategic Housing Market Assessment is an evidence base document which assesses the housing needs of the 
area. The Strategic Housing Market Assessment identifies CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 254 the scale and mix of housing and range of tenures that 
residents require.  
Supplementary Planning 
Documents  Documents which expand upon identified Local Plan 
policies to provide more detailed guidance on how the 
policy should be interpreted and applied.  
Sustainability Appraisal  Under the regulations of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004, Crawley must undertake a 
Sustainability Appraisal (SA) of the Local Plan to satisfy 
independent examination to allow the Plan to be formally 
adopted. The SA is an  ongoing process, which 
endeavours to identify the social, environmental and 
economic impacts of planning policies or allocations  within 
a Local Plan.  
Sustainable Development  Development that meets the social, economic and 
environmental  needs of the present without compromising 
the needs of the future.  
Sustainability Statement  
  A document submitted as part of a planning application 
that sets out how the development has or will achieve the 
objectives set out in Policy SDC1 . The Planning & Climate 
Change Supplementary Planning Document  provides 
detailed guidance on what should be included in the statement and the level of detail it contains will vary 
depending on the type and scale of the proposed 
development . 
Sustainable Transport  Any e fficient, safe and accessible means of transport with 
overall low impact on the environment, including wal king 
and cycling, low and ultra- low emission vehicles, car 
sharing and public transport.  
Sustainable Drainage 
Systems Designed to control surface water  runoff close to where it 
falls and mimic natural drainage as closely as possible.  
Three Bridges Corridor  An area between Three Bridges Station and Crawley Town 
Centre that offers a selection of older and smaller 
employment units.  
Town Centre  In retail policy terms, the Town C entre is represented by  
the Primary Shopping Area as identified on the Local Plan 
Map and defined above.  
Town Centre Boundary  The Town C entre boundary is shown on the Local Plan 
Map, and defines the area within which main town centre uses are focused. It encompasses the Primary Shopping 
Area and areas predominantly occupied by main town 
centre uses within or adjacent to the primary shopping 
area.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 255 Tranquil Areas  Areas sufficiently remote from the visual or audible 
intrusion o f development or traffic to be considered 
unspoilt by urban influences . 
Transport Modelling  A Transport Modelling Assessment  is a technical study 
that forms part of the evidence base for the Local Plan, which assesses the future traffic impact resulting from 
traffic growth and development on the operation of roads, 
junctions and transport systems.   
Urban Capacity Study  A technical study that forms part of the evidence base for 
Crawley's Local Plan. The document is used to assess 
potential employment and housing sites within the town.  
Use Class  Land uses as defined in the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended).  
Viability  Where the costs of any requirements likely to be applied to 
development, such as requirements for affordable housing, 
standards, infrastructure contributions or other requirements, when taking account of normal cost of 
development and mitigation, provide competitive returns to 
a willing landowner to enable the development to be 
deliverable.  
Water Stress  
Water stress occurs when the demand for water exceeds 
the available amount or when poor quality restricts its use.  
Windfall Sites  Windfall s ites are potential housing sites  which have not 
been specifically identified as available in the Local Plan 
process. They normally comprise of sites that have 
unexpectedly become available for a residential use.  
 
  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 256 Abbreviations  
 
AAP Area Action Plan  
AONB  Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty  
ASLC  Area of Special Local Character  
AQMA  Air Quality Management Area  
BREEAM  BRE Environmental Assessment Method  
BUAB  Built-Up Area Boundary  
CAA Civil Aviation Authority  
CABE  Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment  
CHP  Combined Heat and Power  
DCLG  Department for Communities and Local Government  
DECC  Department of Energy and Climate Change  
Defra Department of Environment, Food and Rural Affairs  
DPD  Development Plan Document  
EA Environment Agency  
EGA  Economic Growth Assessment  
ELAA  Employment Land Availability Assessment  
ELT Employment Land Trajectory  
EU European Union  
FRA Flood Risk Assessment  
HER  Historic Environment Record 
HMO  Houses in Multiple Occupation  
HMA  Housing Market Area  
LDS Local Development Scheme  
LEED  Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design  
LEP Local E nterprise Partnership 
mppa  Million Passengers Per Annum  
NPPF  National Planning Policy Framework  
NWS  Northern West Sussex  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 257 PPG  Planning Practice Guidance 
S106 Section 106 Agreements (see “Planning Obligations” definition)  
SA/SEA  Sustainability Appraisal/Strategic Environmental Assessment  
SCI Statement of Community Involvement  
SFRA  Strategic Flood Risk Assessment  
SHLAA  Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment  
SHMA  Strategic Housing Market Assessment  
SPD Supplementary Planning Document  
SSSI  Site of Special Scientific Interest  
SuDS  Sustainable Drainage Systems  
WSCC  West Sussex County Council  
 
  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 258 CRAWLEY LOCAL PLAN PLANNING OBLIGATIONS 
ANNEX  
 
The Crawley Local Plan 2021- 37 makes provision to deliver a minimum of 5,320 homes over 
the next 16  years and with anticipated growth in employment numbers within the borough 
and at Gatwick Airport, this will place additional demands on infrastructure provision. 
Developers will,  therefore, be expected to contribute to meeting the need for additional 
infrastructure generated by their development and ensuring cumulative effects are effectively 
mitigated.  
Planning Legislation 
The statutory framework for planning obligations is set out in Section 106 of the Town and 
Country Planning Act 1990 as amended by Section 12 of the Planning and Compulsory 
Purchase Act 1991.  
The Planning Act 2008 provides the enabling powers for local authorities to apply 
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) to development in order to support the provision of 
infrastructure in an area.  The CIL Regulations 2010 (as amended) were introduced under 
this legislation.  
CIL Regulation 122 sets out that, for a planning obligation to be used as a reason to grant 
planning application for development, or any part of a development, the obligation must be:  
• Necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms  
• Directly related to the development, and  
• Fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the development  
National Planning Policy Framework  
The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) confirms that plans should set out the 
contributions expected from developments. This should include setting out the levels and 
types of affordable housing provision required, along with other infrastructure (such as that 
needed for education, health, transport, flood and water management, green and digital 
infrastructure). Such policies should not undermine the deliverability of the plan (paragraph 
34). 
Paragraphs 54 –  57 of the NPPF further set out the requirements for use of planning 
conditions and obligations as part of decision- making. This confirms that planning obligations 
should only be used where it is not possible to address unacceptable impacts through a 
planning condition.  
The NPPF confirms that where up- to-date policies have set out the contributions expected 
from development, planning applications  for developments  that comply with them should be 
assumed to be viable.   
National Planning Practice Guidance  
The National Planning Practice Guidance sets out further detail about the use of planning 
obligations. This confirms that policies for planning obligations should be set out in plans and 
examined in public. Policy requirements should be clear so that they can be acc urately 
accounted for in the price paid for land. The guidance states that evidence of need at the 
plan- making stage ‘ can be standardised or formulaic’ , and that it ‘ is not appropriate for plan-
makers to set out new formulaic approaches to planning obligat ions in supplementary 
planning documents or supporting evidence base documents, as these would not be subject to examination.’  
Crawley Borough Local Plan 2021- 37 
The Crawley Local Plan Review contains policies which set developer requirements. In most 
instances, the first policy position is  that these should be addressed through design and CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 259 incorporated  on site. However, it is accepted that , in some cases, this is unlikely to be 
feasible. On this basis, financial contributions will be calculated to support o ff-site provision 
elsewhere in order to mitigate  the impacts of the development.  
The Local Plan is supported by a Whole Plan Viability Study. This inform ed the c ouncil’s 
consideration of potential policies and CIL charging rates from a viability perspective whilst 
taking into account adopted national policies that may impact on development viability. It was an iterative process, in order to secure the optimum poss ible approach and ensure the 
Local Plan secures the necessary requirements in order to make development acceptable in planning terms whilst being viable and deliverable. This concludes that , largely , across  
borough- wide schemes for mixed residential developments, viability is positive and would 
support the range of planning obligations anticipated by the Local Plan policies, along with Crawley’s Community Infrastructure Levy. For higher density developments on brownfield 
sites within the Town C entre, partic ularly, though, viability becomes a concern. On this basis, 
a bespoke approach has been taken to some of the Local Plan Policies fo r their application 
within the Town C entre. This has been carefully considered so as to not undermine the 
importance of the r equirements in order to mitigate against the impacts of the development.  
The policies identified in the Plan to have associated developer contributions include:  
Policy No.  Policy  Annex 
Page No.  
Policy IN1:  Infrastructure Provision  261 
Policy DD1 :  Normal  Requirements of All New Development  262 
Policy DD4 : Tree Replacement Standards  262 
Policy OS2:  Provision of Open Space and Recreational Facilities  263 
Policy OS3:  Rights of Way and Access to the Countryside 266 
Policy EC3:  Manor Royal  266 
Policy EC5 : Employment and Skills Development  266 
Policy GAT1:  Development of the Airport with a Single Runway  269 
Policy H2:  Key Housing Sites  269 
Policy H5:  Affordable Housing 270 
Policy H6:  Build to Rent  274 
Policy GI1:  Green Infrastructure  275 
Policy GI3 : Biodiversity and Net Gain 275 
Policy SDC2:  District Energy Network  275 
Policy EP5:  Air Quality  275 
Policy ST1:  Development and Requirements for Sustainable Transport  276 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 260 This Annex sets out the calculations for determining the planning obligations and any 
associated financial contributions (where these are not associated with a case- by-case 
basis) from these.  
Supplementary Planning Documents (SPD’s)  
This Annex should be read in conjunction with the Council’s Affordable Housing SPD, Urban Design SPD and Green Infrastructure SPD and their subsequent reviews. These documents 
provide greater detail on how the contributions will be identified and where they will be 
directed.  
Council Expectations and Standards  
Generally, unless otherwise agreed, the council will expect the following to be included in the 
S106 Agreement or Unilateral Undertaking with respect to the procedures for making commuted sum payments:  
• The formulae as applied in calculating the amount to be paid as at the date of the 
application or the date of the Planning Committee resolution.  
• Indexation from the date of the Resolution to Grant or Unilateral Undertaking until the date of payment. Indexation will be on an annual basis in accordance with the Retail 
Price Index.  
• The applicant is to notify the council when the payment trigger is reached.  
• Penalty interest to be payable on late payments.  
• The council will have 10 years in which to spend the capital contribution.  
The S106 or Unilateral Undertaking will contain a milestone that triggers the payment of the 
capital contribution, usually (but not necessarily always) this will be the carrying out of any 
Material Operation.  
When the payment is triggered, the applicant should notify the council that payment is now 
due. On receipt of the notification, t he council will issue an invoice for the amount payable, 
including any indexation.  
Standard Occupancy Calculations  
Occupancy rates are set out in the table below. Where an outline application is made, the 
average occupancy rate of 2.5 persons (2011 Census)  per dwelling will be used. These are 
applicable to a number of the contribution calculations for policies set out below, including 
open space, sustainable transport , and skills  
Residential Developments 
Dwelling Size  Occupancy  
Studio 1.0 
1 bed  1.5 
2 bed 2.5 
3 bed  2.5 
4+ bed  2.8 
Commercial Developments (per sqm)152 
Offices  (Use Class E ) 1 FTE job per 11 m2 
Industrial  (Use Class B2  or E) 1 FTE job per 36 m2 
Warehouse  & Distribution (Use Class B8)  1 FTE job per 80 m2 
                                                 
152 HCA Employment Density Guide 3rd Edition (November 2015)  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 261 High Street Retail (Use Class E ) 1 FTE job per 19m2 
Food Superstore (Use Class E ) 1 FTE job per 17m2 
Comparison Goods Superstor e/Retail 
Warehouse (Use Class E ) 1 FTE job per 90m2 
Financial & Pro fessional Services (Use 
Class E ) 1 FTE job per 16m2 
Restaurant & Café (Use Class E ) 1 FTE job per 18m2 
Hotels (Budget) (Use Class C1)  1 FTE job per 3 bedrooms  
Hotels (General –  3 Star) (Use Class C1)  1 FTE job per 2 bedrooms  
Hotels (4/5 Star) (Use Class C1)  1 FTE job per 1.5 bedrooms  
Cinemas ( Sui Generis ) 1 FTE job per 90m2 
Amusement and Entertainment (Use Class 
E or Sui Generis ) 1 FTE job per 70m2 
Sports Centres and Private Clubs (Use 
Class E or Use Class F2 or Sui Generis ) 1 FTE job per 65m2 
Policy Contributions  
Policy IN1: Infrastructure Provision  
Development will be per mitted where it is supported by the delivery and maintenance of 
necessary infrastructure both on and off -site (Policy IN1).  
For individual proposed developments this includes the provision of mitigation to avoid any 
substantial cumulative effects on the ex isting infrastructure services (Policy IN1).  
The council will charge Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) on development taking place 
within the borough in accordance with the council’s adopted CIL charging schedule (Policy 
IN1).  
Where appropriate, developer contributions will be sought in the form of planning obligations 
to address site specific issues, subject to the tests in the CIL Regulations (Policy IN1).  
Infrastructure covers a wide range of services and facilities including:  
• Transport (covered more in Policy ST1)  
• Education 
• Health  
• Social infrastructure  
• Community facilities  
• Cultural facilities  
• Sports and recreation centres and facilities  
• Open space (covered more in Policies OS1, OS2 and OS3)  
• Parks and play space (covered more in Policies OS1 and OS2)  
• Waste management and disposal  
• Libraries  
• Cemeteries  
• Emergency services  
• Places of worship  
• Utility services  
• Waste water treatment  
• Telecommunications Infrastructure (covered more in Policy IN3)  
• Flood defences.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 262 It is a fact that development will place additional  demands on infrastructure provision and 
that developers will be expected to contribute to meeting the need for additional 
infrastructure generated by their development and ensuring the cumulative effects are 
effectively mitigated.  
The borough council will  charge developers the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) on 
development, in accordance with the council’s adopted CIL Charging Schedule and the CIL Regulations (2010) as amended.  
Section 106 agreements will address relevant site specific issues in accor dance with the 
statutory tests set out in CIL Regulation 122, and the policies identified in this annex.  
Policy DD1 : Normal Requirements of All New Development  
Proposals must be supported by a future management and maintenance plan for all shared hard and soft landscaping, semi -public or semi -private areas to ensure these areas bec ome 
well-established (Policy DD1).  
Streetscene improvements, public art, CCTV and access and safety measures (such as fire hydrants), or contributions towards these, will be sough t on a site specific basis in 
accordance with policy and relevant service requirements (Policy DD1 ). 
Public art can highlight what is special or locally distinctive about an area and create cultural 
assets that help in the creation of interesting streets and spaces.  
Major developments will be required to allocate a sum equivalent to 1 per cent of build costs 
to the commissioning of public art work to be included as part of the scheme, or else as a 
commuted payment towards offsite provision of public art , where viability allows .  
Policy DD4 : Tree Replacement Standards  
Where development proposals would result in the loss of trees, the number of replacements 
is based on the size of tree to be lost, as s et out in Policy  DD4.  
Where commuted sums are sought in lieu of on -site provision, these will be based on the 
cost on a per tree, taking account of constraints to planting.  
The cost of off -site planting will be based on the cost of a sixteen to eighteen centimetre girth 
tree measured at 1.5m off the ground, pl anting, sundries and watering over a five year 
period.  
Where tree planting will occur within a hard paved area, the additional cost of construction 
for a tree pit must be funded.  
The contribution covers the cost of providing the tree pit (where appropriat e), purchasing, 
planting, protecting, establishing and initially maintaining the new tree.  
The “open ground” contribution will apply where development results in the loss of council -
owned trees in open ground and where the development results in the loss of trees on the 
development site, and it is  unable to provide the required replacement tree planting on site. 
The council will plant the replacements in a location that contributes to the character and 
appearance of the borough and regains loss of biodiver sity. 
The “hardstanding” contribution will apply where new tree planting in hard standing is required off -site to mitigate the impact of development.   
Tree in open ground (no tree pit required)  £700 
Tree in hard standing (tree pit required)  £3,319  
 
 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 263 Policy OS2: Provision of Open Space and Recreational Facilities  
Where a development is on existing open space which is not identified as surplus and is 
required to be replaced through Policy OS1, a S106 agreement will also be sought to secure 
the replacement open space and to provide and improve the Public Rights of Way network 
both within the development and connecting to the surrounding countryside (Policy OS2).  
Existing playing fields and pitches, unless demonstrated to be surplus to requirements through  the evidence base (P laying Pitch Study), are to be replaced with equivalent or better 
provision in terms of quantity and quality and in a suitable location. Where the council agrees 
that on- site provision of open space cannot be reasonably provided, the c ouncil will seek a 
financial contribution towards enhancement of existing facilities in order to mitigate the 
increased demand.  
The additional demand for open space, sport and recreation facilities created by new 
residential development is to be mitigated and addressed through either:  
• on-site provision of open space, where the  characteristics and location of housing sites  
allow this to  be appropriate; or  
• alternatively, where it is agreed this cannot  reasonably be provided on- site, as a financial 
contribution towards the enhancement of existing facilities (or new provision through 
changing the typology of an open space site) in order to mitigate  the increase demand.  
This will be proportional to the additional demand and impacts on open sp ace generated by 
the development, using the borough’s open space standards set out in paragraph 7.13  of the 
Local Plan,  and the Open Space and Indoor Sports Facilities Assessments and Playing Pitch 
Strategy (2020) (and any subsequent updates). A site- speci fic assessment should be 
undertaken to determine the existing quantitative, qualitative and accessibility of public open 
space within the locality of the development.  
In addition, the impact of the increased population from residential development on open  
space and recreational facilities which particularly serve a borough -wide population will be 
mitigated by the use of the Community Infrastructure Levy.  
The table below is a guide as to whether a housing proposal may generate a need for new 
on-site provision:  
Type of 
Provision 1-9 
dwellings  10-49 
dwellings  50-199 
dwellings  200+ 
dwellings  Town 
Centre 
Residential  
Play Space  X     
Amenity 
Green 
Space X     
Outdoor 
Sports 
Space X *   * 
Allotments  X *    
Parks and 
Recreation 
Grounds  X * *  X 
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 264 Type of 
Provision 1-9 
dwellings  10-49 
dwellings  50-199 
dwellings  200+ 
dwellings  Town 
Centre 
Residential  
Natural 
Green Space X * *  
X 
KEY:  
 X      S106 contributions not normally sought.  
 *       Contribution towards off -site provision may be required.  
   On-site provision of facility may be required.  
Higher density development within the Town Centre will be expected to consider opportunities to provide on- site amenity open space, play space and community food 
growing space. A financial contribution will be expected, proportionate to the associated 
anticipated increase in population generated by the development, towards strategic sports 
pitch and ancillary facilities provision. Taking viability into account, higher density town 
centre developments will not be expected to provide a contribution towards parks and 
recreation spaces or natural green space. Imaginative design solutions suitable for high 
density, Town Centre style developments should be considered in meeting the biodiversity net gain requirement on- site (Policy GI3). Where provision of any of the open space 
typologies required from higher dens ity development is agreed cannot reasonably be 
provided fully on- site, the council will seek financial contributions.  
Contributions for proposals under 10 dwellings will not normally be sought. Whilst these 
developments will have a small cumulative impact on open space it is not generally 
expedient to consider on a case -by-case basis as required by the CIL regulations test for 
planning obligations. In these cases, high quality on- site amenity open space and hard and 
soft landscaping will be essential as par t of the design and layout of the proposal.  
Contributions towards children’s play space will be expected from all new residential units on 
schemes of ten dwellings or more. Studio and 1 -bed units have an anticipated occupancy 
calculation of 1 and 1.5 persons respectively. However, this does not negate the council’s 
view that children are often residents of such properties
153, and in these cases, access to 
high quality outdoor play space located close to the property is arguably even more critical for the quality of life.  
The Table below can be used to calculate the contributions required towards off -site 
provision.  
 
Type of Provision  
  A B C 
Standard m2 
per person  Cost per m2 Contribution per 
person (A x B)  
Play Space  0.7 £170 £119 
Amenity Green Space (0.2ha min) 4.5 £15 £67.50  
Outdoor Sports Space  12.5 £21 £262.50  
                                                 
153 Census 2011 records  the presence of 575 dependent children permanently resident in studio or single 
bedroom flats in Crawley, and given worsening affordability in the subsequent period it is considered likely that 
this number has increased since then.  
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 265  
Type of Provision  
  A B C 
Standard m2 
per person  Cost per m2 Contribution per 
person (A x B)  
Allotments  1.5 £30 £45 
Parks and Recreation Grounds  13 £72 £936 
Natural Green Space  10 £15 £150 
Maintenance Where the council adopts areas of open space, sport 
and recreational provision, contributions will be sought 
towards their maintenance to cover a period of 10 years.  
Cost per m2 is to be used when on- site provision can be provided that partly meets 
requirements but a contribution towards off -site provision should also be sought, where 
possible, to meet requirements in full. The following formula will be used to determine 
outstandi ng costs:  
(overall requirement m2 – on-site provision 
m2) x cost per m2 = outstanding contribution  
On-site provision and/or contributions towards Amenity Green Space and Natural Green 
Space can form part of proposals to meet Biodiversity Net Gain require ments for a 
development (as established by Policy GI3).  
Management and maintenance arrangements must be agreed with the council and secured 
to ensure the long- term usability of the site. In the first instance, the developer is expected to 
maintain on -site open space provision for up to 10 years, after which arrangements must be 
put in place for a management company and/or third party to manage the space in 
perpetuity . 
If the developer does not wish to assume responsibility for maintaining the open space, the 
council may be willing to accept a commuted sum and make arrangements for management 
of the open space through the council or a third party. Adoption will be subject to the council 
being satisfied that the facility meets the quality requirements of the council. It is therefore 
important to agree the specification of the open space/facilities with council at an early stage in the planning process. The Table below provides an indication of the costs of maintaining 
the different types of open space. The ex act maintenance sum will need to be agreed with 
the council as part of the S106 discussions.  
Typology  Annual Cost 2013/14 (£/m²)  
Children & Young People’s Space  £3.67  
Parks and R ecreation Grounds  £2.20  
Outdoor Sports Space  £0.92  
Amenity Green Space  £0.62*  
Natural Green Space  £0.42  
Allotments  £0.13  
*maintenance varies significantly, dependent on the exact specification of the space.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 266 Policy OS3: Rights of Way and Access to the Countryside  
Proposals which detract from the character of a right of way or other type of recreational 
route must adequately mitigate the impacts or provide a new resource of equal or better 
value (Policy OS3).  
This may include the provision of safe and convenient links to nearby rights of way/recreational routes, and/or new or upgraded existing rights of way to multi -functional 
routes including environmental functions and visual amenity to create benefits for a range of 
users (Policy OS3).  
Policy EC3: Manor Royal  
To support ongoing improvements to the Manor Royal environment, a developer contribution will be sought towards public realm improvements.  
Where developments involve a net increase in gross internal area in excess of 100sqm, the 
council will seek a proportionate contribution of £2 per square metre of additi onal floorspace 
(GIA) towards public realm improvements in Manor Royal . This will be used towards 
specified projects identified by the council in liaison with Manor Royal BID , subject to 
appropriate projects being identified.  
It is recognised that for smaller development where the financial contribution sought would be £500 or less, the costs involved in preparing a S106 agreement may mean that it is not 
expedient to secure a contribution in this way. Where this is the case, the public realm 
contribution may take the form of appropriate on site provision,  to be negotiated with the 
council.  
Policy EC5 : Employment and Skills Development  
This section relates to Policy EC5 (Employment and Skills Development). It explains how 
Crawley’s Employment and Skills Programme 2019- 2024 (and any subsequent updates)154 
will be delivered through the planning process, detailing the obligations and developer contributions that will be sough t from major development in order to help improve social 
mobility, inclusion and address the existing skills gap.  
Policy Context  
Crawley is an economically successful borough at the heart of the Gatwick Diamond, home 
to around 4,000 active businesses and over 100,000 jobs. However, local residents’ average 
earnings are below those of in- commuters, and they are less likely to access higher -skilled, 
higher -paid jobs. In a recent social mobility report, State of the Nation, Crawley was ranked 
304th out of 324 local authorities for low social mobility.  
Policy EC5  takes a pro -active approach to addressing what is an identified economic 
weakness for Crawley, requiring qualifying development to contribute towards addressing 
the skills gap and improving social mobil ity. 
This is to be achieved through two obligations that will be required from all major 
development:  
i) Committing at the Planning Application stage to prepare and submit a site 
specific Employment and Skills Plan, the content of which must be agreed by the 
council, prior to the commencement of development.  
ii) The making of a proportionate financial contribution towards employment and 
skills initiatives in Crawley.  
For all major development, developers will be required to satisfy parts i.) and ii.) of the policy . 
The following guidance explains to how this can be achieved.  
 
                                                 
154 Crawley Employment and Skills Programme 2019 –  2024  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 267 Part i ) Employment and Skills Plan 
At the planning application stage, the applicant will be asked to commit to preparing a site -
specific Employment and Skills Plan (ESP)  relating to the devel opment. This commitment 
will form part of the obligations on a planning permission, secured by way of a Section 106 
Agreement. The ESP should be prepared by the applicant, in liaison with the council, and 
must be submitted to and agreed by the council prior to the commencement of development.  
An advice note has been prepared by the council on the process and content of an ESP 
(https://investcrawley.co.uk/employment -and-skills/employments -and-skills -programme ).   
Requirements of Part (ii): Developer Contribution towards Employment and Skills  
All major residential and employment developments will be required to make a proportionat e 
financial contribution towards employment and skills initiatives to support those sections of 
the Crawley workforce who face challenges in accessing employment. The financial 
contributions will be used by Employ Crawley to fund workplace coordination, tr aining and 
tailored support that enables individuals to better access employment opportunities, including those arising from development at either the construction or end user phase. This 
will normally focus on people that have been out of work for a long period of time, or that 
may possess a lower level of skills who might struggle to access employment or training 
opportunities without extra support.  
 
The following approach will be used to calculate the financial contribution sought from 
development. The c alculation methodology takes account of local circumstances relating to 
the employment market and, as appropriate, residential occupation assumptions to ensure 
that the financial contribution sought is locally specific and proportionate to the type and 
quantum of development proposed. Please note that the method set out below is the same 
as that shown in the Employment and Skills Provision Guidance Note.  
 Where major development incorporates a mix of different uses, the contribution will be 
calculated on the basis of the individual uses that make up that development. For example, 
for a mixed use office and residential development, the contribution will be calculated on the 
basis of both the commercial and residential elements. In all cases, the financial contribution 
will be secured by way of Section 106 Agreement to be paid upon the commencement of 
development.  
 
Based on Department for  Work & Pensions data, £6,500 is the minimum cost for training, 
preparing and placing into sustainable employment an unemploy ed person claiming 
Employment Support Allowance. This figure is used to inform the amount that would be 
required by Employ Crawley to provide the necessary training to help support a long -term 
unemployed individual to access employment, and feeds into the calculation for both 
commercial and residential developments.  
Residential Development, including as part of Mixed Use Development  
For residential development, including residential components of mixed use development, 
the contribution required is calculated as shown below.  
Employment and Skills Contribution from Residential Development  
The Employment and Skills contribution from residential development, including residential 
components of mixed use development, is based on the following parameters : 
a. minimum cost for supporting an individual to access employment (£6,500);  
b. number of dwellings proposed;  
c. expected adult occupancy rate for those dwellings, these being; 1 adult per studio/1 bed unit; 2 
adults per 2/3/4+ bed unit;  
d. proportion of Crawley’s working age population with no (or other) qualifications (7.6%)  
 
It is calculated as: ( a x b x c x d) / 2 , this being:  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 268 (£6,500  x number of dwellings proposed  x expected adult occupancy x 0.076) / 2  
 
For example, for a development of 10 x 1- bedroom flats and 5 x 2 -bedroom flats, the financial 
contribution would be calculated as:  
(£6,500 x 10 x 1 x 0.076) / 2 = £2,470  + (£6,500 x 5 x 2 x 0.076) / 2 = £2,470)  =  £4,940  
Commercial Development, including as part of Mixed Use Development  
For commercial development, including commercial components of mixed use schemes, 
development that would involve a net increase in gross internal area in excess of 1,000sqm 
will be subject to a proportionate financial contribution towards employment and skills.  
The contribution re quired is based on the following parameters:  
a) Net increase in Gross Internal Area;  
b) Standard Occupancy;  
c) Crawley’s resident employment self -containment rate;  
d) Proportion of Crawley’s working age population with no (or other) qualifications;  
e) Minimum cost for s upporting an individual to access employment (£6,500)  
Standard Occupancy (b) should first be calculated to feed into the commercial employment 
and skills calculated. This will vary according to the type of commercial development that is 
proposed, and should be calculated on the basis on the Standard Occupancy Calculations 
set out below. For hotel development it will first be necessary to calculate the total number of staff based on a ‘per room’ assumption. This figure is then divided by the Gross Inter nal 
Area to feed into the next part of the formula. Sui Generis development does not have a 
standard occupancy, and the financial contribution required for Sui Generis development will 
be subject to negotiation with the council on a case- by-case basis.  
Standard Occupancy for Commercial Development  
Standard Occupancy for Commercial Development is calculated on the basis below:  
Offices (Class E)  1 FTE job per 11sqm  
Industrial (Class B2 or E)  1 FTE job per 36sqm  
Warehouse & Distribution (Class B8)  1 FTE job per 80sqm  
High Street Retail (Class E)  1 FTE job per 19sqm  
Food Superstore (Class E)  1 FTE job per 17sqm  
Comparison Superstore/Retail Warehouse (Class E)  1 FTE job per 90sqm  
Financial & Professional Services (Class E)  1 FTE job per 16sqm  
Restaurant &  Café (Class E)  1 FTE job per 18sqm  
Hotels (Budget) (Use C1)  1 FTE job per 3 bedroom  
Hotels (General –  3 Star) (Class C1)  1 FTE job per 2 bedroom  
Hotels (4/5 Star) (Class C1)  1 FTE job per 1.5 bedroom  
Cinemas (Sui Generis)  1 FTE job per 90sqm  
Amusement and Entertainment (Class E or Sui Generis)  1 FTE job per 70sqn  
Sports Centres and Private Clubs (Class E or Class F2 or Sui Generis)  1 FTE job per 65sqm  
 
 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 269 As identified in the Northern West Sussex Economic Growth Assessment 2020, Crawley has 
a total working population of 55,676 people, of which 36,583 people live and work within the 
borough155. This figure, 65.7%, represents (c) the resident  employment  self-containment 
rate.  
In relation to residential qualification levels (d) , 92.4% of Crawley residents of working 
age are qualified to at least NVQ1 or above. This means that 7.6% of Crawley’s working age 
population have no (or other) qualifications. It is these people that are most likely to face 
challenges in accessing sustainable employment, and who will require support in accessing 
the training or the employment market.  
Employment and Skills Contribution from Commercial Development  
The Employment and Skills contribution from commercial development, including commercial 
components of mixed use development, is based on the following parameters:  
a) Net increase in Gross Internal Area;  
b) Standard Occupancy;  
c) Crawley’s resident employment self -containment rate (65.7%);  
d) Proportion of Crawley’s working age population with no (or other) qualifications  (7.6%) ; 
e) Minimum cost for supporting an individual to access employment (£6,500)  
The contribution required should be calculated according to the type of development, on the basis 
below:  
Commercial Development (excluding Office and Hotel uses)  
(a/b) x c x d x e, this being:  
(Net increase in  Gross Internal Area / Standard Occupancy ) x 0.657 x 0.076  x £6,500  
For example, for a Class B2 industrial development of 1,000m2 net increase in gross internal area, 
the financial contribution would be calculated as:  
(1,000 / 36) x 0.657 x 0.076  x £6,500 = £9,015.50  
 
Office Development  
The equation applied for offices is the same as that used for commercial, though for reasons of viability, the final output is halved. The equation is therefore:  
(a/b) x 0.657  x 0.076 x £6,500 / 2  
For example, for a Class E office development of 1,000m
2 net increase in gross internal area, the 
financial contribution would be calculated as:  
(1000 / 11) x 0.657  x 0.076 x £6,500 / 2 = £14,752.63  
 
Hotel Development  
For hotel development, it is first necessary to identify the anticipated number of staff, which is 
calculated on a ratio of staff per room, depending on the type of hotel. This is calculated on the 
basis of:  
(Number of Rooms / Standard Occupancy ) = z 
(a / z) x 0.657 x 0.076 x £6,500  
For 150 bedroom budget hotel development of 1,000m2 net increase in gross internal area,  the 
financial contribution would be calculated as:  
(150 / 3 = 50 staff ) 
(1,000 / 50) x 0.657 x 0.076  x £6,500 = £6,491.16  
Policy GAT1: Development of the Airport with a Single Runway  
The control or mitigation of impacts, compensation, infrastructure and benefits of growth at 
the Airport will be secured through appropriate planning conditions and/or S 106 obligations 
(Policy GAT1).  
Policy H2: Key Housing Sites  
A number of Key Housing Sites have been identified with specific requirements:  
                                                 
155  Source: ONS census 2011/Lichfields analysis  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 270 • Tinsley Lane Housing and Open Space Site  (includes the replacement of Oakwood 
Football Club; the provision of a senior football pitch and facilities; a junior 3G football 
pitch; community use arrangements for the sports pitch facilities; enhancement and 
management for public access of Summersvere Woods; on- site publicly accessible play 
space and amenity greenspace; and provision of allotments).  
• Breezehurst Drive Playing Fields Housing and Open Space Site  (includes the 
retention of good quality pitch provision to the south of the pavilion; provision of enhanced pitch drainage off -site; new or retained provision of changing facilities; and 
allotments).  
• Henty Close Housing and Open Space Site  (includes the replacement play area of 
equivalent or better quantity and quality in a suitable location).  
• Rushetts Road  Housing and Open Space Site (includes the replacement play area of 
equivalent or better quantity and quality in a suitable location).  
• Land East of Balcombe Road/Street Hill Housing, Biodiversity and Heritage Site 
(includes the long- term commitment to the ecological enhancement and proper 
management of the remainder of the Local Wildlife Sites for the benefit of biodiversity, and adequate mit igation and compensation measures provided to offset any harm 
caused to the site’s important assets).  
Policy H5: Affordable Housing 
Policy H5 requires 40% affordable housing from all residential developments  which fall 
outside the Town C entre . 
The council expect a minimum of 75% of the affordable housing to be Affordable Rent, or 
Social Rent where other forms of subsidy exist , and up to 25 % as  Shared Ownership.  
This equates to 30% of the total scheme f or Affordable/Social Rent and 10% of the total 
scheme as Shared Ownership.  
For sites of 10 dwellings or less, a commuted sum towards off -site affordable housing 
provision will be sought, unless on- site provision is preferred, with the on -site tenure mix to 
be agreed . 
Crawley Town Centre  
For residential developments within the Town Centre, Policy H5 requires 25% affordable 
housing.  
The council will expect 60% of the affordable housing in the Town Centre to be Social Rent 
and/or Affordable Rent, and up to 40% as Intermediate Tenure, to incl ude either Shared -
Ownership, Shared -Equity or Affordable Home Ownership tenures.  
Exceptions  
Policy H5 states that, except for sites of 10 dwellings or less, payments in lieu will only be 
accepted in exceptional circumstances where it can be demonstrated t hat there are robust 
planning reasons for doing so and provided that the contribution i s of equivalent financial 
value.  
For high density schemes elsewhere in the borough, as defined in Policy CL4 ( i), and falling 
outside of the Town C entre, should viabili ty evidence be provided to justify similar levels of 
affordable housing to that required in the Town C entre, this will be considered with claw -
back mechanisms in place to secure higher levels of affordable housing provision, up to the Policy level of 40% s hould viability improve during the period of development construction, or 
in exceptional circumstances an off -site commuted payment in lieu may be considered.  
The council will only consider relaxing this affordable housing requirement, in part or in full,  
in exceptional circumstances, where a scheme is clearly subject to abnormal costs, not 
including land costs, and not otherwise envisaged by the Local Plan Viability Assessment, CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 271 and where this is evidenced by robustly assessed viability. The scheme must al so evidence 
that it addresses a demonstrative and immediate housing need. In such situations, the 
scheme is expected to appraise various permutations of affordable housing provisions to 
best address local affordable housing needs, and where concessions are agreed by the 
council then claw -back mechanisms will be expected to be put in place and the scheme 
independently assessed.  
Build to Rent will also be considered as an exception while it remains all for rent, and is 
further detailed in Policy H6, which wil l revert back to Policy H5 should such schemes cease 
to be predominantly private rental.  
Rent to Buy is considered as an exceptional Intermediate Tenure that may be considered 
only in exceptional circumstances where it can be evidenced to address local housing 
needs, and will not be considered as a rental tenure.  
Mechanism to Secure the Delivery of Affordable Housing 
Section 106 Planning Agreements (or Unilateral Undertakings) will be required to secure the 
delivery of affordable housing. The council will expect affordable housing to receive free 
serviced land as a starting point, whereby the Registered Provider receives transfer of the 
built-out units at a price commensurate with the affordable tenure or under special 
circumstances receives free transfer o f serviced land at an equivalent aggregate value. The 
S106 Agreement will require applicants to provide an Affordable Housing Scheme setting out the provisions of affordabl e housing in keeping with this P olicy requirement (para. 13.31).  
Where exceptional c ircumstances result in the council accepting an off -site commuted 
payment, the basic rationale will be for the council to secure a capital contribution that would 
be at a minimum equivalent to free -serviced land, and should reflect the cost to the 
developm ent had affordable housing been provided on- site. The approach to be taken in 
calculating the financial contribution is based on a Square Metre Levy.  
This is an approach whereby a square metre levy is applied across the whole development 
aimed at securing an appropriate proportion of the build area towards the provision of 
affordable housing on an alternative site. This approach seeks to achieve a value equivalent 
to free -serviced land for the proportion of affordable housing that would otherwise have been 
provided on- site. For Crawley, a land- value tariff of £350 p/sqm is considered appropriate.  
Square Metre Levy:  
 GIA x [£350] p/m2 = Commuted sum  
Note : The key variables of [£350] per square meter and [30%] of gross development value applies in full from 
[11] units upwards.  
To address any ‘disproportional burden’, these variables on smaller schemes of [10 units or less] are 
‘discounted’ on a sliding sc ale, the first unit starting at [one- third] of these respective values.  
 
Affordable Housing Calculator  
 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 272  
 
Key Variables – Model Assumptions:   
1. Free Land to m2: £350 notional value of free serviced land for the 40% affordable 
housing quota.  
2. Free Land to OMV: 30% of market value of the 40% affordable housing quota, equating to a notional value of free serviced land, for 11+ units, with a sliding d iscount applied 
from 1 -10 units.
 
 
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 273  
Normally, for schemes of one to ten dwellings payments shall be made on occupation of the 
first property. For schemes of 11 dwellings or more, the payment schedule will be 50% on 
commencement and 50% upon occupation of  the first market units, unless otherwise agreed. 
Indexation will continue until the final payment is made.  
The council may spend the capital contribution in any part of the borough, or within 
developments beyond Crawley’s administrative boundary where the council secures 
nomination rights to affordable housing, for the provision of and/or improvements to 
affordable housing.  
Approach for Small Sites:  
Where financial contributions are sought (including for calculating the value for on -site tenure 
options in developments of six to ten new dwellings), the Affordable Housing Calculator has 
a built -in sliding scale discount, to ensure the contribution required remains proportionate 
and viable for smaller developments. For smaller schemes (ten dwellings or less) payment is 
accepted at the point of first occupation in order to aid cash -flow constraints.  
On smaller schemes of 10 units or less the starting point will be to establish the capital value 
of the expected affordable housing contribution using the Affordable Housing Calculator. 
This will determine the commuted sum payable on schemes of 5 residential units or less, 
unless the applicant wishes to consider on- site provision whereby the approach detailed 
below will also apply.  
For schemes in the range of 6 to 10 residential units, the capital contribution established by 
the Affordable Housing Calculator for on -site provision will be modelled by the council to 
determine the most appropri ate on -site use of this resource to address local housing needs 
while taking into account practical considerations and constraints.  
The council’s options would then be to apply this capital value across the available 
affordable housing units as either Disc ounted Market Sale or Shared- Equity, which would 
not require the involvement of a Registered Affordable Housing Provider. Alternatively, with 
the involvement of a Registered Affordable Housing Provider, the options available to the 
council would then include either Shared -Ownership or Affordable Rent. The council may 
choose to apply this capital value over fewer affordable units than are due in order to 
improve the affordability of the affordable units.  
For example:  
A scheme comprising of 6 residential units (2 x 1b/2p flats, 2 x 2b/4p flats, and 2 x 2b/4p 
houses) would have:  
• an affordable housing requirement of 2.4 affordable units;  
• which would be equivalent to a capital contribution towards affordable housing rang ing 
between £104,067 and £119,953.  
• This is based on 446m2 GIA and almost £1.5m GDV, depending on which option is 
applied.  
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 274 In addition, to further reduce disproportionate burdens on smaller developments, the council 
will seek to simplify viability assessm ent requirements. If a viability or delivery problem is 
accepted, then the council will consider:  
i. Varying mix/tenure split;  
ii. Varying payment timing;  
iii. Reducing percentage of affordable and/or applying a lower sum to the off -site 
calculation.  
Policy H6: Build  to Rent  
Build to rent schemes are regarded as an exception to Policy H5, whereby Policy H5 will be deferred for as long as the scheme remains all -rental, during which time Affordable Private 
Rent is expected on the following basis:  
i. Schemes shall incorporate an element of Affordable Private Rent comprising:  
• 20% of dwellings in schemes within the town centre, or   
• 30% of dwellings in schemes elsewhere in the borough.   
In both settings rentals will not exceed either 80% of market rent values or Local Housing Allowance rates, and shall be offered to the council for qualifying nominations on an Assured Shorthold Tenure (AST) basis. Under no circumstances will less than 
20% affordable private rent be provided in line with NPPF guidance.  
ii. A deferred Affor dable Housing Scheme is to be identified, for future provision in the 
event that the scheme ceases to be all -rental, in accordance with the requirements of 
Policy H5 (as applicable to the location of the development).  
The deferred Affordable Housing Scheme will be triggered and delivered in the event that 
the scheme ceases to be all -rental, and shall be disposed of to a Registered Provider at their 
best consideration (Policy H6).  
To accommodate this particular investment model, and where ongoing management is to be 
provided in a fully rented scheme, the council will not require a Registered Provider to take 
on the affordable units, and council is prepared to defer the intermediate tenure requirement 
of the policy for as long as the scheme remains all -rental (para . 13.37 ). 
In such circumstances , the council will require the rentals to be made available at affordable 
rent levels, not exceeding 80% of the equivalent open market values and not exceeding 
Local Housing Allowance rates, and the council will enter into a Lettings Agreement to allow 
for nominations to be made into the affordable p rivate rented units (para. 13.38).  
The scheme will be expected to enter into a S106 Agreement that will remain with the land, 
and in the event that the scheme ceases to be all -rental the S106 Agreement will require the 
affordable units, including the deferred intermediate tenure properties, to be made available 
to Registered Providers in line with the council ’s affordable housing policy, which shall 
include any claw -back provis ions in the event that the council allows any concessions to the 
affordable housing policy requirements (para. 13.39).  
A planning obligation will be sought for the following purposes detailed in Policy H6 in 
respect of the rental scheme:  
• Securing the status of the units as Build to Rent for at least 15 years;  
• Securing the unified ownership and unified management across the Build to Rent scheme, embracing both Market Rent and Affordable Private Rent units;  
• Affordable housing requirements (including review mechanisms where appropriate) and regular provision of evidence of compliance by the scheme operator;  
• Securing council nomination rights in respect of the affordable units through an agreed Deed of Nomination;  
• Clawback mechanisms to secure compensation in the event of the loss of Market Rent homes before the expiry of the covenant period;  
• Site management arrangements.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 275 Policy GI1: Green Infrastructure  
Policy GI1 states that p roposals which reduce, block or harm the functions of green 
infrastructure should be  avoided. Any loss will be required to be adequately justified, 
minimised, and mitigate d against or as a last resort compensated for  to ensure the integrity 
of the green infras tructure network is maintained.  
Proposals should maximise the opportunity to mai ntain and extend green infrastructure links 
to form a multi -functional network of open space, providing opportunities for walking and 
cycling, and connecting to the urban/rural fringe and the wider countryside beyond.  
Large proposals will be required to pr ovide new and/or create links to green infrastructure 
where possible.  
Policy GI3 : Biodiversity and Net Gain  
All development proposals will be expected to incorporate features to encourage biodiversity 
and enhance existing features of nature conservation value within and around the 
development. Development will be required to demonstrate how it will meet the 
government’s requirement for securing a ‘net gain’ in biodiversity. As a minimum, all 
development proposals will be need to achieve a net gain for biodi versity in accordance with 
government expectations156: a 10% increase in habitat value for wildlife compared with the 
pre-development baseline (Policy GI3 ). 
In the first instance, net gain for biodiversity will be expected to achieve a minimum 10% increase on site. Only where it is clearly justified this is not practicable to achieve, and where 
it is shown to have been considered and sought from the early stages of the design and 
layout of the development, will off -site provision, in the form of equivalent fi nancial 
contributions, be agreed.  
Defra and Natural England have worked together to prepare and consult on a Biodiversity 
metric 2.0: https://consult.defra.gov.uk/natural -england/the- biodiversity -metric -2-0/
  
The responses received have been published:  
http://publications.naturalengland.org.uk/publicat ion/5850908674228224  
The Natural England link above provides more information on the Biodiversity Metric 2.0 as well as the tools and user guides required to understand the metric 2.0 . It also includes the 
project specific calculation tool.   
It is anticipa ted that the final version of the Biodiversity Metric will be published in December 
2020.  
Policy SDC2 District Energy Networks  
Where a connection to an existing District Energy Network is proposed, the council may 
secure the implementation of this by means  of a planning obligation.  
Policy EP5: Air Quality  
Development that may reasonably be considered to impact upon air quality, will be expected 
to contribute towards achieving a reduction in levels of air pollution, and should demonstrate 
how this will be ac hieved through an Air Quality Assessment (Policy EP5).  
Emissions Mitigation Calculation  
The purpose of an emissions mitigation assessment is to:  
1) calculate the additional transport emissions associated with a development;  
2) determine the appropriate level of mitigation required to help avoid, minimise and/or off -
set the impact on air quality.  
                                                 
156 Government’s Environmental Bill (2019)  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 276 The calculation methodology is provided in the latest version of the Air Quality and 
Emissions Mitigation Guidance for Sussex . In summary, the calculation is a two stage 
process:  
Step 1 uses the DEFRA Emissions Factor Toolkit (EFT) to estimate the tr ansport emissions 
of NO x and PM 2.5 from a proposed dev elopment (over a 5 year period)    
http://laqm.defra.gov.uk/review -and-assessment/tools/emissions.html  
Step 2 uses the output data from the EFT to estimate the associated health damage cost 
from each of these pollutants (over a 5 year period) using the Defra Damage Cost Appraisal 
Toolkit (DCAT)  
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/air -quality -economic -analysis#damage- costs- approach   
The sum of the health damage cost from both pollutants (NO x and PM 2.5) provides the total 
emissions mitigation value to be applied to practical mitigation measures.  
Policy ST1: Development and Requirements for Sustainable Transport  
For development which generates a significant demand for travel, and/or is likely to have other transport implications  contributi ons to improved sustainable transport infrastructure off -
site will be required. This may include, where appropriate, bus priority measures, enhanced 
passenger information, and routes identified in the council’s Local Cycling and Walking 
Infrastructure Plan (P olicy ST1).  
A contribution will be sought from major  residential and commercial  developments including 
new buildings outside of the Gatwick Airport Boundary as follows:  
Contribution = notional unit cost of infrastructure x proportion of infrastructure 
catchment arising from the development x notional distance covered by scheme 
(rounded to the nearest £1)  
Where:  
Notional unit cost of infrastructure  = £375,000  (the cost per km of providing a notional 
cycling/walking route)  
Proportion of infrastructure catchment arising from the development  = a fraction 
calculated in the following way:  
• In Manor Royal: O / (O + 13,931*)  
• Outside Manor Royal: O / (O + 4,000†)  
Where O
 = the net additional occupancy generated by the development, based on the 
development type,  and calculated in accordance with the Standard Occupancy 
Calculations set out above.  
Distance = the higher figure of either 0.5 km or the distance (to the nearest 0.1km) by foot 
or bicycle between the development site and the nearest of either a railway s tation OR a 
stop on the high frequency, quality bus c orridor identified in Policy CL4.  
No contribution will be sought where the amount calculated using this method falls 
below £500 for the entire development.  
*13,931 is a notional catchment figure for sustainable transport infrastructure projects in 
Manor Royal, representing half of the working population of the Business District.  
†4,000 is a notional catchment figure for sustainable transport infrastructure projects in 
Crawley’s neighbourhoods, representing roughly half of the average population of a 
Crawley neighbourhood.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 277 Worked Example 1:  
50-dwelling town centre residential scheme comprising 15 1- bed dwellings, 23 2 -bed 
dwellings, 10 3- bed dwellings and 2 4 -bed dwellings, located within 0.5km of a railway 
station/high frequency bus corridor.  
Occupancy is as follows:  
15 1- bed dwellings = 15 x 1.5 = 22.5  
23 2- bed dwellings = 23 x 2.5 = 57.5  
10 3- bed dwellings = 10 x 2.5 = 25  
2 4-bed dwellings = 2 x 2.8 = 5.6  
Total = 111 (rounded up from 110.6)  
Thus the proportion of infrastructure catchment arising from the development is calculated 
as follows:  
111 / (111+4000) = 111 / 4111 = 0.02700073  
The contribution should therefore be calculated as follows:  
£375,000 X 0.02700073 X 0.5 = £5,063  (to the nearest £)  
Worked Example 2:  
2000sqm office building in Manor Royal within 1km of a railway station/high frequency bus 
corridor.  
Occupancy is as follows:  
2000sqm office = 182 FTE workers at 1 worker per 11 sqm (rounded up from 181.8182).  
Thus the proportion of infrast ructure catchment arising from the development is calculated 
as follows:  
182 / (182+13931) = 182 / 14113 = 0.01289591  
The contribution should therefore be calculated as follows:  
£375,000 X 0.01289591 X 1 = £4,836 (to the nearest £)  
Worked Example 3:  
1000sqm storage and distribution building in Manor Royal within 0.5km of a railway station/high frequency bus corridor.  
Occupancy is as follows:  
1000sqm storage and distribution = 13 FTE workers at 1 worker per 80sqm (rounded up 
from 12.5).  
Thus the propor tion of infrastructure catchment arising from the development is calculated 
as follows:  
13 / (13+13931) = 13 / 13944 = 0.0009323  
The contribution should therefore be calculated as follows:  
£375,000 X 0.0009323 X 0.5 = £175 (to the nearest £) –  therefore no contribution as 
amount is less than £500.  
Further planning obligations may be used to secure:  
• sustainable transport measures or mitigation identified as part of an agreed Travel Plan or Mobility Strategy ; 
• mitigation of residual impacts on the highways network.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 278 CRAWLEY LOCAL PLAN PARKING STANDARDS ANNEX  
The standards set out below are indicative minimum standards, setting out the level of 
provision which the council will generally expect in new developments.   
Where a lower level of provision is proposed,  the council will expect this to be justified on 
site-specific grounds, including (where appropriate) evidence conc erning the accessibility of 
the location.    
Evidence should be provided to demonstrate where overflow parking demands can be accommodated (on-street or elsewhere), that there is sufficient capacity for these demands 
to be met and that mitigation can be provided where necessary to ensure that overflow parking would not create a highway safety issue. This could include, where appropriate, 
meas ures included in a Travel Plan or Mobility Strategy, the funding of additional waiting 
restrictions, or restrictions on the ability of occupants of new development to qualify for 
residents and visitors parking permits.  
The associated car parking zone maps can be found at the end of this Annex. These maps 
are not to scale. For a scaled version please download the electronic copy found on the 
council website.  
Residential Uses  
Parking standards for residential development are based on likely demand in terms o f car 
ownership, taking into account the accessibility of the area by modes of transport other than 
the car. Other factors that will be taken into account include age, household types and the 
type of housing.  
 
Dwellings  
The standards and associated parkin g behaviour zones in respect of dwellings are  
consistent with the West Sussex County Council Guidance on Parking at New 
Developments (2019). The zones are based on (pre- 2019) ward boundaries, and 
accordingly the standards should be applied flexibly where t here are significant variations in 
parking demand within a zone, for example, where there are clear variations in density 
between neighbouring areas of housing, or  in those zones which include parts of the Town 
Centre, where significantly lower levels of demand and parking will be expected. (Please 
note figures for Parking Behaviour Zone 1 which mainly applies to rural areas have not been 
included as no areas within Crawley are identified as falling within that zone.)  
 
Residential Parking Demand (spaces per  dwelling)  
Number of 
bedrooms  Number of 
habitable 
rooms  Parking Behaviour Zones  
2 3 4 5 
1 1 to 3  1.4 0.9 0.9 0.6 
2 4 1.7 1.3 1.1 1.1 
3 5 to 6  2.1 1.8 1.7 1.6 
4+ 7 or more  2.7 2.5 2.2 2.2 
 
Notes:  
The standards are per dwelling, and do not distinguish between flats and houses.  
The boundaries of the zones are shown on zone plans. These boundaries are indicative only, and consideration will be given to applying similar standards in close proximity to the boundaries.  
In the case of an applicati on to extend a dwelling, additional parking may be required in accordance 
with these standards.  
Where it is proposed that parking spaces will be allocated to individual dwellings, the parking 
provision should include allowance for visitor parking and/or fl exible, unallocated spaces as 
appropriate to the circumstances of the site, so as to ensure efficient use of space.  
Habitable rooms include all rooms used for cooking, eating, sleeping and living.  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 279 Other residential uses  
Description  Use Class  Standard  
Sheltered accommodation and flats for the 
elderly *   1 space per 2 units, plus staff 
space  
Care and residential nursing homes  C2 1 space per 20 residents and; 
1 visitor space per 8 residents 
and; 1 staff space per 5 
residents  
Houses in multiple occupation   0.5 spaces per unit  
Hostels   1 space per 4 residents 1 
visitor space for every 20 
residents  
* Sheltered accommodation is where development is provided with internal communal facilities and 
warden accommodation. In other cases the residential standard wil l apply.  
 
Offices  Use Class E  
In order to reflect different levels of accessibility within the town, a zonal approach to 
applying parking standards for office development is adopted. The three zones are:  
1. the Town C entre;  
2. around Three Bridges Station;  and  
3. Manor Royal.  
The boundaries of the three zones are set out on the attached maps.  
Zone 1 – 
Town Centre  Zone 2 – 
Three Bridges  Zone 3 – 
Manor Royal  Other locations  
 
1 space per 41m2 1 space per 35m2 1 space per 31m2 1 space 30m2 
 
Notes:  
These standards are indicative and are intended to reflect likely demand. Provision below these 
standards may be acceptable if it can be demonstrated how the total access needs of the 
development can be met.  
The suggested boundaries of the zones are shown on zone plans. T hese boundaries are indicative 
only, and consideration will be given to similar standards in close proximity to the boundaries.  
 
Other Industrial and Retail Uses  
 Use Class  Car Parking  Lorry Parking  
Food retail *  E 1 space per 14m2  
Non-food retail *  E 1 space per 20m2  
Financial services  E 1 space per 30m2  
Restaurants, cafes  E 1 space per 5m2 public area 
and 2 spaces per bar for staff   
Research and 
development/ Light 
Industry  E Assessed individually. A 
lower level o f parking than in 
equivalent office uses will 
typically be expected.   
Industrial  B2 1 space per 40m2 1 space per 500m2. 
1 space minimum  
Warehousing  B8 1 space per 100m2 1 space per 500m2. 
1 space minimum  
* For extensions and small shop units under 100m2 – no spaces will be sought.  
 
 
 
 
 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 280 Other Uses  
Any uses not listed in the following table will be considered on their own merits.  
 
  Car Parking  Lorry Parking  
Car sales   1 space per 30m2 of internal 
and external gross display 
area. Staff spaces to be 
clearly designated.  On merits but to 
include space for off-loading car  
transporters  
Motor repair garages   1 space per 45m2 for staff 
and 3 spaces per service 
bay (or 25m2). Assessed 
individually  
 
Places of 
assembly/leisure  E or F2 or 
Sui Generis  1 space per 22m2 
  
Large scale places of  
assembly serving 
more  
than a local 
catchment   1 space per 15m2 
  
Cinemas and 
conference facilities   1 space per 5 seats  
  
Stadia  
  1 space per 15 seats  
  
 
Vets and medical 
centres   1 space per practitioner plus 
4 spaces per consulting room plus 1 space per 20m
2 
of office space   
Hotels and 
guesthouses   1 space per bedroom   
Schools   Assessed individually within 
the context of a travel plan 
using 1 space per 2 staff as 
a guide   
Higher and further  
education   1 space per 2 staff  
1 space per 15 students   
Children’s Nurseries   Assessed individually using 
1 space per 2 staff as a guide with provision for 
dropping off   
Playing fields   12 spaces per hectare   
Hospitals   Assessed individually based 
on a travel plan   
Garden centres   1 space per 20m2 for 
covered sales  
1 space per 30m2 for 
uncovered sales  Under 1,000m2 – 2 
spaces  
Over 1,000m2 – 3 
spaces  
Wholesale cash and 
carry   1 space per 50m2 1 space per 200m2  
 
Open storage   1 space per 100m2 Assessed 
individually  
Tennis, badminton 
and 
squash courts   2 spaces per court  
  
Swimming pools   1 space per 10m2 of pool 
area  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 281   Car Parking  Lorry Parking  
Golf courses   4 spaces per hole   
Riding schools/ 
stables   2 spaces per loose box   
Indoor equestrian 
centres   1 space per 20m2 of arena  1 space per 150m2 
of arena  
 
Disabled Parking  
The Department for Transport has published guidance entitled “Inclusive Mobility”: A Guide 
to Best Practice on Access to Pedestrian and Transport Infrastructure (December 2002). 
This document includes technical advice on a range of  mobility/access related issues, 
including recommended standards for parking provision. Additional guidance is provided in 
the government publication ‘Manual for Streets’ 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/manual -for-streets . 
 
For employment uses - a minimum of one space or 5% of total parking provision.  
 
For car parks associated with shopping areas, leisure, recreation and places open to the 
general public -  a minimum of one space per disabled employee plus 6 percent of total  
capacity.  
 
Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure  
Until the introduction of national requirements for EV charging infrastructure in new developments, through Building Regulations or otherwise, provis ion should be made as 
follows:  
• ‘Active’ charging points for electric vehicles should be provided on a set proportion of 
car parking spaces , in accordance with the following table. This is based on West 
Sussex County Council Guidance on Parking at New Devel opments (2019), and is 
informed by the government’s intention that 50% - 70% of new car sales should be 
ultra low -emission by 2030;  
• Ducting provided at all remaining spaces where appropriate to provide ‘passive’ 
provision for these spaces to be upgraded in  future.  
   
Year  Proportion of ‘active’ charging points  
2020  28% 
2021  33% 
2022  37% 
2023  41% 
2024  45% 
2025  49% 
2026  53% 
2027  58% 
2028  62% 
2029  66% 
2030  70% 
 
Car Parking Space Sizes 
The dimensions of parking spaces should follow guidance set out in ‘Manual for Streets’ (see 
link above). Perpendicular car parking spaces should have a minimum width of 2.4m and a 
minimum length of 4.8m.  
 
 
 
 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 282 Cycle Parking  
All cycle parking must be sheltered and secure and in accordance with local guidance and 
best practice design. However, flexibility and innovation will be encouraged. It is  essential 
that cycle parking is considered carefully within the design of new  development.  
 
Non Residential Uses  
Use class   Staff  Visitors  
Retail uses  E 1 space per 100m2 1 space per 100m2 
Financial services  E 1 space per 100m2 1 space per 200m2 
Restaurants/Takeaways  E 1 space per 4 staff  1 space per 25m2 
Offices  E 1 space per 150m2 1 space per 500m2 
Industrial  B2 1 space per 200m2 1 space per 500m2 
Warehousing  B8 1 space per 500m2 1 space per 1000m2 
Places of assembly  
and leisure  E or F2 
or Sui 
Generis  1 space per 4 staff  Assessed individually  
 
 Residential Uses  
No additional cycle parking spaces will be required where a garage is provided.  
 
One bed dwellings -  
One space per  dwelling and 1 space per 8 dwellings for visitors  
 Two bed dwellings or more -  
2 spaces per dwelling and 1 space per 8 dwellings for visitors  
 
Motorcycle Parking  
1 space plus one space per 10 car parking spaces.  
 
For retail uses involving bulky purchases the provision may be reduced to 1 space per  
25 car parking spaces.  
 
  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 283  
 
  
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 284  
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 285  
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 286  
CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 287 CRAWLEY LOCAL PLAN NOISE ANNEX  
 
1.0 Introduction  
1.1 Crawley is home to Britain’s largest single -runway airport, a key sub -regional 
employment destination at Manor Royal Business  District, and a major motorway 
(M23). Noise,  therefore , represents an important planning consideration in the town.  
 
1.2 The revocation of Planning Policy Guidance 24 (Planning and Noise) has resulted in 
an absence of detailed technical guidance at the national level to guide the 
relationship between development and noise. This Annex  and the supporting Noise 
Topic Paper , therefore , draws upon evidence to provide policy context and establish 
locally specific guidance through which the approach of Local Plan Policy EP4: 
Development and Noise should be applied.  
 
1.3 The council also recognises the inter -relationship between acoustics, ventilation, 
overheating and carbon minimisation. Good design needs to consider all these 
factors together and ensure that a solution to one  single aspect is not to the 
detriment of the other three.  
 
2.0 Planning Policy Context  
 
2.1 National Policy Objectives  
2.1.1  The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) sets out the Government’s key 
planning objectives, recognising the need to reduce pollution as one of its 12 key 
principles. It requires the planning system to prevent new and existing development from contributing to or being put at unacceptable risk from, or being adversely 
affected by, unacceptable levels of pollutio n (Paragraph 170). Paragraph 180 
provides more detail, outlining that local plan policies and development management decisions should avoid noise from giving rise to significant adverse impacts on health 
and quality of life as a result of new  development. Where conflict does arise, impacts 
must be mitigated and reduced to a minimum.  
 
2.1.2  The NPPF supersedes previous national level Government planning guidance. This 
included Planning Policy Guidance 24: Planning and Noise, which outlined 
meas urable numeric noise categories through which the relationship between 
development and noise could be assessed.  
 
2.1.3  With PPG 24 having been revoked, the NPPF identifies the Explanatory Note of the 
Noise Policy Statement for England (DEFRA, 2010) as guidance for interpreting the 
level at which noise is considered to  give rise to significant adverse impact. However, 
this does not identify measurable noise values to identify the ‘Significant Observed 
Adverse Effect Level’, the noise exposure level above which significant adverse 
effects on health and quality of life occur.   
 
2.1.4  The g overnment has since published Planning Practic e Guidance: Noise (MHCLG, 
2019). This outlines that local authorities should take account of the acoustic environment in plan making and decision taking, and in doing so should consider:  
- whether or not a significant adverse effect is occurring or likely to  occur;  
- whether or not an adverse effect is occurring or likely to occur; and  
- whether or not a good standard of amenity can be achieved.  
 2.1.5  In line with the Explanatory Note of the Noise Policy Statement for England, this 
would include identifying whet her the overall effect of noise exposure is, or would be, 
above or below the Significant Observed Adverse Effect Level (SOAEL), and the CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 288 Lowest Observed Adverse Effect Level for the given situation (LOAEL). The Planning 
Practice Guidance does not provide technical guidance to establish the levels at 
which SOAEL or LOAEL occur. It does , however , identify that local planning 
authorities may produce local plan specific noise standards to apply to various forms of proposed development and locations in their area.  
 
2.1.6  Section 130 of the NPPF states ‘ Permission should be refused for development of 
poor design that fails to take the opportunities available for improving the character and quality of an area and the way it functions, taking into account any local design 
standards or style guides in plans or supplementary planning documents ’ .  
 
2.1.7  Section 127a of the NPPF states that ‘ Planning policies and decisions should ensure 
that developments… will function well and add to the overall quality of the area, not just for the short term but over the lifetime of the development’ . 
 2.1.8  ProPG: Planning & Noise –  New Residential Development  (May 2017) sets out 
principles of good acoustic design. It recognises the importance of designing out the 
adverse effects of noise at an early stage, using a holistic design process that 
creates places that are both comfortable and attractive to live in, where acoustics is 
considered integral to the living environment.  
 
2.2 Local Policy  
2.2.1  The key objective of Local Plan Policy EP4 is to guide the relationship between noise 
sensitive development and noise sources to ensure that a good quality of life is 
maintained for current and future residents.  
 2.2.2  This Local Plan Noise Annex identifies locally specific noise thresholds comprised of  
measurable value ranges through which noise impact from transport sources can be 
determined in order to support Policy EP4. These are based on the noise exposure 
hierarchy set out in Planning Practice Guidance: Noise and are discussed in detail in 
Section 4.1 of  this Annex.  
 
2.2.3  This Annex also provides guidance where proposals for noise sensitive development 
may be affected by industrial/commercial noise sources (Section 4.2), and on Noise 
Generating Development (Section 4.3).  
 2.2.4  Local Plan Policy EP4 also refers to the ‘Planning Noise Advice Document : Sussex’  
(2020 or latest revision), to assist in the preparation of Noise Impact Assessments. 
This document has been produced on a joint basis by East and West Sussex local planning authorities to provide clear and consistent guidance as to the level of 
information that should be submitted with planning applications for noise generating developments or noise sensitive developments, including guidance on when it is 
appropriate to submit a noise report and t he required contents of such a report.  
 
3.0 Understanding When Noise Could Become a Concern 
3.1 Planning Practice Guidance: Noise identifies a noise exposure hierarchy which 
provides broad guidance on the levels at which noise exposure could become a concern.  For consistency with national policy, this Noise Annex applies the noise 
hierarchy set out by the PPG, drawing upon technical evidence to assign measurable noise standards to each of its noise exposure categories.  
 
3.2 At the lowest extreme, when noise is not noticeable, there is by definition no effect. 
As noise exposure increases, it crosses the No Observed Effect Level . This is the 
stage at which noise becomes noticeable, though it has no adverse effect as it does CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 289 not cause any change in behaviour or attitude. If the noise is at this level, no specific 
measures are required to manage the acoustic environment.  
 
3.3 As noise exposure increases it crosses the Lowest Observed Adverse Effect 
Level , and may reach the Observed Adverse Effect Level. At this level noise can 
start to cause small changes in behaviour and attitude. For example, this could cause 
people to turn up the volume on the television or needing to speak more loudly to be 
heard. The noise level starts to have an adverse effect and s teps need to be taken to 
mitigate and minimise  those effects.  
 
3.4 Continued increase in noise exposure will at some point cause the Significant 
Observed Adverse Effect Level to be crossed. Above this level, noise causes a 
material change in behaviour, for  example necessitating that windows are kept 
closed most of time. If noise exposure is above this level, the planning process 
should be used to prevent this effect from occurring, by use of appropriate mitigation, 
for example through design and layout.  
 
3.5 At the highest extreme, the Unacceptable Adverse Level , noise exposure would 
cause extensive and sustained changes in behaviour, without an ability to mitigate 
the effect of noise. At this level, the impacts on health and quality of life are such that 
regardless of the benefits of the activity causing the noise, noise exposure to  
sensitive uses should be prevented from occurring.  
 3.6 Although the word ‘level’ is used here, this does not mean that the effects can only 
be defined in terms of a single value of noise exposure. This annex states locally 
adopted evidence based levels for specific circumstances.   However, this is not 
appropriate or possible in all circumstances.   Compliance with World Health 
Organization levels or requiring sound to be at no mor e than background level is not 
a guarantee that the noise exposure would not result in a statutory nuisance, which can be said within planning terms to unreasonably affect amenity.  
 3.7 The NPSE and PPG recognises that level of effect can also be described in terms of 
behavioural responses such as having to have windows closed or the person having 
to make adaptations as a result of noise.   These effects can often not be described 
by a single or combination of sound values.   In such circumstances subjective criteria 
may be required whether supported or not by specific sound indices.  
 
4.0 Managing Noise in Crawley: Guidance to Support Local Plan Policy EP4  
 
4.1 Noise sensitive development affected by noise from transport s ources  
4.1.1  Local Plan Policy EP4 outlines that noise sensitive uses will only be permitted where 
users of the development will not be exposed to unacceptable noise disturbance from 
existing or proposed uses.  
 
4.1.2  This section provides guidance to determine the threshold at which noise expos ure 
from transport -based sources (air, road, rail, and mixed sources) is considered to 
become significant  or unacceptable in a Crawley context .  
 
4.1.3  Building  on the noise exposure hierarchy  identified in Planning Practice Guidance: 
Noise , and using the previous guidance in PPG24 and evidence identified in Section 
6, the Annex identifies measurable local values through which to determine the acceptability of noise sensitive proposals where noise exposure from transport is a 
factor.  
 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 290 4.1.4  In particular, it identifies measurable threshold metrics for the Lowest Observed 
Adverse Effect Level (LOAEL), i.e. the level at which noise exposure can bring about 
changes in behaviour, and for the Significant Observed Adverse Effect Level 
(SOAEL), i.e. the noise level at which significant adverse effects on health and quality of life occur. It also outlines a measurable threshold to identify the  
Unacceptable Adverse Effect, this being the  level at which noise exposure can cause 
extensive and regular changes in behaviour, att itude, and an inability to mitigate 
effect of noise, leading to psychological stress .  
 4.1.5  In determining the acceptability of noise sensitive proposals where noise exposure 
from a transport source is a factor, the standards set out in Table 1 (below) will be  
applied.   
 NOISE ANNEX TABLE 1:  
Standards for exposure at the façade
157 for all habitable rooms158 of noise sensitive 
development affected by noise from transport sources.  
 
 Examples of Outcomes  Daytime (07:00 – 23:00) 
Threshold  Night time (23:00 – 
07:00) Threshold  
No Observed Adverse 
Effect Level (NOAEL)  
 
 Present and not intrusive:  Noise 
can be heard, but does not cause any change in behaviour, attitude or other physiological response. Can 
slightly affect the acoustic character 
of the area, but not such that there is 
a change in the quality of life.  <51dB L Aeq,16hr  
 
<65dB L AFmax  <45dB L Aeq,8hr   
 <60dB L
AFmax  
Lowest Observed 
Adverse Effect Level  
(LOAEL)   51dB L Aeq,16hr  
 
65dB L AFmax  45dB L Aeq,8hr  
 
60dB L AFmax  
Observed Effect Level  
 
 
 Present and intrusive: Noise can 
be heard and causes small changes 
in behaviour, attitude or other 
physiological response, e.g. turning 
up volume of television; speaking 
more loudly; where there is no 
alternative ventilation, having to 
close windows some of the time 
because of the noise. Potential for 
some reported sleep disturbance. 
Affects the a coustic character of the 
area such that there is a small actual or perceived change in the quality of 
life. Between 51db and 55dB 
LAeq,16hr  
(51 to 54dB L Aeq,16hr  
for aviation transport sources)  
 
> 65dB L AFmax  Between 45dB and 48dB 
LAeq,8hr  for surface a nd 
aviation transport 
sources.  
 
> 60dB L AFmax  
Significant Observed 
Adverse Effect Level (SOAEL) 
 Present and disruptive: The noise 
causes a material change in behaviour, attitude or other 
physiological response, e.g. avoiding 
certain activities during periods of 
intrusion; where there is no 
alternative ventilation, having to 
keep windows closed most of the 
time because of the noise. Potential for sleep disturbance resulting in 
difficulty in getting to sleep, 
premature awakening, and difficulty 
getting back to sleep. Quality of life diminished due to change in 
acoustic character of the area.  For surface transport sources, 
between 55dB and 66dB 
LAeq,16hr . 
(54dB to 60dB L Aeq,16hr  
for aviation transport sources)  
 
65dB to 82dB L AFmax  Between 48dB and 57dB 
LAeq,8hr . for surface and 
aviation transport 
sources,  
60dB to 82dB L AFmax  
                                                 
157 This is the predicted free-field level  at the proposed façade and not the final ‘façade’ level.  
158 Habitable rooms includes living/dining rooms, bedrooms, kitchen diners and studies.  
 CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 291  Examples of Outcomes  Daytime (07:00 – 23:00) 
Threshold  Night time (23:00 – 
07:00) Threshold  
Unacceptable Adverse 
Effect  
 
 Present and very disruptive 
Extensive and regular changes in 
behaviour, attitude or other 
physiological response and/or an 
inability to mitigate effect of noise 
leading to psychological stress, e.g. regular sleep deprivation/awakening, 
loss of appetite, si gnificant medically 
definable harm, e.g. auditory and no-
auditory.  For surface transport sources, 
greater than 66dB L Aeq,16hr  
 
For aviation transport sources, 
greater than 60dB L Aeq,16hr  
 
 greater than 57dB L Aeq,8hr  
for surface and aviation 
transport sources.  
 > 82dB L
AFmax   
 
4.1.6  All the above levels would include the predicted noise from any proposed or required 
changes in transportation noise including the potential additional southern wide 
spaced runway at Gatwick Airport , for which land is required to be safeguarded in the 
2013 Aviation Policy Framework . Details of the predicted noise contours associated 
with a possible wide- spaced southern runway at Gatwick Airport are set out in Figure 
1 of this Noise Annex, which shows the noise contours identified in Plan 31 of the 
Gatwick Airport Master Plan 2019 (Air Noise Map –  Additional Runway –  Summer 
Day - 2040) . Planning applications for noise sensitive development will be considered 
on the basis of these noise contours. Figure 1 of the Noise Annex will be updated by 
the council  should these contours be superseded  by subsequent noise contours 
published by  Gatwick Airport and approved by  the CAA.   
 4.1.7  In interpreting the categories for the purposes of Local Plan Policy EP4 , noise 
exposure is considered to be acc eptable where the internal noise climate achieves 
standards set in BS8233 or replacement guidance.  (N.B. the noise levels provided in 
BS8233 refer to steady noise sources only). It is also expected that to achieve an 
acceptable internal noise climate that individual noise events shall not exceed 45dB 
L
AFmax on a frequent basis. The acceptability of the frequency of events will depend 
on the level of exceedance of the 45dB L AFmax criteria. Up to 10 events may be 
acceptable for small exceedances (< 5dB), whilst for high exceedances (>10dB) less 
than 5 events will be acceptable.  
 
4.1.8  For surface transport sources, the Lowest Observed Adverse Effect Level (LOAEL) is 
51dB L Aeq,16hr  and 45dB L Aeq,8hr at night. The Significant Observed Effect Level 
(SOAEL) is between 55dB and 66dB L Aeq,16hr  and between 45dB and 57dB L Aeq,8hr  at 
night. The Unacceptable Adverse Effect occurs where noise exposure is above 66dB 
LAeq,16hr  (57dB L Aeq,8hr  at night).  
 
4.1.9  For aviation transport sourc es, the Lowest Observed Adverse E ffect Level (LOAEL) 
is 51dB L Aeq, 16hr  and the Significant Observed Adverse Effect Level is between 54dB 
and 60dB L Aeq, 16hr . The Unacceptable Adverse Effect occurs where noise exposure is 
greater than 60dB L Aeq,16hr  (57dB L Aeq,8hr  at night). The lower standard for the day 
period is required as aviation noise affects the whole neighbourhood and not just a 
single façade as with surface transport. This is less of an issue at night so the level is 
the same as for surface transport.  
 4.1.10  For private amenity areas ( private and communal gardens),  the upper limit of noise 
exposure is considered to be 50dB L
Aeq,16hr , so that they can be enjoyed as intended.  
Where this is not possible to achieve despite implementing all reasonable mitigation measures, the standard can be relaxed by 5dB so that the sound level in private and 
communal gardens (i ncluding balconies) does not exceed 55dB L
Aeq,16hr . In very high 
noise areas where the less stringent standard of 55dB L Aeq,16hr  cannot reasonably be 
achieved, with careful design it  should be achieved in some parts of the amenity 
space. In the case of balconies then the use of winter gardens must be considered.   CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 292  
4.1.11  Where noise exposure is likely to be  of a material concern (LOAEL or SOAEL) , a 
Noise Impact Assessment will be required in support of planning applications  to 
demonstrate how noise impact will be made acceptable. For further information on 
the requirements of a Noise Impact Assessment, please see Section 5 of this Annex,  
ProPG  and Planning Noise Advice Document: Sussex  (2020 or latest version).  
 
4.1.12  Any development  where an acceptable internal noise climate cannot be achieved 
with windows opened must employ all reasonable mitigating steps with regards to 
window and façade design to allow the dwelling to be ventilated naturally. Where this 
is not possible alternative natural forms of ventilation must be provided by use of acoustic louvres or ventilators of adequate size to effectively deal with the effects of 
summer over -heating without the nec essity to open the windows.  The need for 
ventilation as a result of overheating  (giving rise to discomfort and health effects)  
shall be minimised in the design, layout and features of the building having regard to 
the cooling hierarchy  in Policy SDC1:  Sustainable Design and Construction.    
 
4.1.13  If it can be clearly demonstrated that this cannot be achieved, then as a last resort, in 
exceptional circumstances, alternative mechanical ventilation may be acceptable. 
Any mechanical forms of ventilation must achi eve an internal Noise Rating Curve of 
25 (NR25) or lower. Where Mechanical Ventilation and Heat Recovery (MVHR) is 
used it will be expected to have a 100% fully automat ed, modulated, summer bypass. 
Furthermore,  when operating at maximum boost the in duct v elocity shall be kept as 
low as reasonably practicable but in any event no greater than 3.5 metres per second 
and the motor capacity at no more than 70% of operating capacity  unless it can be 
demonstrated that an alternative design criteria can deliver a s uitable internal 
acoustic environment .  The fan unit shall not be sited within bedrooms and any air 
inlets and outlets shall be acoustically treated to prevent noise ingress. The use of 
sealed windows will not be acceptable as they do  not create a suitable living 
environment for the occupants.  
 
4.1.14  Evidence of satisfactory implementation of the agreed mitigation will be required for 
developments in the SOAEL category. This would be the form of a post completion 
report to be submitted to and agreed by the LPA once the development has been 
completed and prior to occupation or sale.  
 
4.2 Noise sensitive development affected by industrial or commercial noise sources  
4.2.1  Local Plan Policy EP4  outlines that noise sensitive uses proposed in areas that  are 
exposed to noise from existing or planned industrial or commercial sources, will only 
be permitted where future users will not be exposed to an unacceptable noise 
impact . For example, the  creation of a statutory nuisance.  This reflects the approach 
of NPPF Para 170(e).  
 
4.2.2  This is based on the recognition that  to introduce  new noise sensitive receptors into 
locations where they may be affected by noise from established businesses can 
create conflict between those two uses  and may prejudice the existing  and future  
industrial or commercial operations . 
 
4.2.3  NPPF paragraph 182 expands, recognising that  existing businesses and facilities 
should not have unreasonable restrictions placed on them as a result of development 
permitted after they were established. Where the operation of an existing business or 
community facility could have a significant adverse effect on new development 
(including changes of use) in its vicinity, the applicant (or ‘agent of change’) should 
be required to provide suitable mitigation before the development has been 
completed . CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 293  
4.2.4  It is also recognised that some industrial or commercial uses may be planned, in the 
sense that they are subject to an extant planning permission, or have been identified 
for economic use through the Local Plan. For this reason, the policy approach also 
has regard to future planned developments.  
 
4.2.5  To ensure that proposed noise sensitive uses do not conflict with existing or planned 
industrial/commercial uses, noise sensitive development will only be considered acceptable where future users would not be exposed to noise impact that would 
result in , for e xample,  a statutory nuisance.  
 
4.2.6  To ensure that proposals are acceptable in noise terms, an assessment should be made using BS4142:2014 + A1:2019 Method for Rating and assessing industrial and 
commercial sound , or any replacement guidance.  
 
4.2.7  Where there is risk that noise sensitive proposals would be affected by  noise that 
may, for example, create a statutory nuisance, a Noise Impact Assessment will be 
required in s upport of planning applications  to demonstrate how  that noise impact will 
be made acceptable. For further information on the requirements of a Noise Impact 
Assessment, please see Section 5 of this Annex, and Planning Noise Advice 
Document: Sussex  (2020 or latest revision).  
 4.2.8  If it cannot be demonstrated that appropriate mitigation will be provided t o manage 
significant or unacceptable noise impacts to an acceptable level, the proposal will be 
refused.  
 
4.2.9  Where it is proposed to have a mixed- use development of residenti al and commercial 
units combined then there must be adequate sound insulation between the 
commercial and residential uses. In such circumstances a minimum DnTW of 65dB would be required.  
 
4.3 Noise generating development  
4.3.1  Local Plan Policy EP4 outlines that noise generating development will be permitted 
wher e it can be demonstrated that any nearby noise sensitive uses (as existing or 
planned), will not be exposed to noise impact that will adversely affect the amenity of 
users of surrounding noise sensitive premises.  
 4.3.2  To ensure that proposals are acceptable in noise terms, development should comply 
with BS4142:2014 + A1:2019 Method for Rating and assessing industrial and 
commercial sound , or any replacement guidance.  
 
4.3.3  When assessing the noise impact using BS 4142 the Noise Rating level must be 
equivalent to the background (L
A90) level. BS4142 advises that there are locations 
where existing noise levels  are high and might result in adverse impacts themselves. 
Therefore when existing noise levels  exceed 50dB L Aeq,1hr during the day or 40dB 
LAeq,15mins during the night the Noise Rating Level must be at least 3dB below the 
background (L A90) level.  
 
4.3.4  The daytime figure relates to the upper limit for external amenity areas and the night time figure relates to the maximum external noise level required to achieve the 30dB 
L
Aeq,8hr level specified in BS8233 for undisturbed sleep with windows wide open.   
 
4.3.5  Where there is risk that development would adversely affect the amenity of users in 
surrounding noise sensitive premises,  a Noise Impact Assessment will be required in 
support of planning applicat ions, to demonstrate how noise impact will be made CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 294 acceptable. For further information on the requirements of a Noise Impact 
Assessment, please see Section 5 of this Annex, and Planning Noise Advice 
Document: Sussex  (2020 or latest revision).  
 4.3.5  If it cannot be demonstrated that appropriate mitigation will be provided to manage 
noise impact  to an acceptable level, the proposal will be refused.  
 
5.0 Noise Impact Assessment  
5.1 As identified i n Part C of Local Plan Policy EP4, a  Noise Impact Assessment will be 
required to support applications  where noise sensitive uses are likely to be exposed 
to significant or unacceptable noise exposure.  
 
5.2 The Noise Impact Assessment will be required to assess the impact of the proposal 
as a noise generator or receptor, as appropriate.  
 5.3 It will also be required to demonstrate in full how the development will be designed, 
located, and controlled to mitigate (as appropriate) the impact of nois e on health and 
quality of life, neighbouring properties, and the surrounding area.  
 5.4 In some circumstances, reliance on a third party structure may not be acceptable as 
a part of a noise control proposal.  
 5.5 In all cases, the best practical means  (or ‘all reasonable steps’)  of mitigation will be 
required to mitigate noise impact to an appropriate level, and in liaison with Crawley 
Borough Council Environmental Health.  In some circumstances this may include the 
use of alternative sites to the one proposed.  
 
5.6 If it cannot be demonstrated that appropriate mitigation will be provided to manage significant or unacceptable noise impacts to an acceptable level, the proposal will be 
refused.  
 5.7 In preparing a Noise Impact Assessment, applicants should adhere to Planning 
Noise Advice Document : Sussex  (2020 or latest revision) , which supports Local Plan 
Policy EP4  and this accompanying Annex.  
 
6.0 Further Reference  
6.1 Where development proposals are likely to be affected by noise, either as a source 
or receptor, applicants are strongly encouraged to liaise with Crawley Borough 
Council Environmental Health prior to submitting an application.  
 
6.2 To contact Environmental Health please email 
environmentalservices@crawley.gov.uk . 
  
  CRAWLEY BOROUGH LOCAL PLAN 2021  – 2037  SUBMISSION CONSULTATION DRAFT JANUARY 2021 295 NOISE ANNEX FIGURE 1: SUMMER DAY (07:00 – 23:00)  WIDE -SPACED 2040 NOISE 
CONTOURS  (LAeq, 16hr ) TAKEN FROM PLAN 31 OF THE GATWCK AIRPORT  MASTER 
PLAN  2019  
 
  Housing Trajectory - Base Date 1 Sept 2020
Summary Trajectory 
Local Plan Year 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Year 2019/ 
202020/ 
212021/ 
222022/ 
232023/ 
242024/ 
252025/ 
262026/ 
272027/ 
282028/ 
292029/ 
302030/ 
312031/ 
322032/ 
332033/ 
342034/ 
352035/ 
362036/
37
Gross (incl. 
permitted small 
sites 2020-24)456 740 145 357 365 205 493 819 584 419 310 97 30 21 0 0 0 0 3846
Losses 4 0 0 0 0 0 1 7 11 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 25
Net 452 740 145 357 365 205 492 812 573 419 310 97 30 15 0 0 0 0 3820
Windfalls (excl. 
permitted small 
sites 2020-24)0 0 75 80 88 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 1413
Communal 
Accommodation-48 0 0 0 0 0 0 50 33 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 83
Projected net 
delivery404 740 220 437 453 295 582 952 696 509 400 187 120 105 90 90 90 90 5316
Local Plan Housing Requirement 2021-37 5320
Stepped Requirement for Years 1 to 5 of Local Plan Period 350 + 350 + 350 + 350 + 350 = 1750
Stepped Requirement with 10% buffer added 1925
Projected net completions in Years 1 to 5 1987
Years' supply projected for Years 1 to 5 5.2Total 
2021-
37 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  SHLAA Category Breakdown (Housing)
Local Plan Year 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
SHLAA 
CategorySHLAA Category 
Description Description2019/
202020/
212021/
222022/
232023/
242024/
252025/
262026/
272027/
282028/
292029/
302030/
312031/
322032/
332033/
342034/
352035/
362036/
37
Gross 136 167 17 42 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 59
Losses 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Net 134 167 17 42 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 59
Gross 10 22 15 10 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 28
Losses 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Net 8 22 15 10 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 27
Gross 268 362 113 141 355 189 93 60 60 60 60 47 0 0 0 0 0 0 1178
Losses 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1
Net 268 362 113 141 355 189 92 60 60 60 60 47 0 0 0 0 0 0 1177
Gross 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 294 265 50 50 50 0 0 0 0 0 0 709
Losses 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Net 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 294 265 50 50 50 0 0 0 0 0 0 709
Gross 0 189 0 152 0 0 400 402 108 200 200 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1462
Losses 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Net 0 189 0 152 0 0 400 402 108 200 200 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1462
Gross 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 29 30 33 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 92
Losses 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8
Net 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 25 26 33 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 84
Gross 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 54 48 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 112
Losses 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Net 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 54 48 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 112
Gross 42 0 0 12 8 16 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 36
Losses 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Net 42 0 0 12 8 16 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 36
Gross 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 24 67 28 0 0 30 21 0 0 0 0 170
Losses 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 7 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 16
Net 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 21 60 28 0 0 30 15 0 0 0 0 154
Gross 0 0 75 80 88 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 1413
Losses 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Net 0 0 75 80 88 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 1413
Gross 0 0 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 1440
Losses 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Net 0 0 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 1440Additional Windfall 
Allowance
Total Windfalls 
(incl. small sites)F (ii)Broad Location Town 
Centre, 5+ units  
GSuitable SHLAA Sites that 
are Deliverable (5 - 29 
units)
HSuitable SHLAA Sites that 
are Developable (5-29 
Units)DLocal Plan Key Housing 
Allocations (Policy H2)  that 
are 'Developable'
ELocal Plan Key Town Centre 
Opportunity Sites (Policy 
H2) (30+ units)
F (i)Broad Location (East of 
London Road) 5+ UnitsCLocal Plan Key Housing 
Allocations (Policy H2)  that 
are 'Deliverable'Total 2021-37
ALarge Housing Sites (5 units 
and above) with extant 
Planning Permission at 30 
BSmall Housing Sites (4 units 
or less) with PP 
 
 
  Sites breakdown (5 units or more)
Local Plan Year Base year 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
SHLAA 
CategorySHLAA 
ReferencePlanning App Reference Site Address Neighbourhood Issue Date Lapses Date Proposed Completed Remaining2019/    
202020/    
212021/     
222022/ 
232023/ 
242024/ 
252025/ 
262026/ 
272027/ 
282028/ 
292029/ 
302030/ 
312031/ 
322032/ 
332033/ 
342034/ 
352035/
362036/
37
Additions 5 0 5 5
Losses 2 2 0 2
Additions 7 0 7 7
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 9 0 9 9
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 9 8 1 1
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 8 0 8 8
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 138 0 138 138
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 136 136 0 136
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 28 0 28 28
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 10 0 10 10
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 14 0 14 14
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 6 0 6 6
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 78 0 78 78
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 25 0 25 25
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 65 0 65 65
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 452 0 452 15 50 50 50 60 60 60 60 47
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 43 0 43 43
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 169 0 169 69 50 50
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 249 0 249 75 50 50 50 24
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 225 225 0 61
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 151 122 29 75 29
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 147 51 96 51 58 38
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 90 0 90 90
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 24 0 24 24
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 15 0 15 15
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 100 0 100 100
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 33 0 33 26 7
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 19 0 19 19
Losses 1 0 1 1
Additions 53 0 53 53
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 44 44 0 44
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 37 37 0 37
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 150 0 150 100 50
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 185 0 185 90 95
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 120 0 120 60 60
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 150 0 150 50 50 50
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 14 0 14 14
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 60 0 60 60
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 30 0 30 30
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 91 0 91 91
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 98 0 98 98
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 400 0 400 200 200
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 100 0 100 100
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 308 0 308 100 100 108
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 20 0 20 20
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 300 0 300 300
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 182 0 182 182
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 152 0 152 152
Losses 0 0 004/05/2023 E 84 CR/2019/0542/FUL MOKA, Station Way Northgate 04/05/2020E 35 N/A Land N of the Boulevard NorthgateE 34 N/A Telford Place / Haslett Avenue Three Bridges16/08/2019
E 33 N/A Land at Cross Keys NorthgateE 32 CR/2016/0294/OUT Crawley Station & Car Parks Northgate 16/08/2016E 31 N/A County Buildings NorthgateE 30 N/A Crawley College Three BridgesCommenced
E 29 CR/2018/0341/FUL Crawley College (East of Tower) Three Bridges 16/08/2018 CommencedE 28 CR/2016/0662/FUL Car Park, 11-13 The Boulevard Northgate 19/07/2017D 91 N/A Land Adjacent to Sutherland House Three BridgesD 83 N/A St Catherine's Hospice, Malthouse Road SouthgateD 82 N/A Rushetts Road Play Area Langley GreenD 27 N/A Land to the Southeast of Heathy Farm, Balcombe Road Pound HillD 25 N/A Tinsley Lane Playing Fields Three BridgesD 17 CR/2018/0894/OUT Land at Steers Lane Pound Hill 21/02/2020 21/02/2023D 16 N/A Land Adj Desmond Anderson TilgateCommenced
C N/A CR/2017/0444/FUL Kilnmead Car Park Northgate 30/01/2018 CommencedC N/A CR/2016/1053/FUL Goffs Park Depot Southgate 24/08/201722/11/2021
C 26CR/2019/0271/PA3 & 
CR/2019/0681/FULZurich House, East Park Southgate28/05/2019 & 
06/08/202028/05/2022 & 
06/08/2023C 24 CR/2017/0519/FUL The Imperial, Broadfield Barton Broadfield 22/11/2018A 23 CR/2017/0882/PA3 Sutherland House (Eastern Section), Russell Way Three Bridges 11/12/2017 11/12/2020
C 21 N/A Shaw House, Pegler Way West GreenC 19 N/A Longley House, East Park SouthgateC 18 N/A Land East of Street Hill Pound HillC 14 N/A Henty Close BewbushC 12 N/A Former TSB Site, Russell Way Three BridgesCommenced
C 11 CR/2017/0125/ARM Forge Wood Phase 4A Pound Hill 27/10/2017 27/10/2020C 11 CR/2016/0962/ARM Forge Wood Phase 3B Pound Hill 11/12/2017Commenced
C 11 CR/2016/0780/ARM Forge Wood Phase 3A Pound Hill 20/03/2017 CommencedC 11 CR/2016/0083/ARM Forge Wood Phase 2C Pound Hill 31/01/2019Commenced
C 11 CR/2015/0718/ARM Forge Wood Phase 2B Pound Hill 31/01/2019 31/01/2022C 11 CR/2014/0061/ARM Forge Wood Phase 1B Pound Hill 23/03/2015C 11 CR/2015/0552/NCC Forge Wood (Reserved Matters to be Approved) Pound Hill 15/11/2016 15/11/2019C 9 N/A Breezehurst Drive Playing Fields BewbushCommenced
C 8 N/A 7 - 13 The Broadway & 1 - 3 Queens Square NorthgateC 7 CR/2015/0609/FUL 15 - 29 The Broadway Northgate 20/04/2016Commenced
A 90 CR/2018/0865/PA3 Second Floor, Pelham House, Broadfield Barton Broadfield 21/01/2019 21/01/2022A 81 CR/2014/0865/FUL Land S/O & R/O 24 Brighton Road Southgate 15/12/201526/06/2023
A 54 CR/2017/0748/PA3 International Business Centre, Spindle Way Three Bridges 26/10/2017 16/10/2020A 47 CR/2020/0254/PA3 Belgrave House, Station Way Northgate 26/06/2020Commenced
A 22CR/2017/0522/PA3 & 
CR/2017/0921/FULStoner House, Kilnmead Northgate27/07/2017 & 
25/02/201927/07/2020 & 
25/02/2021A 6 CR/2017/0594/FUL Ocean House, Hazelwick Avenue Three Bridges 28/08/2018Commenced
A 5 CR/2017/0549/PA3First & Second Floors, 34-38 The Broadway, Second Floor, 40  
The Broadway & First & Second Floors, 48 The BroadwayNorthgate 31/08/2017 CommencedA 4 CR/2017/0760/FUL 9 Woolborough Road Northgate 16/03/2018Commenced
A 3 CR/2017/0552/FUL 8 - 9 Queens Square Northgate 21/12/2018 21/12/2021A 1 CR/2017/0881/FUL 257 - 259 Ifield Road West Green 17/04/2018 
 
 
 
 
 Sites breakdown (5 units or more)
Local Plan Year Base year 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
SHLAA 
CategorySHLAA 
ReferencePlanning App Reference Site Address Neighbourhood Issue Date Lapses Date Proposed Completed Remaining2019/    
202020/    
212021/     
222022/ 
232023/ 
242024/ 
252025/ 
262026/ 
272027/ 
282028/ 
292029/ 
302030/ 
312031/ 
322032/ 
332033/ 
342034/ 
352035/
362036/
37
Additions 12 0 12 12
Losses 4 0 4 4
Additions 63 0 63 30 33
Losses 4 0 4 4
Additions 17 0 17 17
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 20 0 20 20
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 24 0 24 24
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 48 0 48 48
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 10 0 10 10
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 10 0 10 10
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 54 42 12 42 12
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 16 0 16 16
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 8 0 8 8
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 21 0 21 21
Losses 6 0 6 6
Additions 8 0 8 8
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 18 0 18 18
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 15 0 15 15
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 10 0 10 10
Losses 1 0 1 1
Additions 10 0 10 10
Losses 4 0 4 4
Additions 6 0 6 6
Losses 3 0 3 3
Additions 20 0 20 20
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 30 0 30 30
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 12 0 12 12
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 20 0 20 20
Losses 2 0 2 2H 89 N/A 42 & 44 Brighton Road SouthgateH 88 N/A Land at Peterborough Road TilgateH 87 N/A Land at Gales Place and West Way Three BridgesH 86 N/A Furnace Green Community Centre Furnace GreenH 59 N/A Harwood, Blaxley and Forest Way, Balcombe Road Pound HillH 57 N/A 96 - 102 North Road Three BridgesH 56 N/A 46 – 48 Goffs Park Road SouthgateH 51 N/A Rear Gardens, Snell Hatch/Ifield Road West GreenH 50 N/A Rear Gardens, Dingle Close/Ifield Road West GreenH 49 N/A 40 Springfield Road SouthgateH 48 N/A 2 - 12 Friston Walk IfieldG 85 N/A Former Age Concern Building, Shackleton Road TilgateG 46 N/A Ambulance Station, Ifield Avenue West GreenG 10 CR/2018/0015/PA3 EDF Building, Russell Way Three Bridges 01/03/2018 01/03/2021F 45 N/A Parkside Car Park NorthgateF 44 N/A Land R/O The Gatwick George Hotel West GreenF 43 N/A Fire Station, Ifield Avenue West GreenF 42 N/A Brittingham House, Orchard St West GreenF 41 N/A 1-7 Pegler Way West GreenF 40 N/A Oak Tree Filling Station, 114 London Road NorthgateF 39 N/A 21, 25, 27 & 29 Tushmore Lane NorthgateF 38 N/A 138 - 144 London Road Northgate
Communal Accommodation
Local Plan Year Base year 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
SHLAA 
CategorySHLAA 
ReferencePlanning App 
ReferenceSite Address Neighbourhood Issue DateLapses 
DateBedrooms 
ProposedBedrooms 
CompletedBedrooms 
Remaining2019/    
202020/    
212021/     
222022/ 
232023/ 
242024/ 
252025/ 
262026/ 
272027/ 
282028/ 
292029/ 
302030/ 
312031/ 
322032/ 
332033/ 
342034/ 
352035/
362036/
37
Additions 60 0 60 60
Losses 56 0 56 56
Additions 7 7 0 7
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 7 7 0 7
Losses 0 0 0
Additions 146 0 146 146
Losses 100 100 0 100
0 0 0Net Change
Divided by national ratio of adults 
to households (1.8)33 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 500 0 0
36 -48 83 -48 060 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 90 64 -86 150 -86 0Commenced
D 20 CR/2016/0972/FUL Oakhurst Grange Southgate 05/10/2018 CommencedB N/A CR/2018/0330/RG3 Southwell, Balcombe Road Pound Hill 06/03/201921/07/2023
B N/A CR/2019/0292/FUL 49 Horsham Road Southgate 26/09/2019 CommencedA 92 CR/2019/0322/FUL The Gables Nursing Home, Ifield Green Ifield 21/07/2020
00EMPLOYMENT LAND TRAJECTORY JANUARY 2021 (BASE DATE 1 SEPTEMBER 2020)
Site Reference Site/Location Commentary Planning Reference Suitable Available Achievable Site Area (Ha) Business 
Floor 
space (Sq.m)Office B1a/B1b 
floor space 
(Sq.m)Industrial B1c/B2/B8 
floor space (Sq.m)Other 
Employment 
Floorspace 
(Sq.m)Office Land 
B1a/B1b (Ha)Industrial  Land 
B1c/B2/B8 floor 
space (Ha)
A Nexus, Gatwick Road (Parcel 
3)Outline permission CR/2014/0764/OUT for Parcel 3 (3 x A1 and A3/A5 buildings totalling 1,025 sq.m) has 
lapsed. Agent advises that site has potential for B1/B2/B8 plus other support facilities for the main 
employment area. CR/2014/0764/OUT Yes Yes Yes 0.64 0 0 0 0 0.32 0.32
B Wingspan Club Residual Land Landowner, CBC Property, assessing options for development of site as either a single 2,787sqm B8 building 
or a number of smaller units. Anticipate delivery by 2023.N/A Yes Yes Yes 0.64 2,787 0 2,787 0 0 0.64
C(i) Rackspace, Former GSK site 
(south east land parcel)Permission is for 2 x B8 data storage buildings (Rackspace) to provide 25,317sqm in total (12,658.5sqm 
each). Building 1 completed 2015/16. Work on Building 2 not yet started. Remaining site area is therefore 
3.295ha, half that of total scheme (6.59ha).Permitted 
CR/2013/0255/FUL Yes Yes Yes 3.295 12,659 0 12,659 0 0 3.295
C(ii) Former GSK Site (north and 
west land parcel)Permission CR/2014/0415/ARM relates to the north and west land parcel. It permits development of 2 data 
storage halls (Buildings 1 and 2), an emergency power building (Building 3), and a business hub building 
comprising café at ground floor with offices above (Building 4) together with associated car parking, servicing 
arrangements and landscaping. Building 1 provides 13,431sqm B8 on a 2.106 ha plot. It is occupied by 
Digital Realty, and having been completed 2017/18, it is no longer included in the remaining site and 
floorspace figures. Building 2 provides approx 1,521sqm B1a and 19,391sqm B8 on a 2.59ha plot. Work is 
yet to commence on this building. Building 3 provides 2,696sqm plant on a 0.2ha plot. Building 4 provides 
1,433sqm B1a office and 87sqm A3 cafe on a 0.4ha plot.CR/2014/0415/ARM Yes Yes Yes 3.19 22,345 2,954 19,391 2,783 0.565 2.4
D(i) Gatwick Park (Site G1), 
Gatwick RoadPermission for demolition of 3 existing office buildings and erection of a new B1(a) office building. Being 
marketed as Gatwick Park.CR/2016/0997/FUL Yes Yes Yes 0.8 10,960 10,960 0 0 0.8 0.0
D(ii) Gatwick Park (Site G2), BCL 
House, Gatwick RoadPermission for redevelopment of the site with a 5-storey (step down) office building. Being marketed as 
Gatwick Park.CR/2017/1057/FUL Yes Yes Yes 0.44 6,637 6,637 0 0 0.44 0.0
E Elekta, London Road and 
Fleming Way (Phase 2)Phase 1, Building A (11,828 sqm B1a floordpace) is complete. Phase 2, for the erection of a second building 
to provide 4,345 sqm B1a floorspace is not built out. CR/2014/0760/FUL Yes Yes Yes 0.4 4,345 4,345 0 0 0.4 0.0
F Land at Jersey Farm (Site A) Planning Permission CR/2019/0696/FUL for a B8 warehouse, associated landscaping and car parking. CR/2019/0696/FUL Yes Yes Yes 0.69 2,095 0 2,095 0 0.00 0.69
G Units XA1 and XA2, Sussex 
Manor Business ParkPlanning Permission for extension to the existing 9,500sqm building to provide an additional 1,688sqm B2 
floorspace.CR/2019/0456/FUL Yes Yes Yes 1.7 1,688 0 1,688 0 0.00 0.00
H Forge Wood Employment 
LandEmployment provision for Forge Wood neighbourhood, identified for delivery of 5,000 sqm flexible B1/B2/B8 
business land.CR/2016/0858/ARM Yes Yes Yes 2.74 5,000 2,500 2,500 2,500 1.37 1.37
I Tilgate Forest Business Park, 
Vacant PlotSite is located in the Tilgate Forest Business Park Main Employment Area. Discharge of condition relating to 
permission CR/2013/0423/FUL for 2 x three storey office blocks extension of time. Office development is 
subject to a technical commencement and is therefore extant.CR/2017/0346/FUL Yes Yes Yes 0.9 4,630 4,630 0 0 0.9 0
J Southways, London Road Site is situated within land that is subject to Gatwick Airport Safeguarding. However, Certificate of Lawfulness 
CR/2013/0008/192 confirms that development for twin office buildings is commenced and extant.CR/2013/0008/192
CR/2013/0094/FULYes Yes Yes 2.83 3,241 3,241 0 0 2.83 0
K County Buildings, Northgate 
AvenueSite included in WSCC Asset Management Strategy and is identified as a priority for mixed-use residential 
and commercial (office) development. Assumption is for 75% of the site to be dedicated to housing, with 25% 
(plot ratio 2.0) dedicated to office use. Completion is anticipated no later than 2025.  N/A Yes Yes Yes 1.04 5,200 5,200 0 0 0.26 0
L Land North of The Boulevard Permission CR/2017/0997/OUT for a.) demolition of existing council offices and erection of replacement town 
hall, offices, and public square, and b.) outline application for residential development comprising 182 units 
including commercial space. Provides a net gain of 4,173 sqm office space (14,695 sqm total). Office/civic 
sector of the site is 0.56ha, and this figure is counted towards the employment land supply.CR/2017/0997/OUT Yes Yes Yes 1.23 14,695 14,695 0 370 0.56 0
M Moka, Station Way Residential-led mixed-use development. Will deliver 650sqm ground floor commercial floorspace, this being 
flexible within use classes A1/A3/A4/B1/D1 and split between 2 to 4 units.CR/2019/0542/FUL Yes Yes Yes 0.36 650 650 0 650 0.36 0
N Land at Station Hill, Pound Hill Planning permission CR/2019/0588/FUL for erection of three storey office building with car park CR/2019/0588/FUL Yes Yes Yes 0.0379 414 414 0 0 0.0379 0
20.93 97,346 56,226 41,120 6,303 8.84 8.72
Site Reference Site/Location Commentary Planning Reference Suitable Available Achievable Site Area (Ha) Business 
Floor 
space (Sq.m)Office B1a/B1b 
floor space 
(Sq.m)Industial B1c/B2/B8 floor 
space (Sq.m)Other 
Employment 
Floorspace 
(Sq.m)Office Land 
B1a/B1b (Ha)Industrial  Land 
B1c/B2/B8 floor 
space (Ha)
O Land East of Balcombe Road 
and South of M23 Spur 
(Gatwick Green)The Local Plan allocates land at East of Balcombe Road and south of the M23 spur, referred to as Gatwick 
Green, for development of an industrial-led Strategic Employment Location of 24.1ha predominantly B8 
storage and distribution warehouse (Class B8) uses,  potentially supported by light industrial and general 
industrial and a limited amount of complementary ancillary uses that support the principal storage and 
distribution function. The allocation will meet Crawley's outstanding business land supply requirement, which 
equates to 77,800sqm B8 floorspace. Development would come forward Years 6-15 of the Plan, with a seven 
to ten year build out anticipated for completion 2035. The site would therefore meet employment needs in the 
later part of the Plan period.  47ha of land are included in the allocation boundary but any industrial 
floorspace or ancillary uses beyond the 24.1ha allocation would have to be justified by appropriate evidence. 
The identified site is larger because of the potential, where justified by evidence, for supporting uses catering 
for the needs of employees, and because of the need for the strategic development to provide comprehensive 
supporting infrastructure, appropriate landscaping and to protect the amenity of neighbouring properties.Allocated in Reg. 19 
Local PlanYes Yes Yes 24.1 77,800 0 77,800 0 0 24.1
24.10 77,800 0 77,800 0 0 24.1
Office B1a/b 
Floorspace 
(Sqm)Industrial 
B1c/B2/B8 
Floorspace 
(Sqm)Total B-Class 
Floorspace (Sqm) Office B1a/b 
Land (Ha)Industrial 
B1c/B2/B8 Land 
(Ha)Total B-Class 
Land (Ha)
Years 1-5 56,226 41,120 97,346 8.84 8.72 17.56
Gatwick Green SEL 
(Years 6-15)0 77,800 77,800 0.00 24.10 24.10
Local Plan Total 56,226 118,920 175,146 8.84 32.82 41.66Sites Deliverable Years 1-5
Allocation for a Strategic Employment Location (Deliverable Years 6-15)