Dartmoor Local Plan  2018-2036
  Adopted version
  December 2021DARTMOOR LOCAL PLANDartmoor National Park is one of 10 National Parks in England, it covers an area of 954 square kilometres and is the largest 
open space in southern England. Dartmoor is home to 34,000 people. 
Dartmoor National Park Authority (DNPA) was established in 1997 as an independent governmental body to conserve 
and enhance the National Park’s natural beauty, wildlife, cultural heritage and special qualities, and promote their 
enjoyment and understanding. DNPA is the Local Planning Authority for the National Park, including the areas of 
Teignbridge, West Devon, Mid Devon and the South Hams within its boundary.
West 
DevonMid 
Devon
Teignbridge
South 
HamsSouth DownsThe Broads
ExmoorPeak DistrictNorthumberland
North York Moors
New ForestLake District
Yorkshire DalesDartmoor 
National Park  3Contents
Foreword        6
About the Local Plan       6
Using the Local Plan       8
Reading the Local Plan       9
1  Vision, Spatial Strategy, and Planning Applications 10
1.1 National Park purposes and Special Qualities   12
1.2 The Vision for Dartmoor National Park    15
1.3 Sustainable Development in Dartmoor National Park  16
1.4 Spatial Strategy       18
1.5 Major Development      2 1
1.6 Design        2 2
1.7 Amenity        2 6
1.8 Higher risk development and sites    27
2  Environment       28
2.2 Landscape       3 0
2.3 Biodiversity and Geodiversity     3 3
2.4 Dartmoor’s moorland, heathland and woodland  41
East Street, Ashburton42.5   The Water Environment     42
2.6 Tranquillity and dark night skies    44
2.7 The Historic and Cultural Environment   46
3  Housing       54
3.1 Housing development in Dartmoor National Park 57
3.2 Different types of housing     60
3.3 Definition of a Local Person    62
3.4 Definition of Affordable Housing    63
3.5 Financial contributions in lieu of on-site Affordable 
         Housing provision     65
3.6 Housing in classified settlements    66
3.7 Custom and Self-Build Housing    70
3.8 Householder Development    7 4
3.9 Rural Workers’ Housing     79
3.10 Gypsy and traveller accommodation   83
3.11 Low Impact Residential Development   84
4  Communities, Services and Infrastructure  86
4.1 Community Services and Facilities   88
4.2 Public open space and sports facilities   89
4.3 Transport       9 1
4.5 Telecommunications     9 7
4.6 The Access Network      985  Economy       100
5.2 Non-residential Business and Tourism Development 103
5.3 Town Centre Development    10 5
5.4 Tourist Accommodation     11 0
5.5 Agriculture, forestry and rural land-based 
         business development     113
5.6 Farm Diversification     11 5
5.7 Equestrian development     11 7
6  Minerals, Waste and Energy    120
6.1 Minerals Development     12 2
6.2 Waste development     12 5
6.3 Energy development     12 7
7  Towns, Villages and Development Sites  128
7.1 Settlements, site development and community plans 129
7.2 Settlements       13 2
7.3 Local Centres      13 2
7.4 Rural Settlements      1 48  5Appendices       167
Appendix A: Monitoring     16 7
Appendix B: Housing Trajectory    169
Appendix C: List of Policies     171
Appendix D: List of Policies that will be superceded by 
the adoption of this plan     173
Appendix E: Glossary      177
Appendix F: Land Use Class Order    184
You can ask for copy of this 
document in large print or 
another format. We will aim 
to provide for your needs as 
soon as possible.© Crown Copyright 2022
All images © DNPA unless otherwise stated.
Front cover image: Moretonhampstead © Richard Fox
Plans and maps contained within this document are 
based upon Ordnance Survey material and data 
© Crown copyright and database right 2022twitter@DartmoorPlanfacebook/DartmoorPlanwww.dartmoor.gov.uk/localplanDartmoor National Park Authority
Parke, Bovey Tracey, Newton Abbot
Devon, TQ13 9JQ
forwardplanning@dartmoor.gov.uk
+44 (0)16268320936About the Local Plan
The Dartmoor National Park Local Plan guides what development can 
and cannot happen in Dartmoor National Park. 
The Local Plan:
 ●conserves and enhances the National Park’s ‘Special Qualities’, 
and protects special areas and features within it from harmful 
development;
 ●decides the type and amount of development required to meet 
the needs of Dartmoor communities and businesses (e.g. housing, 
employment, open space, essential infrastructure);
 ●identifies where development can take place;
 ●encourages redevelopment of vacant buildings or land, or other 
areas;
 ●helps reduce the National Park’s contribution to climate change; 
and
 ●reduces the need to travel by providing land for homes, schools, 
shops and businesses close together.
The Local Plan cannot:
 ●force development to go ahead, this is decided by land owners 
and developers, and influenced by economic conditions;
 ●decide which businesses undertake development or occupy 
premises;
 ●prevent businesses, schools, hospitals or other services from 
closing;
 ●control things which are not ‘development’, such as vegetation 
cover or land management; 
 ●decide the availability, quality or frequency of public transport; 
orForeword
This Local Plan sets a clear and positive strategy for Dartmoor’s future. 
It responds to today’s challenges of climate change and ecological 
crisis through a pattern of sustainable growth, policies to reduce 
energy use, and a groundbreaking approach to biodiversity net 
gain. It responds to the needs of communities by raising the bar on 
the quality, efficiency and accessibility of new homes. It will deliver a 
mix of housing which responds to local needs, recognising the gap 
between local incomes and house prices. Business and enterprise 
which is consistent with National Park purposes is encouraged and 
supported.
At the most fundamental level the Local Plan as a whole pursues 
National Park purposes of conservation and enhancement, and 
promoting understanding and enjoyment. It ensures that at a time 
of change and uncertainty, Dartmoor stands firm as a stronghold for 
wildlife, a landscape of national importance, a home and workplace, 
and a haven for active recreation, and quiet enjoyment.
The Local Plan has been prepared based upon a strong evidence 
base, understanding the needs of Dartmoor’s natural and historic 
environment, its communities, and visitors. It could not have been 
prepared without your contributions, and we thank everyone who has 
engaged in the process, influenced its content, and who will work with 
us to deliver its vision for Dartmoor National Park.
Pamela Woods
Chair, Dartmoor National Park Authority
Dan Janota
Head of Forward Planning and Economy, Dartmoor National Park 
Authority  7 ●please everyone, all of the time. The Local Plan must strike a 
balance in the best interests of the National Park as a whole.  
With a range of views of how this is achieved it is the purpose 
of the planning system to make a judgement, which some may 
agree with and some may not.
The Local Plan is the starting point for all planning decisions in the 
National Park. Planning decisions must be made in line with the Local 
Plan, unless material planning considerations indicate otherwise.  
This Local Plan is consistent with National Policy (the National Planning 
Policy Framework1) and reflects a range of other relevant legislation 
and guidance.  Most crucially, this Local Plan is a key way in which 
we pursue National Park purposes, and the duty. The Local Plan 
sits alongside the National Park Management Plan, which is a key 
document setting out how joint strategy and partnership working will 
shape Dartmoor in the future.  
The overall strategy, and the policies contained within the Local Plan 
must strike a careful balance between: 
 ●pursuing National Park purposes;
 ●supporting the duty to foster the economic and social wellbeing 
of communities;
 ●delivering sustainable development; 
 ●meeting the aims of government policy and guidance; and 
 ●supporting and engaging local communities and all with an 
interest in Dartmoor, in how decisions are made and places are 
changed to meet their needs. 
The Local Plan has been prepared taking into account the Duty to 
Co-operate2, with strategic cross-boundary issues considered jointly 
with neighbouring Local Planning Authorities and other partners.  The 
National Park Authority also seeks to influence adjoining Authorities in 
pursuit of National Park purposes.
1  National Planning Policy Framework (MHCLG, 2021)  
2  The Duty to Cooperate is a legal test that requires co-operation between local planning authorities and other public bodies to             
    maximise the effectiveness of strategic policies in Local Plans.Neighbourhood Plans must be consistent with the strategic policies 
of this Local Plan. Neighbourhood Plans which are in force, will be a 
material planning consideration when making decisions on planning 
applications.  
The Authority will produce a monitoring report at least annually in order 
to ensure the ongoing effectiveness of the Local Plan policies. This will 
measure policy performance against a series of indicators and targets 
which are set out in the Monitoring section ( Appendix A ).8Using the Local Plan
The Local Plan is divided into seven chapters.
The nuts and bolts of the Local Plan are the strategies and planning 
policies included in each chapter.
There is supporting text, or preamble, before each policy. This text 
explains the purpose for and reasoning behind the policy. Some 
important evidence may be summarised, but the majority of 
supporting evidence is included within Topic Papers and other reports 
in our online evidence base .All strategies and planning policies appear in 
coloured boxes to help draw your attention to 
them. But do not forget the supporting text is also 
important.Chapter
1 Vision, Spatial Strategy and Planning Applications
2 Environment
3 Housing
4 Communities, Services and Infrastructure
5 Economy
6 Minerals, Waste and Energy
7 Towns, Villages and Development SitesChapter 1 includes the overall Vision for the National Park 
and general policies for planning applications. It also sets 
out the spatial strategy all other policies work within.
Chapters 2 – 6 set out policies for certain development 
types. These chapters all work to achieve the Vision 
described in Chapter 1.
Chapter 7 contains policies for different towns and villages 
and identifies land suitable for development.
Planning Policies
The planning policies in the Local Plan are what we use to decide 
planning applications, all development in the National Park 
should comply with the development plan as a whole. There are 
‘strategic’ policies and ‘non-strategic’ policies. Strategic policies 
address Dartmoor’s development priorities. All other policies 
address non-strategic mattersStrategies
Each chapter begins with a short strategy, which describes what 
the following planning policies aim to achieve.   9Reading the Local Plan
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  No single policy can be 
used in isolation, and all relevant policies, together with National 
Policy, Neighbourhood Plans, Supplementary Planning Documents 
and any other material planning considerations may be relevant in 
making a planning decision. Understanding the Local Plan
There are key words in the plan which make a big difference to how it 
will be applied:
‘Will’ or ‘ must ’ is used where there is a specific legal, regulatory or 
policy requirement that must be complied with. 
‘Should ’ is used for minimum good practice guidance you should 
follow unless there’s a good reason (supported by evidence) not to.
‘And ’, ‘or’, or ‘ and/or ’? It’s important to know the difference when 
reading policies:
And is used to join parts of a policy which all must be complied with.
Or is used when either one part or another part of a policy can be 
complied with.
And/or is used when parts of the policy can be taken either together 
or as alternatives. 
Many planning terms have specific definitions; some are even set out 
in law. Definitions of terms in the Local Plan are in the Glossary at the 
end of the document and should be used to help you understand the 
plan. 
National Planning 
Policy FrameworkSupplementary 
Planning Documents
Communities and 
Neighbourhood Plans
Other material 
considerationsLocal Plan
Click here to return to 
the contents page10Strategy
Development is focussed upon protecting the National Park’s Special 
Qualities, whilst meeting the needs of its communities. Development 
should maximise the use of brownfield land and existing buildings. 
Major development will not take place in the National Park other than 
in exceptional circumstances.  
Housing and employment development will take place in the most 
sustainable settlements, where the mix of people, homes, jobs and 
infrastructure make for the most efficient use of resources, minimising 
our impact on climate change. Most development will take place 
in Local Centres, the largest and most sustainable settlements in the 
National Park, where land is allocated to meet identified local need for 
affordable housing, employment uses, or opportunities for regeneration. 
In Rural Settlements, Dartmoor’s larger villages, development may 
come forward at a smaller scale, in order to meet identified housing, 
employment and infrastructure needs for that community and where 
there are specific redevelopment opportunities. In Villages and 
Hamlets, the National Park’s smallest and most sensitive villages, only 
small scale affordable housing development or small scale business 
growth is appropriate. Outside classified settlements development will 
principally support the needs of farming, forestry and other rural land-
based enterprises, where it can be shown that it needs to take place in 
the open countryside.
All new development should be of a high standard of design, accessibility 
and sustainability. All planning applications must be informed by a 
thorough understanding of the site and its surroundings, and respect 
the amenity enjoyed by its neighbours.
1  Vision, Spatial  
Strategy, and Planning 
Applications
South ZealStrategy
Development is focussed upon protecting the National Park’s Special 
Qualities, whilst meeting the needs of its communities. Development 
should maximise the use of brownfield land and existing buildings. 
Major development will not take place in the National Park other than 
in exceptional circumstances.  
Housing and employment development will take place in the most 
sustainable settlements, where the mix of people, homes, jobs and 
infrastructure make for the most efficient use of resources, minimising 
our impact on climate change. Most development will take place 
in Local Centres, the largest and most sustainable settlements in the 
National Park, where land is allocated to meet identified local need for 
affordable housing, employment uses, or opportunities for regeneration. 
In Rural Settlements, Dartmoor’s larger villages, development may 
come forward at a smaller scale, in order to meet identified housing, 
employment and infrastructure needs for that community and where 
there are specific redevelopment opportunities. In Villages and 
Hamlets, the National Park’s smallest and most sensitive villages, only 
small scale affordable housing development or small scale business 
growth is appropriate. Outside classified settlements development will 
principally support the needs of farming, forestry and other rural land-
based enterprises, where it can be shown that it needs to take place in 
the open countryside.
All new development should be of a high standard of design, accessibility 
and sustainability. All planning applications must be informed by a 
thorough understanding of the site and its surroundings, and respect 
the amenity enjoyed by its neighbours.
Vision, Spatial Strategy and Planning Applications  11121.1 National Park purposes and Special Qualities
1.1.1 English National Parks were created with two purposes which 
are set out in law3. These shape what the National Parks are, the reason 
for their designation and how they should be managed. 
First Purpose :  To conserve and enhance the natural   
   beauty, wildlife and cultural heritage of the   
   area.
Second Purpose : To promote opportunities for the     
   understanding and enjoyment of the Special  
   Qualities of the National Park by the public.
1.1.2 Pursuit of the purposes can lead to conflicts, such as the need 
to conserve wildlife and habitats, but also encourage people to enjoy 
and learn from the countryside. In circumstances where the purposes 
of the National Park conflict the Sandford Principle is used to guide 
decision making. The Sandford Principle states that if there is a conflict 
between National Park purposes which cannot be resolved, the first 
purpose, of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty, wildlife and 
cultural heritage, will be given greater weight.
1.1.3 National Parks have not however been designated as 
wilderness parks; their communities are fundamental to their character. 
The government therefore placed a social and economic duty upon 
National Park Authorities themselves.
Duty : To seek to foster the economic and social wellbeing of  
  the local communities within the National Park.
1.1.4 Authorities must ensure that, in their work furthering National 
Park purposes, they have regard and give appropriate weight to the 
economic and social interests of those who live in the National Park. 
Pursuing the duty should be compatible with and not undermine the 
purposes. It should also be noted that the Sandford Principle relates to 
the purposes, and not to the duty.
3  Environment Act 19951.1.5 All relevant authorities, including statutory undertakers and 
other public bodies, are required by law3 to have regard to National 
Park purposes. The Defra Vision and Circular on English National 
Parks and the Broads4 provides guidance on achieving National Park 
purposes and the duty.
1.1.6 National Park purposes and the duty are at the heart of all the 
planning decisions the Authority makes. It is the purpose of the Local 
Plan to detail how the National Park purposes and the duty will be 
used in day-to-day decision-making to ensure they are achieved.
4  English National Parks and the Broads: UK Government Vision and Circular (Defra, 2010)Strategic Policy 1.1 Delivering National Park 
purposes and protecting Dartmoor’s Special 
Qualities
1. Development will be permitted that furthers, and does not 
prejudice, the statutory National Park purposes of:
a) conserving and enhancing the natural beauty, wildlife and 
cultural heritage of the area; and
b) promoting opportunities for the understanding and enjoyment of 
the Special Qualities of the National Park by the public.
Development which complies with the policies in this Local Plan 
will be considered consistent with National Park purposes.
2. Where there is a conflict between the National Park’s 
purposes, greater weight will be attached to the first purpose. In 
pursuit of the purposes, the Authority will have regard to its duty 
to seek to foster the economic and social well-being of the local 
communities within the National Park, provided such development 
is compatible with National Park purposes.
3. We will work with others to influence their plans, strategies 
and proposals to ensure development outside Dartmoor National 
Park does not damage its setting, Special Qualities or otherwise 
prejudice the achievement of National Park purposes.Vision, Spatial Strategy and Planning Applications  13Special Qualities of Dartmoor National Park
1.1.7 Dartmoor’s Special Qualities are the National Park’s distinctive 
and significant features which distinguish it from other areas. The 
combination of the Special Qualities are what justifies Dartmoor being 
designated and protected as a National Park. The Special Qualities 
of Dartmoor National Park include its landscape character, geology, 
biodiversity, archaeology, history and the rural communities who live 
and work within Dartmoor now and the history of those who have lived 
here in the past.
1.1.8 Through consultation with communities and stakeholders the 
Dartmoor National Park Management Plan5 defined Dartmoor’s Special 
Qualities in detail. These Special Qualities clarify what is important 
to conserve and enhance, and to promote the understanding and  
enjoyment of in relation to National Park purposes and are often 
referenced in the Local Plan’s policies. Dartmoor’s Special Qualities 
are:
 ●a distinctive landscape and valuable biodiversity, including:
 ○open, windswept upland moors with far reaching views and 
a sense of remoteness and wildness, distinctive granite tors 
surrounded by loose rock or ‘clitter’, and large expanses of 
grass and heather moorland, blanket bogs, and valley mires 
providing habitats for distinctive wildlife such as skylark and 
cuckoo, and rarities including Vigur’s eyebright and southern 
damselfly;
 ○sheltered valleys with upland oak woodland, rhôs pasture 
and fast-flowing boulder-strewn rivers, home to characteristic 
wildlife including the pied flycatcher and salmon, and rare 
species such as the marsh fritillary butterfly; and
 ○enclosed farmland with small irregular pasture fields bounded 
by dry stone walls and hedgebanks providing a mosaic of 
different wildlife habitats, including hay meadows and species-
rich dry grasslands with wildlife such as the beautiful greater 
butterfly orchid.
5   Dartmoor National Park Management Plan 2021-2026Merrivale Stone Row  © Anna Curnow14 ●a varied geology, including the granite bedrock providing the 
dominant building material throughout history, and a wide range 
of valued minerals including tin, copper, lead, silver and arsenic;
 ●timelessness - a place spared many of the intrusions of modern 
life, with dark night-time skies;
 ●tranquillity, where it is possible to find absolute peace, offering 
spiritual refreshment and opportunities for quiet reflection, escape 
and creativity;
 ●unrivalled opportunities to roam at will over the extensive open 
moorland, and an exceptional rights of way network for walking, 
riding and cycling;
 ●traditional farming practices, using the moorland commons for 
extensive grazing of hardy cattle, sheep and ponies including 
locally distinctive breeds;
 ●clean water, the catchment area for most of the rivers of Devon 
– historic leats still supply water to surrounding settlements. The 
peatlands and open water of the reservoirs provide an important 
water store helping to regulate the flow of water off the moor;
 ●one of the most important archaeological landscapes in western 
Europe revealing a chronology of human activity stretching back 
over 8,000 years, from ancient field systems to the legacy of tin 
mining;
 ●a wealth of historic buildings, structures and townscapes, 
including a strong medieval settlement pattern of scattered 
farmsteads, hamlets, villages and towns, set within enclosed 
farmland surrounding the open moor and linked by an intimate 
pattern of sunken lanes;
 ●resourceful rural communities with distinctive culture and 
traditions, characteristic ways of life, local crafts, fairs, food and 
drink; ●an inspirational landscape of legends and myths that has inspired 
art and literature through the centuries and continues to inspire; 
and
 ●opportunities for discovery, challenge and adventure for all.
Meadow Pipit © Laurie CampbellVision, Spatial Strategy and Planning Applications  151.2 The Vision for Dartmoor National Park
1.2.1 When planning for Dartmoor’s future the Local Plan seeks to 
ensure development is environmentally, socially and economically 
sustainable. To achieve this, the Local Plan must balance the needs 
of people, communities, businesses, and the natural and historic 
environment in a way which is appropriate for an internationally 
important landscape and national asset. How the Local Plan seeks to 
accomplish this is first set out in the Vision.
1.2.2 The Local Plan Vision sits within the wider Vision for Dartmoor set 
out in the National Park Management Plan6. It provides more detailed 
objectives for how the Management Plan Vision will be delivered 
through the planning system. The Local Plan Vision sets the Local 
Plan’s overall direction, describing what the Plan is aiming to achieve 
over the long term and identifying priority areas where actions can 
be taken. The Vision is an aspirational, but realistic, picture of what 
Dartmoor should be like in the future. This picture sets an overarching 
objective for the Local Plan’s strategies and policies to work towards.
6   Dartmoor National Park Management Plan 2014-2019 (DNPA, 2014)The Vision
Strategies & PoliciesEvidence Base
Decisions on Planning 
ApplicationsWhere we want 
to get toData and 
evidence we use 
How we will get 
there
Decisions we make 
on development 
proposalsReview of the Local PlanLocal Plan
Figure 1.1 A summary of the vision’s role in the local plan processThe Vision for Dartmoor National Park
Decent homes   
There is access to well-designed, energy efficient and affordable 
housing for those who contribute to Dartmoor’s thriving communities.
A place to do business
Businesses which respect, value and contribute to Dartmoor’s Special 
Qualities have the opportunity to thrive and innovate.
Sustainability – living within environmental limits
Dartmoor’s natural resources are conserved and there are opportunities 
for innovation in the way in which we live and work which allow us 
to achieve and maintain an environmental, social and economic 
balance. Minimising our contribution to climate change and adapting 
to it. 
Making best use of resources
Dartmoor’s land, resources and buildings are used efficiently, effectively 
and sustainably. Development prioritises previously developed land 
and minimises empty homes.
Culture and arts 
The National Park’s Special Qualities provide a continual source of 
inspiration and are celebrated in culture and the arts.
Exemplars for outstanding development
All new development has a character which respects local 
distinctiveness, vernacular and materials, and leads the way on 
sustainable building.
Community involvement and participation
Dartmoor is a place where people work together with a collective 
goal to respect and protect the National Park, and to promote and 
embrace positive change.
Prosperous and vibrant communities
Dartmoor’s towns and villages provide opportunities for communities 
to thrive.16Farming, forestry and land management
Farming and forestry have the opportunity to evolve and innovate, 
sustaining their vital role in conserving and enhancing Dartmoor’s 
distinctive cultural heritage, internationally significant landscape and 
precious biodiversity.
Resilient landscape
Dartmoor’s nationally important landscape character is conserved 
and enhanced. Its wider landscape setting is respected. 
Thriving habitats and species
A cohesive network of habitats allows species to thrive and be resilient 
to climate change. 
An historic environment in excellent condition
Dartmoor’s cultural heritage, archaeology and historic built 
environment is understood, protected and available as a source 
of inspiration and education. Development delivers significant 
enhancements, including through appropriate re-use.
Opportunities for access and enjoyment
Dartmoor’s Special Qualities are respected, available as a resource 
for health and well-being, and accessible for everyone to understand 
and enjoy. Development helps manage visitor impacts in a way which 
protects the National Park for the benefit of future generations.
1.3 Sustainable Development in Dartmoor 
National Park
1.3.1 Achieving sustainable development is a key objective of 
the Local Plan’s Vision and National Planning Policy. In reality it is a 
complex task with numerous competing priorities which all need 
to be successfully balanced. Sustainable development is defined 
as meeting the needs of the present without compromising the 
ability of future generations to meet their own needs7. It is meeting 
human development goals whilst sustaining the natural resources 
and ecosystems upon which our well-being, society and economy 
depend. This includes minimising our contribution to climate change.1.3.2 Dartmoor’s sustainable development goals are a set of priority 
issues which all development within the National Park must address 
for it to be considered sustainable. They draw from a wide variety of 
issues which affect the National Park and relate to the three pillars 
of sustainable development: the environment, society, and economy. 
Dartmoor’s sustainability goals are summarised in Figure 1.2  and 
detailed in full in Strategic Policy 1.2. 
1.3.3  The policies of the Local Plan set out how the sustainable 
development goals will be achieved. Development which is 
compliant with the policies in this Plan will be considered sustainable 
development.
National Park 
purposes1
1
Promote health, 
safety and 
well-being5
Conserve & 
enhance 
character & 
tranquillity9Minimise our 
impact on 
climate 
change2
2
Conserve 
natural 
resources6
Conserve & 
enhance 
historical 
features 10Respond to 
climate change3
Avoid impact on 
flood risk7
Promote 
sustainable 
transport11Use land & 
infrastructure 
efficiently4
Ensure high 
quality distinctive 
design8
Support 
economic 
vitality12CO%
²
Figure 1.2 A summary of Dartmoor’s sustainable development goalsAvoid adverse
impact on 
flood risk
7   42/187: Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development (United Nations General Assembly, 1987)j) conserves and enhances the character, quality and tranquillity 
of the National Park and sustains and enhances the setting, 
character and local distinctiveness of settlements; 
k) conserves or enhances important historic and cultural features;
l) provides essential services and infrastructure, and promotes and 
enables travel by public transport, cycle or foot; and
m) supports the economic vitality of the National Park.
Vision, Spatial Strategy and Planning Applications  17Strategic Policy  1.2 Sustainable development in 
Dartmoor National Park
1. In Dartmoor National Park all proposals should pursue 
sustainable development. When considering development 
proposals the Authority will take a positive approach that reflects 
the presumption in favour of sustainable development contained 
in the National Planning Policy Framework. Development is 
sustainable where it:
a) supports National Park purposes;
b) minimises our impact upon climate change by ensuring 
development takes place where it minimises the need to travel, 
conserves resources and reduces waste;
c) responds to climate change through community resilience and 
adaptation;
d) makes efficient use of land and infrastructure, in particular by 
prioritising the use of previously developed land and buildings;
e) promotes the health, safety and well-being of the population, 
including by improving and supporting access to workplaces 
and housing, and ensures active community engagement in 
planning for the future of Dartmoor and its communities;
f) enables equal opportunities, freedom from discrimination and 
fair access to services, facilities, and the understanding and 
enjoyment of the National Park;
g) conserves the quality and quantity of natural resources, including 
water, air, soils, geodiversity and biodiversity;
h) avoids development which has an adverse impact on flood risk, 
and allows for the natural drainage of surface water;
i) delivers distinctive high quality design and uses sustainable 
materials and passive design principles where possible;181.4 Spatial Strategy
1.4.1 The spatial strategy of a local plan, the way in which different 
policies apply in different places, is its most powerful tool for shaping 
how an area changes. Towns and villages vary in their size, make up, 
and location relative to each other and their surrounding environment. 
As a result development which is needed may be more appropriate in 
one place than another.
1.4.2 The spatial strategy does not operate in isolation; other policies 
within the Local Plan provide checks and balances which add detail, 
clarify opportunity, or mitigate less desirable change. For example, 
housing development is better directed at settlements which have the 
shops, facilities and services to meet residents’ daily needs. Business 
development will be more appropriate where it is connected with 
the resources it needs and the market it supplies. In some cases the 
market will dictate this, but in others it needs to be controlled through 
the planning system to ensure sustainable development takes place.  
This is a key tool in reducing our impact upon climate change.
1.4.3 A key role of the Local Plan is therefore to avoid development 
in places where it would cause harm to the National Park, and direct 
it to places where there are the best opportunities for sustainable 
living in the National Park context. This means policy must direct 
development to more sustainable locations and avoid unnecessary 
development in unsustainable locations, such as where there are 
limited services and facilities, fewer connections, a greater reliance 
on private transport and important conservation objectives. The way 
in which people, households, and communities behave is often more 
complex in reality, however the principle of aiming to reduce travel 
and promote community is robust.
1.4.4 Focussing development opportunities in existing settlements 
also prioritises use of the most suitable land for development.  Existing 
settlements are most able to offer land which has been developed 
before (brownfield land), has access to roads and utility connections, 
and where housing or employment premises relate well to existing development and therefore have a more limited impact upon the 
National Park’s Special Qualities.
1.4.5 The aim of the Local Plan’s spatial strategy is to: 
 ●focus development opportunities in the most sustainable 
locations, and where it relates well to existing development;
 ●only enable appropriate development opportunities in less 
sustainable locations, where it is justified and clustered with 
existing development; 
 ●avoid development in unsustainable locations; and
 ●direct development away from areas of sensitivity or conservation 
importance.
LustleighVision, Spatial Strategy and Planning Applications  191.4.6 The spatial strategy for Dartmoor National Park is as follows 
(settlement locations are shown in Map 1.1) :
8 Local Centres , the largest and most sustainable settlements 
in the National Park which are well served to meet the 
development needs of the settlement and surrounding parishes.  
These settlements are defined by settlement boundaries. Sites 
are allocated to meet local housing and employment needs, 
or enable redevelopment opportunities.
16 Rural Settlements , the National Park’s larger villages 
which have relatively good access to services and are better 
placed to meet the development needs of the settlement 
and the surrounding parish. These settlements have settlement 
boundaries, but no allocated development sites. 
19 Villages and Hamlets , the National Park’s smallest, most 
sensitive and isolated settlements, but which still have small-
scale housing and business needs which need to be supported. 
These settlements have no settlement boundaries and more 
limited development opportunities.
Outside classified settlements , ‘the open countryside’, 
opportunities are strictly limited to development and activities 
which need to take place in the open countryside. This 
includes farming and forestry, development needed for the 
conservation of historic buildings and farm diversification.
Map 1.1 The Local Plan’s spatial strategy
Strategic Policy 1.3 Spatial Strategy 
Development within the National Park is based on the following 
spatial principles:
1. Local Centres
Ashburton, Buckfastleigh, Chagford, Horrabridge, 
Moretonhampstead, Princetown, South Brent, and Yelverton
Towns and larger villages defined by settlement boundaries where 
development intended to serve the needs of the settlement and its 
rural hinterland will be acceptable in principle. In these settlements 
the priorities are:
a) to give opportunities to meet identified local housing needs, 
providing around 60% of the 65 dwellings per year provided for in 
this Plan; 
b) to maintain employment sites and give opportunities for new or 
improved employment sites where appropriate opportunities 
exist; and
c) to maintain or enhance a range of services which serve the 
settlement and its wider rural hinterland.
2. Rural Settlements
Bittaford, Bridford, Buckfast, Cheriton Cross / Bishop, Christow, 
Cornwood, Dousland, Dunsford, Hennock, Ilsington, Liverton, Mary 
Tavy, South Zeal, Sticklepath, Walkhampton, and Whiddon Down.
Larger villages defined by settlement boundaries where 
development intended to meet the needs of the settlement and 
its parish will be acceptable in principle. In these settlements the 
priorities are:
a) to give opportunities to meet identified local housing needs;
b) to maintain employment sites and give opportunities for new 
or improved small-scale employment sites where appropriate 
opportunities exist; and
c) to maintain or enhance a range of services and facilities which 
serve the settlement. 
203. Villages and Hamlets
Belstone, Dean Prior, Drewsteignton, Holne, Lustleigh, Lydford, 
Manaton, Meavy, North Bovey, North Brentor, Peter Tavy, 
Postbridge, Scorriton, Shaugh Prior, Sourton, South Tawton, Teign 
Village, Throwleigh, and Widecombe-in-the-Moor.
Smaller villages and hamlets where limited development to meet 
identified needs of the settlement and its parish will be acceptable 
in principle. In these settlements the priorities are:
a) to give opportunities to meet identified local housing needs;
b) to maintain and improve existing employment sites where 
appropriate opportunities exist; and
c) to sustain a range of services and facilities which serve the 
settlement. 
4. Open Countryside
Outside classified settlements development will be acceptable in 
principle if it is:
a) farming, forestry or other land-based rural businesses with a 
proven need to locate in the open countryside, including farm 
diversification; 
b) Gypsy and traveller, or low impact development, which is well-
related to a Local Centre or Rural Settlement;
c) new business development making use of redundant buildings 
and development related to existing businesses; 
d) householder or domestic related development; 
e) necessary to sustain buildings or structures of proven conservation 
value; 
f) for the provision of utility, service, transport or recreational 
infrastructure; or
g) needed to pursue National Park purposes.Vision, Spatial Strategy and Planning Applications  211.5 Major Development
1.5.1 The NPPF states that within National Parks planning permission 
should be refused for Major Development other than in exceptional 
circumstances, and where it can be demonstrated they are in the 
public interest. The purpose of this policy is to protect the environment 
of nationally designated areas from the harmful effects of major 
development.
1.5.2 The definition of ‘Major Development’ is not the statutory 
definition8 (i.e. 10 dwellings or more, a building with 1,000m2 of 
floorspace or more etc.). Nor is the definition rigid or size related. 
‘Major Development’ is development which has the potential to have 
a significant adverse impact on the Special Qualities of the National 
Park, such as its dark night skies, landscape character, heritage 
significance, biodiversity, tranquillity and others. The NPPF states it is up 
to the Authority to decide whether a proposed development in the 
National Park should be treated as a Major Development.
1.5.3 Major Development will typically be a proposal of a scale, 
character or nature which extends beyond what is needed locally, 
meaning it will have benefits which extend beyond Dartmoor’s 
boundary. This could include, for example, a reservoir, energy 
development, major road or rail scheme, minerals or waste 
development, large-scale residential or commercial development, or 
high voltage electricity transmission scheme. However, it could also 
include smaller scale development with potential to have significant 
adverse impacts. 
1.5.4 If development falls within the definition of Major Development, 
applicants will be required to demonstrate why it is in the public interest 
and that there are exceptional circumstances which justify it. The 
Authority will consider whether the exceptional circumstances and 
public benefits outweigh the nation’s long term interest in conserving 
and enhancing its National Parks. The policy sets out criteria which 
should be included in this assessment. The need for the development 
will be assessed and greater weight given to a national need for 
a development that must be located in the National Park. If an 
8  As set out in the Town and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure) Order (2015)alternative location is technically and financially viable, applicants 
will be expected to pursue that option. Where an alternative location 
outside the National Park is not being pursued a detailed appraisal of 
alternative options should be submitted.
1.5.5 Where exceptional circumstances exist and development 
would be in the public interest we will then assess the extent to which 
adverse impacts on the National Park’s Special Qualities can be 
moderated.
Definition of Major Development
For the purposes of this policy, the Authority will consider development 
to be Major where its nature, scale, and setting has the potential to 
have a significant adverse impact on the National Park’s Special 
Qualities.
The definition of ‘Major Development’ is not the statutory definition (i.e. 
10 dwellings or more, a building with 1,000m2 of floorspace or more 
etc.).
Bowerman’s Nose  © Thomas Dobner221.6 Design
Delivering Good Design
1.6.1 Design affects everything we make and use, it affects how we 
live, how we travel, how much things cost, the materials we consume 
and the waste we produce. Design also reflects our values, interests 
and says a lot about not only who we are, but who we want to be. The 
design of our built environment is no exception.
1.6.2 The history and culture of Dartmoor National Park is written in its 
buildings, public spaces, historic landscapes and towns and villages. 
Every new development in the National Park has the potential to 
contribute to this legacy, improve our quality of life, stimulate the 
economy and enhance the environment.
1.6.3 Dartmoor National Park’s architectural legacy is widely 
celebrated for its uniqueness and variety. Fundamental to this legacy 
is Dartmoor’s ‘vernacular’ – this is the traditional form of design 
based on local needs, and influenced by the availability of local 
building materials and techniques, and the local climate. Vernacular 
architecture reflects the physical attributes and culture of an area, 
it provides a clear sense of place and, because it is sourced locally, 
it is coincidentally often far more sustainable than modern buildings. 
Dartmoor’s vernacular is fundamental to what makes the National 
Park look and feel like Dartmoor and what gives it its ‘sense of place’. 
The vernacular must be respected by all new development whether it 
is in a traditional or contemporary style. 
1.6.4 The Dartmoor National Park Design Guide  (Supplementary 
Planning Document) is a guide to the styles, materials and features 
of Dartmoor’s local vernacular and identifies the characteristics of 
the built environment which makes Dartmoor distinctive. It is used to 
support Local Plan policy by guiding proposals and informing decisions. 
It should be an important reference for all applicants.
1.6.5 In addition to their form and character the design of new 
buildings and spaces must be fit for purpose, respond to people’s 
changing needs, minimise our impact on climate change, and 
make the best use of Dartmoor’s limited land supply. We encourage 
use of tools such as Building for Life  as a useful way for applicants 
Strategic Policy  1.4 Major Development
1. In deciding whether a proposal is ‘Major Development’ the 
Authority will consider whether the development, by reason of its 
nature, scale and setting, has the potential to have a significant 
adverse impact on the National Park’s Special Qualities.
2. Planning permission will not be granted for Major  Development 
other than in exceptional circumstances, and where it can be 
demonstrated that the development is in the public interest, 
outweighing National Park purposes. Consideration of such 
applications should include an assessment of:
a) the need for the development, including any national 
considerations and the development’s contribution to the 
national economy;
b) the impact of permitting the development, or refusing it, upon 
the local economy of the National Park;
c) the cost of and scope for delivering the development outside 
the designated area, or meeting the need for it in some other 
way; and
d) any detrimental effect on Dartmoor’s Special Qualities and the 
ability for the public to enjoy them, and the extent to which that 
could be moderated.
Sanders, LettafordVision, Spatial Strategy and Planning Applications  23to demonstrate a thorough consideration of good design. We also 
encourage applicants to submit their schemes for review by the 
South West Design Review Panel  who provide independent, multi-
disciplinary, expert advice. 
Efficient use of land
1.6.6 The importance of Dartmoor’s environment means that land 
supply in the National Park is severely limited. The Local Plan therefore 
seeks to ensure that what little suitable development land is available 
is used to best effect. In design terms this means development should:
 ●ensure site layouts and proposed land uses are compatible 
with future development opportunities, particularly at edge of 
settlement locations;
 ●maximise density whilst maintaining an urban grain, scale and 
massing which complements adjacent development; and 
 ●terminate service roads at site boundaries to facilitate pedestrian 
and vehicle access to future development opportunities. Ransom 
strips which prevent community benefits from future development 
being fully realised will be strongly resisted.
Traditional Building Materials
1.6.7 Traditional building materials, such as stone walling, slate 
roofing and hanging, wheat reed thatch, corrugated metal sheeting, 
lime render and timber boarding, windows and doors, are particularly 
important to Dartmoor’s architectural legacy and its vernacular. Many 
of these materials are locally sourced and have a unique colour and 
texture which cannot easily be imitated. Use of these materials will 
often significantly improve how well new development complements 
its surroundings. The value of traditional skills and building practices 
also forms part of Dartmoor’s cultural heritage.   
1.6.8 The Dartmoor National Park Design Guide  provides a guide to 
appropriate building materials for Dartmoor and should be followed 
to ensure new development does not erode Dartmoor’s architectural 
legacy. 
Higher Uppacott  Community safety
 ●Ensure attractive and safe public spaces and security through 
natural surveillance
 ●Ensure development is designed for the prevention of crime, fear 
of crime and disorder
3. The following design features will be scrutinised to assess the 
design quality of new development:
a) urban grain and the arrangement of streets, plots and buildings 
relative to the texture and density of existing settlements;
b) the development’s scale and massing, relative to views, skylines, 
townscapes, buildings and spaces;
c) the development’s character and appearance, and the 
relationship between buildings, surfaces, open space, boundary 
features and the landscape;
d) the density and mix of land uses;
e) the texture, colour, pattern and durability of materials, 
construction techniques and detailing elements; and
f) the development’s accessibility and security.
4. Traditional and natural building materials should be used in all 
new development to complement Dartmoor’s vernacular. 
5. All applications should include sufficient design information, 
including construction details where necessary, so that design 
quality can be adequately assessed at application and 
maintained through to completion.
24Strategic Polic y 1.5 Delivering good design
1. All development will create a strong sense of place with a 
clear and distinctive character by reinforcing local character, 
respecting Dartmoor’s vernacular, and maintaining and enhancing 
townscapes, street patterns and frontages and their relationship 
with the landscape. Planning applications exhibiting anything less 
than good design will be refused.
2. Decisions on design matters will ensure that development 
has been informed by the following design principles and 
supplementary design guidance:
  Character
 ●Encourage development which contributes to the National 
Park’s cohesive and vibrant communities
  Promote quality and variety of accommodation
 ●Ensure architectural taste or style is not imposed without clear 
reason and innovative design, including contemporary design, 
is encouraged
  Environmental sustainability
 ●Achieve efficient use and protection of natural resources 
(promote a fabric-first approach, maximise energy efficiency, 
minimise the use of non-renewable resources, minimise the 
generation of waste and avoid pollution)
  Enhance biodiversity 
 ●Encourage creation of new habitat
 ●Design to allow migration and future adaptability
  Access and Movement
 ●Ensure ease of access to new development and existing 
services through inclusive design, well-located and permeable 
development with adequate parking
  Promote sustainable means of travel and easy access
 ●Ensure land is used efficiently and effectively, and proposals do 
not prejudice the delivery of future developmentVision, Spatial Strategy and Planning Applications  25Sustainable Construction Principles
1.6.9 There is overwhelming and unequivocal evidence that human 
induced climate change is occurring. The Local Plan aims to minimise 
our impact on the environment and climate change, and to ensure we 
contribute all we can to national mitigation targets. The construction 
and use of the built environment accounts for approximately 42% of the 
UK’s total carbon emissions9. Designing development which is energy 
efficient, in terms of its embodied energy and the energy consumed in 
its everyday use, and which has low environmental impact can make 
a significant contribution to climate change mitigation targets.
1.6.10 The hierarchy of measures for reducing a building’s impact on 
climate change involves:
1) Minimising energy consumed in making construction materials 
and the process of construction.
2) Using passive design to minimise energy consumption during a 
building’s use (see Figure 1.3).
3) Generating renewable energy locally.
1.6.11 Strategies 1) and 2) have far greater energy saving 
potential and should always be considered before renewable 
energy generation. This is called a ‘fabric first’ approach and will be 
encouraged in all new development.
1.6.12 This policy seeks to maximise the energy efficiency of all 
new buildings by requiring an improvement over building regulation 
standards. In 2020 th Government consulted on the Future Homes 
Standard which, if introduced, would raise efficiency standards 
beyond the requirements of this policy.
1.6.13 The policy also seeks to address the energy ‘performance 
gap’. The performance gap is where a building’s actual energy use is 
more than expected when it was designed. Research indicates that 
buildings can under-perform by as much as 40%10, often due to poor 
quality control at construction stage. Requiring good quality control 
9    Climate Change (UK Green Building Council)
10  Passivhaus Trust (2019) The route to zero carbon?therefore ensures that buildings perform as well as they were designed 
to and is an ‘easy win’ to deliver more energy efficient development. 
We will therefore require developers meet air tightness standards and 
work to avoid unnecessary heat loss via thermal bridging or bypass in 
order to reduce the energy performance gap.
Figure 1.3 – Passive design principles which minimise energy consumptionOrientated for solar gain
High insulation
Air tight enclosure
High performance windows
Material with high thermal mass
Natural cross ventilation, or
Mechanical ventilation with heat 
recovery1
4
56a6b2
3
Orientate for solar gain
High insulation
Air tight enclosure
High performance windowsMaterial with high thermal mass
Natural cross ventilation
Mechanical ventilation with 
heat recovery43 6b2 6a1 5261.7.3 Commercial and industrial development, including quarry 
and waste management, can detract from the amenity enjoyed 
by existing residents by being noisy, dusty, smelly or creating fumes 
or vibration.  Applicants should take measures to avoid or mitigate 
this, and provide appropriate evidence in support of the proposal, in 
particular where the advice of the Environmental Health Officer may 
be needed.
1.7.4 Decisions will take account of safe and suitable access to the 
site. The NPPF requires that all developments that generate significant 
amounts of movement should be supported by a Transport Statement 
or Transport Assessment. The criteria we will use to decide what level of 
survey is appropriate are set out in paragraph 4.3.6 to 4.3.9 . 
Policy 1.7 Protecting local amenity in Dartmoor 
National Park
Development proposals should not:
a) significantly reduce the levels of daylight and privacy enjoyed by 
the occupiers of nearby properties;
b) have an overbearing and dominant impact;
c) introduce levels of noise, vibration, lighting, odours, fumes or dust 
that would adversely affect human health or quality of life; and/
or
d) have an adverse effect on highway safety.Strategic Poli cy 1.6 Sustainable construction 
1. All development proposals should minimise their impact 
on climate change by reducing carbon emissions further than 
required by Building Regulations, and improving their energy 
efficiency using a ‘fabric-first’ approach.
2. All new residential and commercial non-residential buildings 
must achieve either:
a) a minimum 10% reduction in carbon emissions over Building 
Regulations Part L 2013, using a fabric-first approach; or
b) Association for Environment Conscious Building (AECB) or 
Passivhaus certification.
3. To minimise the risk of an energy performance gap when 
meeting part 2 of this policy, developers will be required to:
a) with regard part 2a, provide:
i) evidence of air tightness tests on all new buildings; and
ii) Passivhaus or equivalent accredited on-site training for 
airtightness and avoiding thermal bypass and thermal 
bridging; or
b) with regard part 2b, relevant certification.
1.7 Amenity
1.7.1 Development of any scale or type may have the potential 
to impact upon those living or working nearby. Neighbours can be 
affected by a development which could cause them to be overlooked, 
have a dominant or overbearing effect, or include activities which 
may affect their quality of life.  
1.7.2 The impact of new development upon local amenity, including 
human health and quality of life should be mitigated, and reduced 
to a minimum. Impacts should be avoided through good design and 
appropriate use of land.    Vision, Spatial Strategy and Planning Applications  271.8 Higher risk development and sites
1.8.1 The planning system protects public safety through controlling 
the use of land.  The re-use of previously developed or ‘brownfield’ 
land (see Glossary for definition) is strongly encouraged in order to 
make efficient use of Dartmoor’s precious land resource. However 
former commercial and industrial uses mean this land may contain 
pollution or contaminants which are a risk to human health and/or 
the environment. Where land is known or suspected to be affected 
by contamination applications should include sufficient information to 
demonstrate any risk is at an acceptable level. We will seek the advice 
of the relevant Local Authority Environmental Health Department 
where necessary.
1.8.2 Dartmoor’s complex geology has supported a rich industrial 
history and a legacy of mining and quarrying across the National Park. 
This means some sites may be at risk from ground instability. Where land 
is known or suspected to be unstable, applications should include a 
ground stability report. 
1.8.3 Risks may also arise from specific development types. The Health 
and Safety Executive (HSE) is responsible for notifying the Authority 
of ‘consultation zones’ around existing hazardous sites, where toxic, 
highly reactive, explosive or flammable substances are present. Within 
these zones we consult the HSE on any proposed development which 
may be at risk. 
1.8.4 Where an application proposes new hazardous land uses, we 
will require sufficient information to assess the degree of risk arising to 
people and the environment of the surrounding area, consulting the 
relevant Local Authority Environmental Health Department and the 
HSE if necessary.  Policy 1.8 Higher risk development and sites
1. Development must be suitable for its proposed use taking 
account of ground conditions and any risks arising from land 
instability and contamination.  Development on sites which may 
have or are suspected to have a higher level of risk through 
contamination or stability, or involve hazardous installations or 
substances, will only be approved, where:
a) in the case of land contamination, appropriate investigation and 
assessment has been undertaken to identify the nature, extent 
and risks associated with the contamination, and evidence has 
been provided that remediation can be undertaken to reduce 
any risk to an acceptable level for its proposed use;
b) in the case of development involving the erection of buildings 
or structures on suspected unstable land, a stability report is 
undertaken, and where instability is present, acceptable remedial 
measures are proposed before, or as part of the development;
c) within a Health and Safety Executive consultation zone, the 
proposed development would not prejudice the safe operation 
of the notified installation or be adversely affected by the 
operation of the notified installation; or
d) the proposal involves the use, production, storage or management 
of hazardous substances and there is no unacceptable risk 
to public health or safety, the general amenity of the area or 
environmental interests.
2. Where the above is satisfied conditions may be attached to 
any permission to ensure that:
a) monitoring is carried out; and/or
b) remediation measures are completed and the site is made 
suitable for use before development starts.28
 10  As defined in the Town and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure) Order2  Environment
Lustleigh CleaveStrategy
Dartmoor National Park Authority will strive to enhance the quality of 
Dartmoor’s environment.
All new development in Dartmoor National Park should respect the 
natural and historic environment, and demonstrate how the proposal 
will conserve or enhance it.  The highest standards of environmental 
responsibility, sustainability and innovation will be sought in new 
development which will aim to minimise the impact on climate change, 
and adapt to it.
All new development must sustain and enhance Dartmoor’s designated 
and priority habitats and species, and the ecological networks which 
support them.  Dartmoor’s geodiversity will be protected from harmful 
development.
Development should conserve and/or enhance Dartmoor’s landscape 
character, tranquillity and dark night skies.
Proposals affecting heritage assets, including designated and non-
designated assets, must respect their significance and demonstrate 
how the historic environment will be conserved and/or enhanced. 
Development will be encouraged to deliver significant enhancement 
to Dartmoor’s cultural heritage, including positive outcomes for heritage 
at risk and opportunities for understanding and enjoyment.
Environment  29302.1.1 Dartmoor is the largest upland area in southern England. 
Its dramatic landscape has a distinctive geology, flora and fauna 
which is of international conservation importance. Human activity 
has shaped Dartmoor over thousands of years leaving a rich cultural 
heritage which includes its distinctive landscape, a wide range of 
archaeological remains and historic features and buildings. Together 
Dartmoor’s natural environment and cultural heritage tell a story 
of how our ancestors lived, and the biodiversity which flourished 
alongside them over thousands of years.
2.1.2 Dartmoor’s environment is of enormous public value and 
fundamental to its designation as a National Park. Its environment 
must be conserved and, wherever possible, enhanced, for the benefit 
of future generations. 
2.2 Landscape
2.2.1 Landscapes are fundamentally important to a National 
Park’s attractiveness, distinctiveness, diversity and quality of place. 
Dartmoor’s landscape is made up of open windswept high moors 
surrounded by intimate enclosed farmland with historic field patterns 
and deep wooded valleys, internationally recognised for its quality 
and uniqueness.
2.2.2 The distinctive and recognisable pattern of elements that 
make one landscape different from another is known as ‘landscape 
character’. The ‘Landscape Wheel’ (Figure 2.1)  illustrates how the 
different natural, cultural and perceptual elements of a landscape 
combine to produce landscape character. Development which 
results in changes to these characteristics will affect the character 
of the landscape, regardless of whether the development can be 
seen from a publicly accessible view point. Importantly, landscape 
character therefore goes beyond ‘visual impact’. 
2.2.3 Dartmoor National Park’s landscape has been assessed at 
a national, county and National Park scale. At the national level Land ownershipLand use
Settlement
Enclosure
Time depth
Memories
Associations
PreferencesTouch / feelSmellsSoundsFormTexture
PatternColourGeologyLandformHydrologyAir & Climate
Soils
Landscape 
character
Land cvover/ flora & fauna
much of Dartmoor National Park is covered by National Character 
Area (NCA) 150: Dartmoor11. At a county level Devon’s landscape 
character assessment12 describes a framework of Devon Character 
Areas (DCAs) and Landscape Character Types (LCTs): areas with a 
distinct identity recognisable on a county scale.  
2.2.4 The Dartmoor Landscape Character Assessment (LCA)13 is 
based on the Devon LCTs, with 10 LCTs representing the different types 
of landscape found in the National Park. The Dartmoor LCA identifies 
11  National Character Area Profile 150: Dartmoor (Natural England, 2014)
12  Devon’s Landscape Character Assessment (Devon County Council)
13  A Landscape Character Assessment for Dartmoor National Park (LUC, 2017)Figure 2.1 - Landscape Character Wheel (Natural England, 2014)Environment  31Valued Attributes for each LCT which, if they were to cease to exist, 
would have a major impact on the character of the landscape. These 
Valued Attributes form the basis for assessing the potential impact of 
change, including new development, on the Dartmoor landscape.
2.2.5 It is therefore important that change in the National Park is 
managed to minimise its effect on these Valued Attributes. Planning 
plays a key role in this, and there are many ways development can 
minimise its impact on landscape character, including: 
 ●incorporating important landscape features into development 
design, such as important habitats, natural ground levels, ancient 
and veteran trees, orchards, hedgebanks, and granite walls; 
 ●reflecting the prevailing pattern of development in the area 
- often new buildings will have least impact on landscape 
character when clustered and located next to existing building 
groups. Development in isolated locations, away from existing 
development, will often have an unacceptable impact on 
landscape character; and
 ●sustaining a sense of tranquillity and dark night skies by proposing 
land uses which are not noisy or intrusive, and do not require 
outside lighting, moving elements or signage.
Landscape setting
2.2.6 The land surrounding the National Park (its setting), also 
contributes to the quality of Dartmoor’s landscape. This is not a defined 
area, but a matter of judgement, and may vary according to the 
character or sensitivity of the landscape. The National Park’s setting 
links Dartmoor with the wider landscape. It acts as a gateway into the 
National Park and affects views, into and out of it, which contribute to 
a wider appreciation of the area’s landscape. Significant or abrupt 
changes to landscape character outside the National Park can have 
adverse impacts on landscape character within the National Park, 
potentially altering its character and sense of tranquillity. Examples of 
development close to the National Park which can have an adverse 
impact on its setting include:
 ●high-density residential or industrial development 
 ●large-scale transport and utility infrastructure 
 ●large-scale renewable energy schemes
 ●large-scale quarrying or mining development
Shuttaford Farm, Holne32
Strategic Policy 2.1 Protecting the character of 
Dartmoor’s landscape
1. All development should conserve and enhance the character 
of the Dartmoor landscape by:
a) respecting the Valued Attributes of the Landscape Character 
Types identified in the Dartmoor National Park Landscape 
Character Assessment;
b) ensuring its location, layout, scale and design conserves and/
or enhances what is special or distinctive about landscape 
character;
c) retaining, integrating or enhancing distinctive local natural, semi-
natural or cultural features;
d) avoiding unsympathetic development that will harm the 
landscape;
e) respecting the tranquillity and sense of remoteness of Dartmoor 
and not introducing or increasing light pollution; and
f) seeking opportunities to enhance landscape character.
2. In the National Park’s landscape setting the Authority will seek 
to ensure development respects Dartmoor’s landscape character, 
particularly the Valued Attributes and key characteristics of the 
relevant Landscape Character Types.
EmsowrthyEnvironment  33are rare and threatened in Europe. The highest level of protection will 
be given to these sites, including candidate SACs15. There are 3 SACs 
in the National Park which cover 27% of all land, see Map 2.1.
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) – These sites represent some 
of the most important habitats, wildlife, geological features and 
landforms in England. They are legally protected and are given a high 
level of protection in planning policy. All SACs are also designated as 
SSSIs. In total, SSSIs cover 28% of all land in the National Park, see Map 
2.1.
County Wildlife Site (CWS)  – These non-statutory sites are of local 
importance and often complement SAC and SSSI designations. 
CWSs are designated with agreement from the landowner and can 
be of similar ecological quality to SSSIs, but do not benefit from the 
same statutory protection. CWSs will be given a level of protection 
proportionate to their value. There are currently 232 CWSs in the  2.3 Biodiversity and Geodiversity
2.3.1 The conservation and enhancement of the National Park’s 
natural beauty and wildlife forms part of its first purpose and is a key 
objective of the Local Plan. Dartmoor’s unique and varied biodiversity 
is internationally important, comprising habitats supporting a rich 
diversity of plant and animal species.
2.3.2 The Government’s 25 Year Environment Plan14 reflects 
agreements to take urgent and effective action to halt alarming 
global and national declines in biodiversity and recommends a holistic 
landscape-scale approach. Living Dartmoor , the Authority’s wildlife 
strategy, sets out how this should happen for the National Park area. 
Fundamental to this strategy is a move towards managing the natural 
environment in a way which recognises its reliance on connections 
with larger natural systems, such as healthy soils, clean air and water, 
biodiversity, climate and more.
2.3.3 Protecting and restoring connectivity in natural networks is 
achieved through the protection and creation of (see Figure 2.2 ):
Core areas  of high nature conservation value which contain important 
habitats and natural systems.
Corridors and ‘stepping stones’  of connecting habitat which enable 
species to move between core areas.
Restoration areas  where strategies are put in place to restore 
ecological functions and wildlife.
Buffer zones  which protect core areas, restoration areas and stepping 
stones from adverse impacts.
2.3.4 A large portion of Dartmoor National Park is made up of core 
areas. These are designated wildlife sites of international, national and 
local importance and priority habitats. All of these can be summarised 
as follows:
Special Area of Conservation (SAC)  – These sites are internationally 
important. They give legal protection to habitats and species which 
14  A Green Future: Our 25 Year Plan to Improve the Environment (HM Government, 2018)
Figure 2.2 - Components of ecological networks
15  Special Protection Areas (SPAs) and Ramsar sites are also international sites but none are located within Dartmoor National Park, see NPPF para    
      176 for the full definition of international habitats sites34National Park and a further 130 sites which meet the criteria but the 
owners are unknown or have not agreed to designation.
Priority Habitat  – These are habitats (listed in Table 2.1) which have 
been identified because of their uniqueness, the species diversity 
they support and because most take many years to mature. These 
habitats have been identified from national priority habitats (Natural 
Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006) and those identified 
in Living Dartmoor (2013) and the Dartmoor Biodiversity Action Plan 
(2001).
2.3.5 The National Park’s buffers , stepping stones  and corridors  
are portions of priority habitat not large enough to be fully functional, 
but which support the functioning of core areas. Much of the National 
Park has the potential to be part of this wider wildlife network, but they 
are most likely to be found within the Key Wildlife Areas identified in 
Living Dartmoor, see Map 2.1 .
2.3.6 It is important that all the National Park’s designated sites and 
habitats are protected from harm, which can be caused by direct 
and indirect impacts, including:
 ●removal and fragmentation of habitats and species by 
development (e.g. flyways and feeding areas);
 ●damage and disturbance of wildlife by recreational activities 
(walking, cycling, horse riding, dog walking, kayaking etc.);
 ●disturbance of wildlife during construction through noise and 
vibration;
 ●water pollution or siltation of waterbodies / courses from run-off;
 ●disturbance of fauna through the use of artificial lighting;
 ●air pollution and wildlife deaths caused by roads, traffic, and 
industry;
 ●threat to sensitive habitats and species from the escape of 
invasive non-native species, such as the exotic garden plant 
American skunk cabbage; 
 ●domestic cats and dogs hunting wildlife; and
 ●prolonged dry, wet or extreme weather events associated with 
climate change.2.3.7 Some of the disturbances above cannot be fully controlled. 
However proposals need to make impacts clear so they can be 
weighed against the benefits of development. All planning applications 
should include relevant and sufficiently detailed information to allow 
us to make a decision. The level of information required will be 
proportionate to the status of the protected site, habitat and/or species 
and the scale of the likely adverse impacts. Proposals considered likely 
to have a significant effect on an internationally protected site will 
require a Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA), whereas a nationally 
protected site will require an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA).
2.3.8 Where there is evidence of deliberate neglect or damage 
to any of the National Park’s protected habitats and species their 
deteriorated condition will not be taken into consideration and the 
ecological potential of the site will be used to decide the acceptability 
of any development proposals.
South Hams Special Area of Conservation (SAC)
2.3.9 The South Hams SAC supports the largest population of greater 
horseshoe bats in the UK and lies partly within the National Park. 
Greater horseshoe bats rely on an interlinked network of:
 ●Roosts  - structures used by bats for shelter and protection, 
including hibernation and raising young (maternity roosts);
 ●Foraging Habitat  - areas where bats feed, including grazed 
pastures, the edges of broadleaved woodland, stream corridors 
and thick hedgerows; and
 ●Commuting Routes  – the routes bats use to move through the 
landscape, often using linear landscape features.
2.3.10 These features span Dartmoor, Teignbridge, Torbay and the 
South Hams Local Planning Authorities and, where known, are mapped 
on Devon County Council’s Environment Viewer . Development which 
may change or remove these features can affect the integrity of the 
SAC, by impacting on the bats’ ability to roost, feed, mate, and move 
through the landscape. The South Hams SAC Greater Horseshoe Bat Environment  35
National Park and a further 130 sites which meet the criteria but the 
owners are unknown or have not agreed to designation.
Priority Habitat  – These are habitats (listed in Table 2.1) which have 
been identified because of their uniqueness, the species diversity 
they support and because most take many years to mature. These 
habitats have been identified from national priority habitats (Natural 
Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006) and those identified 
in Living Dartmoor (2013) and the Dartmoor Biodiversity Action Plan 
(2001).
2.3.5 The National Park’s buffers , stepping stones  and corridors  
are portions of priority habitat not large enough to be fully functional, 
but which support the functioning of core areas. Much of the National 
Park has the potential to be part of this wider wildlife network, but they 
are most likely to be found within the Key Wildlife Areas identified in 
Living Dartmoor, see Map 2.1 .
2.3.6 It is important that all the National Park’s designated sites and 
habitats are protected from harm, which can be caused by direct 
and indirect impacts, including:
 ●removal and fragmentation of habitats and species by 
development (e.g. flyways and feeding areas);
 ●damage and disturbance of wildlife by recreational activities 
(walking, cycling, horse riding, dog walking, kayaking etc.);
 ●disturbance of wildlife during construction through noise and 
vibration;
 ●water pollution or siltation of waterbodies / courses from run-off;
 ●disturbance of fauna through the use of artificial lighting;
 ●air pollution and wildlife deaths caused by roads, traffic, and 
industry;
 ●threat to sensitive habitats and species from the escape of 
invasive non-native species, such as the exotic garden plant 
American skunk cabbage; 
 ●domestic cats and dogs hunting wildlife; and
 ●prolonged dry, wet or extreme weather events associated with 
climate change.
Consultation Zone has been identified jointly by the Authorities and 
defines the area where these features may be found. Guidance 
provides more detailed mapping and should be used to advise on 
information requirements for applications in these areas.
2.3.11 If there is potential for development to have a likely significant 
effect on the SAC’s greater horseshoe bat population, a Habitats 
Regulations Assessment (HRA) should be carried out. Development 
is most likely to have a significant effect within proximity to identified 
roosts and within sustenance zones, and where they effect features 
within the Landscape Connectivity Zone. Development should not be 
approved if it will have an adverse effect on the integrity of the SAC.
Protected Species
2.3.12 European and national protected species have specific legal 
protection. Natural England, as the Licensing Authority, ensure that no 
proposed development will have an adverse impact on a protected 
species. For European protected species the Habitats Regulations 
allow licences to be issued for development in the interests of public 
health and safety or in cases of overriding public interest, where Map 2.1 Designated Wildlife Sites and Key Wildlife Areas
36there is no alternative and that will not have a detrimental impact 
on the species concerned. For nationally protected species it is not 
necessary to demonstrate essential need for the development, but 
the developer must incorporate measures to mitigate the impact.
2.3.13 Planning permission for proposals affecting protected species 
will only be granted where we are confident Natural England is likely 
to grant a licence. A wildlife licence will be needed before works can 
start.
2.3.14 European and national priority species are highlighted in Table 
2.1. There are other legally protected species which are not on this list, 
but are also protected under international and national legislation, 
such as badgers, reptiles, and all nesting birds.
Recreational Impacts
2.3.15 Recent research has identified the pressure Dartmoor faces 
from population increase outside the National Park, which is likely to 
significantly increase visitor numbers and their associated recreational 
impacts, particularly on designated wildlife sites already affected by 
high visitor numbers. Strategic Policy 4.8  seeks to ensure that these 
impacts from development within or outside the National Park are 
appropriately mitigated.
Air and Water Quality
2.3.16 Priority habitats and species exist in finely balanced 
environments and are vulnerable to even small changes in air and 
water quality. Impacts on air and water quality will therefore be 
considered when deciding planning applications. Priority habitats are 
particularly sensitive to changes in drainage which can affect their 
access to water and can introduce harmful pollutants.
2.3.17 Industry, vehicle, shipping, aeroplane and agricultural 
emissions all contribute to poor air quality. Poor air quality is known to 
significantly affect all of Dartmoor’s SACs. A particular issue is nitrogen 
deposition, which can disadvantage the slow-growing, smaller and Priority Habitats Priority Species
Ancient woodland Atlantic salmon Red grouse
Blanket bog Bat species (inc. Greater Horseshoe Bat) Ring ouzel
Caves, disused mines and disused quarries Blue ground beetle Skylark
Grass moor Bog hoverfly Golden plover
Haymeadows and species rich grasslands 
(including some road verges)Cirl bunting Southern damselfly
Species-rich hedgerows and stonewalls Curlew Keeled skimmer dragonfly
Lowland heath Deptford pink Vigur’s eyebright
Moorland Dormouse Woodlark
Parkland and aged, veteran and 
ancient treesDunlin Buzzard
Ponds Flax leaved St John’s wort Cave shrimp
Raised and valley mire Golden hair lichen Heather
Rhos pasture High brown fritillary Greater butterfly orchid
Rocky outcrops Irish lady’s tresses Bog orchid
Rivers and streams Large blue butterfly Wild daffodil
Traditional orchards Marsh fritillary Usnea articulata lichen
Upland heath Narrow-bordered bee hawk moth Graphina pauciloculata lichen
Upland oakwood Otter
Wet woodland Pearl-bordered fritillary
       Internationally protected species            Nationally protected specieslow-growing species typically found in Dartmoor’s rare and valued 
habitats.
Mitigation Hierarchy
2.3.18 Where development is acceptable and some harm to 
biodiversity is unavoidable, mitigation measures will be necessary to 
offset any harm. The following approaches will be taken in preferential 
order:
1. Avoid  any adverse impacts altogether by locating harmful 
development away from sensitive areas
2. Minimise  adverse impacts and then mitigate  remaining adverse 
impacts by providing on-site enhancements, such as habitat 
areas or biodiversity features, or by changing work practices and 
timings to ensure net gain of biodiversity
3. Where on-site biodiversity losses cannot be avoided or mitigated 
and it is a last resort, compensate  for losses by providing off-site 
enhancements.
2.3.19 Mitigation or compensation measures for protected habitats 
and species will be secured for the duration of impacts by planning 
condition and/or section 106 legal agreement. Off-site compensation 
(or offsetting) should happen near the development site and 
result in a net gain over the existing. Offsetting should also result in 
minimal temporary loss of ecology between damage occurring and 
new habitats becoming fully functional and/or species becoming 
established. 
2.3.20 Designated wildlife sites and many of the priority habitats 
listed in Table 2.1 will not be suitable for off-site compensation because 
of their irreplaceable nature. Where initial off-site compensation 
measures have fully or partly failed, further measures will be necessary. Environment  37there is no alternative and that will not have a detrimental impact 
on the species concerned. For nationally protected species it is not 
necessary to demonstrate essential need for the development, but 
the developer must incorporate measures to mitigate the impact.
2.3.13 Planning permission for proposals affecting protected species 
will only be granted where we are confident Natural England is likely 
to grant a licence. A wildlife licence will be needed before works can 
start.
2.3.14 European and national priority species are highlighted in Table 
2.1. There are other legally protected species which are not on this list, 
but are also protected under international and national legislation, 
such as badgers, reptiles, and all nesting birds.
Recreational Impacts
2.3.15 Recent research has identified the pressure Dartmoor faces 
from population increase outside the National Park, which is likely to 
significantly increase visitor numbers and their associated recreational 
impacts, particularly on designated wildlife sites already affected by 
high visitor numbers. Strategic Policy 4.8  seeks to ensure that these 
impacts from development within or outside the National Park are 
appropriately mitigated.
Air and Water Quality
2.3.16 Priority habitats and species exist in finely balanced 
environments and are vulnerable to even small changes in air and 
water quality. Impacts on air and water quality will therefore be 
considered when deciding planning applications. Priority habitats are 
particularly sensitive to changes in drainage which can affect their 
access to water and can introduce harmful pollutants.
2.3.17 Industry, vehicle, shipping, aeroplane and agricultural 
emissions all contribute to poor air quality. Poor air quality is known to 
significantly affect all of Dartmoor’s SACs. A particular issue is nitrogen 
deposition, which can disadvantage the slow-growing, smaller and Priority Habitats Priority Species
Ancient woodland Atlantic salmon Red grouse
Blanket bog Bat species (inc. Greater Horseshoe Bat) Ring ouzel
Caves, disused mines and disused quarries Blue ground beetle Skylark
Grass moor Bog hoverfly Golden plover
Haymeadows and species rich grasslands 
(including some road verges)Cirl bunting Southern damselfly
Species-rich hedgerows and stonewalls Curlew Keeled skimmer dragonfly
Lowland heath Deptford pink Vigur’s eyebright
Moorland Dormouse Woodlark
Parkland and aged, veteran and 
ancient treesDunlin Buzzard
Ponds Flax leaved St John’s wort Cave shrimp
Raised and valley mire Golden hair lichen Heather
Rhos pasture High brown fritillary Greater butterfly orchid
Rocky outcrops Irish lady’s tresses Bog orchid
Rivers and streams Large blue butterfly Wild daffodil
Traditional orchards Marsh fritillary Usnea articulata lichen
Upland heath Narrow-bordered bee hawk moth Graphina pauciloculata lichen
Upland oakwood Otter
Wet woodland Pearl-bordered fritillary
       Internationally protected species            Nationally protected speciesTable 2.1 Dartmoor National Park’s Priority Habitats and SpeciesGeodiversity
2.3.21 The National Park’s geology shapes its spectacular 
landscapes, particularly the dramatic granite high moor, deeply 
cut river valleys and rolling hills. It has also influenced Dartmoor’s 
industrial and mining heritage, determining where minerals have 
been worked and the methods used to do so, such as streaming, 
open cast and underground mining. 
2.3.22 Dartmoor’s most significant sites of geological importance 
are designated as earth science SSSIs and protected in the same 
way as biological SSSIs. Regionally Important Geological Sites 
(RIGS) are regionally important sites which contribute to local 
distinctiveness and are designated for their educational, historic 
and aesthetic value.
38Strategic Policy 2.2 Conserving and enhancing 
Dartmoor’s biodiversity and geodiversity
1. Development must conserve and enhance all Dartmoor’s 
biodiversity and geodiversity. 
2. Development proposals, either alone or in combination 
with other development, having adverse impacts on
a) internationally, nationally or locally designated biodiversity 
and geodiversity sites; and/or
b) Dartmoor’s priority habitats and species identified in Table 2.1
         will only be permitted in exceptional circumstances. 
3. For the exceptional circumstances test to be met, 
applicants must demonstrate that:
a) for internationally protected sites or species (e.g. SACs) and 
other sites affecting their wider natural network, including 
candidate SACs, the development must be of overriding 
public and environmental interest and compensatory 
measures must be provided to protect the overall coherence 
of the site and its wider network, and maintain its species 
population at favourable conservation status in its natural 
range; orb) for nationally protected sites (e.g. SSSIs) or species, the 
development must result in benefits which clearly and 
significantly outweigh its adverse impact on the site or its wider 
natural network; or
c) for locally protected wildlife sites (e.g. CWSs), Regionally 
Important Geological Sites (RIGS) and the Dartmoor priority 
habitats and species listed in Table 2.1 the development must 
result in benefits which significantly outweigh its adverse impact 
on the site; or
d) for Dartmoor priority habitats listed in Table 2.1 which are of 
non-functional size and no irreplaceable, development must 
not have a significant adverse impact on the integrity of the 
local natural network.
4.  All development with the potential to have adverse impacts 
on biodiversity must demonstrate that there is no less harmful 
option available with regard to, in order of preference:
a) avoiding adverse impacts altogether,
b) minimising adverse impacts and mitigating any remaining 
impacts on-site, or
c) where adequate on-site mitigation measures are not possible 
and as a last resort, provide off-site compensatory measures.Environment  39Biodiversity Net Gain
2.3.23 At the national level, evidence for biodiversity loss over the last 
50 years is clear. The UK is among the most nature depleted countries 
in the world and we are not on course to meet the global agreements 
we have signed for improving our biodiversity16. Enhancing biodiversity 
is crucial to sustaining the essential and irreplaceable benefits it 
provides us with, such as pollination, soil health, nutrient cycling, 
resilience to and regulation of climate change, clean air and water 
and many more. 
2.3.24 Strategic Policy 2.3 ensures that development with 
the potential to impact on habitats and biodiversity makes a 
proportionate contribution to biodiversity enhancement. This policy 
must be applied after the strategic biodiversity policy ( Strategic Policy 
2.2), which protects designated sites and priority habitats from harmful 
development. This policy then ensures that loss of protected and 
unprotected habitat is appropriately compensated for.
2.3.25 Development involving 2 homes, 100m2 of non-residential 
floorspace, or a site area of 0.2 hectares, or more, will be required to 
compensate for any habitat losses and deliver 10% biodiversity net 
gain. Development not involving any loss of habitat will not be required 
to deliver net gain, e.g. changes of use. The value of existing habitats 
and the compensation required will be calculated in accordance 
with Natural England’s biodiversity metric. 
2.3.26 Net gain should be secured and maintained for as long as the 
development exists. Maintenance payments for off-site biodiversity 
gains should cover a minimum of 30 years, with a clear commitment 
for longer. Further details on net gain and how it will be delivered will 
be available in supplementary planning guidance.
2.3.27 Development falling below the threshold for net gain will be 
required to deliver a simpler form of enhancement through delivery of 
biodiversity enhancement features in accordance with the thresholds 
in Table 2.2. 
16  State of Nature Report (State of Nature Partnership, 2016)  Type of minor development1 enhancement feature 
required for every (or part 
thereof*)
New and replacement residential buildings 
(including dwellings, extensions, 
conversions, garages and outbuildings)20m2 of floorspace
New non-residential buildings and 
conversions30m2 of floorspace
New non-residential roads, tracks, 
hardstandings, and car parks.30m2 of footprint developed
* e.g. a residential extension of 30m2 should deliver 2 units of enhancement
Floorspace measurements should use gross internal floor area (GIFA)2.3.28 Various options for delivering biodiversity enhancement 
features are set out in Table 2.3. Although the amount of enhancement 
is fixed, applicants should propose the most appropriate types of 
enhancement which suit their site, local ecosystem, and circumstances.  
Appropriate alternatives and mixing of enhancements will be allowed 
provided they are of equivalent value.
2.3.29 It may not be possible to deliver enhancements on-site, in which 
case, off-site enhancements will be preferred. Off-site enhancements 
should be in the most beneficial locations and should not be limited by 
political boundaries. Proposed enhancement (on-site or off-site) which 
would conflict with local conservation or land management objectives 
will not be accepted. Off-site enhancements will be secured by legal 
agreement with independent land owners included as signatories 
and the payments necessary to deliver the enhancement works and 
subsequent maintenance will be clearly stated. On-site biodiversity 
enhancements will be secured by condition.
Table 2.2 Thresholds for calculating required biodiversity enhancement40Table 2.3 Biodiversity enhancement options
Strategic Policy 2.3 Biodiversity Net Gain
1. Development will be required to contribute towards 
biodiversity enhancement. Biodiversity enhancement should 
support the National Park’s network of wildlife sites and priority 
habitats and maximise potential for other environmental gains; 
including soil, water and air quality, natural flood management, 
carbon sequestration and pollination.
2. Development involving 2 homes, 100m2 of non-residential 
floorspace or a site area of 0.2 Hectares, or more, will be required 
to deliver 10% biodiversity net gain. 
3. Development falling below the threshold in part 2 will be 
required to make a proportionate on-site contribution to wildlife 
enhancement in accordance with the thresholds in Table 2.2.
4. Off-site enhancement will only be acceptable where on-site 
provision is not possible, or it would make a better contribution 
to improving biodiversity than wholly on-site provision. Financial 
contributions in lieu will be accepted where it is demonstrated on- 
or off-site provision is not possible or the Authority is satisfied it will 
enable greater environmental benefit.2.3.30 Financial contributions in-lieu will also be considered 
acceptable where on or off-site provision is proven not possible or 
the Authority is satisfied it will enable greater environmental benefit, 
including through pooling multiple contributions.
2.3.31 Where there is evidence of deliberate neglect or damage to 
existing biodiversity its deteriorated state will be disregarded in decision 
making. Where proposals require removal of unprotected biodiversity 
features, this must be mitigated for in addition to the requirements in 
Table 2.2 and 2.3. Enhancement OptionsQuantity required for 1 
enhancement feature
Habitat:
• Native wildflower meadow
• Native hedgerow
• Native trees
• Native fruit trees (orchard)
• Integrated bird or bat boxes
• Permanent pond
• Stone bank (with corridors)
• Swale or wetland
• Fence rivers, woodland, 
ditches, scrapes, scrub or other 
habitats to prevent grazing10m2
10m length
3 trees
3 trees
2 boxes
2m3 (min. 0.6m depth)
2m length (min. 1m high)
8m2
25m length of fence
Habitat connectivity:
• Permeable boundaries, 
including wildlife corridors 
under fences and walls
• Wildlife corridors under main 
roads and amphibian friendly 
kerbingAll new boundary 
treatments, at least 1 
corridor per 2m
2 corridors and 1 kerb
Sustainable drainage:
• Simple rainwater harvesting
• Swale or wetland1 rainwater butt
8m2Environment  412.4 Dartmoor’s moorland, heathland and 
woodland
2.4.1 Section 3 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1985 requires 
National Park Authorities to identify areas of moorland, heathland and 
woodland ‘whose natural beauty it is, in the opinion of the Authority, 
particularly important to conserve’, including for its landscape, 
archaeological, ecological and recreational importance.
2.4.2 For the purposes of the Local Plan these areas are identified 
as areas of moorland, heathland and woodland of conservation 
importance, as shown on Map 2.2  and the Policies Map. These areas 
form the heart of the National Park, comprising 53.4% of its area 
and including many of the Special Qualities described in Section 
1.1. Approximately 52% of Dartmoor’s woodland resource and 49% 
of its agricultural resource are designated as areas of conservation 
importance.
2.4.3 The Local Plan protects these areas from harmful development 
which would compromise their quality, accessibility and character. 
It ensures development in these areas is in the public interest and 
supports their continued conservation and enhancement. This 
includes development needed for land management and small-scale 
public recreation, where this is freely open to the public. In both cases 
proposals should be appropriate in scale and not lead to harm, this is 
particularly relevant for recreation proposals where increases in visitor 
numbers can lead to harm.
2.4.4 Woodlands of conservation importance are under particular 
development pressure. In the National Park there is more demand for 
small amenity/recreational woodlands than there is for commercial 
forestry and this has led to ownership of some large woodlands 
breaking up. Smaller woodlands can increase the demand for 
buildings, vehicle access tracks and other infrastructure which can 
impact on the woodland’s character and ecological significance.Map 2.2 Moorland, Heathland and Woodland of Conservation Importance 
422.5 Water Environment
2.5.1 Dartmoor’s landscape, biodiversity, and cultural heritage 
are inextricably linked with its water environment. A finely balanced 
water environment has shaped Dartmoor over millennia, creating its 
landscape, habitats, supporting industry and shaping development 
patterns. Dartmoor’s wet uplands store water and are the source of 
many of Devon’s rivers, its wooded valleys slow catchment run-off, 
and its 7 reservoirs provide around 45% of South West Water’s daily 
water supply. Dartmoor’s upland peat is a significant carbon store, 
restoration of eroded peat and careful management of its water 
environment can play an important role in offsetting our impact on 
climate change. Functioning peatlands can also assist us adapt to 
climate change, including by reducing wild fire risk and helping water 
security for us and the environment.
2.5.2 Development proposals provide an opportunity to review a 
site’s water environment and provide on- and off-site enhancements 
which can benefit an array of environmental indicators, particularly 
soil quality, biodiversity and flood risk. Enhancements to the water 
environment will therefore be taken into consideration when 
pursuing biodiversity net gain as part of Strategic Policy 2.3 . Typical 
enhancements range from simple measures, such as water butts, 
swales and natural flood management measures, to more complex enhancements, such as greywater recycling, attenuation ponds, oil 
interceptors, and wetlands.
Flood risk
2.5.3 Positive planning can play an important role in catchment and 
flood risk management. The Local Plan will ensure that flood risk is taken 
into account in all new development, managing risk by directing land 
uses to the most appropriate locations. All sources of flooding will be 
taken into account, including water courses, surface and ground 
water flooding. Development should not take place where it would 
have an unacceptable level of flood risk, or where it would increase 
flood risk elsewhere by, for example, reducing flood storage, impeding 
the flow of flood water or increasing run-off. Devon County Council is 
the Lead Local Flood Authority responsible for managing local flood 
risk on Dartmoor and a statutory consultee for major development. The 
Environment Agency’s Flood Zone map and Devon County Council’s 
Surface Water Flooding map are used to identify the potential for 
flood risk.’
2.5.4 Where development is proposed in an area of flood risk, 
applications must be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment (FRA). The 
purpose of the FRA is to demonstrate the flood risks to and from a 
proposed development, it will also help inform the flood risk sequential 
test, which steers new development to areas with the lowest probability 
of flooding. It should also be noted that not all developments have equal 
flood vulnerability, for example caravans, mobile homes, emergency 
services, and hazardous installations are considered more vulnerable 
than dwellings17. If, following the sequential test and consistent with 
wider sustainability objectives, it is not possible to locate development 
in an area of lower flood risk, the exception test can be applied. This 
ensures that there is a need for the development which outweighs 
potential risk, and that the FRA demonstrates the development will be 
safe, and not increase flood risk elsewhere.
2.5.5 Sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) can make an important 
contribution to good catchment management by:
 ●controlling the quantity of runoff;
 ●managing water quality; and
 ●providing amenity and biodiversity improvements.Strategic Policy 2.4 Conserving and enhancing 
Dartmoor’s moorland, heathland and woodland
Within the areas of moorland, heathland and woodland of 
conservation importance development shall only be permitted 
where it:
a) conserves, enhances and/or restores features of landscape, 
archaeological, historic and ecological significance; and
b) maintains and/or improves public access; or
c) is demonstrated to be necessary for managing land and/or 
small-scale public recreation.
17  National Planning Practice Guidance: Flood Risk and Coastal ChangeEnvironment  43Policy 2.5 The Water Environment and Flood risk
1. All development should conserve Dartmoor’s water environment 
and explore and take opportunities to enhance it.
2. Through application of the sequential test, development will not 
be located where it would be at risk of flooding or where it would 
lead to increased flood risk in other places.
3. In exceptional circumstances, where the sequential test 
demonstrates there are no suitable locations of lower flood risk, 
development will be permitted in flood risk areas when:
a) the development is demonstrated to provide wider benefits which 
outweigh flood risk;
b) there will be appropriate flood protection for the lifetime of the 
development, taking account of the vulnerability of its users; and
c) the development will not increase flood risk elsewhere, and where 
possible, will reduce flood risk overall.
4. Major development, and development which is within a Critical 
Drainage Area, must incorporate sustainable drainage systems 
(SuDS), taking account of advice from Devon County Council, the 
Lead Local Flood Authority. Where necessary, conditions will be used 
to ensure their future management and maintenance.2.5.6 Despite their clear benefits SuDS are generally underused. 
Devon County Council has produced straightforward SuDS Guidance18 
to encourage their wider use. This guidance will be used to inform 
decisions on all proposals involving SuDS. 
2.5.7 Major development,19 and development which is within a 
Critical Drainage Area must include sustainable drainage systems. 
Minor development19 outside an area of flood risk will also be 
encouraged to incorporate sustainable drainage systems. The most up 
to date flood and Critical Drainage Area maps can be found online .
18  Sustainable Drainage Systems: Guidance for Devon (Devon County Council, 2017)
19  As defined in the Town and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure)                         
      Order 2015© Anna CurnowNew housing is tightly restricted as per national 
policy. Opportunities generally limited to:
• Agriculture, forestry and rural workers’      
housing to meet needs of rural land-based 
businesses.
• Conversion of redundant historic buildings, 
where well related to services and facilities 
or as part of farm diversification. 
Employment uses are required to be 
demonstrated not viable and works 
sympathetic. Open Countryside
All land which is not within or adjoining Local Centres, 
Rural Settlements and Villages and Hamlets
The flood risk sequential test
This graphic illustrates the flood risk sequetial test, which steers new development to 
areas with the lowest risk of flooding. It ensures permission is not granted for 
development if there are reasonably available sites appropriate for the proposed 
development in areas with a lower risk of flooding. 
Settlement boundary
Boundaries shown in Chapter 7. 
Villages and Hamlets have no 
settlement boundaries, professional 
judgement used to determine if land is 
within or adjacent the settlement.1. Proposed site
A site adjacent to settlement 
boundary, but in flood zone. Flood 
risk assessment and sequential test 
required. Alternative sites should be 
sought. If no reasonable alternative 
site exists, exception test may need 
to be applied.3. Preferred site
Another site available outside 
flood zone. In a sustainable 
location in settlement 
boundary. This is a reasonable 
alternative to the proposed site. 
2. Alternative site
Alternative site available outside 
the flood zone, but also outside 
the settlement boundary, so not 
a reasonable alternative.Settlement
Flood zoneThe flood risk sequential test
This graphic illustrates the flood risk sequential test, which steers new 
development to areas with the lowest risk of flooding. It ensures 
permission is not granted for development if there are reasonably 
available sites appropriate for the proposed development in areas 
with a lower risk of flooding.442.6 Tranquillity and dark night skies
2.6.1 The tranquillity found within Dartmoor National Park is 
increasingly rare and is cherished by Dartmoor’s communities and 
visitors alike. Dartmoor’s vast open uplands, unspoilt enclosed 
farmlands, and remote river valleys all serve to make the National Park 
a place where tranquillity can be found easily.
2.6.2 Tranquillity is subjective and relative: whether a place feels 
tranquil will be different for everyone, however there are common 
characteristics20 which help us refine our understanding. Tranquillity 
can be understood as being made up of a variety of sounds and 
experiences which help people find peace and a sense of wellbeing 
within the landscape. Most commonly these factors include:
 ●Feeling close to nature and wildlife
 ●Feeling solitude and remoteness
 ●Hearing natural sounds
 ●Seeing unspoilt natural beauty
2.6.3 A particularly sensitive part of tranquil places are dark night 
skies: areas where light pollution does not noticeably disturb our view 
of the stars at night. It’s important to understand that tranquillity and 
dark night skies are finite resources which are highly valued, attract 
visitors, and therefore also have economic value. Tranquillity and dark 
night skies are also fragile resources easily diminished by noise, lighting 
and intrusive development both within and beyond Dartmoor’s 
boundaries. Dartmoor’s location, close to major trunk roads and the 
growing urban areas of Plymouth, Exeter and Newton Abbot, make 
its position particularly sensitive. The following development activities 
have the potential to directly and indirectly impact on tranquillity and 
dark night skies: 
 ●New buildings and structures in isolated locations
 ●New noisy operations, such as quarrying
20  Tranquillity Mapping: Developing a Robust Methodology for Planning Support (Jackson et al., 2008) ●Utility and renewable energy infrastructure in isolated locations, 
such as pylons, wind turbines and solar farms
 ●New light sources, such as security and flood lighting
 ●Transport infrastructure, such as roads and car parking
 ●Road, air and rail traffic
 ●Signage and visual clutter
 ●Recreational activities
2.6.4 The CPRE’s tranquillity map21 provides the most up-to-date 
assessment of tranquillity for Dartmoor National Park and we will use 
this to inform assessments of a site’s relative tranquillity.
2.6.5 External lighting should be avoided in the National Park to 
preserve tranquillity and dark night skies, but also to protect wildlife, 
visual amenity, and landscape and historic character. To ensure 
conservation of dark night skies the following sequential approach will 
be used across the National Park when considering proposals for new 
external lighting:
1. Avoid the installation of external lighting altogether
2. Where external lighting is absolutely necessary, mitigate all its 
adverse impacts
3. As a last resort, mitigate its adverse impacts to the greatest 
possible extent
2.6.6 Where necessary, a technical lighting statement will be required 
to justify why lighting is necessary and demonstrate every effort has 
been made to mitigate its adverse impacts. As a minimum, these 
proposals will be required to meet the Institute of Lighting Professionals 
(ILP) standards for National Parks: Zone E122.
21  Tranquillity Map: England (CPRE, 2007)
22  Guidance Notes for the reduction of obtrusive light (Institute of Lighting Professionals, 2011)Environment  45 ●Utility and renewable energy infrastructure in isolated locations, 
such as pylons, wind turbines and solar farms
 ●New light sources, such as security and flood lighting
 ●Transport infrastructure, such as roads and car parking
 ●Road, air and rail traffic
 ●Signage and visual clutter
 ●Recreational activities
2.6.4 The CPRE’s tranquillity map21 provides the most up-to-date 
assessment of tranquillity for Dartmoor National Park and we will use 
this to inform assessments of a site’s relative tranquillity.
2.6.5 External lighting should be avoided in the National Park to 
preserve tranquillity and dark night skies, but also to protect wildlife, 
visual amenity, and landscape and historic character. To ensure 
conservation of dark night skies the following sequential approach will 
be used across the National Park when considering proposals for new 
external lighting:
1. Avoid the installation of external lighting altogether
2. Where external lighting is absolutely necessary, mitigate all its 
adverse impacts
3. As a last resort, mitigate its adverse impacts to the greatest 
possible extent
2.6.6 Where necessary, a technical lighting statement will be required 
to justify why lighting is necessary and demonstrate every effort has 
been made to mitigate its adverse impacts. As a minimum, these 
proposals will be required to meet the Institute of Lighting Professionals 
(ILP) standards for National Parks: Zone E122.
21  Tranquillity Map: England (CPRE, 2007)
22  Guidance Notes for the reduction of obtrusive light (Institute of Lighting Professionals, 2011)Strategic Policy 2.6 Protecting tranquillity and dark 
night skies 
1. Outside classified settlements development proposals will only 
be permitted where they conserve and/or enhance tranquillity. 
2. All development proposals should avoid external lighting. Where 
external lighting is demonstrated to be absolutely necessary its design 
should avoid all adverse impacts, or as a last resort mitigate them to 
the greatest possible extent in order to avoid adverse impacts on 
tranquillity, dark night skies, biodiversity, visual amenity, landscape 
character and heritage significance.
Kings Tor © Anna Curnow462.7 The Historic and Cultural Environment
2.7.1 The quality of Dartmoor’s historic and cultural environment 
is a key reason for the area’s designation as a National Park and is 
fundamental to its Special Qualities. Dartmoor’s cultural heritage, 
including its archaeological features, settlements, buildings, and 
landscapes, is one of the richest of any area in the UK. These heritage 
assets make a substantial contribution to Dartmoor’s rich and distinctive 
character. Together they allow the story of Dartmoor’s settlement to be 
widely appreciated. The types of heritage asset found in the National 
Park are summarised below:
Archaeology 
Remains which provide material evidence of past human activity 
and culture. Important sites vary in scale from building remains to field 
systems. Of particular importance are Dartmoor’s 1,082 Scheduled 
Monuments. Archaeology has the greatest potential for discovery of 
new assets.
Settlements and building groups
Significant historic towns and villages, farmsteads, isolated building 
groups and industrial building groups. 25 of the National Park’s 
settlements have Conservation Area status and there are 1,100 
historic farmsteads. A building’s significance comes not just from its 
individual elements, but also its relationship with other buildings and 
the surrounding landscape. 
Buildings and structures
All traditional historic buildings and structures have some heritage 
significance. The National Park is home to 2,059 listed buildings and 
structures which are of particular importance.
Landscapes
Many of the National Park’s landscapes show layers of evidence of 
past human activity. This can include historic field systems, old mining 
and farming activities, and historic routeways and greenlanes. There 
are 14 Premier Archaeological Landscapes (PALs) within the National 
Park which are some of the finest archaeological landscapes in 
Europe.Conserving and Enhancing Heritage Assets
2.7.2 Heritage assets are protected in two ways:
Designated heritage assets  include Conservation Areas, Listed 
Buildings, Scheduled Monuments and Registered Parks and Gardens 
which are of national significance and are statutorily protected under 
legislation. 
Non-designated heritage assets  include buildings, monuments, 
sites, places, areas, landscapes or archaeology which have a level 
of significance sufficient to warrant consideration in the planning 
process, but which are not formally designated assets. 
2.7.3 Designated and non-designated heritage assets are recorded 
by the Authority on the Historic Environment Record (HER) : a live, 
searchable and publicly accessible database of historic sites, buildings 
and features known to exist in the National Park. There is always the 
potential for the discovery of new assets. Potential heritage assets will 
be assessed against Historic England’s significance criteria, discussed 
in paragraph 2.7.4, to decide whether they should be protected as 
designated or non-designated assets. Evidence prepared to inform 
decisions, or acquired during or after development should be made 
available to be added to the HER.
Understanding Significance
2.7.4 Understanding a heritage asset’s significance is essential to 
assessing the impact of a development. Historic England describes 
significance as consisting of four values in Conservation Principles 
(2008) and significance may be found in all or just one of these values:
Evidential value : the potential for a place to preserve evidence of 
past human activity.
Historical value : the ways in which historic people, events and 
aspects of life can be understood through a place.
Aesthetic value : the ways in which people draw sensory and 
intellectual stimulation from a place. 
 Bishop’s House, ChagfordEnvironment  47Conserving and Enhancing Heritage Assets
2.7.2 Heritage assets are protected in two ways:
Designated heritage assets  include Conservation Areas, Listed 
Buildings, Scheduled Monuments and Registered Parks and Gardens 
which are of national significance and are statutorily protected under 
legislation. 
Non-designated heritage assets  include buildings, monuments, 
sites, places, areas, landscapes or archaeology which have a level 
of significance sufficient to warrant consideration in the planning 
process, but which are not formally designated assets. 
2.7.3 Designated and non-designated heritage assets are recorded 
by the Authority on the Historic Environment Record (HER) : a live, 
searchable and publicly accessible database of historic sites, buildings 
and features known to exist in the National Park. There is always the 
potential for the discovery of new assets. Potential heritage assets will 
be assessed against Historic England’s significance criteria, discussed 
in paragraph 2.7.4, to decide whether they should be protected as 
designated or non-designated assets. Evidence prepared to inform 
decisions, or acquired during or after development should be made 
available to be added to the HER.
Understanding Significance
2.7.4 Understanding a heritage asset’s significance is essential to 
assessing the impact of a development. Historic England describes 
significance as consisting of four values in Conservation Principles 
(2008) and significance may be found in all or just one of these values:
Evidential value : the potential for a place to preserve evidence of 
past human activity.
Historical value : the ways in which historic people, events and 
aspects of life can be understood through a place.
Aesthetic value : the ways in which people draw sensory and 
intellectual stimulation from a place. Communal value : the meaning of a place for the people who relate 
to it, or for whom it forms part of their collective experience or memory.
The NPPF refers to significance as being the value of a heritage asset 
to this and future generations because of its heritage interest, which 
may be: archaeological, architectural, artistic or historic. Significance 
derives from the physical presence of a heritage asset and from its 
setting.
2.7.5 In addition to the above principles other factors to be taken into 
consideration include age, state of preservation, rarity, vulnerability 
to damage, contribution to setting, group value and the degree to 
which a heritage asset is characteristic of a given period. 
2.7.6 The below list summarises the buildings and features within the 
National Park which are likely to have heritage significance or where 
within which there is significant potential for discovery of previously 
unknown heritage assets: 
 ●archaeological features, structures and buildings;
 ●historic buildings and structures which reinforce local 
distinctiveness, particularly those in Conservation Areas (e.g. 
vernacular farm buildings, historic farmsteads and houses pre-
1919);
 ●historic artefacts and structures (e.g. milestones, bridges, wells, 
slotted gateposts);
 ●sites, buildings or structures which reflect Dartmoor’s industrial 
and socio-economic history (e.g. engine houses, mines, Boulton 
& Paul prefabricated buildings, nonconformist chapels);
 ●buildings which reflect a distinctive architectural style (e.g. estate 
buildings, such as Hambleden and Bedford, and K6 telephone 
boxes);
 ●historic land divisions and landscapes (e.g. burgage plots and 
preserved historic field systems); and 
 ●historic road, lane and routeway surfaces (e.g. disused railway 
tracks, green lanes and byways).48impacts on prominent or significant views or leads to abrupt changes 
in building scale and style. We have identified a number of Areas of 
Historic Setting adjacent to designated Conservation Areas which 
have particular significance. These areas, below, are considered non-
designated heritage assets and are shown on the policies map.
Ashburton : fossilised medieval strip fields to the north and west of the 
town.
Buckfastleigh : a leat and associated land serving the town’s woollen 
industry to the west of the town.
Moretonhampstead : the site of the potential Saxon settlement and 
glebe lands to the east and north east of the town.
North Bovey : water meadows to the south of the village.2.7.7 A heritage asset’s significance can be harmed by alteration 
or destruction of the asset and also by development within its setting. 
As heritage assets are irreplaceable, there is presumption against 
harming assets. Any proposed harm must have clear and convincing 
justification. 
2.7.8 All applications proposing development affecting a heritage 
asset must include a Statement of Heritage Significance. This will 
describe the significance of the asset and its setting and assess 
the impact of the proposal. Historic England have produced good 
practice advice which will assist when assessing significance23 and 
setting24.
Conservation Areas
2.7.9 Conservation Areas are designated heritage assets. There are 
25 Conservation Areas in the National Park, each has a Character 
Appraisal . These appraisals describe the heritage qualities of the 
Conservation Area and provide important background information to 
inform development proposals which affect the Conservation Area.
2.7.10 Within Conservation Areas the Authority has some special 
controls to ensure their heritage value is not undermined, including to:
 ●restrict permitted development rights;
 ●control substantial demolition of buildings;
 ●restrict advertisements; and
 ●control works to trees.
2.7.11 However, the key purpose of designating Conservation Areas 
is not to prevent change, but to allow development to occur in a 
way which conserves and enhances the character and appearance 
of the Conservation Area. To achieve this we will seek to ensure 
development respects the elements and features that define the 
Conservation Area’s character and heritage significance.
2.7.12 Development outside Conservation Areas can also have 
an impact on its character and appearance, particularly where it 
24  The setting of heritage assets (Historic England, 2017)Strategic Policy 2.7 Conserving and enhancing 
heritage assets 
1. All development must conserve and/or enhance heritage assets 
and their settings. Great weight will be given to the conservation 
of designated heritage assets. All proposals should avoid harming 
an asset’s significance, and where harm is justified, it should be 
minimised.
2. All applications affecting designated and non-designated 
heritage assets must be supported by a Statement of Heritage 
Significance. All applications affecting designated heritage assets 
must be submitted as detailed applications.
3. The change of use, extension or alteration of heritage assets, 
including development in their settings, will be permitted only 
where:
a) for designated heritage assets, any harm to significance is less than 
substantial, justified and clearly outweighed by the development’s 
public benefits; or
23 Managing significance in decision-taking  (Historic England, 2015)Environment  49Conservation of historic non-residential buildings in 
the open countryside
2.7.13 The National Park has a substantial number of non-residential 
historic buildings in the open countryside, particularly farm buildings, 
chapels and churches, which are of historic value and contribute 
to the character and cultural value of Dartmoor. There are known 
to be 1,100 surviving pre-1919 historic farmsteads and over 200 lost 
farmsteads.
2.7.14 These traditional buildings tell a story of Dartmoor’s history 
and the settlement of its landscape. Their construction often reflects 
underlying geology and vernacular building practices and they 
contribute to a sense of place, local distinctiveness and landscape 
character. 
2.7.15 Changing farm practices have resulted in many traditional 
farm buildings falling out of use or being repurposed. Furthermore, 
changes in land ownership leading to the splitting up or amalgamation 
of farms have disassociated traditional buildings from the land they 
once served. Where buildings are no longer needed to support farming 
practices there can be demand to find alternative uses. Redundant 
buildings can provide flexible and affordable employment space. 
However the isolated rural location of these buildings can make them 
particularly desirable for residential conversion, unfortunately of the 
range of possible uses residential is almost always the most harmful in 
conservation terms.
2.7.16 It is crucial that conversions preserve the important features, 
materials and form of the building and the traditional techniques 
used to build them. As important as the building itself is its setting; 
agricultural buildings generally have a modest setting, unenclosed 
and with few embellishments, churches and chapels will typically have 
a more formal enclosed setting. Residential conversions can lead to 
a significant amount of pressure on a building’s setting to provide 
gardens, patios or decking, sheds, furniture and other paraphernalia 
which can all distance the building from its modest beginnings. The b) for non-designated heritage assets, any harm has been balanced  
against the significance of the asset and found to be reasonable 
and justified.
4. The substantial harm, whole or partial loss of heritage assets, 
including development within their settings, will only be permitted 
in exceptional circumstances, where:
a) it is necessary for health and safety reasons; or
b) the loss of all or part of a designated asset is necessary to achieve 
substantial public benefits that outweigh the loss; or
c) the loss of all or part of a non-designated asset has been balanced 
against the significance of the asset and found to be reasonable 
and justified; and
d) the harm is the least possible and there is no less harmful viable 
option; and
e) it is demonstrated there is no other source of funding that might 
achieve the conservation benefits.
5. Where whole or partial loss of a heritage asset is permitted the 
applicant will be required to undertake a detailed record of the 
asset and provide this to the Dartmoor HER.
6. Where an application could affect existing or potential 
archaeological interests the application must be supported by 
sufficient information to understand their significance and the 
impact of the proposal. This may include a method statement 
detailing the assessment, evaluation or excavation works necessary 
to inform the decision, or ensure its protection.
7. Where there is evidence of deliberate neglect of or damage to 
a heritage asset (including demolition) its deteriorated state will be 
disregarded in decision making.50result can be, whilst the building is conserved, its relationship with the 
surrounding landscape is lost.
2.7.17 We will take the following steps when assessing proposals for 
re-use and conversion of all historic non-residential buildings in the 
open countryside:
1.  Is the building historic, redundant and capable of conversion?
Suitable buildings need to be historic within the context of Dartmoor’s 
built heritage, redundant, and be capable of conversion without 
substantial alteration. The conversion of modern non-residential 
buildings, proposals which create a need for new buildings or involve 
the rebuilding, extension or alteration of historic buildings will not 
generally be acceptable under this policy. The creation of new access 
roads or tracks will also not be acceptable and buildings should not 
be at risk of flooding. 
A building is redundant when it is no longer needed or useful for its 
intended purpose. When assessing for redundancy, a building’s 
current and potential use will be taken into account. For example, 
although a building may not be of use to one owner it may still serve 
a need for its intended use in the wider area. Its value should reflect its 
current use, and not a ‘hope value’ for conversion. To be considered 
redundant a building should be entirely surplus to requirements and 
its loss should not generate a need for additional floorspace or an 
extension, even for a general use such as storage.
There are limited opportunities for conversion of modern buildings 
included elsewhere in the Local Plan, within policies for non-residential 
business and tourism development ( Strategic Policy 5.1 ) and farm 
diversification ( Policy 5. 9).
2.  Is the proposed use in a sustainable location?
All buildings and their uses rely on infrastructure, services and facilities 
to support them (e.g. access roads, utilities, shops, amenity and health 
facilities etc.). The Local Plan seeks to minimise our impact on climate 
change by reducing the need to travel by car to meet daily needs. Each use will be different, but proposals which are located close to 
the infrastructure, services and facilities needed to sustain them will 
be considered more favourably. The acceptability of a proposal 
will be considered by balancing the quality of the building and the 
conservation works against the sustainability of the building’s location. 
For this reason uses which significantly impact on character, such as 
residential uses or intensive holiday lets, will not generally be acceptable 
in isolated locations away from basic facilities and services.
3.  Will the proposed works harm heritage significance?
Different uses can put varying degrees of pressure on a building and its 
setting to change. Generally the more a building changes the more its 
character is lost and the less likely the building’s heritage significance will 
be successfully conserved. Table 2.4 summarises the pressure different 
works can put on a building to change. Importantly it is principally 
the works, not the proposed use, that determine a proposal’s impact. 
As each building is different and demands a different approach to 
achieve its conservation, proposals’ impacts will be determined on a 
case-by-case basis.
2.7.18 High impact proposals will be carefully scrutinised to ensure 
they achieve conservation. Any proposals of a low, medium or high 
impact will be refused where they do not conserve the heritage asset, 
and all proposals will be encouraged to achieve enhancement. 
The following buildings are unlikely to be suitable for high impact 
conversions because of their special historical and architectural 
characteristics:
 ●Longhouse shippons, linhays and cart sheds
 ●Pre-1700 farm buildings
 ●Agricultural buildings providing an agricultural setting for a Grade 
I or II* listed farmhouse
 ●All non-residential buildings of particular significance, including:
 ○those of the highest heritage significance Environment  51 ○those which make an important contribution to the character 
of a settlement, particularly within a Conservation Area
 ○those within building groups of particular merit or with important 
historic associations
 ○the best examples of estate architecture
 ○those with particularly good interiors or with internal features, 
furniture or machinery of interest which cannot be retained in 
the conversion scheme
2.7.19 Applications for high impact uses must demonstrate that 
the proposal represents the optimum viable use for the building by 
providing evidence that less harmful uses have been explored and 
are not viable. For all proposals, except farm diversification proposals, 
this should include marketing evidence the property has been offered 
on the open market for rent, sale or lease for a range of less harmful 
uses for not less than 6 months at a realistic price (requirements for 
marketing evidence are provided in the glossary). To ensure marketing 
exercises do not encourage splitting-up of farms, farm diversification 
proposals can demonstrate this through business planning, see Policy 
5.9. 
2.7.20 Where permanent residential accommodation is acceptable 
the new dwelling will be required to be affordable housing or rural 
workers’ accommodation. However, there may be occasions where 
on-site provision of affordable housing is unviable or inappropriate. 
Affordable housing may be inappropriate where the accommodation 
and its curtilage is too large and cannot be made affordable, even 
with a significant discount. In these cases a financial contribution 
(‘commuted sum’) in-lieu will be sought on an equivalent basis and 
the property restricted to occupation by a Local Person. Section 3.5 
details our approach for deciding when contributions in-lieu will be 
acceptable.Impact Typical changes to building Example uses
Low Use can generally be achieved with 
only minor alterations to the building 
interior and exterior, and the wider 
site.Light industrial, storage, 
workshop, community use 
(e.g. hall, meeting room, 
or community centre), 
equestrian, ancillary to 
residential (e.g. garage, 
games room)
Medium Significant alterations necessary, but 
can be achieved with a minimalist 
approach: without the need to 
subdivide the interior, enclose and 
subdivide the building’s setting, 
create new wall openings. New 
rooflights and flues are minimised 
and placed discretely.Office, camping barn, 
farm shop, pub, restaurant, 
museum, granny annexe
High Very significant alterations normally 
necessary and difficult to achieve 
with a minimalist approach. 
Including subdivision of interior, roof 
and wall insulation, and alterations 
to door and window openings. Any 
new rooflights and flues are placed 
prominently. Often demand for 
ancillary buildings, gardens and 
domestic curtilage which subdivides 
and harms setting. Generally 
incompatible with listed buildings 
and difficult to achieve conservation 
in non-designated assets.Permanent residential, 
holiday let, hotelTable 2.4 The pressure for change different uses generally have on historic non-
residential buildings52Enabling Development
2.7.21 Some heritage assets need such significant work to conserve 
them that in exceptional circumstances flexibility in planning policy 
can be necessary to enable important conservation works to take 
place. ‘Enabling development’ is development that would normally 
be unacceptable except that it enables sufficient conservation 
benefits to justify it, and which could not otherwise be achieved.
2.7.22 Enabling development is a last resort, but nevertheless a 
useful planning tool which enables a community to secure the long-
term future of a heritage asset and sometimes bring about other 
public benefits. Crucial to the acceptability of enabling development 
is that the public benefit outweighs the harm of departing from the 
development plan (i.e. the Local Plan and any Neighbourhood Plans 
in force). When deciding applications for enabling development we 
will have regard to the best practice advice of Historic England25.
25  Enabling development and the conservation of significant places (Historic England, 2008)Evidence should include not less than 6 months marketing evidence 
demonstrating the property has been offered on the open market 
for rent, sale or lease for a range of less harmful uses, at a realistic 
price.
4. Where permanent residential uses are considered acceptable, 
these will be for affordable or rural workers’ accommodation. Where 
affordable or rural workers’ accommodation is demonstrated to 
be unviable or inappropriate an equivalent financial contribution 
in-lieu of provision on-site will be sought and the dwelling will be 
restricted to occupation by a Local Person.
5. Permitted development rights will normally be removed to 
control the character and appearance of the converted building 
and its setting.Strategic Policy 2.8 Conservation of historic non-
residential buildings in the open countryside
1. Development must conserve and/or enhance the heritage 
significance of non-residential buildings.
2. The conversion of redundant historic non-residential buildings in 
the open countryside will only be permitted where:
a) The building is:
i) redundant for its most recent use;
ii) of a form, structure and history that is traditional within the context 
of Dartmoor’s built heritage;
iii) structurally sound and capable of conversion without the need 
for reconstruction, excavation or alteration, as confirmed by a 
structural engineer’s survey; and
iv) appropriately sized for the intended use and capable of 
conversion without the need for ancillary buildings or extension.
b) The proposed use is the optimum viable use consistent with the 
building’s conservation and is located with reasonable access to 
necessary infrastructure, services and facilities; and
c) The proposed conversion work:
i) conserves and/or enhances the character and appearance of 
the building and its setting;
ii) proposes no significant new openings or extensions;
iii) preserves significant historic or architectural elements; and
iv) ensures any garden, fence or wall, parking, lighting, essential 
utilities (cables and pipes) or other paraphernalia do not harm 
the building’s character, setting or any significant historic or 
architectural features.
3. The optimum viable use is the viable use which causes least 
harm to the asset’s significance. Applications for high impact uses 
must be supported by evidence which demonstrates the proposal 
is the optimum viable use and less harmful uses are unviable. Environment  53
Enabling Development
2.7.21 Some heritage assets need such significant work to conserve 
them that in exceptional circumstances flexibility in planning policy 
can be necessary to enable important conservation works to take 
place. ‘Enabling development’ is development that would normally 
be unacceptable except that it enables sufficient conservation 
benefits to justify it, and which could not otherwise be achieved.
2.7.22 Enabling development is a last resort, but nevertheless a 
useful planning tool which enables a community to secure the long-
term future of a heritage asset and sometimes bring about other 
public benefits. Crucial to the acceptability of enabling development 
is that the public benefit outweighs the harm of departing from the 
development plan (i.e. the Local Plan and any Neighbourhood Plans 
in force). When deciding applications for enabling development we 
will have regard to the best practice advice of Historic England25.
25  Enabling development and the conservation of significant places (Historic England, 2008)Policy 2.9 Enabling Development
1. In exceptional circumstances enabling development that 
secures a heritage asset’s future, but conflicts with other planning 
policies, will be permitted where:
a) the public benefits clearly outweigh the harm of departing from 
adopted planning policies;
b) it will not materially harm the heritage asset or its setting; 
c) it will avoid detrimental fragmentation of management of the 
heritage asset;
d) it will secure the long-term future of the heritage asset and, where 
applicable, its continued use for a purpose sympathetic to its 
conservation;
e) it is necessary to resolve problems arising from the inherent needs 
of the heritage asset, rather than the circumstances of the present 
owner or the purchase price paid;
f) it is demonstrated there is no other source of funding that might 
achieve the benefits without the need for enabling development; 
and
g) it is demonstrated that the amount of enabling development is the 
minimum necessary to secure the future of the heritage asset and 
it minimises harm to other public interests.
2. Where necessary, planning conditions or a section 106 legal 
agreement will be used to secure the future of the heritage asset.
Combe, Scorriton54
3  Housing
West Street, AshburtonStrategy
The focus of housing development in Dartmoor National Park is the delivery of 
affordable, well-designed, efficient homes to meet the needs of local people. 
Market housing will support the delivery of affordable housing, it should also 
respond to the needs of local people in terms of size, mix and tenure. Around 
65 new homes will be built in the National Park each year.
Housing development should be of a mix of house type and size which 
enables and encourages younger families to live and work within Dartmoor’s 
communities, as well as providing opportunities for older local people to stay. 
Housing should be accessible and adaptable and achieve high levels of 
sustainability. 
Housing delivery will reflect the Spatial Strategy. In Local Centres land is 
allocated for development to meet the affordable housing needs of local 
people: 45% of homes on allocated sites are required to be affordable, subject 
to viability. A mix of housing can come forward within Local Centres, to meet 
local needs and respond to appropriate development opportunities.
In Rural Settlements a mix of small scale housing may come forward, and there 
are opportunities for development which meet local needs on brownfield sites. 
In Villages and Hamlets new housing is restricted to small scale development 
to meet local needs.
Outside classified settlements new housing development will principally 
support the needs of farming, forestry and other land-based rural enterprises 
with a functional need for a worker to live in the open countryside. 
Homes may be altered and extended to improve their design, efficiency and 
meet the needs of their occupants. The size of extensions and replacement 
homes is limited in order to retain a mix of smaller and more affordable housing.
  Housing  5556Housing Evidence Summary 
Population projections
How housing delivery could affect Dartmoor’s populationDartmoor’s approximate age profile in 2035
33,00033,50034,00034,50035,00035,50036,000
2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 203580 dwellings / year
30 dwellings / year50 dwellings / year
2008 Local Plan65 dwelling / year
2018 Local Plan
05090
300 300 0Loss of working population
Shortage of skills and labourSevere ageing population
39% of population 65+AgePopulation
Year
£272,000
Median house price
£22,034
Median earningsPopulation
Dartmoor’s Housing Affordability Ratio median house price : median earnings
London - 12.36 Cotswolds - 14.00 City of London - 14.83 Poole - 10.00 Exeter - 8.45 Northumberland - 6.38 Richmondshire - 7.43Dartmoor National Park - 12.43 Typical Mortgage Cap 
earnings : loanOffice for National Statistics 2017
0 5 10 15
RatioMale Female2035 age profile
50 dwellings / year2035 age profile
65 dwellings / year2018 age profile
Demographic Forecasts, Edge Analytics, 2019  Housing  57Housing Evidence Summary 
Population projections
How housing delivery could affect Dartmoor’s populationDartmoor’s approximate age profile in 2035
33,00033,50034,00034,50035,00035,50036,000
2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 203580 dwellings / year
30 dwellings / year50 dwellings / year
2008 Local Plan65 dwelling / year
2018 Local Plan
05090
300 300 0Loss of working population
Shortage of skills and labourSevere ageing population
39% of population 65+AgePopulation
Year
£272,000
Median house price
£22,034
Median earningsPopulation
Dartmoor’s Housing Affordability Ratio median house price : median earnings
London - 12.36 Cotswolds - 14.00 City of London - 14.83 Poole - 10.00 Exeter - 8.45 Northumberland - 6.38 Richmondshire - 7.43Dartmoor National Park - 12.43 Typical Mortgage Cap 
earnings : loanOffice for National Statistics 2017
0 5 10 15
RatioMale Female2035 age profile
50 dwellings / year2035 age profile
65 dwellings / year2018 age profile
Demographic Forecasts, Edge Analytics, 20193.1 Housing development in Dartmoor National 
Park
3.1.1 The 2008 Core Strategy aimed to deliver around 50 homes per 
year. Delivery has been in line with this, but over the last 10 years this 
has resulted in little population change. This is largely because new 
housing provision has been counter balanced by a growth in smaller 
households (i.e. fewer people living in more houses). Whilst the National 
Park does not have a declining population, within its population there 
are trends which, when projected forward, could have a significant 
impact upon Dartmoor’s communities. In particular, projections show 
an ageing population and a reduction in the proportion of working 
age people.
3.1.2 National policy seeks to significantly increase housing delivery 
across the country in the expectation that it will improve affordability 
and deliver a range of homes to meet national housing need. In 
the National Park the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) 
recognises this is not an appropriate response and the scale and 
extent of development within these designated areas should be 
limited. Instead the Dartmoor Local Plan must carefully balance the 
needs of the National Park’s communities with the need to conserve 
and enhance its internationally important environment. Planning 
cannot and should not ‘engineer’ the National Park’s population, but 
it can be a tool to respond to issues and deliver community priorities. 
It is important therefore that the Local Plan responds to these trends, 
which would have a range of impacts within Dartmoor’s communities, 
including:
 ●High housing unaffordability making it difficult for local people 
and workers to live locally 
 ●A reduction in the working age population, making it increasingly 
difficult for local businesses to recruit and retain staff, and reducing 
the sustainability of communities and local services
 ●Continued or increasing under-occupancy of homes by older 
people or individuals, which runs at odds with the aim of making 
the best use of the housing stock ●A greater demand for services and facilities to meet the needs of 
older people, some of which may be difficult to deliver in deeply 
rural areas (for example home care)
 ●A decreasing demand for services and facilities for younger 
people, including schools, making them increasingly difficult to 
sustain in smaller communities 
3.1.3 Seeing these changes first hand in Dartmoor’s towns and 
villages, local communities are looking for the Local Plan’s housing 
policies to:
 ●provide appropriate and flexible opportunities for housing 
development which meets communities’ needs in a range of 
settlements;
 ●ensure a mix of house sizes are available to meet communities’ 
housing needs, including those in affordable housing need, needs 
of first time buyers, elderly downsizers, growing families and small 
households;
 ●provide suitable homes for older people and downsizers;
 ●enable local families and working people to live on Dartmoor;
 ●work within environmental limits, and achieve more sustainable 
construction; and
 ●support farming, forestry and other rural land-based enterprises.
3.1.4 The housing strategy in the Local Plan therefore makes provision 
for at least 65 homes each year across the National Park. This is the 
level of development evidence suggests is necessary to reduce the 
trends identified above and provide sufficient housing to meet local 
housing needs. The figure is set locally, rather than by Government, 
and the policies and site allocations within this Local Plan seek to 
deliver that amount of development throughout the plan period. 
This number of homes will enable the delivery of affordable housing 
to meet local needs, allow sufficient open market housing to cross-
subsidise affordable housing delivery, and bring about a small increase 58in population intended to reduce the scale of the demographic issues 
described above.
3.1.5 New housing will be focused in the Local Centres, which are 
the most sustainable locations for development. Within the Rural 
Settlements there is opportunity for small scale development. Within 
the Villages and Hamlets development opportunities are limited to 
affordable housing to meet identified local needs.  
3.1.6 Within settlements local needs custom and self-build housing 
may come forward, providing opportunities for local people, 
making the best use of previously developed (or ‘brownfield’) land 
and encouraging high quality, sustainable and innovative design. 
Opportunities also exist for conversion of buildings to new homes.  
3.1.7 Beyond the classified settlements, in the Open Countryside, the 
broader housing needs of communities may be met through: 
 ●rural workers’ houses;
 ●subdivision of existing dwellings; and
 ●in locations well-related to necessary services and infrastructure:
 ○conversion of suitable redundant historic buildings
 ○Gypsy and traveller accommodation
 ○low impact development – enabling small-scale residential 
development which has exceptionally low environmental 
impact.
Housing need
3.1.8 The strategy for the Local Plan is founded upon delivering the 
development required to meet the needs of the National Park and its 
communities, sustaining them as vibrant and viable places to live and 
work, whilst also ensuring Dartmoor’s Special Qualities are conserved 
and enhanced. The housing strategy takes forward this approach 
by using land for development only when it is needed to meet an 
identified local housing need and makes the best use of Dartmoor’s 
limited land supply.  This needs-based approach applies on allocated 
sites, larger ‘windfall’ sites (sites which weren’t planned for through the 
Local Plan’s site allocations) and through a rural exception sites policy. 
Policies on all these development site types require that development should only come forward when homes are needed. Assessing housing 
need is the first step in the process of deciding how many homes need 
to be panned for.
3.1.9 It is important that assessments of affordable housing need and 
the allocation of new affordable homes, reflect the roles of the Local 
Centres, Rural Settlements and Villages and Hamlets within Dartmoor. 
Within these settlement types, the area or ‘catchment’ we assess to 
identify whether any affordable housing need exists should reflect 
that settlement’s role, and then people with connections to that area 
should have priority for any new affordable homes. The approach to 
this is set out in Strategic Policy 3.1. 
3.1.10 Housing needs assessments are surveys undertaken in 
communities which establish the level and nature of current and future 
housing need. They are a vital tool for understanding a community’s 
housing need, and offer far more detailed information about a 
community than the Housing Register. Housing needs assessments 
are typically valid for around 3-5 years and they may be supported 
by information from the Housing Register. Where a development has 
taken place since a survey was carried out, this will normally mean the 
housing needs assessment’s results are less meaningful.    
Widecombe-in-the-Moor  Housing  593.1.11 The use of section 106 legal agreements is critical for securing 
affordable housing into the future, and provides communities with 
assurance that new affordable homes will continue to be available to 
meet local housing need. Equally, Section 106 legal agreements must 
be carefully worded to ensure they are flexible so development or 
property can be financed and homes are not left empty. 
3.1.12 All parishes in Dartmoor National Park are in Designated 
Protected Areas (DPA)26 where statutory protections are also in place 
to ensure an ongoing supply of rural affordable housing. Within the 
DPA process it is possible on individual schemes for a Registered 
Provider to seek a waiver from these protections, including those that 
limit the amount of equity that a resident of a shared ownership home 
can buy, known as ‘staircasing’. Dartmoor National Park will consider 
applications for such waivers on individual sites through the DPA 
waiver process where applicable and with the agreement of relevant 
local authority and Homes England. Where schemes are not funded 
through Homes England consideration will be given to a waiver with 
the agreement of the relevant local authority.Strategic Policy 3.1 Meeting Housing Need in 
Dartmoor National Park
1. This Local Plan makes provision for at least 1,125 homes (65 
homes each year after adoption) to be delivered across the National 
Park over the period of this Plan (2018 - 2036) in order to meet the 
identified needs of local communities. It will do so by identifying 
opportunities for housing delivery on allocated sites, windfall sites, 
and rural exception sites. A trajectory at Appendix B illustrates 
the expected rate of housing delivery over the plan period. The 
Monitoring Framework will assess whether delivery is meeting local 
needs for Dartmoor and whether the overall housing requirements 
for the Plymouth and Exeter Housing Market Areas are being met.
2. Development on allocated sites and windfall sites will only be 
approved where there is a current identified affordable housing 
need. For schemes of 6 homes or more within Local Centres, or 
schemes of 4 homes or more within Rural Settlements and Villages 
and Hamlets, affordable housing need should be demonstrated 
by an up-to-date housing needs assessment. Schemes delivering 
fewer homes within these settlements may be evidenced using the 
Housing Register.
3. Development on rural exception sites will only be approved 
where there is a current identified need for affordable housing 
demonstrated by an up-to-date housing needs assessment.
4. The geographic areas from which affordable housing need 
should be identified is as follows:
a) for development within a Local Centre, but not Princetown, the 
housing need of the parish in which development is taking place 
and the adjoining parishes which are wholly or substantially within 
the National Park;
b) for development within a Rural Settlement or Princetown, the 
housing need of the parish in which development is taking place 
and the adjoining rural parishes (i.e. excluding those which contain 
a Local Centre or larger settlement) which are wholly or substantially 
within the National Park; or
c) for development within Villages and Hamlets, the housing need of 
the parish in which development is taking place, and any adjoining 
rural parishes as may be agreed with the parish of provision.5. The size and tenure mix of the development should respond to 
the need identified, including the need for any specialist housing. In 
classified settlements, an up-to-date Housing Needs Assessment will 
be required. The need for smaller windfall developments in Local 
Centres may be evidenced by the Housing Register. 
6. In all cases other development in the pipeline or recently 
completed, which may alter the need for affordable housing in the 
relevant geographic area, will be taken into account. The above 
geographical areas shall be used for allocating affordable housing 
and will be included in section 106 legal agreements. Priority may be 
varied through Local Lettings Plans.  Section 106 legal agreements 
will include a cascade to ensure properties do not remain empty 
for an unreasonable period of time and a mortgagee in possession 
clause to ensure mortgageability. 
26  Housing and Regeneration Act 2008  Paragraphs 300 - 30260Vacant Building Credit
3.1.13 The NPPF (2019) provides for a ‘Vacant Building Credit’ 
designed to promote the use of previously developed (‘brownfield’) 
land. It sets out that, where vacant buildings are being reused or 
redeveloped, any affordable housing contribution should be reduced 
by a proportionate amount.  For the application of the Vacant Building 
Credit we will apply the following factors:
 ●The provision applies to previously developed land only
 ●All floorspace will be calculated using gross internal floor area 
(GIFA)
 ●The whole building needs to be vacant, not just a single planning 
unit or part of the building and the provision does not apply to 
buildings which have been abandoned
 ●The applicant must demonstrate that the building has been 
vacant for a continuous period of 3 years preceding the day the 
planning application is valid
 ●Credit will not be applied to building(s) which have been made 
vacant for the purpose of redevelopment or where a building is 
covered by an extant or recently expired planning permission for 
the same or substantially the same development
 ●Where vacant building credit is applied, the full affordable housing 
obligations will be sought as a percentage of the remaining floor 
space viability
 ●Where a vacant building credit calculation results in a part 
dwelling requirement this will be rounded up to the next whole 
affordable dwelling  
 ●Vacant building credit provisions do not apply to rural exceptions 
sites3.2 Different types of housing 
3.2.1 As well as evidencing overall need housing needs assessments, 
in combination with the Housing Register, provide important information 
on what size, affordability, and tenure of homes are needed by a 
community, as well as the need for older persons’ homes or specially 
adapted housing. 
3.2.2 Both the affordable and open market element of schemes 
should respond to a community’s identified housing needs. Having a 
mix of available housing is vital to ensuring Dartmoor’s communities 
are inclusive and sustainable. This means ensuring that there is a mix of 
housing to meet the needs of first time buyers, elderly downsizers, the 
disabled as well those unable to afford open market prices. To support 
the housing and economic strategies, any new open market housing 
should therefore be of a mix of house types and sizes which enable 
and encourage younger families to live and work within Dartmoor’s 
communities.
3.2.3 With regards affordable housing tenure, an indicative tenure 
split between affordable rental properties (e.g. social rent, affordable 
rent) and intermediate sale (e.g. shared ownership, discounted sale) 
of 70:30 is generally appropriate. However this is indicative only, and 
the tenure mix should reflect the identified housing need as closely as 
possible.
3.2.4 Forecasts suggest that the proportion of Dartmoor’s population 
aged 65 or over could increase by 44% by 2035. It is important 
that future housing supply responds to the needs of older people. 
Dartmoor’s existing housing stock contains a high proportion of historic 
buildings which can have poor accessibility. Whilst many older homes 
continue to be desirable, many will not meet the accessibility needs 
of an ageing population. This means providing new homes which are 
smaller, more accessible for those with limited mobility, and adaptable. 
Homes for older people may need to be affordable housing, or may 
be market housing, normally as part of a mixed development. This 
type of housing can enable local people to stay in their communities 
for longer, enable downsizing, free up under-occupied family sized 
housing and encourage a churn in the local housing stock.         Housing  613.2.5 There has been an increase in the proportion of second homes 
and holiday homes within the National Park (3% in 2001, 8% in 2011), 
mostly in the open countryside rather than settlements. Whilst this is a 
concerning trend it is not of the scale seen in other areas, where some 
Local and Neighbourhood Plans are responding by applying ‘principal 
residence’ conditions on new housing. Principal residence conditions 
have limited impact where it is the existing ‘traditional’ housing stock 
which is more attractive for second homes. These conditions also 
impact on development viability, reducing the amount of affordable 
housing which can be delivered. The Local Plan does not therefore 
require principal residence conditions on new homes, but responds to 
this issue by supporting the sustainability of Dartmoor’s communities 
with policies aimed at providing homes for those living or working in 
the National Park. 
3.2.6 Local needs custom and self-build housing is a key way of 
doing this, Local Plan policy encourages this type of housing on smaller 
sites or through conversions within Local Centres, Rural Settlements 
and Villages and Hamlets. Custom and self-build housing has multiple 
benefits: it can be more affordable to build, encourages people to 
stay in their home longer, and can lead to a greater variety and quality 
of house design.  
3.2.7 The Authority encourages communities to engage in shaping 
development locally. Community Land Trusts (CLTs) can play a key 
role in helping to identify need, shaping the mix of new housing and 
the process of allocating homes to new tenants. Where a CLT is the 
freehold owner of new homes, they can attract a small income for 
community use, and have a greater influence over the future of the 
homes.
The size and accessibility of new housing
3.2.8 Properties should be modest and commensurate with the 
needs of communities. Nationally described technical housing 
standards27 will be used to benchmark house sizes and ensure that all 
new affordable and open market housing is not excessively large or 
27  Technical Housing Standards - nationally described space standards (MHCLG, 2015)small for the need it is intended to meet. Housing which is significantly 
larger or smaller than these standards will need to be justified. 
3.2.9 To ensure new dwellings are accessible and adaptable for 
ageing residents this policy requires that all new build housing meets 
Building Regulations Requirement M4(2) for  accessible and adaptable 
dwellings, unless it is not practical, viable or desirable in planning terms. 
Wheelchair accessible dwellings will be encouraged where a specific 
local need has been identified and space standards will be applied 
flexibly if necessary.
Strategic Policy 3.2 Size and accessibility of new 
housing
1. All new housing development should contribute towards 
creating and sustaining sustainable and balanced communities 
by delivering a mix of dwelling sizes and types, that will meet the 
needs of present and future generations.
2. All new housing should meet and not significantly exceed 
nationally described technical housing standards30. 
3. All new build dwellings should be constructed in accordance 
with Building Regulations Requirement M4(2) for accessible and 
adaptable dwellings, or successive regulations, unless evidence 
demonstrates:
a) it is not desirable or possible for planning or environmental reasons; 
or
b) it is not viable.
4. Wheelchair accessible dwellings constructed in accordance 
with Building Regulations Requirement M4(3), or successive 
regulations, will be encouraged where a specific local need for a 
wheelchair adaptable or accessible dwelling is identified.623.3 Definition of a Local Person
3.3.1 In response to the challenge of meeting local affordable 
needs, an ageing community and the need to sustain the working 
age population, local occupancy restrictions will apply to affordable 
and local needs custom and self-build housing. In all cases this will be 
secured in perpetuity with a section 106 legal agreement.
3.3.2 The definition of a Local Person is set out below. The criteria are 
based upon community desire to support local people who wish to 
stay in their communities, to enable those who have been unable to 
stay to come back, and to encourage those already working in the 
National Park to live locally.
Definition of a Local Person
Dartmoor’s local needs and local affordable homes are restricted 
to occupancy by a local person. ‘Local’ is defined as a household 
containing at least one permanent resident who:
 ●currently lives in the National Park or a rural parish which lies 
substantially within the National Park and having done so for at 
least 5 years; or
 ●has lived in the National Park or a rural parish which lies substantially 
within the National Park for at least 5 years, but moved away 
within the last 5 years; or
 ●is currently employed within the National Park, working for not less 
than 16 hours per week, and having done so for at least 26 weeks 
out of the preceding year; or
 ●has a strong connection to the National Park or a rural parish 
which lies substantially within the National Park by virtue of, for 
example: upbringing, employment, or having a requirement to 
provide substantial care for a close relative who currently lives in 
the National Park and has done so for at least 5 years.
These criteria are not in priority order. A level of priority will be applied 
in s106 legal agreements to the geographical area of housing need 
used to justify the development, in accordance with Strategic Policy 
3.1. Priority may also be applied to other criteria where this is sought by 
the community, and is consistent with the Local Plan.
Duckspond, Buckfastleigh  Housing  633.4 Definition of Affordable Housing
3.4.1 The term ‘affordable housing’ can mean different things to 
different people. Indeed the broader definition set out by Government 
in the National Planning Policy Framework means that affordable 
housing is not as affordable as ‘social housing’ delivered in the past. 
This does, however, reflect the fact that a widening gap between 
incomes and house prices means open market housing in some 
areas, including Dartmoor, may be beyond the reach of those with an 
average household income.
3.4.2 It is critical that the type of housing delivered responds to the 
need identified in any Housing Needs Assessment. Developers should 
therefore work with communities to tailor schemes to meet the most 
appropriate mix of affordable housing in line with the definition, below.
Housing Association (‘Council’) Housing
3.4.3 In most cases affordable housing is built by or for a registered 
provider or ‘housing association’. In these cases a section 106 legal 
agreement will be attached to any permission, ensuring that the 
property remains affordable and for occupation by a Local Person in 
perpetuity. The registered provider will be responsible for the allocation 
of these homes to an eligible household in accordance with the 
section 106 legal agreement. Rents for affordable housing are linked 
with a discount from market rents, however in some instances this can 
still be unaffordable, given the high house prices in many Dartmoor 
communities. Affordable rents should therefore not exceed the Local 
Housing Allowance (LHA) for the area, including any additional 
charges on the property.
Private (Intermediate) Affordable Housing
3.4.4 Affordable housing may also be delivered without a registered 
provider. This approach allows privately built affordable homes to 
come forward in the National Park which have a section 106 legal 
agreement restricting their occupation to an eligible household, i.e. a 
household containing somebody who: ●is a Local Person;
 ●is in housing need; and
 ●is unable to afford market house prices in that area.
3.4.5 Given the range of land and property values, and potential 
build costs across the National Park, a fixed discount for affordable 
housing is not appropriate. The minimum discount is 20% from open 
market value, but this should be increased where necessary to ensure 
the housing is affordable to eligible households.
3.4.6 In 2017 median earnings for Dartmoor were £22,034. Using 
a mortgage indicator of 3.5 times earnings a household with two 
average earners would be able to borrow £154,238. Given the need 
for a minimum 5% deposit this equates to an affordable house price 
of around £150,000 - £165,000. This relies on two average earners and 
is intended to be a guide that will vary with incomes and lenders’ 
requirements. It is considered to be at the upper end of what is 
currently affordable for a 2 bedroom 4 person house.
3.4.7 Delivering homes in line with this benchmark may require 
a varying level of discount, depending on the property’s size and 
location. We will therefore discount the open market sale price, having 
already taken into account the occupancy restriction, by 20% - 40%. 
In accordance with the definition of affordable housing, all private 
affordable housing will be controlled in perpetuity. Where a private 
affordable house is rented to an eligible household, it should be rented 
at not less than a 20% discount from the prevailing market rent for the 
property, or at a greater discount if this is necessary to ensure the rent 
charged does not exceed the Local Housing Allowance (LHA) for the 
area, including any additional charges on the property.
3.4.8 Alongside the discount, careful design can also help to ensure a 
property is more affordable. Private affordable housing will be restricted 
to 93m2 in size (gross internal floor area) to support its affordability, 
this is equivalent to a 3 bedroom 5 person house in national space 
standards. For the successful delivery of affordable housing it is crucial Definition of Affordable Housing
Affordable housing is housing for sale or rent, for those whose needs are 
not met by the market. 
In Dartmoor National Park, all affordable housing must remain at an 
affordable price for future eligible households or include provision for 
subsidy to be recycled for alternative affordable housing. Affordable 
housing is:
 a) Affordable housing for rent : where the rent is set in accordance 
with the Government’s rent policy for Social Rent or Affordable 
Rent, or is at least 20% below local market rents. Affordable rented 
housing must remain at an affordable price for future eligible 
households, or include provision for the subsidy to be recycled for 
alternative affordable housing provision. 
 b) Starter homes : is as specified in Sections 2 and 3 of the Housing 
and Planning Act 2016 and any secondary legislation made under 
these sections. 
 c) Discounted market sales housing : is that sold at a discount of at 
least 20% below local market value. Eligibility is determined with 
regard to local incomes and local house prices. Provisions should 
be in place to ensure housing remains at a discount for future 
eligible households. 
 d) Other affordable routes to home ownership : is housing provided 
for sale that provides a route to ownership for those who could not 
achieve home ownership through the market. It includes shared 
ownership, relevant equity loans, other low cost homes for sale (at 
a price equivalent to at least 20% below local market value) and 
rent to buy (which includes a period of intermediate rent). Homes 
must remain at an affordable price for future eligible households 
or include provision for subsidy to be recycled for alternative 
affordable housing.
Homes which do not remain at an affordable price for future eligible 
households or include provision for subsidy to be recycled for alternative 
affordable housing will not be considered as affordable housing for 
planning purposes. Local needs custom and self-build housing is not 
affordable housing.
64that the land value also reflects its use for affordable housing. This will 
include ensuring the size of the plot and the building’s design support 
its affordability. In particular:
 ●Garages will not be acceptable, a modest car port may be.
 ●The property should have a modest amount of garden space. 
Large gardens or associated land and buildings will not be 
acceptable. 
 ●The finish of the property must be carefully considered. Whilst 
we will seek a high standard of design and build including 
aspects of sustainable design, a high internal specification is not 
appropriate for this type of housing, and could make the property 
unaffordable for an eligible household. 
 ●Permitted Development Rights will be removed in order to control 
extensions and alterations (including loft conversions), preventing 
the property from becoming less affordable. 
3.4.9 In developments where a proportion of affordable housing is 
required the development should either provide the number of units 
required, rounded up to the nearest single property, or may provide a 
contribution in lieu for any part of a unit required through policy.    Housing  653.5 Financial contributions in lieu of on-site 
Affordable Housing provision
3.5.1 National policy recognises that providing affordable housing 
on small development sites can be difficult to achieve. The Local Plan 
therefore provides some flexibility in how Affordable Housing can be 
provided on small sites to ensure policy is not unduly restrictive. This is 
achieved by allowing financial contributions (or ‘commuted sums’) in 
lieu of affordable housing on-site. Our approach varies depending on 
a development site’s location, it is summarised below. 
3.5.2 In Local Centres and Rural Settlements, where the majority of 
housing growth is planned, we will permit financial contributions in lieu 
of on-site Affordable Housing provision on small sites of: up to 5 units in 
Local Centres; and up to 3 units in Rural Settlements. This is set out in 
Strategic Policy 3.3  and Strategic Policy 3.4 .  
3.5.3 In Villages and Hamlets and in the open countryside, where 
there is greater need for affordable housing and the environment 
is more sensitive, our approach is more restrictive. Here financial 
contributions will only be acceptable where the proposal involves 
the creation of one or more new dwellings which comply with Local 
Plan policy, but provision of affordable housing is considered by the 
Authority to be inappropriate because of:
 ●the anticipated market value (e.g. being too expensive to be an 
affordable dwelling); or
 ●the feasibility of converting or adapting the building (e.g. building 
works are too complex and/or costly); or
 ●the impact the conversion or adaptation would have on the 
building (e.g. where the building works would harm a heritage 
asset).
3.5.4 Given the range of land and property values, and potential 
build costs across the National Park, we will negotiate financial 
contributions in lieu on a case by case basis. These sums should be 
calculated on an equivalent basis, i.e. the contribution would be equivalent to the provision of an affordable dwelling on-site. The 
principle being that the developer of a scheme should be no worse 
or better off where they provide the affordable housing required on-
site or as a financial contribution. The calculation of a commuted sum 
would therefore be based upon the difference between the value of 
a development providing the required amount of affordable housing 
in line with policy, and the value of that development as 100% market 
housing.
3.5.5 Applications which propose a contribution in lieu must therefore 
be supported by a viability appraisal and we will seek independent 
verification of this appraisal, as required, by a suitable professional 
instructed by the Authority and at the applicant’s cost.
Lower Green, South Brent663.6 Housing in classified settlements
3.6.1 Strategic Policy 3.3 , Strategic Policy 3.4 , and Strategic Policy 
3.5 set out the locations and types of housing which will be permitted 
within classified settlements.  Importantly, these policies must be 
considered alongside all other relevant Local Plan policies.  
3.6.2 In all classified settlements a rural exception site policy is in 
place, which enables additional affordable housing to come forward 
where this cannot be met within the settlement. Due to the dispersed 
and varied character of Dartmoor’s settlements, the merits of a site will 
be considered on a case by case basis, taking into account:
 ●the identified need for affordable housing;
 ●the availability of alternative sites within or adjoining the 
settlement;
 ●the relationship of the site with the settlement’s built form;
 ●the scale of development in relation to the site and character of 
the settlement; and
 ●the value of the land reflecting the fact that it would only be 
available for affordable housing.
3.6.3 Strategic Policy 3.3 sets out where new housing development 
will be permitted in Local Centres.  Within these settlements there are 
opportunities for the small scale development of affordable housing 
and local needs custom and self-build housing. A mix of housing, 
which includes local needs custom and self-build housing, may be 
appropriate, however the priority for Dartmoor’s limited land supply 
must be the delivery of affordable housing to meet identified local 
needs.
3.6.4 In classified settlements the need to make the best use of 
redundant buildings, brownfield land, and any land which may be 
suitable for development, means that affordable housing should 
normally be provided on-site. However, in some cases it may be 
appropriate to use a ‘commuted sum’ (see Section 3.5 ). 3.6.5 In some cases, the percentage of affordable housing 
required on an exception site in a Local Centre or Rural Settlement 
may be varied where a development is also delivering community 
infrastructure. Community infrastructure might include:
 ●public car park, highways, flood infrastructure or utilities 
improvements; and/or
 ●non-residential employment space required within the  
community.
3.6.6  These will only be taken into account in reducing the affordable 
housing requirement where they are necessary within the community 
and identified in the National Park Authority’s Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan. A viability appraisal of the development must demonstrate that 
any reduction in affordable housing from the policy requirement, is 
proportionate to the cost of the new community infrastructure being 
provided.
3.6.7 Where there is an evidenced need for employment space within 
a community this may be provided as part of a mixed development 
which provides affordable housing. This must be safeguarded for 
employment use in perpetuity. Permitted development rights will 
be removed to ensure it does not become residential use. If the 
employment space later proves undeliverable or unviable the land 
should become available for affordable housing.
3.6.8 Where the percentage of affordable housing is varied for 
reasons of development viability, this must be a last resort. The 
developer should first meet any funding gap through any reasonably 
available subsidy, or financial contribution offered by the Authority or 
Housing Authority.
  Housing  673.6.5 In some cases, the percentage of affordable housing 
required on an exception site in a Local Centre or Rural Settlement 
may be varied where a development is also delivering community 
infrastructure. Community infrastructure might include:
 ●public car park, highways, flood infrastructure or utilities 
improvements; and/or
 ●non-residential employment space required within the  
community.
3.6.6  These will only be taken into account in reducing the affordable 
housing requirement where they are necessary within the community 
and identified in the National Park Authority’s Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan. A viability appraisal of the development must demonstrate that 
any reduction in affordable housing from the policy requirement, is 
proportionate to the cost of the new community infrastructure being 
provided.
3.6.7 Where there is an evidenced need for employment space within 
a community this may be provided as part of a mixed development 
which provides affordable housing. This must be safeguarded for 
employment use in perpetuity. Permitted development rights will 
be removed to ensure it does not become residential use. If the 
employment space later proves undeliverable or unviable the land 
should become available for affordable housing.
3.6.8 Where the percentage of affordable housing is varied for 
reasons of development viability, this must be a last resort. The 
developer should first meet any funding gap through any reasonably 
available subsidy, or financial contribution offered by the Authority or 
Housing Authority.
Strategic Policy 3.3 Housing in Local Centres 
1. In Local Centres new housing development will be approved:
a) on sites allocated in this Local Plan or an adopted neighbourhood 
plan;
b) on sites within the settlement boundary; or
c) through the conversion, sub-division or change of use of existing 
buildings.
2. In developments of up to 5 dwellings, the development must: 
a) comprise local needs custom and self-build housing;  
b) comprise not less than 45% affordable housing provided on-site; or
c) provide a commuted sum equivalent to 45% affordable housing.
    This may be varied only where:
a) a higher proportion of open market housing is proven essential for 
the viability of the development; and
b) the development is still making a meaningful contribution towards 
the provision of affordable housing, community infrastructure, or 
environmental betterment within the wider settlement.   
3. In all developments of 6 dwellings or more, the development 
must comprise not less than 45% affordable housing provided on-
site. This may be varied only where:
a) a housing needs assessment would justify that the development 
includes a proportion of local needs custom and self-build housing 
to meet an identified local need; or 
b) a higher proportion of open market housing is proven essential for 
the viability of the development; and
c) the development is still making a significant contribution towards 
the provision of affordable housing, community infrastructure, or 
environmental betterment within the wider settlement. 
4. Exceptionally, where there is an identified need for affordable 
housing which cannot be met within the settlement boundary new 
housing development will be approved on suitable sites which are adjoining the settlement boundary. Development on these sites 
must comprise 100% affordable housing. This may be varied only 
where:
a) it is proven essential for the viability of the development and 
comprises not less than 75% affordable housing; or
b) a development is providing community infrastructure and/or non-
residential employment space which is proven necessary within 
the wider settlement, that any reduction in affordable housing 
is proportionate to the infrastructure and/or non-residential 
employment space provided and the development comprises 
not less than 45% affordable housing.
Little Bewden, Holne683.6.9 In Rural Settlements Strategic Policy 3.4 sets out opportunities 
for small scale development, and windfall development on previously 
developed land within the settlement boundary. A rural exception sites 
policy operates for sites within or adjoining the settlement boundary to 
enable development to come forward in response to an identified 
local need for affordable housing which cannot be met within the 
settlement boundary. 
Strategic Policy 3.4 Housing in Rural Settlements
1. In Rural Settlements new housing development will be approved:
a) on infill sites of up to 3 dwellings within the settlement boundary;
b) on previously developed land within the settlement boundary; or
c) through the conversion, sub-division or change of use of existing 
buildings. 
2. In developments of up to 3 dwellings within the Settlement 
Boundary, the development must: 
a) comprise local needs custom and self-build housing;  
b) comprise not less than 45% affordable housing provided on-site; or
c) provide a commuted sum equivalent to 45% affordable housing
       This may be varied only where:
i) a higher proportion of open market housing is proven essential for 
the viability of the development; and
ii) the development is still making a meaningful contribution towards 
the provision of affordable housing, community infrastructure, or 
environmental betterment within the wider settlement.   
3. Developments of 4 dwellings or more must be on previously 
developed land within the settlement boundary, development must 
comprise not less than 45% affordable housing provided on-site. This 
may be varied only where:
a) a housing needs assessment would justify that the development 
includes a proportion of local needs custom and self-build housing 
to meet an identified need; or 
b) a higher proportion of open market housing is proven essential for 
the viability of the development; and
c) the development is still making a significant contribution towards 
the provision of affordable housing, community infrastructure, or 
environmental betterment within the wider settlement.   Buckfast  Housing  694. Exceptionally, where there is an identified need for affordable 
housing, development will be approved on other suitable sites which 
are within or adjoining the settlement boundary. Development on 
these sites must comprise 100% affordable housing. This may be 
varied only where:
a) it is proven essential for the viability of the development and 
comprises not less than 75% affordable housing; or
b) a development is providing community infrastructure and/or non-
residential employment space which is proven necessary within 
the wider settlement, that any reduction in affordable housing 
is proportionate to the infrastructure and/or non-residential 
employment space provided and the development comprises not 
less than 45% affordable housing.Strategic Policy 3.5 Housing in Villages and Hamlets
1. In Villages and Hamlets new housing development will be 
approved:
a) on small infill sites within the settlement; 
b) on previously developed land within the settlement; or
c) through the conversion, sub-division or change of use of existing 
buildings within the settlement.
2. Development of up to 3 dwellings, will be approved, where it: 
a) is local needs custom or self-build housing, or 100% affordable 
housing, on previously developed land; 
b) is local needs custom or self-build housing, or 100% affordable 
housing provided through the conversion, sub-division or change of 
use of an existing building; or 
c) is on a small infill plot within an existing built frontage and within the 
settlement, and comprises local needs custom or self-build housing, 
or 100% affordable housing provided on-site.
3. Exceptionally, where there is an identified need for affordable 
housing, development will be approved on suitable sites which are 
within or adjoining the settlement, and well related to its existing built 
form. Development on these sites must:
a) comprise 100% affordable housing; or
b) where it is proven essential for the viability of the development, 
comprise not less than 75% affordable housing.3.6.10 In Villages and Hamlets opportunities for housing are more 
restricted. Infill development is restricted to affordable housing, or 
local needs custom and self-build housing on previously developed 
land. Villages and Hamlets can be more disperse in their form; infill 
sites must respect this form, and therefore be clearly within the built 
form of the settlement, not leading to sprawl or linear spread of these 
small settlements. A rural exception sites policy operates for sites within 
or adjoining the settlement boundary in response to an identified 
local need for affordable housing which cannot be met within the 
settlement (no settlement boundaries are identified in Villages and 
Hamlets).
3.6.11 Importantly, Villages and Hamlets are small settlements with a 
small population. Any development must be proportionate to the size 
of the settlement ensuring that, cumulatively, development does not 
harm its character or have an overbearing nature on the settlement 
or its community.      703.7 Custom and Self-Build Housing
3.7.1 Policies for housing development within classified settlements 
support the development of custom and self-build housing.  
Development of small sites or single plots can make a notable 
contribution towards housing delivery in the National Park. 
3.7.2 Custom and self-build housing is a long established route for 
new homes on Dartmoor.  This type of housing can have a range of 
benefits, including:
 ●Those who self-build may save money by carrying out work 
themselves (known as ‘sweat equity’), making access to home 
ownership more affordable
 ●It supports local suppliers, trades, and small builders
 ●Homes are tailored to the needs of the occupant, meaning also 
they are more likely to stay in the home and the community for 
longer
 ●There is scope for a greater variety of design, and a greater 
opportunity for higher quality, innovative and sustainable design
 ●It can make efficient use of land by using small or underused 
plots, and with a lower impact than larger scale development.
3.7.3 The housing strategy of the Local Plan is focussed upon the 
delivery of affordable housing. Custom and self-build housing can 
come forward as affordable housing on an exception site, on an 
allocated site or appropriate infill development opportunity.  In this 
instance affordable housing should be in line with the approach 
described in paragraph 3.4.4 .
3.7.4 Local needs custom and self-build housing may also be built, 
including as conversions, small infill development or as the market 
element of exception sites or allocated sites. Local needs custom and 
self-build housing will be subject to a section 106 legal agreement to 
ensure the property is only occupied by a Local Person (see definition 
in section 3.3 ). This policy enables a greater degree of opportunity © Thomas Dobnerto deliver custom and self-build housing, meeting government’s 
aspirations to increase the amount of housing coming forward through 
this route. 
3.7.5 Where policies allow for unrestricted market housing, this may 
also come forward as custom and self-build housing.  
Moretonhampstead  Housing  71to deliver custom and self-build housing, meeting government’s 
aspirations to increase the amount of housing coming forward through 
this route. 
3.7.5 Where policies allow for unrestricted market housing, this may 
also come forward as custom and self-build housing.  
Policy 3.6 Custom and Self-Build Housing
1. DNPA will positively encourage the delivery of custom and self-
build housing and be proactive in exploring ways to approve plots in 
pursuit of the duty set out in the Self-Build and Custom Housebuilding 
Regulations.
2. Custom and self-build housing may be approved as either:
a) affordable housing: house restricted to 93m2, occupation by an 
eligible household and its value, taking into account the occupancy 
condition, discounted by at least 20% in perpetuity; or
b) local needs custom and self-build housing: house restricted to 93m2 
and occupation by a Local Person in perpetuity; or
c) market housing: unrestricted housing.
in accordance with the strategic housing policies relevant to the 
site location, i.e. Strategic Policy 3.3 , Strategic Policy 3.4  or Strategic 
Policy 3.5 .Definition of Custom or Self-Build Housing
Custom or self-build housing means the building or completion of a 
house by:
 ●individuals;
 ●associations of individuals; or
 ●people working with or for individuals or associations of individuals, 
of houses to be occupied as homes by those individuals. 
More specifically, custom build housing is: a home commissioned by an 
individual for their own use, and to which they have had a significant 
influence over the design, layout and specification.
Self-build housing is: a home built in whole or in part by an individual for 
their own use and to which they have had a significant influence over 
the design, layout and specification. 
Custom or self-build housing does not include the building of a house 
on a plot purchased with detailed planning permission provided by 
the seller.  Local Centres
Ashburton, Buckfastleigh, Chagford, Horrabridge, 
Moretonhampstead, Princetown, South Brent, 
YelvertonHousing Strategy Summary Diagram
Exception sites
For local needs which 
cannot be met within 
Settlement Boundary.
100% AH, up to 25% cross 
subsidy where essential 
for viability; or
Minimum 45% AH where 
providing necessary 
infrastructure. Allocated sites 
Identified in Chapter 7
45% AH
Infill sites 
≤ 5 dwellings: 45% AH on-site 
or commuted sum, or no AH if 
Local Needs Custom- or 
Self-build restricted to 
occupation by local people.
≥ 6 dwellings: 45% AH on-siteSettlement boundaryRural Settlements
Bittaford, Bridford, Buckfast, Cheriton Cross / Bishop, 
Christow, Cornwood, Dousland, Dunsford, Hennock, 
Ilsington, Liverton, Mary Tavy, South Zeal, Sticklepath, 
Walkhampton, Whiddon Down
Settlement
Exception sites
For local needs which 
cannot be met within 
Settlement Boundary.
100% AH, up to 25% 
cross subsidy where 
essential for viability; or
Minimum 45% AH where 
providing necessary 
infrastructure.Infill sites 
≤ 3 dwellings: 45% AH on-site 
or commuted sum, or no AH 
if Local Needs Custom- or 
Self-build restricted to 
occupation by local 
people.
≥ 4 dwellings on Previously 
Developed Land: 45% AH 
on-site.
All other sites are exception 
sites.Settlement boundarySettlementVillages and Hamlets
Belstone, Dean Prior, Drewsteignton, Holne, Lustleigh, 
Lydford, Manaton, Meavy, North Bovey, North Brentor, 
Peter Tavy, Postbridge, Scorriton, Shaugh Prior, Sourton, 
South Tawton, Throwleigh, Widecombe-in-the-Moor
Exception sites
≥ 4 dwellings for local 
needs within or 
adjoining settlement.
100% AH, up to 25% 
cross subsidy where 
essential for viability.Infill sites 
≤ 3 dwellings: 100% AH 
on-site, or no AH if Local 
Needs Custom- and 
Self-Build restricted to 
occupation by local 
people.
All other sites are 
exception sitesSettlement
AH: Affordable Housing    ≤: Less than or equal to    ≥: More than or equal to
Summary only, detailed policy wording will be relied upon for decision making. 72New housing is tightly restricted as per national 
policy. Opportunities generally limited to:
• Agriculture, forestry and rural workers’      
housing to meet needs of rural land-based 
businesses.
• Conversion of redundant historic buildings, 
where well related to services and facilities 
or as part of farm diversification. 
Employment uses are required to be 
demonstrated not viable and works 
sympathetic. Open Countryside
All land which is not within or adjoining Local Centres, 
Rural Settlements and Villages and Hamlets
How to identify land 
This graphic shows how land around settlements is identified as within, adjoining or in the open 
countryside.
Settlement boundary
Boundaries shown in Chapter 7. 
Villages and Hamlets have no 
settlement boundaries, professional 
judgement used to determine if land is 
within or adjacent the settlement.Adjoining
A site outside, but touching, 
the settlement boundary. Within
A site inside the 
settlement boundary.
Open countryside
A site wholly outside the 
settlement boundary.Settlement
  Housing  73743.8 Householder Development
3.8.1 Changes to a dwelling, such as extensions, conservatories, 
loft conversions and other alterations are known as ‘householder 
development’. Some of these changes may be ‘permitted 
development’, meaning they do not need planning permission. In the 
National Park extensions, alterations to the roof, and new outbuildings 
will typically need planning permission. 
3.8.2 Dartmoor’s popularity as a place to live means it has much 
higher than average house prices: for decades prices have risen 
steadily and more recently these rises have outstripped wages. 
Dartmoor’s housing affordability ratio (median earnings : median 
house price) is now extremely high (see section 3.1 ).
3.8.3 Although extending a property can be more cost effective for 
a family’s changing needs, over time this has reduced the available 
stock of smaller and more affordable homes in the National Park. 
It is now far harder for local people to afford to live in the National 
Park, they are more likely to be in affordable housing need or have 
to move outside the National Park. Evidence shows this pressure on 
workers also affects local businesses who often struggle to find staff, 
particularly in the tourism, and food and drink services industries. It also 
reduces opportunities for elderly people to downsize and encourages 
the separate sale of farmhouses from farm land.
The 30% rule
3.8.4 To support sustainable communities and a vibrant economy it 
is important to ensure the National Park retains a mix of house sizes. The 
Local Plan therefore sets restrictions on householder development. All 
policies relating to residential extensions, outbuildings and replacement 
homes require proposals not to increase the habitable floorspace of 
the original dwelling by more than 30%. This is in addition to the design, 
amenity and other typical considerations which will be considered as 
part of a planning application for householder development.3.8.5 The original dwelling  is the dwelling as it existed on 1 April 
1995 (the year of the most recent primary legislation for National Park 
Authorities) or the original dwelling if constructed after this date. Ancillary 
buildings will only be considered part of the original dwelling where 
they are converted to habitable floorspace, attached to the main 
dwelling, and accessed via a fully enclosed corridor or walkway (i.e. 
you should not have to go outside to access them). Accommodation 
in roof spaces will only be included where it is converted, accessed via 
a permanent staircase and has a ceiling height of at least 1.8m.
3.8.6 Habitable floorspace  is defined as the areas of a dwelling 
which are usually lived in (living rooms, kitchens, bathrooms, hallways 
etc.). Habitable floorspace should be measured using gross internal 
floor area (GIFA): the area of a building measured to the internal face 
of the perimeter walls at each floor level. However, any areas which 
are not currently lived in should be excluded (garages, workshops 
etc.). For clarity, a detailed definition of habitable floorspace, what it 
includes and excludes, is provided in the Glossary.
3.8.7 When assessing whether proposals comply with the 30% rule, all 
habitable floorspace which has been, or is proposed to be, added to 
the original dwelling will be included. This includes:
 ●any extension, including those completed with permitted 
development rights;
 ●any outbuildings which contain habitable floorspace (e.g. living 
space above garages); and
 ●any proposed replacement dwelling which exceeds the original 
dwelling’s habitable floorspace.
Non-Habitable Floorspace
A garage / utility roomNon-Habitable Floorspace
Unconverted loft space
Habitable Floorspace
A bedroom and living room  Housing  753.8.5 The original dwelling  is the dwelling as it existed on 1 April 
1995 (the year of the most recent primary legislation for National Park 
Authorities) or the original dwelling if constructed after this date. Ancillary 
buildings will only be considered part of the original dwelling where 
they are converted to habitable floorspace, attached to the main 
dwelling, and accessed via a fully enclosed corridor or walkway (i.e. 
you should not have to go outside to access them). Accommodation 
in roof spaces will only be included where it is converted, accessed via 
a permanent staircase and has a ceiling height of at least 1.8m.
3.8.6 Habitable floorspace  is defined as the areas of a dwelling 
which are usually lived in (living rooms, kitchens, bathrooms, hallways 
etc.). Habitable floorspace should be measured using gross internal 
floor area (GIFA): the area of a building measured to the internal face 
of the perimeter walls at each floor level. However, any areas which 
are not currently lived in should be excluded (garages, workshops 
etc.). For clarity, a detailed definition of habitable floorspace, what it 
includes and excludes, is provided in the Glossary.
3.8.7 When assessing whether proposals comply with the 30% rule, all 
habitable floorspace which has been, or is proposed to be, added to 
the original dwelling will be included. This includes:
 ●any extension, including those completed with permitted 
development rights;
 ●any outbuildings which contain habitable floorspace (e.g. living 
space above garages); and
 ●any proposed replacement dwelling which exceeds the original 
dwelling’s habitable floorspace.
Non-Habitable Floorspace
A garage / utility roomNon-Habitable Floorspace
Unconverted loft space
Habitable Floorspace
A bedroom and living roomResidential alterations, extensions and outbuildings
3.8.8 Alterations, extensions and outbuildings are a common way of 
upgrading and increasing available space in the home. The objective 
of this policy is to:
 ●prevent unsympathetic alterations and extensions; and 
 ●retain a mix of dwelling sizes to help sustain balanced communities 
across the National Park.
3.8.9 Unsympathetic works can detract from a building’s character, 
quality and its immediate surroundings. In some cases households 
may see the desire for more floorspace as more important than good 
design. It is an important element of policy to ensure that residential 
extensions are subservient to the original dwelling and respect its 
original architecture. In most cases this can be achieved by following  
these basic design principles: 
 ●their scale should be subordinate to the existing house;
 ●eaves and ridge heights should be below that of the existing 
house;
 ●they should be on the side or rear of the property, not on the 
front; and 
 ●materials should complement those on the existing house, with a 
preference for natural materials characteristic of Dartmoor.
3.8.10 More detailed design guidance is provided in the Dartmoor 
National Park Design Guide  and should be considered when designing 
householder development proposals.
3.8.11 An extension also offers an opportunity to improve energy 
efficiency and reduce our impact on climate change. The energy 
efficiency of Dartmoor’s housing stock is very poor and a very high 
proportion of homes are difficult to improve, such as those off the gas 
network and of solid wall construction.
3.8.12 To ensure permitted development rights are not used to avoid Figure 3.1 Identifying habitable and non-habitable floorspace 76the 30% rule after permission is granted, permissions will be subject 
to a condition removing permitted development rights in respect of 
extensions. Where there is a possibility of habitable accommodation 
becoming a separate dwelling over time (e.g. a granny annexe), 
permissions will be subject to a condition or legal agreement requiring 
it remains ancillary and tied to the principal dwelling.
3.8.13 There are only two exceptions where a proposal which 
exceeds the 30% rule will be permitted: 
 ●if the original dwelling’s habitable floorspace is smaller than the 
standard set out in National technical housing standards28 for that 
type of dwelling, in which case a 30% increase from the relevant 
standard will be permitted; or
 ●if a minor increase is necessary to ensure the proposed design 
conserves the dwelling’s special character.
3.8.14 Proposals to extend domestic curtilage (e.g. gardens) will 
be decided based on their impact on landscape character, the 
surrounding built environment and other National Park Special 
Qualities, and also taking into account the impact of the extension on 
the affordability of the house. Domestication of the pastoral landscape 
can be harmful to its character. It will generally be resisted where it 
would not deliver environmental enhancement.
3.8.15 Proposals for the merging of one or more dwellings into a 
single dwelling impact on the availability of smaller more affordable 
homes in the National Park, and would normally constitute a material 
change of use. These proposals will not be permitted, except where 
the building was previously a single dwelling.
3.8.16 The subdivision of homes can be a way of creating smaller 
and more affordable homes, however proposals for subdivision must 
carefully consider other relevant policies in the Local Plan, including 
impact upon the character of the property, and the effect of an 
intensification of use upon highways, parking needs, and amenity. 
3.8.17 In the open countryside, subdivision will only be permitted 
28  Technical Housing Standards - nationaly described space standards (MHCLG, 2015)where it subdivides the habitable floorspace of an original dwelling, 
as defined in 3.8.5 . Conversion and subdivision of non-habitable 
floorspace (e.g. garages and outbuildings) or habitable floorspace 
which is not connected or accessed from the original dwelling (e.g. 
granny annexes) will not be permitted. The new dwelling will be required 
to be affordable housing (see definition in section 3.4)  or rural workers’ 
accommodation (see section 3. 9). However, there may be occasions 
where on-site provision of affordable housing is inappropriate and a 
financial contribution in lieu of provision of affordable housing on-site is 
sought on an equivalent basis. Our approach for determining when a 
contribution will be acceptable is explained in section 3.5 .
Policy 3.7 Residential alterations, extensions and 
outbuildings
1. Residential alterations, extensions and outbuildings will be 
permitted provided that, either individually or cumulatively with 
previous works, they:
a) reflect the design principles set out in the Design Guide;
b) are subservient to the original dwelling and conserve or enhance 
its character, appearance, curtilage and immediate surroundings; 
and
c) do not increase the habitable floorspace of the original dwelling by 
more than 30%.
2. In exceptional circumstances an increase in habitable floorspace 
which exceeds the 30% allowable will be permitted where:
a) the original dwelling’s size is below technical housing standards33, in 
which case a 30% increase from the applicable technical housing 
standards will be permitted; or 
b) a minor increase is necessary to ensure the design conserves and/
or enhances the dwelling’s special character.  Housing  77
Shuttaford Farm, Holne © Francesca Wadia3. Where the above is satisfied permissions will normally be subject 
to a condition removing permitted development rights in respect 
of extensions. Where the proposal involves the creation of ancillary 
accommodation, permission will be subject to a condition or legal 
agreement requiring it remain ancillary and tied to the principal 
dwelling.
4. Extensions and/or outbuildings will not be permitted if the dwelling 
is:
a) unauthorised or has become immune from enforcement action 
through, for example, the passage of time or with the benefit of a 
Certificate of Lawful Use of Development; or 
b) limited by a rural workers’ occupancy condition and the extension 
would result in a gross internal floor area over 106m2; or
c) an affordable dwelling.
5. The merging of more than one dwelling to create a single dwelling 
will not be permitted, except where the building was previously a 
single dwelling.
6. The subdivision of an existing dwelling in the open countryside will 
only be permitted where:
a) it subdivides the habitable floorspace of the original dwelling; and
b) the new dwelling(s) is affordable housing or rural workers’ 
accommodation, or where this is demonstrated to be unviable or 
inappropriate, an equivalent off-site affordable housing contribution 
is made.78Replacement Homes
3.8.18 When designed well, replacement homes can help improve 
the character and appearance of an area and replace sub-standard 
housing. However, replacement homes should not replace structures 
of heritage, architectural or cultural interest. 
3.8.19 The loss of embodied energy in any demolished structures 
and the energy consumption required to produce new materials is 
also an issue. To avoid wasteful development which unnecessarily 
contributes to climate change this policy requires replacement homes 
to deliver a major additional improvement in energy efficiency which 
could not otherwise be achieved through alteration or improvement 
of the existing building. Equally, homes which are perfectly capable 
of alteration or improvement should not be demolished and replaced. 
In considering whether a significant improvement in energy efficiency 
is being achieved, the loss of embodied energy from the existing 
building should be taken into account.  
3.8.20 To ensure permitted development rights are not used to avoid 
the 30% rule after permission is granted, permissions for replacement 
homes will be subject to a condition removing permitted development 
rights in respect of extensions.Policy 3.8 Replacement Homes 
1. Replacement homes will be permitted provided they will lead 
to:
a) removal of a dilapidated dwelling; or 
b) a significant improvement in energy efficiency which could not be 
achieved by modification or adaptation of the existing dwelling; 
and
c) the building is not on or would not be a candidate for inclusion on 
the Historic Environment Record (HER).
2. Proposed replacement homes must:
a) enhance their local environment and reflect the design principles 
set out in the Design Guide; and
b) not increase the habitable floorspace of the original dwelling by 
more than 30%.
3. An increase in habitable floorspace which exceeds the 30% 
allowable will only be permitted where the original dwelling’s size 
does not meet technical housing standards. In which case a 30% 
increase from the applicable technical housing standard will be 
allowed.
4. Permission for a replacement home will normally be subject to 
a condition removing permitted development rights in respect of 
extensions.   Housing  793.9 Rural Workers’ Housing
3.9.1 Rural workers are workers on land-based enterprises located 
in the countryside. Traditionally comprising agriculture and forestry 
workers, but more recently including equestrian, horticultural and 
other rural land-based enterprises.
3.9.2 There is a demand for homes in the countryside from all sectors 
of the community, caused by a shortage of more affordable housing 
and the desirability of the National Park as a place to live. In Dartmoor 
this has led to rising house prices and an increase in pressure to sell 
desirable countryside homes, many of which used to accommodate 
agricultural and other rural workers. 
3.9.3 The separate sale of farmhouses, divorced from the rest 
of the farm, has brought about the loss of much needed worker 
accommodation. Although farm sizes are increasing there remains 
a clear and continuing need for agricultural and other rural workers’ 
dwellings. This is evident by the number of planning applications 
received.
3.9.4 This policy ensures rural workers’ dwellings are only approved 
where there is an essential need, and not where need is artificially or 
unnecessarily created. We will not approve a rural worker’s dwelling if 
a need is created through recent sale of another dwelling separately 
from the land holding. The history of the holding will be investigated to 
ensure that only genuine applications are approved.
3.9.5 ‘Essential need’ means specific management activities 
which require a worker’s presence at most times and which cannot 
be achieved by other means, such as electronic surveillance, 
mechanical watering etc. Essential need is demonstrated by there 
being circumstances which might threaten the stability and economic 
viability of an enterprise and need to be managed day and night 
most of the week, such as animal welfare and crop quality. Security 
concerns will not, on their own, be sufficient to justify a new dwelling.
3.9.6 Where a new rural worker’s dwelling is proposed to service a new 
rural enterprise, a temporary dwelling will be allowed for three years, in order to demonstrate the need and the viability of the business. A 
permanent new rural worker’s dwelling will only be acceptable where 
the business has been established for three years, profitable for at least 
one, currently financially sound and has a clear prospect of remaining 
so. Further temporary permissions will not be granted. 
3.9.7 To demonstrate there is an essential need for a worker (the 
functional test) and the business is viable (the financial test) applicants 
will be required to submit a rural business appraisal. Where necessary, 
we may seek independent verification of an appraisal, at the 
applicant’s expense.
3.9.8 The size of new rural workers’ housing is critical. New dwellings 
should be modestly sized to safeguard the farm holding’s affordability 
and ensure it can be purchased at a competitive value in the future. 
Whilst many farms will pass down within a family, those which don’t 
should be accessible for new entrants to the sector. They should 
be capable of being affordable dwellings, should the occupation 
condition need to be removed in the future. The size of dwellings 
should therefore reflect the evidenced need and are restricted to a 
maximum gross internal floor area of 106m2. This includes all storage, 
boot and equipment rooms. Outbuildings and garages will not 
normally be acceptable because of their impact on affordability, a 
modest car port may be. For many smaller farms, separate offices will 
not be necessary. Where they are justified they will generally need to 
be no larger than a small bedroom of around 10m2 and will be allowed 
in addition to the 106m2 size restriction.
3.9.9 To ensure housing for rural workers remains available and 
connected to land, all new rural workers dwellings will be subject to 
the following:
 ●An occupancy condition requiring the dwelling only be used for 
the needs of the rural enterprise, additionally conditions may be 
imposed to restrict occupancy of other associated dwellings on 
the same holding
 ●A condition removing permitted development rights so that any 80future alterations or extensions can be controlled to conserve the 
dwelling’s character and affordability
 ●A legal agreement which ties the dwelling to the farm holding 
and ensures the dwelling is not sold separately from the land in 
the future, also known as an anti-severance obligation.
3.9.10 Permission will not be unreasonably withheld to vary the 
land associated with an anti-severance obligation. To allow flexibility 
for future business needs a portion (typically around 25%) of the 
applicant’s land holding, at the time planning permission is sought, 
may also be left untied. In both circumstances the tied land must be 
sufficient to ensure the business’ future viability.
Removal of rural workers’ occupancy conditions
3.9.11 Where a rural workers’ house is no longer needed by the 
current occupant, the occupancy condition should remain in place 
so it can serve the wider area. Removal of a rural worker occupancy 
condition will only be permitted following rigorous assessment and 
where evidence demonstrates there is no demand for the unit. 
Policy 3.9 Rural Workers’ Housing 
1. The principle of new rural workers’ housing will only be acceptable 
where:
a) it is justified by an essential need for a full-time rural worker in 
agriculture, forestry or other rural land-based business to live 
permanently at or near their place of work;
b) the business has been established for at least three years, profitable 
for at least one, is currently financially sound and has a clear 
prospect of remaining so; and
c) the business and land management activity contributes to the 
conservation and/or enhancement of the National Park’s Special 
Qualities.2. Where the principle of new rural workers’ housing is acceptable 
proposals should:
a) use suitable redundant historic buildings before proposing the 
construction of new buildings;
b) be clustered with existing building groups and conserve and/
or enhance the National Park’s Special Qualities, particularly 
landscape character, heritage significance, and biodiversity; and
c) be sized to reflect the evidenced need and not have a gross 
internal floor area of larger than 106m2.
3. Where the above is satisfied, permission will be granted subject 
to the following:
a) an occupancy condition requiring the dwelling only be used by a 
rural worker;
b) a legal agreement tying the dwelling and any other relevant 
dwellings to the holding; and, normally
c) a condition removing permitted development rights.
4. To support the establishment of a new farm or other rural land-
based business, permission for a residential caravan will be granted 
for a temporary period up to 3 years. New enterprises will be required 
to meet the functional and financial tests set out in Part 1 of this 
policy, the viability of the business should be demonstrated through 
business planning.
5. Removal of a rural worker’s occupancy condition will only be 
approved where:
a) evidence demonstrates there is no demand for rural workers’ 
housing in the area and the property has been offered on the 
open market for rent, sale or lease for not less than 12 consecutive 
months at a price which reflects the occupancy condition; and
b) the applicant enters into a legal agreement ensuring the property 
is affordable housing.  Housing  81Residential annexes to support farming
3.9.12 The physical and variable nature of upland farming work 
means farms typically operate using flexible work practices: making 
use of part-time or informal workers. Older farmers will also often stay 
working on the farm well into retirement, but on a more part-time basis. 
These work practices often create a need for more accommodation 
than a single small farmhouse can offer. Given the importance of 
agriculture to the conservation of the National Park’s biodiversity, 
landscape and heritage significance, this policy’s objective is to allow 
for a new residential annexe where there is a need: 
 ●to accommodate an agricultural worker; or 
 ●to provide for a retired farmer where the annexe would free up 
an existing dwelling for a full time worker. 
3.9.13 An annexe could facilitate farm succession, but could also 
support part-time agricultural workers and therefore the rural economy 
more widely. An annexe will be allowed as an exception to the normal 
restrictions on extensions to rural workers’ dwellings set out in Policy 3.7 .
3.9.14 This policy should be read alongside Policy 5.9  which allows 
the conversion of a redundant historic building to a dwelling to support 
farm diversification. Where no redundant historic buildings suitable 
for conversion exist, this policy provides an alternative approach. 
It is important to understand that only one of these policies can be 
pursued on any farm holding. In other words, where accommodation 
has been permitted under one policy it will not be permitted under 
the other.
3.9.15 Eligible farm enterprises must be viable and meet the same 
financial and conservation tests set out in part 1 of the rural workers’ 
housing policy ( Policy 3.9 ). Applicants will need to demonstrate the 
above by submitting a rural business appraisal. The functional need for 
the accommodation does not need to be essential, but the appraisal 
should demonstrate an eligible agricultural worker exists and that 
housing them on the holding will benefit the farm enterprise.  
Challacombe Farm, Widecombe-in-the-Moor82Policy 3.10 Residential annexes to support farming 
1. In exception to the restrictions on residential extensions and 
alterations set out in Policy 3.7 , development of one new residential 
annexe on a farm holding will be acceptable where:
a) there is a need for additional agricultural worker accommodation 
to support the farm holding;
b) there is at least one rural worker’s dwelling on the holding;
c) the existing accommodation is not sufficient to meet the need;  
d) the business meets the financial and conservation tests for rural 
workers’ housing set out in Part 1 of Policy 3.9 ; and
e) no residential accommodation has already been permitted under 
this Policy or Policy 5.9 .
2. Where the principle of an annexe is acceptable proposals 
should:
a) be located close to and share some facilities with the existing 
dwelling;
b) be subservient to the existing dwelling and not adversely affect its 
appearance, curtilage or immediate surroundings; and
c) have a gross internal floor area of no more than 40m2.
3. Where the above is satisfied, permission will be granted subject 
to the following:
a) an occupancy condition requiring the dwelling only be used for 
the needs of a rural worker; 
b) a condition tying the annexe to the associated dwelling; and, 
normally
c) a condition removing permitted development rights.3.9.16 The design of annexes will be closely controlled. They should 
be located close to and share facilities with the main dwelling, be 
subordinate in scale and respond to their local environment in 
accordance with the design policies in this plan. All annexes will be 
restricted in size to no more than 40m2 gross internal floor area (GIFA).
3.9.17 In order to meet the objective of this policy, it is important 
to ensure an annexe remains tied to the main dwelling and farm. 
Permissions will therefore be subject to conditions restricting occupancy 
to a rural worker and tying the annexe to the main dwelling.
Kings Tor © Adrian Oakes  Housing  833.10 Gypsy and traveller accommodation
3.10.1 The Government’s overarching aim is to ensure fair and equal 
treatment for travellers, in a way that facilitates the traditional and 
nomadic way of life of travellers while respecting the interests of the 
settled community.
3.10.2 The most recent Gypsy and traveller Accommodation 
Assessment (GTAA) for Devon29 indicated a very low level of need for 
Dartmoor National Park. Given this, it is not appropriate for this Local 
Plan to identify a pitch target for Gypsy and traveller sites.  Instead 
a criteria based policy is set out below which enables suitable sites 
to come forward where a need is identified through an up to date 
GTAA, and/or appropriate local information on needs. Consistent with 
Government Guidance30, this policy takes into account: 
 ●peaceful and integrated co-existence between the site and the 
local community
 ●access to and availability of health and education services and 
infrastructure
 ●a settled base that reduces both the need for long-distance 
travelling and possible environmental damage caused by 
unauthorised encampment 
 ●local environmental quality, and health and well-being, and 
vulnerability to flood risk
 ●the potential inherent sustainability of traditional lifestyles 
It must also comply with relevant building regulations and health and 
safety requirements. 
3.10.3 Sites for Gypsy and traveller accommodation should be within 
or adjoining a Local Centre or Rural Settlement. Where no suitable site 
is available within or adjoining a Local Centre or Rural Settlement, a 
site outside but well-related to the settlement may be acceptable. 
Suitable sites for Gypsy and traveller accommodation (and for Low 
Impact Development), which are well-related to a settlement must:
 ●take a sequential approach, considering previously developed 
land first, and flood risk;
29  Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment (Devon Partnership, 2015)
30  Planning policy for traveller sites (MHCLG, 2015) ●be within a reasonable and safe walking distance of the centre 
of the settlement;
 ●have a safe suitable highway access;
 ●have reasonable access to utilities, with any new telephone or 
electricity connections being placed underground;
 ●be of a size which is proportionate to the adjacent community; 
and
 ●be consistent with other relevant policies within this Local Plan, 
including matters of landscape character, tranquillity, and the 
natural and historic environment.
Policy 3.11 Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation
1. Proposals for small scale development of permanent or transit 
sites for Gypsy and traveller accommodation will be permitted where 
need for such development in the National Park is demonstrated by 
a Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment.
2. Permanent and transit sites must be within, adjoining, or well-
related to a Local Centre or Rural Settlement. Applications should 
consider whether any reasonable alternative sites are available 
outside the National Park.
3.  Sites must:
a) be of a scale which is appropriate for and does not dominate the 
settlement and its community;
b) take into account local amenity;
c) have suitable highway, pedestrian and utilities access; and
d) take a sequential approach to the use of previously developed 
land and not be located in areas of high flood risk, consistent with 
other policies in this Local Plan.
4. Permission will be subject to a section 106 legal agreement 
to ensure occupation is limited to those meeting the definition of 
Gypsies and travellers in the relevant national planning policy.843.11 Low Impact Residential Development
3.11.1 A fundamental principle of the NPPF’s environmental 
ambition is supporting a transition to the low carbon economy, through 
encouraging the reuse of existing resources and use of renewable 
resources (including renewable energy) to minimise our impact on 
climate change. Planning can play a key role in supporting a transition 
to a low carbon economy which is central to the economic, social 
and environmental aspects of sustainable development. 
3.11.2 This Local Plan aims to take an inclusive approach to 
sustainable development, supporting the varied needs of Dartmoor’s 
community. There is a growing movement of people who genuinely 
wish to live differently and take it upon themselves to pursue 
development and a lifestyle which is far more sustainable and low 
impact than what is considered normal in the 21st Century. Their 
homes are unconventional structures, built on-site, of natural materials 
sourced within the locality. Whilst a home may be of non-standard 
construction, it must meet relevant building regulations, and provide 
safe and healthy living accommodation. 
3.11.3 Low impact means not only being broadly self-sufficient, but 
doing so in a way which has no significant environmental impact and 
instead brings environmental enhancements. This includes landscape, 
biodiversity, cultural heritage, air, water and soil quality and other 
relevant environmental enhancements on-site. 
3.11.4 Landscape character is particularly relevant to this type of 
development, new buildings will have least impact on landscape 
character when clustered and located next to existing buildings. 
Development in isolated locations, away from existing development, 
will often have an unacceptable impact on landscape character.
3.11.5 The use of the land may be genuinely experimental, and 
also include elements of education and research; however these 
activities must also be taken into account in the overall impact of the 
development, e.g. travel to and from the site. Where a development 
is outside, but well related to a settlement, it must meet the criteria 
described in 3.10.3.3.11.6 It may be appropriate to permit a temporary permission in 
the first instance in order to test or demonstrate policy compliance.  
However government guidance states that it will rarely be justifiable 
to grant a second temporary permission; further permissions should 
normally be granted permanently or refused. There is no presumption 
that a temporary planning permission should be then granted 
permanently.
3.11.7 This policy allows for a departure from policy outside of 
classified settlements, so it is critical that proposals must clearly 
demonstrate a truly low impact approach, and will therefore undergo 
rigorous assessment. Proposals must be supported by robust evidence 
including:
 ●Business and Improvement Plan : in order to clearly identify 
the need to live on the site, quantifying how the inhabitants’ 
requirements in terms of income, food, energy and waste 
assimilation can be obtained directly from the site, and 
demonstrating that land use activities proposed are capable 
of supporting the needs of the occupants within a reasonable 
period of time and no more than 5 years from first occupation
 ●Ecological Footprint Analysis : for the occupation of the site 
- providing a figure for the land area required to support an 
individual, a family or a community in terms of food, resources, 
energy, waste assimilation, and greenhouse gases mitigation. 
Developments should demonstrate that they will achieve an 
Ecological Footprint consistent with this type of low impact living.
 ●Zero Carbon Analysis : for the construction and use of buildings - 
demonstrating that a zero carbon status will be achieved
 ●Landscape and Visual Assessment, Biodiversity Assessments : 
in order to prove the development is appropriate in its local 
context, conserving the Special Qualities of the National Park 
and providing environmental gain.      Housing  85 ●Travel Plan and Transport Statement or Assessment : assessing 
traffic generated by the development, and demonstrating the 
suitability and sustainability of its location through ready access 
to other services and facilities by walking or cycling.   
3.11.8 In order for proposals to clearly demonstrate the achievability 
of the project, permissions will only be granted initially on a temporary 
basis.  
Policy 3.12 Low Impact Residential Development
1. Low impact residential development will be permitted where:
a) the proposal is located within, adjoining, or well-related to a Local 
Centre, Rural Settlement or Village and Hamlet; 
b) the proposal is proportionate in scale to the settlement it relates to;
c) the proposal will make a positive environmental, social and 
economic contribution; 
d) all activities and structures on site are demonstrated to have a low 
impact in terms of the environment and use of resources, consistent 
with development of this type; 
e) the development uses suitable redundant historic buildings before 
proposing the construction of new buildings; 
f) the development conserves and/or enhances the National Park’s 
Special Qualities, particularly landscape character, heritage 
significance and biodiversity; 
g) where located outside a settlement, the proposal requires a 
countryside location, involves agriculture, forestry or horticulture 
and is tied directly to the land on which it is located; 
h) the proposal demonstrates a business plan and sufficient land Is 
available which can provide for the livelihood and substantially 
meet the needs of all residents on the site within a reasonable 
period of time and no more than 5 years from first occupation; i) the number of adult residents is directly related to the functional 
requirements of the enterprise; and
j) in the event of the development involving members of more than 
one family, the proposal will be managed and controlled by a trust .
2.   Where the above is satisfied permission will first be granted:
a) for a temporary period of up to 6 years; and
b)  subject to the condition that at five years from the development’s 
first occupation a Monitoring Report is submitted to the Authority 
reporting on how the requirements of this policy have been 
achieved.
3. Following the grant of temporary permission, permanent 
permission will only be granted where the Authority is satisfied the 
policy requirements have been and will continue to be met.86
4  Communities, Services 
and Infrastructure
MoretonhampsteadStrategy
DNPA will strive to support the needs of Dartmoor’s communities.
New services and facilities, including for transport, education, health, 
community, culture, sport and recreation purposes, will be supported. 
New development should protect and/or improve the quality and 
range of sports and play facilities.
New development should be located where it enables the most 
effective use of sustainable transport, minimising our impact on climate 
change. New sustainable transport networks, including infrastructure 
for cycling and walking, electric car charging, bus and rail, will be 
supported where they are consistent with the National Park’s Special 
Qualities.
New development will be expected to contribute to the provision of 
new services, facilities and infrastructure where this is necessary.
Proposals which will result in loss of community services, facilities and/or 
infrastructure will be resisted. 
New development should provide an appropriate amount of parking, 
and demonstrate how it will have either a neutral or positive effect on 
congestion.  
The access network will be protected and enhanced where 
opportunities exist. Development likely to increase harmful recreational 
pressure on Dartmoor will be mitigated.
  Communities, Services and Infrastructure  87884.1 Community Services and Facilities
4.1.1 ‘Community services and facilities’ are social and cultural 
services and facilities which support the social well-being of the 
community as a whole, or a substantial portion of it. 
4.1.2 The vitality and well-being of Dartmoor’s communities is reliant 
upon local services and facilities which meet their day-to-day needs. 
These include health, education, emergency services, community halls, 
car parks, public transport, places of worship, cultural infrastructure 
(museums, art galleries etc.) and libraries. They can also include more 
commercial enterprises such as pubs and post offices, and ‘Assets of 
Community Value’ which communities can nominate themselves31.
4.1.3 Funding, developing and maintaining facilities can be an 
enormous task for small communities and, once established, they are 
easily undermined by short term interests. The Authority will support 
development of new facilities in appropriate locations where they are 
needed. As far as we are able we will also ensure necessary facilities 
are not lost. The planning system can protect community facilities 
and services from harmful development, but it cannot require the 
continuation of services which are not feasible or viable. 
4.1.4 The protection of the National Park’s community services and 
facilities is all the more important given the National Park’s ageing 
population. Services which support the elderly population and 
encourage retention of young people and families are of particular 
importance to the National Park’s communities. However, increasing 
second home ownership, reducing household sizes and use of online 
services is likely to threaten the viability of many services into the future.
4.1.5 The case for losing community services or facilities cannot be 
based upon the short term needs of an owner or tenant, or their current 
business model. The case must demonstrate a business or facility is 
not workable in the long term by exploring the full range of potential 
uses or ways to operate it. For example, the loss of an important pub 
will not be allowed based only on the failure of the current owner’s 
business model. Marketing evidence and independent assessments 
of the facility’s potential will be expected, taking into consideration 
31  Find out more in Understanding the Community Right to Bid (My Community, 2016)alternative uses or ways to make the service or facility more viable. 
Evidence should be proportionate to the scale of the loss and flexibility 
will be allowed where it is clear the facility is only suited to a specialist 
use.
4.1.6 Where the viability of services and/or facilities is genuinely 
threatened it may be possible to combine facilities, or introduce 
complementary commercial activities (such as shops, cafes, or offices) 
which help to secure their long term future without undermining the 
principal service and/or facility. 
  Communities, Services and Infrastructure  894.2 Public open space and sports facilities
4.2.1 Public open space and sports facilities play an important role 
in making Dartmoor’s communities healthy, sociable and desirable 
places to live. They are generally located within or close to settlements 
and can include:
 ●allotments
 ●greenspaces, for informal recreation
 ●hard-surfaced areas, providing functional space or public 
amenity 
 ●equipped children’s play space
 ●outdoor sports areas and associated buildings
 ●swimming pools
 ●indoor sports facilities
 ●cemeteries and churchyards
4.2.2 These spaces and facilities are separate from the National 
Park’s common and open access land, but allow important public 
recreational activities which are no less valuable. To provide certainty, 
known areas of public open space and sports facilities are mapped 
in our Settlement Profiles . These profiles have been produced for each 
classified settlement and are informed by community consultation. 
They identify where public open space and sports facilities exist, but 
are not intended to be exhaustive and will be updated periodically.
4.2.3 The planning system helps ensure communities have adequate, 
good quality and accessible public open space and sports facilities. 
This is achieved by protecting existing provision and supporting the 
development of new facilities where there is an identified need. 
Clustering, or grouping facilities together, can significantly improve 
their accessibility, effectiveness and viability.
4.2.4 Where development, such as housing, creates or exacerbates 
a shortfall in provision we will seek a contribution towards the creation Strategic Policy 4.1 Supporting community 
services and facilities
1. All existing community services and facilities will be protected. 
2. Development involving the whole or partial loss of community 
services and facilities will only be permitted where evidence 
demonstrates:
a) there is no community need;
b) there is equivalent provision elsewhere which meets the 
community’s needs; or
c) the service and/or facility is not viable.
3. Within or adjoining classified settlements provision of new or 
extended community facilities will be supported.
4. Proposals for the diversification of community services and 
facilities will be supported where evidence demonstrates:
a) the development improves the viability of the service and facility, 
and is necessary to resolve inherent viability problems, rather 
than the circumstances or needs of the present owner;
b) the development is subservient and well related in scale and 
kind to the existing service and/or facility;
c) there is no other source of funding that might achieve the same 
benefits; and
d) the proposed development will secure the long term future of 
the service and facility.90
of new facilities, or the improvement of existing ones (via section 106 
legal agreement). The scale of these contributions will be directly 
related to the development.
4.2.5 Shortfalls in existing provision will be identified using:
 ●the most up to date Open Space, Sport and Recreation Study 
(OSSR) which assesses the quantity and quality of open space 
within the National Park’s settlements;
 ●other local authorities’ assessments of open space, built sports 
facilities, playing pitches and other types of provision; and/or
 ●any other evidence at the time of application which provides 
more up to date information on shortfalls in provision.
4.2.6 As development in the National Park is generally small scale 
and focused on affordable housing delivery there is often limited scope 
for significant open space contributions. For this reason we will focus 
contributions on equipped play areas and outdoor sports provision. 
Standards for these are established in the OSSR and are summarised 
in Table 4.1. Contributions for other open space types and built leisure 
facilities will, however, still be sought where evidence demonstrates 
they are directly related to the development.
4.2.7 The good management of sites by local authorities, parish and 
town councils, community groups and private organisations is critical 
to their success. Where new public open space and/or sports facility 
is provided, it will be important to set out, normally in a section 106 
legal agreement, who is responsible for its ongoing management and 
maintenance.
Table 4.1 Dartmoor National Park open space standards
Open Space Type Quantitiy Standard
Equipped play areas 0.12Ha / 1,000 population
Outdoor sports (pitch and non-pitch) 1.2Ha / 1,000 populationStrategic Policy 4.2 Supporting public open space 
and sports facilities
1. Development should promote the availability of and access 
to public open space and sports facilities. The whole or partial loss 
of public open space and/or sports facilities will only be permitted 
where evidence demonstrates:
a) the space or facility is not needed by the community, and 
compensatory enhancements of equivalent value are made to 
other local spaces or facilities; or
b) alternative provision of better quantity, quality and accessibility 
is made available elsewhere.
2. Provision of new or extended public open space and/or sports 
facilities will be supported in locations well-related to classified 
settlements.
3. Development will be required to contribute to open space 
and/or sports facilities provision where it creates or exacerbates a 
shortfall in provision, or as identified in a site allocation in this Local 
Plan or an adopted Neighbourhood Plan.
Manaton  Communities, Services and Infrastructure  914.3 Transport
4.3.1 It is a strategic objective of national planning policy and the 
Local Plan to ensure development occurs where people can use 
sustainable transport, reducing their need to travel and minimising our 
impact on climate change. This is particularly challenging in a National 
Park. Dartmoor’s isolated nature, dispersed settlement pattern and low 
population density means its residents are heavily reliant on the private 
car. Bus services are available in Dartmoor’s larger settlements and are 
an essential service for many. However, lack of work-time connections, 
limited destination choice and people’s preference to travel by car 
means these services are generally under-used. Walking and cycling 
are popular, but often the distances people need to travel mean they 
cannot be relied upon. Despite the challenging context the Local 
Plan seeks to ensure development supports provision of sustainable 
transport opportunities and that development which prejudices these 
opportunities is refused.
Rail
4.3.2 None of the National Park’s settlements have direct national 
rail network access.  The nearest railway stations are at Ivybridge and 
Okehampton, though the mainline rail service passes through South 
Brent, and a recreational heritage line links Buckfastleigh with Totnes, 
where there is a mainline service.  There are currently four potential rail 
opportunities for Dartmoor National Park: 
 ●There has been a desire to explore whether the Buckfastleigh to 
Totnes heritage line could be extended to its original Ashburton 
terminus. The option for this exists through the identification of 
land at Chuley Road for redevelopment.  
 ●A small portion of land beside the rail line at South Brent is 
safeguarded for the potential re-opening of South Brent station. 
This is the only land option which could enable future rail access 
returning to South Brent. 
 ●Long term options (2030+) include reopening the Okehampton, 
Coleford Junction, Tavistock to Plymouth route north of Dartmoor.  ●Outside Dartmoor work is on-going to provide a regular Exeter 
to Okehampton service supported by a parkway station at 
Okehampton.  
Roads
4.3.3 A large part of the National Park’s road network comprises 
narrow winding country lanes bounded by high hedgebanks. These 
roads have limited capacity to accommodate significant traffic 
growth, and make a valuable contribution to the National Park’s 
landscape character and habitat connections. For this reason there is 
a strong national policy presumption against significant road widening 
or the building of new roads through the National Park32.
4.3.4 The Local Plan’s spatial strategy therefore focusses growth 
in settlements with good access to the existing road network, local 
services, shops and facilities, including public transport, walking and 
cycling links. This approach:
 ●reduces people’s need to travel;
 ●ensures development sites are serviced by existing transport 
infrastructure;
 ●avoids costly new transport infrastructure which can be difficult 
to deliver;
 ●allows contributions from new development to help address 
existing transport issues; and
 ●improves sustainable access and viability of public transport 
services
4.3.5 The small scale of growth planned in the National Park and its 
focus in settlements with established highway access, albeit rural in 
character, means that, strategically, the National Park’s constrained 
nature should not prevent planned growth. It should be recognised 
however, that this approach relies on the Local Plan:
 ●ensuring new development minimises its impact on existing 
transport issues, including by providing appropriate car parking 
32  English National Parks and the Broads, UK Government Vision and Circular (Defra, 2010)92and supporting provision of car parking where it is needed;
 ●supporting provision of sustainable transport infrastructure; and
 ●requiring submission of appropriate evidence to inform decision 
making.
Transport Statements and Transport Assessments
4.3.6 Where development may have transport impacts it should be 
supported by an appropriate level of survey and assessment to inform 
the decision making process.
4.3.7 Transport Statements and Transport Assessments are used to 
assess the implications of a development. Transport Statements involve 
a lighter touch evaluation and are used where transport impacts are 
limited. Transport Assessments are more comprehensive and assess all 
transport issues relating to a development.
4.3.8 We will decide the appropriate level of assessment on a case 
by case basis, with regard to:
 ●the scale of the proposed development and its potential for 
additional trip generation;
 ●existing intensity of transport use and the availability of public 
transport;
 ●proximity to nearby environmental designations or sensitive areas;
 ●impact on other priorities/strategies (such as promoting walking 
and cycling);
 ●the cumulative impacts of multiple developments within a 
particular area; and
 ●whether there are particular types of impacts around which to 
focus the Transport Assessment or Statement (e.g. assessing traffic 
generated at peak times).
4.3.9 Major Development (as defined in section 1.5 ) is not common 
in the National Park and can have significant and/or unique transport 
implications. These proposals should be assessed through a Transport 
Assessment.
Widecombe-in-the-Moor  Communities, Services and Infrastructure  93Policy 4.3 Enabling sustainable transport
1. In order to minimise our impact on climate change, and 
promote healthy lifestyles, new development should encourage 
and enable sustainable travel by protecting, enhancing and 
providing new walking, cycling, and sustainable transport routes.
2. Development should support a network of walking and 
cycling routes which are safe, convenient, and connect to local 
services, facilities and sustainable transport links. Opportunities 
for sustainable transport development which meets the needs of 
the National Park will be supported. Development which would 
prejudice the ability to deliver future sustainable travel and 
transport infrastructure will not be approved.
3. Applications should be supported by an appropriate level of 
transport survey and assessment to inform the decision making 
process.
Car Parking Standards for new development
4.3.10 Dartmoor’s historic settlements and housing means car 
parking often does not feature in their design. Terrace houses without 
off-street parking and narrow streets with little capacity for on-street 
parking are common across Dartmoor. In most circumstances there 
is little scope to adapt these houses and settlements to meet modern 
car parking standards. The National Park’s parking standards therefore 
seek to ensure new development’s parking demands do not over-spill 
onto streets already under parking pressure.
Residential parking standards
4.3.11 The Authority’s minimum residential parking standards 
aim to ensure resident’s parking needs are met. All new residential 
development is required to meet the standards in Table 4.2  on-
site. Alternative levels of provision may be accepted where on-site 
parking provision is not possible (e.g. a conversion in a restricted town centre location), there is good public transport access (including as 
a minimum public transport with work-time connections, and walking 
and cycling links), alternative provision nearby and evidence clearly 
indicates an alternative level of provision is appropriate. The Highway 
Authority’s view will be considered when deciding what level of 
parking is appropriate.
Table 4.2  Minimum on-site residential car parking standards
Dwelling size Parking provision
1 bedroom 1
2-3 bedrooms 2
4+ bedrooms 3
* in addition 1 visitor parking space should be 
provided for every 10 dwellings
Fore Street, Buckfastleigh94Use (Class) Standard parking
(Gross internal floor area)Lorry parking
(Gross internal floor area)
Shops and financial and 
professional services (Class E)1 space per 14m2
1 staff space per 100m21 lorry space for 
supermarkets over 1000m2
Café, restaurant, pub or drinking 
establishment 
(Class E)1 space per 5.5m2 dining area
1 space per 2m2 drinking area
Staff spaces 10% of customer spaces1 lorry space
Hotel (Class C1)1 space per bedroom
Restaurant and bar as per A3 & A4
Staff spaces 10% of customer spaces1 lorry space
Office and light industrial 
(Class E)1 space per 28m2Office: 1 lorry space/1000m2
Light industrial: 1 lorry space
 Industrial (Class B2) 1 space per 32.5m21 lorry space/100m2
Storage and Distribution (Class 
B8)1 space per 200m2No maximum
Policy 4.4 Parking standards for new development
1. All new residential development should provide on-site car 
parking in line with the standards in Table 4.2.  Alternative levels of 
parking provision will be supported  only where:
a) on-site parking provision is not possible and the development 
has good access to sustainable transport. The availability and 
proximity of off-site public and private car parking will be used to 
determine appropriate provision; and/or
b) robust and convincing evidence demonstrates alternative car 
parking provision is appropriate.2. All new non-residential development should provide 
appropriate parking which does not exceed the maximum 
specified in Table 4.3 and conserves the area’s character and 
appearance. Provision which exceeds the maximum standards 
will only be supported where it is justified by robust and convincing 
evidence set out in a Transport Assessment.
3. All new parking areas should incorporate sustainable drainage 
systems (SuDS).Table 4.3  Maximum on-site non-residential car parking standards Non-residential parking standards
4.3.12 We will take a flexible approach to 
parking provision on non-residential sites. Across 
the National Park accessibility varies to such an 
extent it is not possible for a single standard to 
always be appropriate. For this reason maximum 
parking standards are set in Table 4.3. Applicants 
should decide appropriate levels of parking 
provision, not exceeding the standards in Table 
4.3, based on the needs of the development 
and conserving the character and appearance 
of the surrounding area. Parking provision above 
the standards in Table 4.3 should be justified by 
a Transport Assessment (see paragraph 4.3.6 to 
4.3.9 ).  Communities, Services and Infrastructure  954.3.17 In 2019 the Government consulted on amending Building 
Regulations to require charging point provision on all new residential 
and non-residential buildings. Were these proposals introduced it 
would supersede this policy’s requirements for new buildings, however 
the requirements for car parks would continue to apply.Electric Vehicle Charging Points (EVCPs)
4.3.13 With Dartmoor’s population highly reliant on the private car 
for personal transport, electric vehicles represent one of the key ways 
Dartmoor can transition to a lower carbon economy, minimising our 
impact upon climate change. However, there are significant challenges 
in encouraging use of electric vehicles. Our existing vehicles, fuels 
and infrastructure are long established, and our economy, business 
and lifestyle rely upon them. Many people see little reason to make 
greener travel choices due to not having access, not being able to 
afford or being unaware of lower carbon options.
4.3.14 Electric vehicles require a network of charging points and 
by investing in this infrastructure now obstacles to take-up can be 
overcome. An accessible charging network can encourage wider 
use of electric vehicles by residents and workers, it can also improve 
visitor attraction and convenience. Recognising that electric vehicles 
are the most realistic low carbon transport option on Dartmoor this 
policy requires delivery of electric vehicle charging points (EVCPs) 
alongside off-street car parking provision in new development. 
Minimum standards for the provision of EVCPs are in Table 4.4. Provision 
is only required with off-street parking provision.
4.3.15 EVCPs will not be sought for on-street parking spaces due 
to the current lack of cost-effective charging solutions, however this 
should not lead to a higher proportion of on-street parking being 
provided than is acceptable in design or highway safety terms. 
4.3.16 EVCPs can be provided as either active or passive charging 
points. Active points are fully wired and ready to use. At passive 
charging points the infrastructure is installed, but electricity supply 
not activated and charging equipment may not be supplied. Passive 
points are cheaper and allow the market to decide when activation 
is necessary. Table 4.4 Minimum standards for provision of EVCPs in off-street car 
parking spaces
Development Type Electric Vehicle Charging Points (EVCPs)*
New and replacement 
dwelling(s) with private 
driveway or garage1 active EVCP per dwelling
New dwellings with 
communal car parking5% of car parking spaces provide active EVCP
50% of remaining spaces provide passive EVCP
Non-residential commercial 
development and public 
car parks5% of car parking spaces provide active EVCP
50% of remaining spaces provide passive EVCP
* part provision rounded up. 
All EVCPs should be at least 32 Amps
Policy 4.5 Electric Vehicle Charging Points 
(EVCPs)
All development involving off-street car parking provision should 
provide electric vehicle charging points (EVCPs) to comply with 
the standards in Table 4.4. This may be varied only where it is 
proven essential for development viability.96
Public car parks
4.3.18 Many of Dartmoor’s historic settlements cannot easily 
accommodate modern day parking demands and sometimes 
experience significant parking pressures which can create highway 
safety issues and harm an area’s appearance. Parking pressures 
can also arise in the open countryside, particularly at popular tourist 
and public recreation destinations. Whilst the purpose of a car park 
is to enable people to access a community, business or destination, 
we should also be actively enabling a transition to a lower carbon 
economy. New car parks are therefore required to provide Electric 
Vehicle Charging Points in line with Policy 4.5 .
4.3.19 Public car parks can help alleviate parking pressures, but they 
need to be in convenient and safe locations to ensure they are used, 
and should conserve the character and appearance of the area. New 
car parks will be supported where there is an evidenced need. Need 
should be based on demand throughout the year. Meeting peak car 
parking demands is not appropriate in the National Park.  
4.3.20 In countryside locations additional car parking should be 
carefully designed, with use of appropriate loose surfacing, and 
considered against the need to manage recreational impacts. 
Additional parking must not exacerbate or lead to inappropriate 
recreational impacts. Where there is uncertainty, applicants will be 
required to submit a management strategy to demonstrate potential 
negative impacts of additional parking have been fully addressed.
4.3.21 Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) should be used in all 
locations to ensure surface water drains effectively and does not 
impact on flooding or lead to pollution or erosion of the surrounding 
environment.
4.3.22 Funding construction and continued maintenance of car 
parks is often difficult for small communities. To support car park 
provision, in Local Centres and Rural Settlements there are opportunities 
to provide community infrastructure alongside housing development, 
see Chapter 3 (Housing) . Policy 4.6 Public car parks
1. All public car park development should be conveniently 
located and conserve and enhance the National Park’s Special 
Qualities, particularly heritage significance, tranquillity, dark night 
skies and landscape character.
2. Within or adjoining classified settlements new or extended 
public car parks will be supported where evidence demonstrates 
they are necessary to:
a) meet a public need arising from within the community or from 
visitors;
b) alleviate local traffic problems; or 
c) enhance a settlement’s historic character in combination with 
other traffic management measures.
3. Outside classified settlements new or extended public car 
parks will only be permitted in exceptional circumstances, where 
evidence demonstrates they will have overriding benefits for the 
management of public recreation and traffic.
4. All new parking areas should incorporate sustainable drainage 
systems (SuDS).
Carpark, Haytor  Communities, Services and Infrastructure  974.4 Telecommunications
4.4.1 Modern communications infrastructure delivering high quality 
mobile and broadband internet services is vital for a modern economy 
and society. In principle support will be given to proposals which deliver 
high quality and reliable communications, but keep the number of 
supporting masts and sites to a minimum and protect the National 
Park’s Special Qualities.
4.4.2 New masts and sites will only be acceptable where the applicant 
demonstrates it is not possible to use existing masts, buildings, or other 
structures. New wired connections should be installed underground.
4.4.3 Where a new mast or site is absolutely necessary it will be 
important to ensure it is located and designed so its impact on the 
National Park’s tranquillity and landscape character is minimised. 
Masts in isolated rural locations, on ridges or other prominent and 
unspoilt locations are likely to harm the National Park’s tranquillity and 
landscape character. Applicants will be required to demonstrate that 
a proposal is the least harmful way to deliver the service, and minimise 
its impact by, for example:
 ●mast-sharing and clustering masts and other infrastructure with 
existing development;
 ●avoiding isolated, prominent and sensitive locations;
 ●making use of natural materials where feasible, such as timber 
poles;
 ●using shrouds to reduce visual impact of antennas and other 
equipment;
 ●painting masts, cabinets and equipment to blend with their 
surroundings; and
 ●camouflaging mast antenna and equipment to mimic or blend 
in with adjacent trees or other natural features.
4.4.4 There is a joint accord in place between National Parks England 
and the Mobile Operators Association which recognises the need to 
treat the National Parks specially33. The Accord includes agreement 
for operators to use mast-sharing, innovative designs or other network 
33  Joint Accord / Memorandum of Understanding (National Parks England and Mobile UK, 2018)solutions and mitigation measures which allow infrastructure to be 
installed in an environmentally sensitive manner.
4.4.5 Some types of communication infrastructure benefit from 
permitted development rights and can be constructed without 
planning permission provided the Authority approve of its siting and 
appearance. The policies of this Local Plan and the Design Guide will 
be considered when deciding whether the siting and appearance of 
these proposals is acceptable.
4.4.6 The International Commission on Non-ionizing Radiation 
Protection set out the public exposure guidelines for communications 
equipment. National Policy requires local planning authorities do not 
set health safeguards different from the International Commission 
guidelines for public exposure.
Policy 4.7 Telecommunications Development
1. New telecommunications infrastructure will only be permitted 
where;
a) evidence demonstrates the service cannot be delivered less 
harmfully by installing equipment on existing masts, buildings or 
other structures; 
b) the equipment is located and designed to minimise its impact; 
and
c) the equipment does not cause substantial harm to the character 
and appearance of the built environment and/or the National 
Park’s Special Qualities, particularly landscape character, 
heritage significance and tranquillity.
2. A condition will be applied requiring removal of all 
telecommunications structures and equipment and the 
reinstatement of the site to its former condition should the 
development become redundant.984.5 The Access Network 
4.5.1 The National Park provides unrivalled opportunities to roam 
at will using open access land, and walk, run, ride or cycle along 
an exceptional Public Rights of Way network. The National Park’s 
public access opportunities are a major draw and a key way people 
experience and enjoy Dartmoor.
4.5.2 Dartmoor’s settlements also benefit from pedestrian and cycle 
connections within and between them. This infrastructure facilitates 
greater and better use of public transport and less reliance on private 
vehicles, minimising our impact on climate change. It also improves 
people’s ability to access the health and mental well-being benefits 
of walking and cycling.
4.5.3 The Local Plan requires all development to explore opportunities 
and provide enhancements to the access network, including path 
extensions, improved connectivity and provision of additional access 
land.4.5.4 This policy also ensures that development affecting the access 
network does not have undesirable impacts, such as harming its 
character or views, undermining its maintenance, increasing its use by 
motorised traffic or otherwise disturbing the public’s ability to use and 
enjoy the network.
4.5.5 Public Rights of Way are legally protected and cannot be 
closed or diverted without making a Public Path Order, a legal process 
separate to the planning system. Applicants wanting to close or divert 
a public right of way should apply to the Authority at the same time 
as submitting a planning application so both applications can be 
considered together32.
Recreational Impacts
4.5.6 Recent research has exposed the pressure Dartmoor faces from 
housing growth within the surrounding area, in particular at Plymouth, 
Exeter and Newton Abbot. The research identifies the region’s 
forecasted population increase is likely to significantly increase visitor 
numbers and their associated recreational impacts, particularly on 
designated wildlife sites already affected by high visitor numbers.
4.5.7 The research studied impacts from large events, hiking, 
dog-walking, cycling, and other common types of recreation. Key 
impacts identified include path erosion, damage to vegetation and 
disturbance and loss of habitat and key species. Recommended 
mitigation measures include smaller initiatives, such as public outreach, 
temporary path closures, and small-scale biodiversity enhancement, 
and larger initiatives, such as land management changes, and 
creation of interceptor sites and wildlife refuges. As development 
and population increases will occur, in the main, outside the National 
Park achieving these mitigation measures will require strong cross-
boundary co-operation with neighbouring local planning authorities 
and government organisations.
34  See our website for more information on making changes to Public Rights of Way
  Communities, Services and Infrastructure  99
Strategic Policy 4.8 The Access Network
1. All development should explore and take opportunities to 
enhance the access network, including public rights of way, 
permissive paths and access land.
2. Development affecting the access network will only be 
permitted where:
a) the development’s public benefits outweigh any harm to the 
access network’s character, quality or quantity;
b) there are no alternative less harmful locations;
c) any harm is minimised and any loss is mitigated with an 
acceptable diversion and/or compensatory land of equivalent 
value;
d) the public’s ability to use and enjoy the network is not materially 
affected; and
e) opportunities to enhance the network by extending it and 
improving its connectivity have been fully explored, and where 
feasible, form part of the proposed mitigation.
3. The Authority will seek to ensure development within or outside 
the National Park which is likely to increase harmful recreational 
pressure on Dartmoor’s Special Qualities, particularly biodiversity, 
cultural heritage and the access network, is appropriately 
mitigated.
Ponsworthy100
Bullaton Farm, Bovey Tracey © Historic England Archive5  EconomyStrategy
Businesses which respect and value Dartmoor’s Special Qualities will 
have the opportunity to thrive and innovate in the National Park.  
New business and tourism development will be permitted within 
and adjoining Local Centres and Rural Settlements where it is of an 
appropriate scale and use.  
In the Villages and Hamlets and open countryside expansion of existing 
businesses will be supported. Development to support new businesses 
will be permitted where they make use of redundant buildings, support 
farm diversification, or are low impact and principally focussed on 
improving opportunities for the quiet enjoyment and understanding of 
the National Park’s Special Qualities. 
New tourist accommodation should be located within Local Centres 
and Rural Settlements. In the Villages and Hamlets and open countryside 
new short-stay accommodation should be located close to tourist 
services and be provided through conversion of suitable historic 
buildings.
Development meeting the needs of agricultural, forestry and other 
rural land-based businesses will be supported where it conserves and/
or enhances Dartmoor’s Special Qualities, is proportionate to a proven 
functional need, and respects its environment.
Cultural and artistic proposals will be supported where they actively 
pursue National Park purposes.
 Economy  1011025.1.1 As a predominantly rural area Dartmoor’s largest employers 
are agriculture and food and accommodation services. However 
the biggest contributors to Dartmoor’s economy are the construction, 
information technology and business administration services industries. 
5.1.2 The challenges Dartmoor’s economy faces are:
 ●Dartmoor’s ageing population leading to a declining working 
age population, shortages in skills and labour and a difficult 
operating environment for businesses;
 ●a shortage of affordable housing pushing workers outside the 
National Park, and increasing the commuting costs of those living 
in the National Park, all of which threatens workforce availability 
and businesses’ access to labour and skills;
 ●the ageing population resulting in an increase in demand for 
adult social care and a corresponding decline in demand for 
services sought by younger and middle-aged people; 
 ●changing consumer preferences (e.g. online shopping and 
home delivery) putting pressure on traditional high street shops 
and services, forcing down rents and discouraging long term 
investment; and
 ●uncertainty for the future of forestry and agriculture.
5.1.3 Despite these challenges Dartmoor is well placed to take 
advantage of many opportunities:
 ●Dartmoor boasts an attractive quality of life which can be used 
to capture forecast growth in construction, IT services, education, 
retail and social and residential care;
 ●Dartmoor’s distinctive settlements and high streets are well-
equipped to withstand changing consumer demands;
 ●improving internet connectivity and affordable employment 
rents can attract footloose businesses; and ●strong communities can support traditional businesses and 
community initiatives.
5.1.4 The Local Plan takes an holistic approach to realising these 
opportunities. Policies and strategies throughout the Local Plan work 
to support a vibrant economy. These include:
 ●concentrating new residential and business development in 
settlements to improve footfall on high streets and the viability of 
local services;
 ●prioritising affordable housing development to support workers 
and local people seeking to stay in the National Park;
 ●allowing those in permanent employment in the National Park to 
be eligible to occupy homes restricted for local people;
 ●restricting householder development to ensure the National Park 
retains a mix of more affordable housing;
 ●creating opportunities for staff accommodation alongside existing 
serviced accommodation businesses in the open countryside;
 ●creating opportunities for small-scale employment development, 
or community infrastructure investment (e.g. car parks) through 
flexible affordable housing requirements on exception sites in 
Local Centres and Rural Settlements; 
 ●introducing flexibility in town centres by allowing changes of use 
between a variety of active uses; and
 ●ensuring larger scale town centre development is located in 
town centres and can have a positive effect on their vitality. Economy  103 ●strong communities can support traditional businesses and 
community initiatives.
5.1.4 The Local Plan takes an holistic approach to realising these 
opportunities. Policies and strategies throughout the Local Plan work 
to support a vibrant economy. These include:
 ●concentrating new residential and business development in 
settlements to improve footfall on high streets and the viability of 
local services;
 ●prioritising affordable housing development to support workers 
and local people seeking to stay in the National Park;
 ●allowing those in permanent employment in the National Park to 
be eligible to occupy homes restricted for local people;
 ●restricting householder development to ensure the National Park 
retains a mix of more affordable housing;
 ●creating opportunities for staff accommodation alongside existing 
serviced accommodation businesses in the open countryside;
 ●creating opportunities for small-scale employment development, 
or community infrastructure investment (e.g. car parks) through 
flexible affordable housing requirements on exception sites in 
Local Centres and Rural Settlements; 
 ●introducing flexibility in town centres by allowing changes of use 
between a variety of active uses; and
 ●ensuring larger scale town centre development is located in 
town centres and can have a positive effect on their vitality.
5.2 Non-residential Business and Tourism 
Development
5.2.1 The Local Plan encourages appropriate business and 
employment development. This policy sets out the locations where 
non-residential business (Class E and B uses), tourism and other 
employment development will be acceptable. The policy focusses 
growth around Local Centres and Rural Settlements, but also allows 
limited development in Villages and Hamlets and the open countryside. 
5.2.2 Office, light industrial and home-based enterprise development 
are generally the most appropriate business uses in the National Park. 
New general industrial (Class B2) and warehousing (Class B8) uses are 
more likely to impact on the National Park’s Special Qualities. However, 
they may be acceptable where they are of an appropriate use and 
scale for the settlement and local highway network, and can clearly 
demonstrate no adverse impact on Dartmoor’s Special Qualities. 
5.2.3 Tourism development may include visitor attractions, outdoor 
pursuits, and visitor services and facilities. Tourism businesses providing 
accommodation should refer to Section 5.4 . Tourism development 
should be of an appropriate scale and use for the settlement and 
local highway network. We will consider the potential negative 
impacts of high visitor numbers and ensure proposals are appropriate 
for their location with any tourism impacts being managed effectively, 
including where growth is incremental. There are limits to the amount 
of use parts of Dartmoor can sustain before its character and quality 
is diminished for all.
5.2.4 The business, tourism and other employment uses you would 
typically find across the settlement hierarchy are summarised below:
Local Centres
Small and medium scale offices and light industrial uses. Some larger 
scale industrial and warehousing uses. A selection of convenience 
and specialist retail which serves the wider rural area. Basic property 
and financial services, food and drink, arts and culture, entertainment, 
Higher Mills, Buckfast © Form Design Architects104leisure and tourist facilities. Some public services such as schools and 
health services.
Rural Settlements 
Small-scale offices and light industrial. General industrial uses are rare. 
Most will have a general store. Convenience retail, some local services 
and tourist facilities, such as pubs and post offices.
Villages and Hamlets 
Small-scale offices and light industrial. Some may also have 
convenience retail, some local services and tourist facilities, such as 
pubs and post offices.
Open Countryside 
Land-based enterprises, such as agriculture and forestry. Farm 
diversification enterprises. Home based small-scale offices and light 
industrial, or in otherwise redundant buildings.
5.2.5 In Villages and Hamlets and the open countryside opportunities 
are more limited and the protection of Dartmoor’s Special Qualities 
is overriding. Development needed to support establishment of 
appropriate new businesses should be limited to conversion of 
redundant buildings, including modern buildings. New buildings will 
only be permitted where they support the small-scale expansion 
of existing businesses, farm diversification, or establishment of new 
businesses whose principal focus is aligned with the National Park’s 
second purpose: to improve opportunities for the understanding and 
enjoyment of Dartmoor. In the open countryside new businesses will 
be carefully tested to ensure they make use of redundant buildings 
only, are appropriate for their location and can access sustainable 
transport connections. It may be appropriate to remove permitted 
development rights for new business to prevent inappropriate changes 
of use.
5.2.6 A town centre first approach is taken for proposals involving 
main town centre uses over 150m2, see Strategic Policy 5.2 . Offices 
(Class E) and tourism uses are main town centre uses and best located 
within the town centres of Local Centres and Rural Settlements. Where main town centre uses are proposed adjacent to or outside town 
centres applications should apply the town centre sequential test set 
out in Strategic Policy 5.2 . 
Strategic Policy 5.1 Non-residential Business and 
Tourism Development
1. All non-residential business and tourism development should be 
of a scale and use appropriate for its location and local highway 
network and will conserve and/or enhance Dartmoor’s Special 
Qualities.
2. Non-residential business and tourism development will be 
acceptable in principle within or adjoining Local Centres and Rural 
Settlements. 
3. Within Villages and Hamlets and the open countryside non-
residential business and tourism development will be acceptable 
where it is needed to support:
a) small-scale expansion of existing businesses;
b) farm diversification in accordance with Policy 5.9 ; or
c) the establishment of appropriate new businesses where:
i) the proposal involves the conversion of redundant buildings only 
and suitable historic buildings are used first in accordance with  
Strategic Policy 2.7  and/or Strategic Policy 2.8 ; or
ii) the proposal and activity is small-scale, low impact and is 
focussed on improving opportunities for the quiet enjoyment and 
understanding of the National Park’s Special Qualities.
4. Existing business and employment sites and premises will be 
retained for economic uses. Proposals involving the loss of existing 
employment sites and premises will be carefully assessed to ensure 
the National Park’s business and industry needs would not be harmed 
by the proposal. Economy  1055.3 Town Centre Development
5.3.1 Dartmoor’s town centres are at the heart of its communities, 
providing shops, services and facilities which serve a wide variety 
of people, businesses and organisations. Many of Dartmoor’s town 
centres are small and particularly sensitive to changing consumer 
demands and competition. 
5.3.2 Dartmoor’s town centres are defined as the areas of Local 
Centres and Rural Settlements where main town centre uses are 
concentrated, including retail, leisure, entertainment, offices, arts, 
cultural and tourism uses (see Appendix F  for full definition of Use 
Classes). They are identifiable through the concentration of main town 
centre uses, and described in more detail in the Settlement Profiles .
A Town Centre first approach
5.3.3 This policy ensures new main town centre uses above 150m2 
are located to enhance Dartmoor’s town centres. The policy requires 
proposals involving main town centre uses be located, in preferential 
order, within town centres, on the edge of a town centre, and, only if 
there are no suitable sites, outside a town centre. This is known as the 
‘town centre sequential test’.
5.3.4 After completing this sequential test, a proposal which is outside 
a town centre and would have a significant adverse impact on a town 
centre will not be supported. If there is uncertainty, we may require 
an impact assessment which quantifies and assesses the proposal’s 
impact on the town centre. 
5.3.5 Each of Dartmoor’s town centres is different and a proposal 
which significantly impacts on one, may not impact another. The 
degree of impact will be assessed by the extent to which a proposal 
competes with existing services and facilities, impacts on footfall, 
vacancies and consumer choice, among other considerations. For 
this reason the requirement for impact assessments will be made on 
a case by case basis taking into consideration the role of the town 
centre. Impact assessments may therefore be required on smaller developments, but the level of assessment required should be 
proportionate to the development.
5.3.6 To support new town centre development and increased 
footfall, the Local Plan’s policies support new community infrastructure, 
such as car parks, visitor facilities and more, where there is a proven 
need. In particular in Local Centres and Rural Settlements, housing 
policy allows for a lower amount of affordable housing where 
community infrastructure is delivered, see Strategic Policy 3.3  and 
Strategic Policy 3.4 .
5.3.7 Proposals involving the loss of main town centre uses will be 
considered as loss of employment uses and will be resisted where they 
would harm the National Park’s business needs. Loss of main town 
centre uses from Town Centres will be considered in accordance with 
Strategic Policy 5.3 , loss of other employment uses will be considered 
in accordance with Strategic Policy 5.1 .
The Pepperpot, Chagford106Strategic Policy 5.2 Development affecting Town 
Centres
1. Development involving main town centre uses will be required 
to follow the town centre sequential test if proposals:
a) are not located within a Town Centre;
b) have a gross internal floor area (GIFA) of 150m2 or more; and
c) are not part of farm diversification;
2. The town centre sequential test should ensure that main town 
centre uses are located, in preferential order, within a town centre, 
on the edge of a Town Centre, or, only if there are no suitable sites, 
outside a Town Centre. Proposals outside Town Centres should 
demonstrate:
a) an audit trail of any sequentially preferable sites and robust 
justification for them being discounted;
b) the regeneration or economic benefits brought forward by the 
development;
c) appropriate access/improvements, particularly by public 
transport, safe and convenient pedestrian and cycling routes 
and appropriate parking; and
d) connectivity to surrounding defined centres, and appropriate 
enhancements to these linkages.
3. Proposals outside Town Centres which could have a significant 
adverse impact on a Town Centre and will have a gross internal 
floorspace of 150m2 or more will be required to submit an impact 
assessment. The scope of the impact assessment should be agreed 
with the Authority and reflect the development’s scale. 
4. Proposals outside Town Centres which are found to have a 
significant adverse impact on a Town Centre will not be granted.Active uses in Town Centres
5.3.8 The 2020 COVID pandemic and increasing popularity of internet 
shopping has put significant strain on the high street. In September 
2020 the Government responded to this and long-standing calls for 
greater flexibility by changing the Use Class Order and combining 
many previously distinct town centre uses into one use class (Class E). 
This change means that changes between retail, restaurant, office, 
light industrial, clinic, health centre, indoor recreation and other uses 
do not generally require planning permission, unless conditions on a 
planning consent control approved uses. This change significantly 
effects how local planning policies operate to protect and enhance 
town centres, for example it is not now possible to protect retail as a 
distinct use from other town centre uses. It is hoped these changes will 
support the high street make the changes it needs to be successful.
5.3.9 The planning system still has a role to play in ensuring Dartmoor’s 
Town Centres remain vibrant and active uses are not lost in favour of 
higher value residential uses. This policy therefore protects main town 
centre uses in Dartmoor’s Town Centres, allowing change of use only 
where a thorough marketing exercise demonstrates no demand.
5.3.10 This policy also seeks to protect the last shop, general store or 
pub in any of Dartmoor’s classified settlements. Helping ensure these 
important public services remain available for communities.  Economy  107Signs and Advertisements
5.3.11 Apart from the centre of Buckfastleigh, the whole of 
the National Park is designated as an Area of Special Control of 
Advertisements. This designation gives us additional controls over the 
siting and appearance of signs and advertisements, this includes; 
advance signs, those related to local events and public safety notices, 
sign and advertising boards, canopies and flags.
5.3.12 In the first instance applicants should use the Government’s 
Guidance on Outdoor Advertisements and Signs35 to decide whether 
advertisement consent is required. Some classes of sign are excluded 
from planning control or are considered to have ‘deemed consent’ 
and do not need the Authority’s consent. Where advertisement 
consent is required the policies of the Local Plan will be used to decide 
whether they are acceptable.
35  Outdoor Advertisements and Signs: A Guide for Advertisers (MHCLG, 2007)5.3.13 Within the National Park the following types of signage can 
have a harmful impact on Dartmoor’s tranquil and rural character, its 
dark night skies and the quality of its built environment:
 ●large, garish and poorly designed signage which uses materials 
that weather and deteriorate easily;
 ●the sprawl of signage into the open countryside;
 ●signage which includes unnecessary advertisements;
 ●illuminated signage in the open countryside; and
 ●signage which creates a highway safety issue.
5.3.14 This policy’s objective is to ensure signs and advertisements, 
either on their own or cumulatively with those nearby, do not harm the 
National Park’s Special Qualities and are high quality, whilst allowing 
sufficient opportunities for local businesses to promote themselves.
5.3.15 The preference is for signs to be on-site and closely related to 
the associated business. To limit the sprawl of signage into the open 
countryside this policy requires off-site advance signage to be limited 
to brown tourism signs, unless there are specific highway safety reasons 
which require a bespoke sign. Brown tourism signs can be applied for 
through the Highway Authority . Strategic Policy 5.3 Protecting Active Uses in 
Dartmoor’s Settlements
1. Within Town Centres permission will be granted for main town 
centre uses provided they do not adversely affect neighbouring 
uses, particularly their amenity.
2. Permission will not be granted:
a) within Town Centres, for a proposal that converts main town 
centre uses to other uses; or
b) within a classified settlement, for a proposal that involves the loss 
of the last general store, shop or public house;
unless evidence submitted demonstrates the property has 
been offered for sale, rent and/or lease on the open market 
for the existing use or, in the case of Town Centres, main town 
centre uses, for a continuous period of at least 12 months, at a 
realistic price.
Policy 5.4 Signs and Advertisements 
1. On-site signs and advertisements will be permitted where:
a) their number, size, shape, materials and design will have no adverse 
impact, either on their own or cumulatively with other existing signage, 
on the National Park’s Special Qualities, particularly landscape 
character, heritage significance, tranquillity and dark night skies; 
b) they are directly related to the business; and
c) they will have no adverse effects on public or highway safety.
2. In the open countryside off-site advance signage will be limited to 
brown tourism signs, unless justified for highway safety reasons. Where 
new signage is allowed it must comply with 1(a-c). Local Centres
Ashburton, Buckfastleigh, Chagford, Horrabridge, 
Moretonhampstead, Princetown, South Brent, 
YelvertonEconomic Strategy Summary Diagram
Allocated sites 
Identified in Chapter 7
Business and tourism 
development
New businesses and 
expansion of existingTown centre
Change of use between 
Class A1-4 uses allowed.
The last general store, shop 
or public house is 
protected.
New town centre uses 
>150m² should be located 
in the town centre first.Settlement boundaryRural Settlements
Bittaford, Bridford, Buckfast, Cheriton Cross / Bishop, 
Christow, Cornwood, Dousland, Dunsford, Hennock, 
Ilsington, Liverton, Mary Tavy, South Zeal, Sticklepath, 
Walkhampton, Whiddon Down
Settlement
Business and tourism 
development
New businesses and 
expansion of existingTown centre
Protection of the last 
general store, shop or public 
house.
New town centre uses 
>150m² should be located in 
the town centre first.Settlement boundarySettlementVillages and Hamlets
Belstone, Dean Prior, Drewsteignton, Holne, Lustleigh, 
Lydford, Manaton, Meavy, North Bovey, North Brentor, 
Peter Tavy, Postbridge, Scorriton, Shaugh Prior, Sourton, 
South Tawton, Throwleigh, Widecombe-in-the-Moor
Business and tourism 
development
Expansion of existing 
businesses.
New businesses only 
through conversion of 
redundant buildings, 
suitable historic 
buildings preferred.Settlement
108New employment development restricted, as 
per national policy. Opportunities limited to:
• Development necessary for agriculture, 
forestry and other rural land-based 
businesses
• Expansion of existing businesses
• New businesses only through conversion of 
redundant buildings, suitable historic 
buildings preferredOpen Countryside
All land which is not within or adjoining Local Centres, 
Rural Settlements and Villages and Hamlets
Settlement boundaryEdge of town centre
Second preference, a site 
outside, but next to the 
town centre. Town centre
The commercial centre of 
Local Centres and Rural 
Settlements.
Within town centre
First preference, a site 
within the town centre.
Out of town centre
Least preferable, a site 
outside the town centre.The Town Centre sequential test
Policy requires development involving new centre uses over 150m2 to be located in town 
centres. This graphic shows how land should be prioritised, for the purposes of the 
sequential test.
Summary only, detailed policy wording will be relied upon 
for decision making. SettlementLocal Centres
Ashburton, Buckfastleigh, Chagford, Horrabridge, 
Moretonhampstead, Princetown, South Brent, 
YelvertonEconomic Strategy Summary Diagram
Allocated sites 
Identified in Chapter 7
Business and tourism 
development
New businesses and 
expansion of existingTown centre
Change of use between 
Class A1-4 uses allowed.
The last general store, shop 
or public house is 
protected.
New town centre uses 
>150m² should be located 
in the town centre first.Settlement boundaryRural Settlements
Bittaford, Bridford, Buckfast, Cheriton Cross / Bishop, 
Christow, Cornwood, Dousland, Dunsford, Hennock, 
Ilsington, Liverton, Mary Tavy, South Zeal, Sticklepath, 
Walkhampton, Whiddon Down
Settlement
Business and tourism 
development
New businesses and 
expansion of existingTown centre
Protection of the last 
general store, shop or public 
house.
New town centre uses 
>150m² should be located in 
the town centre first.Settlement boundarySettlementVillages and Hamlets
Belstone, Dean Prior, Drewsteignton, Holne, Lustleigh, 
Lydford, Manaton, Meavy, North Bovey, North Brentor, 
Peter Tavy, Postbridge, Scorriton, Shaugh Prior, Sourton, 
South Tawton, Throwleigh, Widecombe-in-the-Moor
Business and tourism 
development
Expansion of existing 
businesses.
New businesses only 
through conversion of 
redundant buildings, 
suitable historic 
buildings preferred.Settlement
New employment development restricted, as 
per national policy. Opportunities limited to:
• Development necessary for agriculture, 
forestry and other rural land-based 
businesses
• Expansion of existing businesses
• New businesses only through conversion of 
redundant buildings, suitable historic 
buildings preferredOpen Countryside
All land which is not within or adjoining Local Centres, 
Rural Settlements and Villages and Hamlets
Settlement boundaryEdge of town centre
Second preference, a site 
outside, but next to the 
town centre. Town centre
The commercial centre of 
Local Centres and Rural 
Settlements.
Within town centre
First preference, a site 
within the town centre.
Out of town centre
Least preferable, a site 
outside the town centre.The Town Centre sequential test
Policy requires development involving new centre uses over 150m2 to be located in town 
centres. This graphic shows how land should be prioritised, for the purposes of the 
sequential test.
Summary only, detailed policy wording will be relied upon 
for decision making. Settlement
 Economy  1091105.4 Tourist Accommodation
5.4.1 Serviced and non-serviced tourist accommodation businesses 
make a significant contribution to the tourism economy on Dartmoor. 
They also provide a diverse range of people with access to Dartmoor, 
allowing them to understand and enjoy this national asset. This policy 
sets out where tourist accommodation will be acceptable in principle, 
except camping and touring caravan sites which are addressed in 
Policy 5. 7. The policy focusses new accommodation to Local Centres 
and Rural Settlements. 
5.4.2 In Villages and Hamlets and the open countryside short-
term holiday accommodation (holiday lets occupied by the same 
occupant for no more than 28 days in a calendar year) is allowed 
where it is located close to tourist services, such as a general store 
and pub, and is provided through conversion. Holiday lets generally 
have a high-impact on historic farm buildings, such as barns, which is 
comparable to a residential use. In accordance with Strategic Policy 
2.8, high-impact proposals in the open countryside will therefore be 
required to demonstrate less harmful uses are not viable by providing 
marketing evidence. Within settlements Strategic Policy 2.7  will be 
used to determine whether a proposal’s impact is acceptable.
5.4.3 Strategic Policy 5.2  sets out a town centre first approach for 
proposals involving main town centre uses over 150m2. Hotel and 
guesthouse uses are main town centre uses and best located within 
the town centres of Local Centres and Rural Settlements. Where hotels 
and guesthouses are proposed adjacent to or outside town centres 
applications should apply the town centre sequential test set out in 
Strategic Policy 5.2 .
5.4.4 New-build holiday homes, flats, chalets, lodges and other 
permanent holiday accommodation amounts to new housing and 
will therefore be expected to comply with this Local Plan’s housing 
policies (see Chapter 3 ). Policy 5.5 Tourist accommodation
1. Within Local Centres and Rural Settlements planning permission 
will be granted for:
a) new small-scale hotels and guesthouses, or extensions to hotels and 
guesthouses; and
b) new short-stay tourist accommodation provided through conversion, 
including suitable redundant historic buildings in accordance with 
Strategic Policy 2.7 . 
2. Within Villages and Hamlets and the open countryside 
planning permission will only be granted for new short-stay tourist 
accommodation where it is:
a) well related to tourist services; and
b) provided through conversion of suitable redundant historic buildings 
in accordance with Strategic Policy 2.7  and/or Strategic Policy 2.8 .
3. New short-stay holiday accommodation will be subject to 
conditions to ensure:
a) it is occupied for holiday purposes only and not as a person’s sole or 
main residence; and 
b) the owner/operator maintains an up to date register of the names 
and main home addresses of all occupiers and this information is 
available to the Authority on request.
4. In the open countryside removal of a holiday let occupancy 
condition will only be approved where:
a) the proposal complies with Strategic Policy 2.8 ; or
b) evidence demonstrates there is no demand for holiday 
accommodation in the area and the property has been offered on 
the open market for rent, sale or lease for not less than 12 months at 
a price which reflects the occupancy condition; and
c) the applicant enters into a legal agreement ensuring the property is 
affordable housing. Economy  111Staff accommodation for serviced accommodation 
businesses
5.4.5 Serviced accommodation businesses, such as hotels and 
guesthouses, make an important contribution to the local tourism 
economy. However, they are often reliant on low wage workers who 
are unable to afford to live locally. Dartmoor’s isolated nature and 
poor public transport availability means workers can also struggle to 
meet commuting costs. As a result many businesses cannot attract 
and retain sufficient staff.
5.4.6 To help improve access to skills and labour, whilst also reducing 
the impact of the business on climate change, this policy allows new 
staff accommodation where it is needed by established serviced 
accommodation businesses. Permission will be granted where 
evidence demonstrates staff accommodation is needed and cannot 
be provided locally. The first preference will be for accommodation 
to be provided through conversion of a suitable redundant historic 
building, then conversion of modern buildings. Where this is not possible 
a small-scale extension that is subordinate to the existing property may 
be permitted. New detached buildings will not be permitted for staff  
accommodation.
5.4.7 The size of accommodation should be proportionate to the 
need. Given that the accommodation is for workers who generally 
cannot afford to live locally it is expected that accommodation will 
also be modestly sized and proportionate to employees’ needs.
5.4.8 To ensure new staff accommodation is not sold separately and/
or occupied as an independent unit of accommodation, permissions 
will be subject to a condition tying the accommodation to the business.Policy 5.6 Staff accommodation for serviced 
accommodation businesses
1. Proposals for staff accommodation will be supported where 
evidence clearly demonstrates it is needed by a hotel, guesthouse or 
other serviced accommodation business to provide accommodation 
for staff who cannot afford to live locally, and it cannot be reasonably 
provided through existing accommodation in the local area. 
2. Staff accommodation must be:
a) modestly sized and proportionate to employees’ needs; and 
b) provided through conversion of redundant buildings. Suitable 
historic buildings should be used first in accordance with Strategic 
Policy 2.7  and/or Strategic Policy 2.8 ; or
c) where this is not possible, a small-scale extension which is subordinate 
to an existing building.
3. Permission for new staff accommodation will be subject to a 
condition tying the use of the accommodation to the business.112Camping and Touring Caravan Sites
5.4.9 Camping can be an inexpensive and low-impact way of staying 
overnight in the National Park. Having good quality campsite options 
can help improve the National Park’s overall tourism offer, making it 
accessible to a range of people and supporting the economy. This 
policy allows for new tented campsites which are well related to 
tourist services, such as a pub and general store, and conserve and/or 
enhance Dartmoor’s Special Qualities. In particular, significant earth 
works, isolated power points, new tracks and footpaths will be resisted 
where they would adversely impact on landscape character.
5.4.10 Touring caravan and motorhome sites can also be popular, 
but have a far greater impact on landscape character and local 
traffic movements. This policy therefore only allows for small scale 
motorhome and caravan sites within or adjacent to Local Centres 
and Rural Settlements, and where this conserves and/or enhances 
Dartmoor’s Special Qualities. In most cases this will limit opportunities to 
previously developed land, or other sites where significant landscape 
and other environmental enhancements can be made.
5.4.11 For both tented campsites and touring caravan sites there 
can be an issue with pitches being used for the long term storage 
of unoccupied tents, yurts, wigwams or caravans. This practice has 
an impact on landscape character without any benefit to the local 
economy. To safeguard against this we will require a condition that 
no tent or caravan shall occupy any pitch for more than 28 days per 
calendar year.
5.4.12 Camping pods, shepherd huts and other structures which 
are permanently or seasonally sited on the land can have a similar 
impact to touring caravan sites and proposals for these structures will 
be considered in the same way as a new caravan site.Policy 5.7 Camping and touring caravan sites
1. Within or adjoining Local Centres or Rural Settlements small 
scale camping, touring caravan, and/or motorhome sites will be 
permitted where the development conserves and/or enhances the 
National Park’s Special Qualities, particularly landscape character, 
biodiversity, dark night skies and heritage significance.
2. Within Villages and Hamlets and the Open Countryside new small 
scale campsites will be permitted where:
a) the proposal involves siting of tents only, is located close to tourist 
services and is of a scale appropriate for the local highway network;
b) the development, use of the site and provision of site utilities and 
services conserve and/or enhance the National Park’s Special 
Qualities, particularly landscape character, biodiversity, dark night 
skies and heritage significance;
c) any need for a new building is met through the conversion of a 
redundant building, and suitable historic buildings are used first in 
accordance with Strategic Policy 2.7  and/or Strategic Policy 2.8 ; 
and
d) the site is capable of being managed without the need for a new 
dwelling.
3. Permissions for campsites and touring caravan sites will be subject 
to conditions requiring that:
a) Tents, motorhomes and caravans are restricted to short stay holiday 
occupancy only; and 
b) no tent or caravan occupies any pitch for more than 28 days. Economy  1135.5 Agriculture, forestry and rural land-based 
business development
5.5.1 Dartmoor has been shaped by agriculture, forestry and other 
rural land-based businesses for centuries. These industries have a big 
impact on the National Park’s Special Qualities: its landscape, the 
abundance of wildlife and how well maintained its heritage features 
are. 
5.5.2 Agriculture, forestry and rural land-based development may 
include new buildings, tracks, hardstandings, field accesses and other 
structures. The planning system does not control the use of land for 
agriculture or forestry, however the keeping of horses may require 
planning permission (see S ection 5.7 ). This policy does not address 
buildings for residential use, our approach for new rural workers’ houses 
is set out in Policy 3.9 .
5.5.3 When considering proposals we will prioritise the conservation 
and enhancement of the National Park’s Special Qualities. This ensures 
the rural economy is supported provided development is compatible 
with the National Park’s first purpose (see Section 1.1 ).
5.5.4 All agriculture, forestry and other rural land-based enterprise 
development needs to comply with the same policy criteria. Even 
small-scale development, such as isolated field shelters and other 
structures, can have a significant cumulative landscape impact which 
becomes noticeable over time.
5.5.5 To comply with this policy applicants should:
 ●demonstrate a functional need for the development which 
cannot be met by existing buildings, where uncertainty exists an 
appraisal will be required;
 ●conserve and enhance landscape character by:
 ○not proposing isolated buildings or structures, but ensuring they 
are clustered with existing buildings;
© Historic England Archive114 ○enclosing new buildings and yards with locally appropriate 
features such as hedgebanks or stone walls;
 ○retaining hedgebanks and field patterns; and
 ○not disturbing natural drainage and respecting local 
topography by not locating development where significant 
earth works are required;
 ●conserve and enhance features of biodiversity merit and heritage 
significance, including by ensuring new buildings and yards are 
of an appropriate scale and sensitively sited relative to existing 
buildings and farmsteads;
 ●avoid or, where absolutely necessary minimise the installation of 
external lighting; and
 ●provide enhancements to landscape and biodiversity features 
where possible.
5.5.6 Where there is no acceptable location on an applicant’s 
land which complies with the policy criteria the development will be 
considered unacceptable, regardless of whether there is a proven 
need for the building. In these circumstances, we will make every 
effort to ensure applicants are advised on appropriate locations to 
meet the identified need, including by fully assessing an applicant’s 
land holding. Where multiple businesses are struggling to find suitable 
locations for development they should consider cooperating to form 
an infrastructure hub in an acceptable location.
5.5.7 In some circumstances permitted development rights exist for 
the construction and alteration of agricultural and forestry buildings 
and tracks. Development allowed for under permitted development 
rights can be applied for using a system of notification and typically 
require prior approval of the development’s siting, design and external 
appearance. We will assess these criteria using the approaches set 
out in Local Plan policy and any relevant design guidance: seeking to 
ensure the National Park’s Special Qualities are conserved, their siting 
is appropriate and the design is high quality. The Forestry Commission 
provides design guidance for forestry roads and tracks36.
36  Operations note 25: Forest roads and tracks (Forestry Commission, 2011)Policy 5.8 Agriculture, forestry and rural land-
based enterprise development
Agriculture, forestry and other rural land-based development will 
be permitted where:
a) the development’s scale is proportionate to a proven functional 
need which cannot be met by an existing building or one which 
was recently disposed of;
b) either on its own or cumulatively with other development, 
it conserves and/or enhances the National Park’s Special 
Qualities, particularly landscape character, biodiversity, heritage 
significance, tranquillity and dark night skies; 
c) it does not harm natural drainage and avoids pollution of soils, 
water or air;
d) relates well to local topography and does not require significant 
earth works; and
e) in the case of new buildings and structures, they are clustered 
with existing building groups and enclosed with an appropriate 
boundary feature, taking into account the special characteristics 
of the built environment. Economy  1155.6 Farm Diversification
5.6.1 Farming is the principal land use in Dartmoor National Park and 
is also one of its largest employers. Over the lifetime of this Local Plan, 
the industry is likely to be effected by an ageing workforce, changing 
consumer habits, Brexit and wage pressures. Adding new business 
activities through diversification can help build resilience into existing 
farming businesses and in the process safeguard the National Park’s 
Special Qualities.
5.6.2 This policy permits the following types of farm diversification to 
occur on established and active farms:
 ●small-scale development, including construction of new buildings 
for a range of commercial uses, such as farm shops, offices, 
education, and campsites; and
 ●conversion of suitable redundant historic buildings to holiday lets 
or one dwelling for occupation by a Local Person.
5.6.3 This policy is only intended to support established and active 
farms, not lifestyle or hobby farms. Where there is uncertainty, 
applicants will be required to submit a business plan demonstrating 
that before and after diversification:
 ●the farm supports at least one full-time agricultural worker; and
 ●the business’ total agricultural receipts37 are at least 40% of the 
total gross receipts (i.e. before costs and taxes) in the most recent 
financial year.
5.6.4 Proposals for new buildings will be carefully assessed to ensure 
they are: clustered with existing building groups; of an appropriate 
scale; and are sensitively sited relative to the existing farmstead. 
5.6.5 The conversion of historic buildings will be assessed against 
Strategic Policy 2.8 . On farmsteads the building’s location will be 
presumed sustainable for the purposes of part 2b of Strategic Policy 
2.8. However, proposals for high impact uses, such as residential or 
holiday-lets, will still need to demonstrate less harmful uses are unviable 
through a business plan (not marketing evidence) and that works will 
37  The definition of agricultural and non-agricultural receipts is the same as that used for the Active Farmer Certificate and is included in the Glossary.116be sympathetic. Isolated buildings are less likely to be appropriate 
for conversion because of their sensitive character, setting and 
surroundings, buildings on farmsteads are generally more suitable.
5.6.6 To support farm diversification and successional farming this 
policy allows the conversion of a suitable redundant historic building 
(as assessed against Strategic Policy 2.8 ) to a dwelling. A maximum 
of one dwelling per farm holding is allowed and it must remain tied 
to the enterprise. Where no redundant historic buildings suitable for 
conversion exist, Policy 3.10  provides an alternative approach for 
creating additional accommodation through a residential annexe. 
Only one of these policies can be pursued on any farm holding. This 
means that where new accommodation is permitted under one policy 
it will not then be permitted under the other.
5.6.7 Any conversion or new build proposed must be of a high quality 
design and in the case of historic structures minimise its impact on a 
building’s or other asset’s significance. Residential and holiday let uses 
will often have a high impact and there will be occasions where a 
conversion or new build is not possible due to the adverse impact on 
the historic environment.
5.6.8 New business activities and dwellings must be kept associated 
with and support the main farm business. To prevent businesses being 
sold separately, or severed, it may be necessary to tie the proposed 
use to the agricultural business and/or holding through condition or 
legal agreement. For new dwellings, there is a significant threat of 
severance, whereby the dwelling is sold separately from the farm land 
and enterprise. New dwellings will therefore only be granted permission 
subject to an anti-severance obligation: a legal agreement tying them 
to the agricultural holding.
5.6.9 Permission to vary the land associated with an anti-severance 
obligation will not be unreasonably withheld. To allow flexibility for 
future business needs a portion (for example 25%) of the applicant’s 
land holding at the time planning permission is sought, may also be 
left untied. In both circumstances the tied land must be sufficient to 
ensure the business’ future viability.Policy 5.9 Farm diversification
1. Planning permission will be granted for development to support 
farm diversification enterprises where they:
a) are located on an established and active farm;
b) support and add value to a farm business which contributes to the 
conservation and/or enhancement of the National Park’s Special 
Qualities; 
c) are ancillary and subordinate in scale to the farm business;
d) make use of redundant buildings before proposing new buildings; 
and
e) in the case of new buildings and structures, they are clustered 
with existing building groups and enclosed with an appropriate 
boundary feature, taking into account the special characteristics 
of the farmstead.
2. Proposals for a holiday let or Local Needs dwelling of up to 93m2 will 
be supported where they are provided only through the conversion 
of a suitable redundant historic building in accordance with Strategic 
Policy 2.8 . Only one Local Needs dwelling will be permitted per farm 
holding and only where no residential accommodation has already 
been permitted under this Policy or Policy 3.10 .
3. For new diversification enterprises, permission will be subject to a 
condition tying the enterprise to the main farm business.
4. For Local Needs dwellings, permission will be subject to a legal 
agreement restricting it to occupation by a Local Person and tying 
the dwelling and any other relevant dwellings to the land holding. Economy  1175.7 Equestrian development
5.7.1 The keeping and riding of horses on Dartmoor’s rugged 
landscape brings pleasure to many and can make a notable 
economic contribution through employment, providing opportunities 
for agricultural diversification and stimulating tourism. However, poor 
quality equestrian development and inappropriate land management 
practices harm the National Park. The Dartmoor Landscape Character 
Assessment38 and National Character Area Profile39 both identify 
increased equine pressure as a threat to Dartmoor’s landscape. This 
policy ensures only appropriate equestrian development is permitted .
5.7.2 Equestrian development which has a harmful impact on the 
National Park is not supported, this includes:
 ●new stables, tracks, parking areas and other development 
located away from existing development or involving excavation 
of sloping ground and which contributes to the sprawl of 
development into the countryside
 ●new sand schools (also known as a ’manège’ or arena), which 
are an alien feature in the Dartmoor landscape and easily harm 
landscape character
 ●use of fencing and horse tape to subdivide fields which erodes 
traditional field patterns 
 ●use of permanent building materials (concrete block, concrete 
foundations etc.) which have greater visual impact and make 
removing the building difficult upon redundancy
 ●poorly sited muck heaps which can contaminate water courses 
and disturb nearby residents or users of public rights of way
 ●creation of additional field accesses which have an undesirable 
urbanising effect and involve loss of hedgerows of biodiversity 
value
 ●external lighting which impacts on dark-night skies  
38  Dartmoor Landscape Character Assessment (LUC, 2017)
39  National Character Area Profile 150 Dartmoor (Natural England, 2014)
118Policy 5.10 Equestrian development
1. Equestrian development will only be permitted where:
a) on its own and cumulatively with other development, it conserves 
and/or enhances the National Park’s Special Qualities, particularly 
landscape character, biodiversity, heritage significance, water 
quality, and dark night skies;
b) in the case of new buildings and structures, they are not isolated, 
are clustered with existing building groups and enclosed with an 
appropriate boundary feature.
c) adequate grazing land, buildings and facilities are available; 
d) it avoids pollution of soils and water, does not harm natural 
drainage, relates well to local topography and does not require 
significant earth works; and
e) existing buildings are used wherever possible.
2. A condition will be attached to any permission for a new 
building or structure requiring it to be removed when it is redundant 
and the site returned to its former condition.5.7.3 Ensuring horses have sufficient grazing land is a key way some 
of these impacts can be avoided. Defra has established guideline 
standards for the area of pasture needed to ensure animal welfare 
and husbandry of land40. Dartmoor’s high altitude, often nutrient poor 
and poorly draining soils are more susceptible to poaching and take 
longer to recover than low altitude soils. A minimum grazing area of 1 
Hectare (2.5 acres) will therefore be used as a guideline for determining 
appropriate pasture for a typical horse grazing at grass year round. 
This guideline allows for rotational grazing without subdivision of fields. 
A lower grazing area may be appropriate where horses are stabled 
and only graze occasionally, but the proposal should still not involve 
the subdivision of fields.
5.7.4 All applications for equestrian development must include a 
‘Land Management Plan’ setting out: 
 ●the number and species of animals to be kept;
 ●a sustainable grazing and waste management regime;
 ●how all buildings will be used and any required lighting; 
 ●how soils, Dartmoor’s priority habitats (see Table 2.1), and water 
quality will be protected and preferably enhanced; and
 ●how buildings and structures will be removed when redundant.
5.7.5 Land Management Plans should be proportionate to the scale 
of the development. Specialist ecological or environmental advice 
will be required where the development is likely to affect Dartmoor’s 
priority habitats (see Table 2.1 ), water quality or protected species.
40  Code of Practice for the Welfare of Horses, Ponies, Donkeys and their Hybrids (Defra, 2017) Economy  119Policy 5.10 Equestrian development
1. Equestrian development will only be permitted where:
a) on its own and cumulatively with other development, it conserves 
and/or enhances the National Park’s Special Qualities, particularly 
landscape character, biodiversity, heritage significance, water 
quality, and dark night skies;
b) in the case of new buildings and structures, they are not isolated, 
are clustered with existing building groups and enclosed with an 
appropriate boundary feature.
c) adequate grazing land, buildings and facilities are available; 
d) it avoids pollution of soils and water, does not harm natural 
drainage, relates well to local topography and does not require 
significant earth works; and
e) existing buildings are used wherever possible.
2. A condition will be attached to any permission for a new 
building or structure requiring it to be removed when it is redundant 
and the site returned to its former condition.5.7.3 Ensuring horses have sufficient grazing land is a key way some 
of these impacts can be avoided. Defra has established guideline 
standards for the area of pasture needed to ensure animal welfare 
and husbandry of land40. Dartmoor’s high altitude, often nutrient poor 
and poorly draining soils are more susceptible to poaching and take 
longer to recover than low altitude soils. A minimum grazing area of 1 
Hectare (2.5 acres) will therefore be used as a guideline for determining 
appropriate pasture for a typical horse grazing at grass year round. 
This guideline allows for rotational grazing without subdivision of fields. 
A lower grazing area may be appropriate where horses are stabled 
and only graze occasionally, but the proposal should still not involve 
the subdivision of fields.
5.7.4 All applications for equestrian development must include a 
‘Land Management Plan’ setting out: 
 ●the number and species of animals to be kept;
 ●a sustainable grazing and waste management regime;
 ●how all buildings will be used and any required lighting; 
 ●how soils, Dartmoor’s priority habitats (see Table 2.1), and water 
quality will be protected and preferably enhanced; and
 ●how buildings and structures will be removed when redundant.
5.7.5 Land Management Plans should be proportionate to the scale 
of the development. Specialist ecological or environmental advice 
will be required where the development is likely to affect Dartmoor’s 
priority habitats (see Table 2.1 ), water quality or protected species.
40  Code of Practice for the Welfare of Horses, Ponies, Donkeys and their Hybrids (Defra, 2017)
120
6  Minerals, Waste 
and Energy
Linhay Hill Quarry, AshburtonStrategy
DNPA will work with other minerals and waste planning authorities locally to meet 
identified minerals and waste needs through development outside the National Park 
wherever possible.
Minerals development should:
 ●minimise the impact of new, existing or redundant minerals operations and sites 
upon Dartmoor’s environment and communities
 ●maximise the use of recycled materials and secondary aggregates as far as 
practicable, in preference to primary minerals extraction
 ●allow for appropriate opportunities to extract mineral resources within the 
National Park, where:
 ○it provides material which enables conservation of the National Park’s 
distinctive character; or 
 ○it is necessary to meet a proven wider need for a specific mineral which, 
taking into account the National Park’s high conservation status, cannot be 
reasonably met elsewhere.
 ●safeguard Dartmoor’s mineral resource so that it may be accessed in the future, 
whilst not presuming it would be appropriate to do so.
Development in the National Park should minimise the amount of waste produced 
during its construction and operation.  Most waste processing and management 
should take place outside the National Park. Small scale community-based reuse, 
recycling and composting facilities will be supported, where they are located on a 
site within or adjoining the community they serve, and provide principally for waste 
arising in that community. 
Development should first reduce its energy consumption, and then consider 
renewable sources of energy. Renewable energy development will be encouraged 
where it is not Major Development and does not harm the National Park’s Special 
Qualities or environment.  
Minerals, Waste and Energy  1211226.1 Minerals Development
6.1.1 Minerals are essential to provide the infrastructure, buildings, 
energy and goods which may be needed locally, nationally or 
internationally. The natural mineral resources on Dartmoor are a 
potential source of building stone, aggregate, clays, and metalliferous 
minerals. 
6.1.2 Minerals development differs from other types of development 
in that minerals are a finite natural resource which can only be worked 
where they are found. Minerals development is a temporary use of 
land though operations may go on for many years, with potential 
benefits and impacts seen both during and after the mineral working. 
Mineral development includes exploration, minerals extraction, the 
extension of existing workings, extensions of time for working, ancillary 
minerals operations, or alterations to rates of extraction, mineral waste 
tipping, and re-working of tips. 
6.1.3 The following policies will be used to decide applications for 
minerals development in the National Park. Importantly, whilst this 
section constitutes the Minerals Local Plan for the National Park, these 
policies are not the only considerations for minerals applications, 
and a range of other policies in this Plan will likely be relevant, this 
includes in particular those policies relating to landscape, biodiversity, 
geodiversity, heritage, tranquillity, traffic, and amenity. Minerals 
applications may also be considered to be major development in 
respect of Strategic Policy 1.4 .
New or Extended Minerals Operations
6.1.4 Minerals development that is considered to be Major 
Development, as defined in Strategic Policy 1.4 , can have a 
significant and irreversible impact and is not considered appropriate 
in the National Park other than in exceptional circumstances. 
The environmental impact of minerals operations has improved 
significantly in recent years though, and where existing infrastructure 
and mitigation is in place the extension of existing operations can be 
the most efficient and reasonable approach to sustaining a source of minerals. It is important in considering applications for extensions (in 
time or scale) to carefully assess the ongoing impact of the operation 
and the need for it to take place within a National Park. 
6.1.5 There exists within the National Park a resource of different 
building stones which have had significant use, on Dartmoor and 
more widely, in the past.  This resource can support the positive 
conservation and design strategies for the National Park, as well as 
having economic benefits. In particular the reopening of an old quarry, 
operating at a small scale, to provide materials for the conservation 
of historic buildings and structures inside the National Park, or beyond, 
and supporting high quality modern design in the National Park may 
be possible without having a significant impact.    
Linhay Hill Quarry, AshburtonStrategic Policy 6.1 New or Extended Minerals 
Operations
1. Minerals development that is Major Development, as defined in 
Strategic Policy 1.4 , will not be approved other than in exceptional 
circumstances.  
2. The expansion of existing quarries, or extension of time for minerals 
operations, will be permitted where it can be demonstrated that the 
socioeconomic benefits of the development outweigh any impact 
upon the National Park’s Special Qualities.
3. Small scale quarrying of traditional building stone will be 
permitted where it is demonstrated that there is an identified local 
need for the stone which will conserve, maintain or enhance the 
fabric or character of the National Park.
4. In all cases:
a) all reasonable mitigation must be provided for in the proposal, in 
order to minimise any negative environmental and socioeconomic 
impacts; and
b) the proposal must be consistent with the Plan as a whole.1
2
3
4Exploration:  to prove the existence, extent and economic 
viability of a mineral resource and to inform quarry design. 
Methods of exploration include drilling of boreholes, trial pits and 
seismic surveys.  Much of this work is permitted development. 
Site preparation:  involving all activities that are necessary 
before the extraction of the mineral can take place. This typically 
includes constructing access roads, processing plant and site 
offices, the removal of soil and overburden and its storage or 
disposal and the creation of screening.
Extraction:  the process of removing the minerals from the 
ground and preparing them for use. Different techniques will 
be used for this depending on the type of mineral, and may 
include blasting, excavation or use of a high pressure water 
jet. Once the mineral is removed from the ground, it then has 
to be processed. Again, this varies on the type of mineral, but 
can include crushing, screening, separation, refining, washing, 
drying and blending. Finally, different minerals produce varying 
amounts of solid and liquid waste that are deposited within 
or close to the quarry by backfilling voids, surface tips and 
settlement lagoons. 
Restoration and aftercare: once the minerals have been 
extracted, the quarry will be restored to an agreed use, often 
agriculture, forestry, amenity or commercial uses. The operator 
of the quarry is normally responsible for the maintenance and 
aftercare of the restored site for a number of years. The typical lifecycle of a quarry
Minerals, Waste and Energy  123124Minimising the Impact of Minerals Operations
6.1.6 It is important to recognise that the minerals extraction industry 
has evolved significantly in recent years, with higher industry standards 
now reducing the relative impact of minerals development.  Whilst 
these changes are positive, the impacts of minerals development 
can be significant and long lasting.  Given National Parks have the 
highest status of environmental protection, minerals development 
on Dartmoor must meet the highest environmental standards. Where 
periodic reviews of conditions (Review of Old Minerals Permission 
(ROMP) applications) provide the opportunity to further reduce the 
impact of operations, the highest environmental standards would also 
be sought where this does not affect the asset value or viability of the 
operation.
6.1.7 Dartmoor’s landscape is characterised by the exploitation of 
its natural resources through history.  This includes a legacy of historic 
minerals workings such as tin streaming, granite quarrying, and mining 
of metals, which now form part of Dartmoor’s historic landscape 
character. Historic minerals sites can often offer opportunities for new 
commercial uses, recreation or habitat restoration as well as gradual 
reclamation by flora and fauna and return to a more natural state.
6.1.8 Minerals sites which are no longer in use should therefore be 
the subject of a restoration and aftercare strategy which identifies the 
most appropriate use for that site. That afteruse will depend upon a 
number of factors, including the location of the site and surrounding 
land uses, its scale and form, its hydrology, and risks relating to stability 
or contamination. Restoration also provides opportunities to deliver 
substantial environmental betterment, particularly habitat restoration, 
which should be pursued where appropriate. Some of the National 
Park’s most special and sensitive habitats have established in old 
quarry workings.Strategic Policy 6.2 Minimising the Impact of 
Minerals Operations
1. Applications for new or extended mineral operations must be 
supported by information necessary to consider:
a) evidence of the presence of the mineral and the need for the 
mineral, at a local, regional or national level; 
b) the proposed working methods; and
c) the impact of the proposal on: 
i) assets of natural or cultural value; 
ii) levels of noise, dust and vibration; 
iii) amenity and a loss of privacy; 
iv) dark night skies and tranquillity;
v) landscape character and visual intrusion; 
vi) habitats and species and geodiversity; 
vii) traffic and air quality; 
viii) water quality, quantity, flood risk and drainage; 
ix) land resource, including agricultural land, access land and public 
rights of way;
x) soil, contamination and land instability; and
xi) the economy.
2. Applications must include a proposed restoration and aftercare 
strategy which sets out:
a) how the proposed afteruse responds to the site and its surroundings;
b) the removal of plant and other infrastructure, final landform and 
retained features, reinstatement of soils, and landscaping and 
planting proposals;
c) where applicable, any use of waste or other imported materials for 
restoration purposes;
d) phasing arrangements including avoidance of sterilisation of 
remaining resources; and
e) a programme of aftercare and monitoring of the site for a minimum 
of five years following completion of restoration.Minerals, Waste and Energy  125Strategic Policy 6.3 Minerals Safeguarding
Important mineral resources and reserves, including associated 
transport and processing facilities as identified on the Policies Map, 
shall be safeguarded from development which, by virtue of its 
siting or nature, would prevent or obstruct mineral development or 
associated operations at that site.  Safeguarding Dartmoor’s Mineral Resource
6.1.9 Minerals are a finite resource and it is the role of the planning 
system to manage the demand for land and different development 
types sustainably. Minerals Safeguarding Areas are shown on the 
policies map.  The purpose of a Minerals Safeguarding Area is to ensure 
that the ability remains to extract a minerals resource, by ensuring that 
non-minerals development does not take place where it may sterilise 
or constrain minerals operations. Safeguarding of minerals should 
not be taken as a presumption that permission would be granted 
in the future for minerals development.  It does however ensure that 
the opportunity for minerals development is not prejudiced through 
inappropriate land uses or development.  
6.1.10  In considering proposals for non-mineral use of these areas 
we will take into account opportunity for prior extraction (where 
reasonable and feasible), potential non-sterilising land uses, or may 
decide not to grant permission where development may prejudice 
future minerals operations.  
6.1.11 The following summarises areas identified on the Policies Map 
as Minerals Safeguarding Areas:
 ●Linhay Hill Quarry 
 ●Meldon Quarry 
 ●Yennadon Quarry 
 ●Blackenstone Quarry 
 ●Merrivale Quarry 
 ●Prison Quarry 
 ●Lee Moor Quarry complex6.2 Waste development
6.2.1 DNPA is the Waste Planning Authority for the National Park. 
Responsibility for waste management within the National Park is 
split between the District/Borough Councils (waste collection) and 
the County Council (waste disposal). There is also a close cross-
boundary relationship with Devon County Council as the surrounding 
waste planning authority. Given the small population and level of 
economic activity within Dartmoor compared with Devon as a whole, 
waste arising within the National Park is accounted for in the Devon 
Waste Plan. There is policy provision for sufficient waste facilities to be 
delivered outside the National Park to meet Dartmoor’s waste needs.  
6.2.2 Whilst this is the case it is still appropriate that within the 
National Park all opportunities are taken to prevent waste and enable 
re-use and recycling in accordance with the waste hierarchy.  The 
following waste policies will be used to decide applications for waste 
development, or larger scale development with opportunities for the 
prevention of waste. The design of new development needs to include 
space for the storage of waste and recycling, in accordance with 
the latest regulations and guidelines. Importantly, whilst this section 
constitutes the Waste Local Plan for the National Park, these policies 
are not the only considerations for waste development, and a range 
of other policies in this Plan will be relevant. This includes in particular 
those policies relating to landscape, tranquillity, biodiversity, cultural 
heritage, transport, and amenity.  Waste applications may also be 
considered to be major development in respect of Strategic Policy 
1.4.126The Waste Hierarchy
6.2.3 Waste can be managed in a number of ways and this varies 
across the different types of waste. The waste hierarchy sets out the 
sequential approach which should be followed in order to achieve 
sustainable waste management. 
Reduce
Reuse
Recycle
Recover
Landfilluse less and use it for 
longer
re-use it or re-purpose it
turn waste into new 
products or compost
recover energy from waste 
through treatment
dispose of it responsiblyPolicy 6.4 Waste Prevention
1. All new development should seek to prevent waste, and must 
identify sufficient and convenient space for storage of waste and 
recycling.
2. Applications for major development (for 10 or more dwellings 
or buildings greater than 1,000m2 etc.) must include a waste audit 
statement demonstrating how the demolition, construction and 
operational phases of the development will minimise the generation 
of waste and provide for the management of waste in accordance 
with the waste hierarchy, including: 
a) sustainable procurement in construction phase; and 
b) methods for limiting the generation of waste and maximising 
recycling in construction phase.
Policy 6.5 Waste Disposal and Recycling Facilities 
1. New waste management facilities or disposal sites will not be 
permitted unless they can demonstrate significant environmental 
benefits for Dartmoor National Park.
2. Small scale community-based reuse, recycling and composting 
facilities will be supported where they are located on a site within 
or adjoining the community they serve, and provide principally 
for waste arising in that community. Facilities should maximise the 
opportunity for the use of previously developed land. 
3. In all cases development must mitigate against environmental 
and socioeconomic impacts.Figure 6.1 - The waste hierarchyMinerals, Waste and Energy  1276.3 Energy development
6.3.1 The UK has legal commitments to cut greenhouse gases and 
meet our increasing energy demands from renewable sources.  The 
Government’s Vision for National Parks says we should be “leading 
the way in adapting to, and mitigating climate change”41. The 
National Planning Policy Framework explains that all communities 
have a responsibility to help increase the use and supply of renewable 
energy, but this does not mean that the need for renewable energy 
overrides environmental protections and the planning concerns of 
local communities.
6.3.2 Dartmoor has the potential to contribute to the reduction in 
energy demand, and the supply of renewable energy at a household 
or community level. Dartmoor is not an appropriate location for 
large scale energy development aimed at power generation to 
support national and regional energy supply. Wind energy and solar 
photovoltaic farm development in particular can significantly harm 
the National Park’s Special Qualities.   
6.3.3 New development should take a ‘fabric first’ approach and 
aim for a building to be as efficient as possible through good design 
and construction which exceeds Building Regulations where possible. 
The building should be at its most efficient before renewable energy 
‘bolt-ons’ are considered. Strategic Policy 1.6  sets out our approach to 
the energy efficiency of new buildings.
6.3.4 Dartmoor has a high proportion of traditional properties built 
of solid wall construction, and limited mains gas supply. These ‘hard 
to treat’ homes can be difficult to make more energy efficient and it 
means the potential energy efficiency of Dartmoor’s existing housing 
stock is limited. Small-scale renewable energy can do much to improve 
efficiency, but should be considered alongside other cost-effective 
improvements where these are suitable, such as wall insulation and 
draught proofing. Historic England offers some helpful advice on a 
range of potentially appropriate changes42.
6.3.5 Renewable energy development which meets the energy 
41  English National Parks and the Broads UK Government Vision and Circular (Defra, 2010)
42  Energy Efficiency and Historic Buildings: How to improve Energy Efficiency (Historic England, 2018)demands of a single property, business or local community is unlikely 
to have an impact on the National Park’s Special Qualities. New and 
emerging technologies mean that efficient and viable generation can 
come about from smaller and lower impact installations. In particular 
Dartmoor has a high potential for micro-hydro generation, in locations 
where biodiversity impacts can be avoided. A range of domestic 
scale renewable energy facilities can be installed without the need 
for planning permission, and ground source and air source heat can 
be a relatively low impact source of renewable energy where a 
building is already at its most energy efficient.  In some instances this 
can be achieved on a larger community scale to provide renewable 
energy. Many commercial or agricultural buildings may also be able 
to incorporate renewable energy development without impacting 
upon the National Park’s Special Qualities. Often this does not need 
planning permission.
Policy 6.6 Renewable energy development
1. Renewable energy development will be encouraged where 
it does not harm the National Park’s Special Qualities, including:
a) landscape character, taking into consideration the cumulative 
impact with other development;
b) biodiversity, geodiversity, and heritage significance;
c) tranquillity, dark night skies and residential amenity, taking into 
consideration noise, lighting, movement, odour and vibration; 
and
d) air, soil and water quality.
2. Renewable energy development should not impact on flood 
risk or soil stability. Utility connections, such as cables and pipes, 
should be placed underground.
3. Renewable energy development that is Major Development, 
as defined in Strategic Policy 1.4 , will not be approved other than 
in exceptional circumstances.128
7  Towns, Villages and 
Development Sites
AshburtonTowns, Villages and Development Sites  129
7.1 Settlements, site development and community plans
7.1.1 This chapter describes any policies or proposals which apply in specific 
settlements in the National Park.  Strategic Policy 1.3  sets out the settlement strategy 
for the Local Plan, including that there may be sites identified or ‘allocated’ for 
development, and settlement boundaries. The inset maps that follow also show other 
key policy factors within the larger settlements (such as conservation areas, and flood 
zone).  There are also two ‘special policy areas’ where development is restricted in 
order to protect their special character.
7.1.2 A Settlement Profile for each of the classified settlements (Local Centres, Rural 
Settlements and Villages and Hamlets), is published online . These can inform decision 
making, monitoring, and help communities prepare their own plans. They may be 
updated as necessary during the life of this Plan.
Settlement Boundaries
7.1.3 Settlement boundaries are shown for Local Centres and Rural Settlements. 
Spatial policies in the Local Plan describe development as being appropriate either 
‘within’, ‘adjoining’ or ‘well related’ to a settlement, or describing what type of 
development is appropriate outside classified settlements. Settlement Boundaries 
therefore enable these policies to be more easily understood, and support the overall 
strategy of the Local Plan by preventing the encroachment of development into the 
open countryside. 
7.1.4 The inclusion of an area within a settlement boundary does not mean 
development would automatically be acceptable, it just shows where different parts 
of a policy may apply.  Any proposal within a settlement boundary is subject to all of 
the relevant Local Plan policies and other material considerations.
7.1.5 Settlement boundaries are based on these key principles:
 ●They are drawn tightly around the built form of the settlement, including any 
land with planning permission or any land allocated in this Local Plan
 ●They normally include the following land uses: residential, settlement services 
and facilities (including shops, schools, community buildings, health services), 
employment uses, permanent hard surfaced car parks, identified recreation or 
community open space (including sports fields, allotments or cemeteries). 130 ●They normally exclude the following land uses; agriculture, 
forestry, equestrian, minerals extraction or landfill sites.  Areas of 
water or other open space, and public utilities, which are not well 
contained within the settlement form, are excluded.
 ●The boundary relates to defined physical features such as field 
boundaries, roads or water courses.  It would normally follow the 
boundaries of the curtilage or properties except where buildings 
or structures are located in large grounds or open areas on the 
edge of settlements where the plot or area of extended garden 
may be excluded.
Site Allocations
7.1.6 Site allocations are a tool to support development coming 
forward in the best possible way. Though they can be a contentious 
element of the Local Plan, they have significant value, through: 
 ●providing a proactive approach to the consideration of sites, 
rather than  reacting to a planning application on a site which 
has not previously been considered;
 ●enabling communities and planners to consider the relative 
merits of different site options;
 ●giving a community certainty of which sites should be coming 
forward next within their town or village;
 ●giving developers and landowners a clear indication of which 
are the suitable sites for development;
 ●demonstrating a positively prepared Local Plan by identifying 
enough appropriate land to meet identified need; and
 ●providing a defence to potential challenges relating to 
appropriate land supply, or the promotion of a development site 
which is not supported.
7.1.7 We recognise concerns that land allocation amounts to 
the ‘concreting over of the National Park’, and an ‘urbanisation of Dartmoor’. It is therefore worth noting that the land allocated accounts 
for 0.024% of the total National Park area, and 39% of allocated land 
is brownfield land. As a whole, 0.3% (293Ha) of Dartmoor is currently 
identified as ‘urban’ in the Landscape Character Assessment.  
7.1.8 Identifying land for development in the Local Plan ensures that:
 ●the most appropriate land is used to meet local needs; 
 ●it is used effectively, to meet local needs and priorities; and 
 ●by taking a proactive approach we can then defend robustly 
against inappropriate sites and urban sprawl.
7.1.9 Strategic Policy 3.1  states clearly that allocated sites should 
only come forward when they are needed.  If there is not a current 
identified need for affordable housing, development should not come 
forward. This is to ensure that best use is made of Dartmoor’s limited 
land resource. 
7.1.10 Allocations may include specific requirements, such as a level 
of affordable housing or infrastructure, which should be provided as 
part of development on the site. These are summarised in the Site 
Briefs published alongside this Plan, which also describe landscape 
mitigation or specific assessment or reports which would be required 
as part of an application. These Briefs should be read alongside the 
relevant policies within this Local Plan and taken into account in 
preparing applications in order to ensure proposals are consistent with 
the Local Plan as a whole.
7.1.11 Given the degree of certainty provided by an allocation we 
would generally encourage proposals on allocated sites to submit 
detailed planning applications in the first instance. Where a proposal 
of 6 dwellings or more is proposed on a (‘windfall’) site which is not 
allocated in the Local Plan, or clearly deviates from the published Site 
Brief, an appropriate level of pre-application engagement should be 
demonstrated such as through a development brief or masterplan. 
These should show how the proposal will deliver sustainable 
development within that community.Towns, Villages and Development Sites  131Dartmoor’. It is therefore worth noting that the land allocated accounts 
for 0.024% of the total National Park area, and 39% of allocated land 
is brownfield land. As a whole, 0.3% (293Ha) of Dartmoor is currently 
identified as ‘urban’ in the Landscape Character Assessment.  
7.1.8 Identifying land for development in the Local Plan ensures that:
 ●the most appropriate land is used to meet local needs; 
 ●it is used effectively, to meet local needs and priorities; and 
 ●by taking a proactive approach we can then defend robustly 
against inappropriate sites and urban sprawl.
7.1.9 Strategic Policy 3.1  states clearly that allocated sites should 
only come forward when they are needed.  If there is not a current 
identified need for affordable housing, development should not come 
forward. This is to ensure that best use is made of Dartmoor’s limited 
land resource. 
7.1.10 Allocations may include specific requirements, such as a level 
of affordable housing or infrastructure, which should be provided as 
part of development on the site. These are summarised in the Site 
Briefs published alongside this Plan, which also describe landscape 
mitigation or specific assessment or reports which would be required 
as part of an application. These Briefs should be read alongside the 
relevant policies within this Local Plan and taken into account in 
preparing applications in order to ensure proposals are consistent with 
the Local Plan as a whole.
7.1.11 Given the degree of certainty provided by an allocation we 
would generally encourage proposals on allocated sites to submit 
detailed planning applications in the first instance. Where a proposal 
of 6 dwellings or more is proposed on a (‘windfall’) site which is not 
allocated in the Local Plan, or clearly deviates from the published Site 
Brief, an appropriate level of pre-application engagement should be 
demonstrated such as through a development brief or masterplan. 
These should show how the proposal will deliver sustainable 
development within that community.
Policy 7.1 Settlement Boundaries and 
Development Sites
1. Settlement boundaries shown on the inset maps define 
the area of the settlements within which development will be 
permitted where it is consistent with this Local Plan.
2. Applicants are encouraged to recognise the benefits of 
pre-application advice from the Authority, and pre-application 
engagement and consultation with the community.
3. Proposals of 6 dwellings or more on sites not allocated in 
this Plan, or which clearly deviate from the published Site Brief, 
should be informed by the preparation of a development brief 
or masterplan, prepared in association with the local community, 
relevant stakeholders and the Authority.Community Planning
7.1.12 There is significant opportunity for local communities to 
influence the way in which development happens locally. The 
Localism and Neighbourhood Planning Acts enable neighbourhood 
plans to be prepared, in which they can develop a shared vision for 
their neighbourhood and shape the development and growth of their 
local area. Importantly, Neighbourhood plans may identify where 
they want development, but are not a tool to resist or prevent new 
development.  They must be consistent with the strategic policies 
in the Local Plan, and once formally made will become part of the 
development plan, and be taken into account alongside the Local Plan 
when deciding planning applications. The neighbourhood plan area 
does not have to follow administrative boundaries, but an application 
must be made to each of the local planning authorities which has part 
of its administrative area within the area. Local planning authorities 
are encouraged to agree a lead authority to handle neighbourhood 
planning in a particular neighbourhood area.
7.1.13 There still remains a place for other community plans too.  In 
many cases communities are not seeking to write new planning policy, 
but simply want to express their ideas and priorities, and influence 
decisions. Community plans, such as parish plans, appraisals or village 
design statements can be an effective way to do this, and, whilst they 
carry less weight in decision making, are substantially quicker and 
easier to produce than a formal Neighbourhood Plan. Increasingly, 
communities are also recognising the value of forming a Community 
Land Trust, which can become more involved in the development 
process, and in particular the delivery of affordable housing.
Policy 7.2 Community Planning
Where a Parish Plan, Appraisal or Village Design Statement has been 
properly prepared and endorsed by the Town or Parish Council, the 
relevant recommendations and action plans will be regarded as 
material considerations in deciding planning applications.Widecombe-in-the-Moor1327.2 Settlements 
7.2.1 The follow sections include an inset map for each Local Centre, 
and Rural Settlement. These show sites allocated for development, 
special policy areas, settlement boundaries and other key planning 
considerations.  
7.3 Local Centres
Ashburton
7.3.1 Ashburton is a Local Centre in the Local Plan.  Detailed and up 
to date information about the settlement is available in its Settlement 
Profile .
7.3.2 Much of Ashburton is designated as a critical drainage area 
by the Environment Agency. In this area there are critical drainage 
problems from surface water run-off which can cumulatively impact 
on flooding downstream. Any new development will be required to 
reduce current rainfall runoff rates using the SuDS hierarchy by using 
infiltration as far as practicable. 
7.3.3  In order to meet identified local housing need, and enable 
redevelopment opportunities, the following sites are identified. 
Proposal 7.3 Land at Longstone Cross, Ashburton 
1. An area of land at Longstone Cross is allocated for residential 
development to provide around 40 homes with 100% affordable 
housing. Development of this site should come forward only in 
response to an identified affordable housing need.
2. Applications should be supported by evidence to inform an 
appropriate assessment (Habitats Regulations) in order to establish 
that development of this site will have no adverse impact on the 
South Hams Special Area of Conservation.Proposal 7.4 Land at Chuley Road, Ashburton 
1. An area of land at Chuley Road is identified for redevelopment 
for mixed use. Within this area, development will be approved where 
it is informed by and responds to: 
a) the local need for affordable housing 
b) the economic vibrancy of the area 
c) traffic movement, and public and private parking needs 
d) opportunities to conserve and enhance the sites’ railway heritage 
e) opportunities to improve sustainable transport links
f) opportunities to enhance the quality of the built environment and 
the public realm; and
g) wildlife and habitat conservation and enhancement opportunities.
2. Applications should be supported by:
a) a Flood Risk Assessment which includes consideration of climate 
change and demonstrates that any development will be safe, not 
increase flood risk elsewhere, and where possible reduces flood risk 
overall; and
b) evidence to inform an appropriate assessment (Habitats 
Regulations) in order to establish that development of this site 
will have no adverse impact on the South Hams Special Area of 
Conservation.Towns, Villages and Development Sites  1337.2 Settlements 
7.2.1 The follow sections include an inset map for each Local Centre, 
and Rural Settlement. These show sites allocated for development, 
special policy areas, settlement boundaries and other key planning 
considerations.  
7.3 Local Centres
Ashburton
7.3.1 Ashburton is a Local Centre in the Local Plan.  Detailed and up 
to date information about the settlement is available in its Settlement 
Profile .
7.3.2 Much of Ashburton is designated as a critical drainage area 
by the Environment Agency. In this area there are critical drainage 
problems from surface water run-off which can cumulatively impact 
on flooding downstream. Any new development will be required to 
reduce current rainfall runoff rates using the SuDS hierarchy by using 
infiltration as far as practicable. 
7.3.3  In order to meet identified local housing need, and enable 
redevelopment opportunities, the following sites are identified. 
Proposal 7.4 Land at Chuley Road, Ashburton 
1. An area of land at Chuley Road is identified for redevelopment 
for mixed use. Within this area, development will be approved where 
it is informed by and responds to: 
a) the local need for affordable housing 
b) the economic vibrancy of the area 
c) traffic movement, and public and private parking needs 
d) opportunities to conserve and enhance the sites’ railway heritage 
e) opportunities to improve sustainable transport links
f) opportunities to enhance the quality of the built environment and 
the public realm; and
g) wildlife and habitat conservation and enhancement opportunities.
2. Applications should be supported by:
a) a Flood Risk Assessment which includes consideration of climate 
change and demonstrates that any development will be safe, not 
increase flood risk elsewhere, and where possible reduces flood risk 
overall; and
b) evidence to inform an appropriate assessment (Habitats 
Regulations) in order to establish that development of this site 
will have no adverse impact on the South Hams Special Area of 
Conservation.134Buckfastleigh
7.3.4 Buckfastleigh is a Local Centre in the Local Plan. Detailed 
and up to date information about the settlement is available in its 
Settlement Profile .   In order to meet identified local housing need, and 
enable redevelopment opportunities, the following sites are identified.
Proposal 7.5 Land at Barn Park, Buckfastleigh 
1. An area of land at Barn Park is allocated for residential 
development to provide around 26 homes, of which not less than 
45% must be affordable housing to meet identified local needs. 
Development should come forward only in response to an identified 
affordable housing need. 
2. Applications should be supported by evidence to inform an 
appropriate assessment (Habitat Regulations) in order to establish 
that development of this site will have no adverse impact on the 
South Hams Special Area of Conservation.Proposal 7.6 Land at Timbers Road, Buckfastleigh
1. An area of land at Timbers Road is allocated for development:
a) Parcel A is allocated to provide around 70 homes, of which not 
less than 45% must be affordable housing to meet identified local 
needs; and
b) Parcel B is allocated for the delivery of appropriate highway 
improvement works to access Plymouth Road.
Development should come forward only in response to an identified 
affordable housing need.
2. Applications should be supported by evidence to inform an 
appropriate assessment (Habitats Regulations) in order to establish 
that development of this site will have no adverse impact on the 
South Hams Special Area of Conservation.
3. Development of this site must:
a) include delivery of appropriate highway improvements to achieve 
vehicle and pedestrian access from Plymouth Road; and
b) be supported by a surface water management plan which 
demonstrates how surface water from the proposed development 
and adjoining public highways will be disposed of in a manner 
that does not increase flood risk elsewhere.Towns, Villages and Development Sites  135Buckfastleigh
7.3.4 Buckfastleigh is a Local Centre in the Local Plan. Detailed 
and up to date information about the settlement is available in its 
Settlement Profile .   In order to meet identified local housing need, and 
enable redevelopment opportunities, the following sites are identified.
136Chagford
7.3.5 Chagford is a Local Centre in the Local Plan. More detailed 
and up to date information is available in the Settlement Profile . In 
order to meet identified local housing and employment needs, the 
following sites are identified.  
Proposal 7.7 Land at Lamb Park, Chagford 
1. An area of land at Lamb Park, Chagford, is allocated for 
residential development of around 36 homes, of which not less than 
45% must be affordable housing to meet identified local needs. 
Development should come forward only in response to an identified 
affordable housing need. 
2. Development of this site should include an element of affordable 
and local needs custom and self-build housing.
Proposal 7.8 Land at Crannafords, Chagford 
An area of land at the Crannafords employment area, Chagford, is 
allocated for business and employment uses (non-main town centre 
uses). Development of this site must: 
a) deliver appropriate highway access improvements;
b) enhance the quality of the built environment and public realm of 
the Crannafords employment area; and
c) enable the delivery of improved cycle and pedestrian access to 
Chagford.Towns, Villages and Development Sites  137Chagford
7.3.5 Chagford is a Local Centre in the Local Plan. More detailed 
and up to date information is available in the Settlement Profile . In 
order to meet identified local housing and employment needs, the 
following sites are identified.  
Proposal 7.8 Land at Crannafords, Chagford 
An area of land at the Crannafords employment area, Chagford, is 
allocated for business and employment uses (non-main town centre 
uses). Development of this site must: 
a) deliver appropriate highway access improvements;
b) enhance the quality of the built environment and public realm of 
the Crannafords employment area; and
c) enable the delivery of improved cycle and pedestrian access to 
Chagford.138Horrabridge
7.3.6 Horrabridge is a Local Centre in the Local Plan. Detailed 
information about the settlement is available in its Settlement Profile . 
In order to meet identified local housing need, the following site is 
identified.    
Proposal 7.9 Land at New Park, Horrabridge
1. An area of land at New Park, Horrabridge is allocated for 
residential development of around 35 homes, of which not less than 
45% must be affordable housing to meet identified local needs. 
Development should come forward only in response to an identified 
affordable housing need.  Development on this site must make an 
appropriate on or off-site contribution towards local sports and play 
provision.
2. Development should be informed by: 
a) a flood risk assessment which includes consideration of climate 
change and demonstrates that any development will be safe, not 
increase flood risk elsewhere, and where possible reduces flood risk 
overall; and
b) a mining assessment including in situ ground investigations.Towns, Villages and Development Sites  139Horrabridge
7.3.6 Horrabridge is a Local Centre in the Local Plan. Detailed 
information about the settlement is available in its Settlement Profile . 
In order to meet identified local housing need, the following site is 
identified.    
Proposal 7.9 Land at New Park, Horrabridge
1. An area of land at New Park, Horrabridge is allocated for 
residential development of around 35 homes, of which not less than 
45% must be affordable housing to meet identified local needs. 
Development should come forward only in response to an identified 
affordable housing need.  Development on this site must make an 
appropriate on or off-site contribution towards local sports and play 
provision.
2. Development should be informed by: 
a) a flood risk assessment which includes consideration of climate 
change and demonstrates that any development will be safe, not 
increase flood risk elsewhere, and where possible reduces flood risk 
overall; and
b) a mining assessment including in situ ground investigations.140Moretonhampstead
7.3.7 Moretonhampstead is a Local Centre in the Local Plan.  
Detailed information about the settlement is available in its Settlement 
Profile . In order to meet identified local housing need, and enable 
redevelopment opportunities, the following sites are identified.  
Proposal 7.10 Land at Betton Way, 
Moretonhampstead 
1. An area of land at Betton Way is allocated for residential 
development of around 18 homes, of which not less than 45% must 
be affordable housing to meet identified local needs.  Development 
should come forward only in response to an identified affordable 
housing need. 
2. Development of this site should include an element of local 
needs custom and self-build housing.  
Proposal 7.11 Land at Forder Farm, 
Moretonhampstead 
An area of land at Forder Farm is allocated for residential development 
of around 30 homes, of which not less than 45% must be affordable 
housing to meet identified local needs.  Development should come 
forward only in response to an identified affordable housing need.Proposal 7.12 Land at Thompson’s Haulage Depot, 
Moretonhampstead 
1. An area of land at the Thompson’s Haulage depot at Station 
Road is allocated for residential development of around 26 homes, 
of which not less than 45% must be affordable housing to meet 
identified local needs. 
2. Development of this site should:
a) be of an appropriate density in order to respect the rural edge 
location and historic character of the site;
b) conserve and enhance the site’s railway heritage, sensitively 
incorporating the goods shed and platform;
c) include landscaping to the south and east of the site;
d) provide a link to the Wray Valley Trail; and
e) be supported by a flood risk assessment which includes consideration 
of climate change and demonstrates that any development will be 
safe, not increase flood risk elsewhere and where possible reduces 
flood risk overall.Towns, Villages and Development Sites  141Moretonhampstead
7.3.7 Moretonhampstead is a Local Centre in the Local Plan.  
Detailed information about the settlement is available in its Settlement 
Profile . In order to meet identified local housing need, and enable 
redevelopment opportunities, the following sites are identified.  
Proposal 7.12 Land at Thompson’s Haulage Depot, 
Moretonhampstead 
1. An area of land at the Thompson’s Haulage depot at Station 
Road is allocated for residential development of around 26 homes, 
of which not less than 45% must be affordable housing to meet 
identified local needs. 
2. Development of this site should:
a) be of an appropriate density in order to respect the rural edge 
location and historic character of the site;
b) conserve and enhance the site’s railway heritage, sensitively 
incorporating the goods shed and platform;
c) include landscaping to the south and east of the site;
d) provide a link to the Wray Valley Trail; and
e) be supported by a flood risk assessment which includes consideration 
of climate change and demonstrates that any development will be 
safe, not increase flood risk elsewhere and where possible reduces 
flood risk overall.142Princetown
7.3.8 Princetown is a Local Centre in the Local Plan.  Detailed 
information about the settlement is available in its Settlement 
Profile . In order to ensure future redevelopment opportunities are 
comprehensively considered, the following site is identified.
Policy 7.13 Land at Dartmoor Prison, Princetown 
1. Any proposals for the redevelopment of Dartmoor Prison must be 
comprehensive, informed by and delivered in accordance with a 
Masterplan for the entire site. 
2. A Masterplan for the site should:
a) be prepared in association with the local community, relevant 
stakeholders and the Authority and be informed by comprehensive 
consultation and engagement;
b) be informed by an Historic Area Assessment enabling a detailed 
understanding of the heritage of the site and its wider context;
c) be based upon a thorough understanding of economic impact, 
housing need, environmental and infrastructure matters; and
d) demonstrate that it represents the most reasonable and effective 
strategy for the conservation of the Prison complex, taking into 
account all relevant planning considerations.Towns, Villages and Development Sites  143Princetown
7.3.8 Princetown is a Local Centre in the Local Plan.  Detailed 
information about the settlement is available in its Settlement 
Profile . In order to ensure future redevelopment opportunities are 
comprehensively considered, the following site is identified.
Policy 7.13 Land at Dartmoor Prison, Princetown 
1. Any proposals for the redevelopment of Dartmoor Prison must be 
comprehensive, informed by and delivered in accordance with a 
Masterplan for the entire site. 
2. A Masterplan for the site should:
a) be prepared in association with the local community, relevant 
stakeholders and the Authority and be informed by comprehensive 
consultation and engagement;
b) be informed by an Historic Area Assessment enabling a detailed 
understanding of the heritage of the site and its wider context;
c) be based upon a thorough understanding of economic impact, 
housing need, environmental and infrastructure matters; and
d) demonstrate that it represents the most reasonable and effective 
strategy for the conservation of the Prison complex, taking into 
account all relevant planning considerations.144South Brent
7.3.9 South Brent is a Local Centre. Detailed information about 
the settlement is available in its Settlement Profile . In order to meet 
identified local housing need and potential transport improvements, 
the following sites are identified.  
Proposal 7.14 Land at Palstone Lane(a)
1. An area of land at Palstone Lane is allocated for community-led 
affordable and local needs custom and self-build housing of around 
15 homes, of which not less than 45% must be affordable housing to 
meet identified local needs. Development should come forward only 
in response to an identified local need. 
2. Development of this site must allow for highway access in 
conjunction with Proposal 7.15.
3. Applications should be supported by evidence to inform an 
appropriate assessment (Habitats Regulations) in order to establish 
that development of this site will have no adverse impact on the 
South Hams Special Area of Conservation.
Proposal 7.15 Land at Palstone Lane(b)
1. An area of land at Palstone Lane is allocated for residential 
development of around 34 homes, of which not less than 45% must 
be affordable housing to meet identified local needs.  Development 
should come forward only in response to an identified affordable 
housing need. 
2. Development of this site must provide highway access in 
conjunction with Proposal 7.14.
3. Applications should be supported by evidence to inform an 
appropriate assessment (Habitats Regulations) in order to establish 
that development of this site will have no adverse impact on the 
South Hams Special Area of Conservation.Proposal 7.16 Land at Fairfield
1. An area of land at Fairfield is allocated for residential development 
of around 36 homes, of which not less than 45% must be affordable 
housing to meet identified local needs.  Development should come 
forward only in response to an identified affordable housing need. 
2. Applications should be supported by evidence to inform an 
appropriate assessment (Habitats Regulations) in order to establish 
that development of this site will have no adverse impact on the 
South Hams Special Area of Conservation.
Proposal 7.17 Land at Station Yard
1. An area of land at Station Yard is identified to safeguard the 
opportunity for a new railway station at South Brent and associated 
car park. 
2. Applications should be supported by evidence to inform an 
appropriate assessment (Habitats Regulations) in order to establish 
that development of this site will have no adverse impact on the 
South Hams Special Area of Conservation.Towns, Villages and Development Sites  145South Brent
7.3.9 South Brent is a Local Centre. Detailed information about 
the settlement is available in its Settlement Profile . In order to meet 
identified local housing need and potential transport improvements, 
the following sites are identified.  
Proposal 7.17 Land at Station Yard
1. An area of land at Station Yard is identified to safeguard the 
opportunity for a new railway station at South Brent and associated 
car park. 
2. Applications should be supported by evidence to inform an 
appropriate assessment (Habitats Regulations) in order to establish 
that development of this site will have no adverse impact on the 
South Hams Special Area of Conservation.146Yelverton
7.3.10 Yelverton is a Local Centre in the Local Plan. Detailed 
information about the settlement is available in its Settlement Profile .  
In order to meet identified local housing need, the following sites are 
identified.    
Proposal 7.18 Land at Elfordtown, Yelverton
An area of land at Elfordtown is allocated for residential development 
of around 40 homes, of which not less than 45% must be affordable 
housing to meet identified local needs. Development should come 
forward only in response to an identified affordable housing need. Policy 7.20 Yelverton Special Policy Area
Special constraints will apply to development proposals within this 
historic residential core of Yelverton. Subdivision and development of 
typically large plots in this location will not be permitted.
Proposal 7.19 Land at Binkham Hill, Yelverton
1. An area of land at Binkham Hill is allocated for residential 
development of around 41 homes, of which not less than 45% must 
be affordable housing to meet identified local needs.  
2. Development of this site should:
a) include landscaping to the south and east of the site;
b) provide a link to the Princetown cycle trail; and
c) include delivery of appropriate highway improvements to access 
Dousland Road.Towns, Villages and Development Sites  147Yelverton
7.3.10 Yelverton is a Local Centre in the Local Plan. Detailed 
information about the settlement is available in its Settlement Profile .  
In order to meet identified local housing need, the following sites are 
identified.    
Policy 7.20 Yelverton Special Policy Area
Special constraints will apply to development proposals within this 
historic residential core of Yelverton. Subdivision and development of 
typically large plots in this location will not be permitted.1487.4 Rural Settlements
Buckfast
7.4.1 Buckfast is a Rural Settlement in the Local Plan. Detailed 
information about the settlement is available in its Settlement Profile . 
The following redevelopment opportunity is identified.Proposal 7.21 Land at Axminster Carpets, Buckfast
1. An area of land at the former Axminster Carpets works is 
identified for mixed use redevelopment to meet identified local 
needs. Development of this area may include:
a) A mix of around 40 homes, including an element of affordable 
housing and local needs custom and self build housing
b) Commercial uses comprising principally business and industrial uses 
(non-main town centre Class E, B2 and B8), and assembly and leisure 
uses (non-main town centre Class E and F2). Any main town centre 
uses should be of a scale and use commensurate with Buckfast and 
its local highway network.
c) A mix of residential care (C2) and appropriate uses, including an 
element of affordable housing
2. Development of this site must:
a) provide a level of employment which is not less than the previous 
employment use;
b) conserve and enhance the setting of heritage assets;
c) be informed by a flood risk assessment which includes consideration 
of climate change and demonstrates that any development will be 
safe, not increase flood risk elsewhere, and where possible reduces 
flood risk overall, taking a sequential approach to land uses;
d) identify and deliver opportunities to improve pedestrian and cycle 
access through the area; 
e) be supported by evidence to inform an appropriate assessment 
(Habitat Regulations) in order to establish that development of this 
site will have no adverse impact on the South Hams Special Area of 
Conservation; and 
f) be informed by an understanding of the hazards relating to the 
Health and Safety Executive consultation zone and take a sequential 
approach to land uses.Towns, Villages and Development Sites  1497.4 Rural Settlements
Buckfast
7.4.1 Buckfast is a Rural Settlement in the Local Plan. Detailed 
information about the settlement is available in its Settlement Profile . 
The following redevelopment opportunity is identified.
150Mary Tavy
7.4.2 Mary Tavy is a Rural Settlement in the Local Plan. Detailed 
information about the settlement is available in its Settlement Profile . 
The following sites are identified.
Proposal 7.22 Land off Warren Road
Land at Warren Road, Mary Tavy is allocated as a site for a new 
village primary school.
Proposal 7.23 Land in Mary Tavy
1. To improve the character and appearance of the centre of 
Mary Tavy, two sites totalling 0.5ha are allocated for mixed-use 
development incorporating:
a) around 19 homes, including not less than 45% affordable housing to 
meet local needs;
b) parking provision to serve the village; and
c) public amenity space.
2. Traffic calming measures will be sought through planning 
obligations. Proposals on this site should be supported by a 
development brief prepared in association with the local community 
and relevant stakeholders.Towns, Villages and Development Sites  151Mary Tavy
7.4.2 Mary Tavy is a Rural Settlement in the Local Plan. Detailed 
information about the settlement is available in its Settlement Profile . 
The following sites are identified.
152South Zeal
2.4.1 South Zeal is a Rural Settlement in the Local Plan. Detailed 
information about the settlement is available in its Settlement Profile .  
The following area is identified.
Other Rural Settlements
2.4.2 Maps showing the settlement boundaries for all Rural 
Settlements are shown in the following pages. Detailed information for 
all settlements is available in the settlement profiles available online .Policy 7.24 South Zeal Conservation Area
Within the South Zeal Conservation Area, development will not be 
permitted where this would cause harm to, or loss of the significance 
or setting of burgage plots, in particular:
a) the plot boundaries; and
b) the lanes and alleyways which serve the rear plots.Towns, Villages and Development Sites  153South Zeal
2.4.1 South Zeal is a Rural Settlement in the Local Plan. Detailed 
information about the settlement is available in its Settlement Profile .  
The following area is identified.
Other Rural Settlements
2.4.2 Maps showing the settlement boundaries for all Rural 
Settlements are shown in the following pages. Detailed information for 
all settlements is available in the settlement profiles available online .154
Towns, Villages and Development Sites  155
156
Towns, Villages and Development Sites  157
158
Towns, Villages and Development Sites  159
160
Towns, Villages and Development Sites  161
162
Towns, Villages and Development Sites  163
164
Towns, Villages and Development Sites  165
166
Towns, Villages and Development Sites  167Appendices
Appendix A: Monitoring
The table below summarises the key topics and indicators which will 
inform the monitoring of the performance of policies within this Local 
Plan. We will continue to refine this list each year through the Authority 
Monitoring Report.
Topics Indicators
1 - Vision, Spatial Strategy and Planning Applications
Including spatial 
strategy, major 
development, 
delivering 
good design, 
sustainable 
construction ●Applications for Major Development approved (number 
and percent of total);  
 ●Net homes approved and completed (number and percent 
of total) in Local Centres, Rural Settlements, Villages and 
Hamlets, and Open countryside; 
 ●Appeals lost on design grounds (number and percent of 
total);and
 ●Homes approved and completed which are AECB or 
Passivhaus accredited, or achieve a minimum 10% reduction 
in carbon emissions over Building Regulations Part L 2013 
(number and percent of total).
2 - Environment
Including 
landscape 
character, 
biodiversity, 
historic 
environment 
and the water 
environment ●Appeals lost on landscape character grounds (number and 
percent of total);  
 ●SSSI in favourable or unfavourable recovering condition 
(area and percent of total);  
 ●Number of net new Biodiversity Units provided;  
 ●Listed buildings, scheduled monuments and conservation 
areas at risk (number and percent of total);  
 ●Number of listed buildings and scheduled monuments 
removed from At Risk Register;  Topics Indicators
 ●Number of planning permissions granted contrary to the 
advice of the Environment Agency on flooding and water 
quality grounds; and
 ●Percent of river length achieving water quality rating of 
good or above.
3 - Housing
Including 
affordable 
housing delivery, 
custom and self-
build housing, 
extensions, rural 
workers housing 
and gypsy 
and traveller 
accommodation. ●Overall housing delivery within the Plymouth and Exeter HMAs 
consistent with the monitoring framework for the HMAs.
 ●Net homes approved and completed (3 year average); 
 ●Net homes approved and completed (number and percent 
of total) on allocated sites, rural exception sites, windfall sites 
 ●Affordable homes approved and completed (number and 
percent of total)
 ●Homes which meet M4(2) accessibility standards approved 
and completed (number and percent of total)
 ●Housing and employment development approved and 
completed on brownfield land (area and percent of total); 
 ●Housing affordability ratio: average house price to average 
income;
 ●Custom and self-build houses approved and completed 
(number and percent of total);  
 ●Number of people on the self-build register (part 2);  
 ●Rural workers’ dwellings approved and completed (number 
and percent of total); and
 ●Number of Gypsy and traveller pitches approved and 
completed.168Topics Indicators
4 - Communities, Services and Infrastructure
Including 
community 
services and 
facilities, public 
open space and 
sports facilities, 
electric vehicle 
charging ●Change in community services and facilities (area);  
 ●Change in public open space and sports facilities (area); 
and  
 ●Number of EVCP (Active/Passive) approved and installed
5 - Economy
Including business 
and tourism 
development, 
agriculture, 
forestry and 
rural land-based 
enterprise 
development, 
farm 
diversification ●Net permissions granted for: employment floorspace (area), 
main town centre uses (area), tourist accommodation 
(number), staff accommodation (number), camping and 
touring caravan sites (area), agriculture, forestry and rural 
land-based enterprise (area), farm diversification (area), 
equestrian development (area);
 ●Change in number of businesses by sector;  
 ●Growth rate of the Dartmoor economy;  
 ●Change in job seekers allowance claimant rate; and 
 ●Change in average income.Topics Indicators
6 - Minerals, Waste and Energy
Including new 
or extended 
minerals 
operations, waste 
disposal and 
recycling facilities, 
renewable energy 
development ●Permissions granted (number and area) for: new minerals 
development, extended minerals operations;
 ●Permissions granted for small scale community-based 
recycling facilities per year (number and area);
 ●Permission granted for new waste management or disposal 
sites per year (number and area);
 ●Number and output of renewable and low carbon energy 
schemes permitted
7 - Town, Villages and Development Sites
Including 
community 
planning and site 
allocations. ●Number of classified settlements recently or currently 
engaged in community planning;  
 ●Applications and completions on allocated sites (percent 
and area)Appendices  169Appendix B: Housing Trajectory
Settlement Site19 
/2020 
/2121 
/2222 
/2323 
/2424 
/2525 
/2626 
/2727 
/2828 
/2929 
/3030 
/3131 
/3232 
/33 33 
/3434 
/3535 
/36 36 
/37Total
Ashburton Outdoor Experience, Chuley Rd 12 10 22
Tuckers, Chuley Rd 12 11 23
Longstone Cross 12 16 12 40
Kenwyn 12 5 27
Buckfastleigh Axminster Carpets 12 20 8 40
Barn Park 12 14 26
Timbers Road 25 25 20 70
Glebelands 3 3
Chagford Bretteville Close 25 25 25 13 88
Lamb Park 12 12 12 36
Cornwood Church Park 10 10
Horrabridge New Park 12 23 35
Mary Tavy Down’s Garage 12 7 19
Moretonhampstead Forder Farm 12 13 25
Thompsons Depot 12 14 26
Betton Way 12 6 18
South Brent Fairfield 12 24 36
Palstone Land (a) 7 8 15
Palstone Land (b) 12 22 34
Yelverton Binkham Hill 12 25 4 41
Elfordtown 12 25 3 40
Widecombe-in-the-Moor Adj Brookland Cottages 6 6
Local Centres Projected Windfall 0.4 11.4 19.4 19.4 7.4 14.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 305
Rural Settlements and 
Villages and HamletsProjected Windfall
0.86 4.86 0.86 0.86 8.86 8.86 8.86 8.86 8.86 8.86 8.86 8.86 8.86 8.86 8.86 8.86 8.86 8.86 131
Open Countryside Projected Windfall 6 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 125
Total 47 71135 116 81 92 80 87 83 63 69 35 59 66 38 35 35 35 1,231
Notes: Windfall rates are calculated on the basis of the average of past completions on unidentified sites over the last Local Plan period, 2007/8 to 2018/19.170020406080100120140160
19/20 20/21 21/22 22/23 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 27/28 28/29 29/30 30/31 31/32 32/33 33/34 34/35 35/36 36/37Number of houses
Year(65 / year)Appendices  171Strategic Policy 3.5 Housing in Villages and Hamlets 69
Policy 3.6 Custom and Self-Build Housing 71
Policy 3.7 Residential alterations, extensions and outbuildings 76
Policy 3.8 Replacement Homes  78
Policy 3.9 Rural Workers’ Housing  80
Policy 3.10 Residential annexes to support farming  82
Policy 3.11 Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation 83
Policy 3.12 Low Impact Residential Development 85
Communities, Services and Infrstructure
Strategic Policy 4.1 Supporting community services and facilities 89
Strategic Policy 4.2 Supporting public open space and 
sports facilities 90
Policy 4.3 Enabling sustainable transport 93
Policy 4.4 Parking standards for new development 94
Policy 4.5 Electric Vehicle Charging Points (EVCPs) 95
Policy 4.6 Public car parks 96
Policy 4.7 Telecommunications Development 97
Strategic Policy 4.8 The Access Network 99
Economy
Strategic Policy 5.1 Non-residential Business and 
Tourism Development 104
Strategic Policy 5.2 Development affecting Town Centres 106
Strategic Policy 5.3 Protecting Active Uses in Dartmoor’s  
Settlements 10 7
Policy 5.4 Signs and Advertisements  107
Policy 5.5 Tourist accommodation 110
Policy 5.6 Staff accommodation for serviced 
accommodation businesses 111
Policy 5.7 Camping and touring caravan sites 112
Policy 5.8 Agriculture, forestry and rural land-based 
enterprise development 114
Policy 5.9 Farm diversification 116
Policy 5.10 Equestrian development 118Appendix C: List of Policies
Vision, Spatial Strategy and Planning Applications
Strategic Policy 1.1 Delivering National Park purposes and 
protecting Dartmoor’s Special Qualities 12
Strategic Policy 1.2 Sustainable development in Dartmoor 
National Park 17
Strategic Policy 1.3 Spatial Strategy  20
Strategic Policy 1.4 Major Development 22
Strategic Policy 1.5 Delivering good design 24
Strategic Policy 1.6 Sustainable construction  26
Policy 1.7 Protecting local amenity in Dartmoor National Park 26
Policy 1.8 Higher risk development and sites 27
Environment
Strategic Policy 2.1 Protecting the character of 
Dartmoor’s landscape      3 2
Strategic Policy 2.2 Conserving and enhancing 
Dartmoor’s biodiversity and geodiversity     38
Strategic Policy 2.3 Biodiversity Net Gain    40
Strategic Policy 2.4 Conserving and enhancing 
Dartmoor’s moorland, heathland and woodland 42
Strategic Policy 2.5 The Water Environment and Flood Risk 43
Strategic Policy 2.6 Protecting tranquillity and dark night skies  45
Strategic Policy 2.7 Conserving and enhancing heritage assets  48
Strategic Policy 2.8 Conservation of historic non-residential 
buildings in the open countryside 52
Policy 2.9 Enabling Development 53
Housing
Strategic Policy 3.1 Meeting Housing Need in Dartmoor 
National Park 59
Strategic Policy 3.2 Size and accessibility of new housing 61
Strategic Policy 3.3 Housing in Local Centres  67
Strategic Policy 3.4 Housing in Rural Settlements 68172Minerals, Waste and Energy
Strategic Policy 6.1 New or Extended Minerals Operations 123
Strategic Policy 6.2 Minimising the Impact of Minerals 
Operations 12 4
Strategic Policy 6.3 Minerals Safeguarding 125
Policy 6.4 Waste Prevention 126
Policy 6.5 Waste Disposal and Recycling Facilities  126
Policy 6.6 Renewable energy development 127
Towns, Villages and Development Sites
Policy 7.1 Settlement Boundaries and Development Sites 131
Policy 7.2 Community Planning 131
Proposal 7.3 Land at Longstone Cross, Ashburton  132
Proposal 7.4 Land at Chuley Road, Ashburton  132
Proposal 7.5 Land at Barn Park, Buckfastleigh  134
Proposal 7.6 Land at Timbers Road, Buckfastleigh  134
Proposal 7.7 Land at Lamb Park, Chagford  136
Proposal 7.8 Land at Crannafords, Chagford  136
Proposal 7.9 Land at New Park, Horrabridge 138
Proposal 7.10 Land at Betton Way, Moretonhampstead  140
Proposal 7.11 Land at Forder Farm, Moretonhampstead  140
Proposal 7.12 Land at Thompson’s Haulage 
Depot, Moretonhampstead  140
Policy 7.13 Land at Dartmoor Prison, Princetown  142
Proposal 7.14 Land at Palstone Lane(a) 144
Proposal 7.15 Land at Palstone Lane(b) 144
Proposal 7.16 Land at Fairfield 144
Proposal 7.17 Land at Station Yard 144
Proposal 7.18 Land at Elfordtown, Yelverton 146
Proposal 7.19 Land at Binkham Hill, Yelverton 146
Policy 7.20 Yelverton Special Policy Area 146
Proposal 7.21 Land at Axminster Carpets, Buckfast 148
Proposal 7.22 Land off Warren Road 150
Proposal 7.23 Land in Mary Tavy 150
Policy 7.24 South Zeal Conservation Area 152Appendices  173Appendix D: List of Policies that will be superseded by the adoption of this plan
Policies superseded Status
Core Strategy 2008
COR1 Sustainable 
DevelopmentReplaced by Strategic Policy 1.2 Sustainable 
development in Dartmoor National Park
COR2 Spatial Strategy Replaced by Strategic Policy 1.3 Spatial Strategy
COR3 National Park 
landscape and special 
environmental qualitiesReplaced by detailed Strategic Policies 2.1, 2.2, 2.4, 
2.6 and 2.7.
COR4 Design Replaced by Strategic Policy 1.5 Delivering good 
design
COR5 The historic built 
environmentReplaced by Strategic Policy 2.7 Conserving and 
enhancing heritage assets
COR6 Archaeology
COR7 Biodiversity and 
geological conservationReplaced by Strategic Policy 2.2 Conserving and 
enhancing Dartmoor’s biodiversity and geodiversity
COR8 Climate change Replaced by Policy 1.6 Sustainable construction, 
Policy 2.3 Biodiversity Net Gain, Policy 6.4 Waste 
prevention, and Policy 2.5 The Water Environment 
and Flood Risk
COR9 Flooding Replaced by Policy 2.5 The Water Environment and 
Flood Risk
COR10 Renewable 
energyReplaced by Policy 6.6 Renewable energy 
development
COR11 Tranquillity Replaced by Strategic Policy 2.6 Protecting 
tranquillity and dark night skies
COR12 Infrastructure, 
community facilities and 
public servicesReplaced by Strategic Policy 4.1 Supporting 
community services and facilities, and Policy 4.3 
Enabling sustainable transportPolicies superseded Status
COR13 Accessibility and 
designReplaced by Strategic Policy 3.2 Size and 
accessibility of new housing
COR14 Infrastructure for 
new developmentReplaced by Strategic Policy 1.2 Sustainable 
development in Dartmoor National Park
COR15 Location and 
type of housing provisionReplaced by Strategic Policy 1.3 Spatial Strategy
COR16 Social inclusion Replaced by Strategic Policy 1.2 Sustainable 
development in Dartmoor National Park
COR17 Health and well-
beingReplaced by Strategic Policy 4.1 Supporting 
community services and facilities
COR18 Sustainable 
economic growth 
including tourismReplaced by Strategic Policy 5.1 Non-residential 
Business and Tourism Development
COR19 Tourism Replaced by Strategic Policy 5.1 Non-residential 
Business and Tourism Development
COR20 Agricultural 
diversificationReplaced by Policy 5.9 Farm diversification
COR21 Alternatives to 
private transportReplaced by Strategic Policy 1.2 Sustainable 
development in Dartmoor National Park, Policy 1.7 
Protecting local amenity in Dartmoor National Park 
and Strategic Policy 4.8 The Access Network
COR22 Minerals 
developmentReplaced by Strategic Policy 6.1 New or Extended 
Minerals Operations
COR23 Waste Replaced by Policy 6.5 Waste Disposal and 
Recycling Facilities
COR24 Water resources Replaced by Strategic Policy 1.2 Sustainable 
development in Dartmoor National Park, and Policy 
2.5 The Water Environment and Flood Risk174Policies superseded Status
Development Management and Delivery DPD 2013
DMD1a Presumption in 
favour of sustainable 
developmentDeleted
DMD1b Delivering National 
Park purposes and 
protecting Dartmoor’s 
special qualitiesReplaced by Strategic Policy 1.1 Delivering 
National Park purposes and protecting Dartmoor’s 
Special Qualities
DMD2 Major Development Replaced by Strategic Policy 1.4 Major 
Development in Dartmoor National Park
DMD3 Sustaining the 
quality of places in 
Dartmoor National Park Replaced by Strategic Policy 1.2 Sustainable 
development in Dartmoor National Park and 
Strategic Policy 1.5 Delivering good design
DMD4 Protecting local 
amenityReplaced by Policy 1.7 Protecting local amenity in 
Dartmoor National Park
DMD5 National Park 
landscapeReplaced by Strategic Policy 2.1 Protecting the 
character of Dartmoor’s landscape
DMD6 Dartmoor’s 
moorland and woodlandReplaced by Strategic Policy 2.4 Conserving and 
enhancing Dartmoor’s moorland, heathland and 
woodland
DMD7 Dartmoor’s built 
environmentReplaced by Strategic Policy 1.5 Delivering good 
design
DMD8 Change to historic 
buildings and other 
heritage assetsReplaced by Strategic Policy 2.7 Conserving and 
enhancing heritage assets
DMD9 The re-use and 
adaptation of historic 
buildings in the countrysideReplaced by Strategic Policy 2.8 Conservation 
of historic non-residential buildings in the open 
countryside
DMD10 Enabling 
developmentReplaced by Policy 2.9 Enabling DevelopmentPolicies superseded Status
DMD11 Demolition of a 
listed building or local 
heritage assetReplaced by Strategic Policy 2.7 Conserving and 
enhancing heritage assets
DMD12 Conservation areas Replaced by Strategic Policy 2.7 Conserving and 
enhancing heritage assets
DMD13 Archaeology Replaced by Strategic Policy 2.7 Conserving and 
enhancing heritage assets
DMD14 Natural 
environment, biodiversity 
and geodiversityReplaced by Strategic Policy 2.2 Conserving 
and enhancing Dartmoor’s biodiversity and 
geodiversity
DMD15 Renewable energy Replaced by Policy 6.6 Renewable energy 
development
DMD16 Hazardous 
installations and potentially 
polluting activityReplaced by Policy 1.8 Higher risk development 
and sites
DMD17 Development on 
contaminated landReplaced by Policy 1.8 Higher risk development 
and sites
DMD18 Development on 
unstable landReplaced by Policy 1.8 Higher risk development 
and sites
DMD19 Local services and 
facilitiesReplaced by Strategic Policy 4.1 Supporting 
community services and facilities
DMD20 
Telecommunications 
development Replaced by Policy 4.7 Telecommunications 
Development
DMD21 Residential 
development in Local 
CentresReplaced by Strategic Policy 3.3 Housing in Local 
Centres
DMD22 Residential 
development in Rural 
SettlementsReplaced by Strategic Policy 3.4 Housing in Rural 
Settlements and Strategic Policy 3.5 Housing in 
Villages and HamletsAppendices  175Policies superseded Status
DMD23 Residential development 
outside Local Centres and Rural 
SettlementsReplaced by Strategic Policy 1.3 Spatial 
Strategy and Policy 3.9 Rural Workers’ Housing
DMD24 Extensions and 
alterations to dwellingsReplaced by Policy 3.7 Residential alterations, 
extensions and outbuildings
DMD25 Ancillary residential 
developmentReplaced by Policy 3.7 Residential alterations, 
extensions and outbuildings
DMD26 Agricultural and holiday 
use occupancy conditionsReplaced by Policy 3.9 Rural Workers’ Housing 
and Policy 5.4 Tourist accommodation
DMD27 Replacement dwellings Replaced by Policy 3.8 Replacement Homes
DMD28 Residential caravans Replaced by Policy 3.9 Rural Workers’ Housing
DMD29 The accommodation 
needs of gypsies and travellersReplaced by Policy 3.11 Gypsy and Traveller 
Accommodation
DMD30 Low impact residential 
development in the open 
countrysideReplaced by Policy 3.12 Low Impact 
Residential Development
DMD31 Provision of new 
recreational and leisure facilitiesReplaced by Strategic Policy 4.2 Supporting 
public open space and sports facilities
DMD32 Protection of 
recreational and amenity open 
spaceReplaced by Strategic Policy 4.2 Supporting 
public open space and sports facilities
DMD33 Horse related 
developmentReplaced by Policy 5.10 Equestrian 
development
DMD34 Agriculture and forestry Replaced by Policy 5.8 Agriculture, 
forestry and rural land-based enterprise 
development
DMD35 Farm diversification Replaced by Policy 5.9 Farm diversification
DMD36 Signs and advertisements Replaced by Policy 5.4 Signs and 
AdvertisementsPolicies superseded Status
DMD37 Advance signs Replaced by Policy 5.4 Signs and 
Advertisements
DMD38 Access onto the 
highwayDeleted, addressed by Strategic Policy 2.1 
Protecting the character of Dartmoor’s 
landscape
DMD39 Provision of car parks Replaced by Policy 4.6 Public car parks
DMD40 Parking provision for new 
residential developmentReplaced by Policy 4.4 Parking standards for 
new development
DMD41 Parking provision for new 
non-residential developmentReplaced by Policy 4.4 Parking standards for 
new development
DMD42 Public rights of way Replaced by Strategic Policy 4.8 The Access 
Network
DMD43 New visitor attractions 
and development of existing 
enterprisesReplaced by Strategic Policy 5.1 Non-
residential Business and Tourism Development
DMD44 Tourist accommodation Replaced by Policy 5.4 Tourist 
accommodation
DMD45 Settlement boundaries 
and site development Replaced by Policy 7.1 Settlement Boundaries 
and Development Sites
DMD46 Parish plans and 
development managementReplaced by Policy 7.2 Community Planning
ASH1 Housing land at LOngstone 
CrossReplaced by Proposal 7.3 Land at Longstone 
Cross, Ashburton
ASH2 Redevelopment area at 
Chuley RoadReplaced by Proposal 7.4 Land at Chuley 
Road, Ashburton176Policies superseded Status
BCK1 Housing land at Barn Park Replaced by Proposal 7.5 Land at Barn Park, 
Buckfastleigh
BCK2 Housing land at Holne 
RoadReplaced by Proposal 7.6 Land at Timbers 
Road, Buckfastleigh
BCK3 Redevelopment at 
Devonia Products Mill siteDeleted
CHG1 Housing land north of 
Lamb ParkReplaced by Proposal 7.7 Land at Lamb Park, 
Chagford
CHG2 Mixed use development 
east of Bretteville CloseImplemented
HOR1 Housing land at Walkham 
MeadowsImplemented
HOR2 Housing land at New Park Replaced by Proposal 7.9 Land at New Park, 
Horrabridge
MTN1 Housing land at Forder 
FarmReplaced by Proposal 7.11 Land at Forder 
Farm, Moretonhampstead
MTN2 Housing at Thompson’s 
haulage depotReplaced by Proposal 7.12 Land at 
Thompson’s, Moretonhampstead
SBR1 Housing land adjacent to 
FairfieldReplaced by Proposal 7.16 Land at Fairfield
SBR2 New station facilities Replaced by Proposal 7.17 Land at Station 
Yard
SBR3 Public car park at station 
yardReplaced by Proposal 7.17 Land at Station 
Yard
YEL1 Housing land adjacent to 
Briar TorImplemented
YEL2 Special protection area – 
centre of villageReplaced by Policy 7.20 Yelverton Special 
Policy Area
MTV1 Primary school site off 
Warren RoadDeletedPolicies superseded Status
MTV2 Mixed use development 
site centre of Mary TavyPart-implemented, replaced by Policy 7.23 
Land in Mary Tavy
SZL1 Conserving the quality of 
the built environment Replaced by Policy 7.24 South Zeal Special 
Policy Area
Minerals Local Plan 2004
M1 Mineral working in the 
National ParkReplaced by Strategic Policy 6.1 New or 
Extended Minerals Operations
M2 Mitigating permitted 
operationsDeleted
M3 Small-scale quarrying Replaced by Strategic Policy 6.1 New or 
Extended Minerals Operations
M4 Assessment of applications 
for mineral workingsReplaced by Strategic Policy 6.2 Minimising the 
Impact of Minerals Operations
M5 Recyling and re-use of 
mineral wasteDeleted
M6 Minerals Consultation Areas Replaced by Strategic Policy 6.3 Minerals 
Safeguarding
M7 Exploratory Drilling DeletedAppendices  177Appendix E: Glossary
A
Affordable Housing : See Section 3.4 .
Agricultural Receipts : Gross amounts received (before related costs 
and taxes are deducted) for ordinary agricultural business activity. 
VAT, receipts from selling of capital items (e.g. tractors) and personal 
receipts should not be included. All receipts will be regarded as from 
non-agricultural activities unless specifically identified as obtained 
from the agricultural activities listed below. 
Agricultural receipts include:
 ●All payments from the Single Payment Scheme (SPS), BPS (including 
the greening payment and any young farmer payments) or the 
Rural Development Programmes (whether or not the receipts are 
related to farming) including any national co-financing, and any 
other payments from the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund 
(EAGF). 
 ●Receipts from SPS, BPS or the Rural Development Programmes and 
any other payments from the EAGF that are received by another 
organisation first (such as a co-operative, producer association, 
or commoners’ association) and passed on to the farmer. 
 ●Receipts from a claimant’s agricultural activities on their holding 
only (that is, all the land they farm in the UK) – not from working 
on someone else’s holding. This includes producing, rearing or 
growing agricultural products, including harvesting, milking, 
breeding animals, and keeping animals for farming. ‘Agricultural 
products’ are listed in Annex I to the Treaties of the European 
Union, with the exception of fishery products. Cotton is also an 
agricultural product. 
 ●Receipts from processing agricultural products from their holding, 
if the product remains in the ownership of the farmer and remains  ●an agricultural product (for example, butchered meat or flour 
that is sold in the farm shop). 
 ●National aid granted for agricultural activities. For example, 
receipts to compensate for destruction of animals testing positive 
for tuberculosis. 
 ●Receipts to compensate for loss of production (for example, for 
flooding) from the Rural Development Programme.
Non-agricultural receipts include:
 ●Income from operating on-farm diversification activities. 
For example, receipts from bed and breakfast or rents from 
holiday lets (even if the diversification itself was funded by rural 
development payments). 
 ●Grants for forestry (other than rural development payments). 
 ●Receipts from a product such as bread that is not in the list of 
agricultural products in the Treaties of the European Union 
described above (even if it was processed from a product in the 
list. 
 ●Receipts from agricultural products produced off the holding 
and then processed or sold on the holding. 
 ●Receipts from providing shooting, hunting or fishing. 
 ●Receipts to compensate for loss of production from a private 
insurer. 
 ●Receipts from contracting and contract farming. 
 ●Receipts from renting out land.
Allocated Sites : Land identified in the Local Plan for development.
Ancient Woodland : An area that has been wooded continuously 
since at least 1600 AD.
Article 4 Direction : Direction removing some or all permitted 
development rights, for example within a conservation area or 178curtilage of a listed building. Article 4 directions are issued by local 
planning authorities.  
B
Brownfield land : see ‘previously-developed land’.
C
Change of Use : A change in the way that land or buildings are used 
(see Use Classes Order). Planning permission is usually necessary in 
order to change from one ‘use class’ to another.
Character : A term relating to Conservation Areas, Listed Buildings and 
the appearance of any rural or urban location in terms of its landscape 
or the layout of streets and open spaces, often giving places their own 
distinct identity.
Classified Settlement : A town, village or hamlet in the National Park 
which has been identified as a sustainable place for a certain amount 
of development. Types of classified settlement include Local Centres, 
Rural Settlements and Villages and Hamlets.
Contributions in lieu of provision of affordable housing on-
site (commuted sums) : A financial contribution provided by the 
developer of a site towards the provision of affordable housing off-site, 
instead of providing affordable housing on-site.
Details of when financial contributions will be permitted and how they 
should be calculated is available in section 3.5 .
Conditions (planning conditions) : Requirements attached to a 
planning permission to limit, control or direct the manner in which a 
development is carried out.
Conservation Area : Local planning authorities have the power to 
designate as conservation areas, any area of special architectural or historic interest. This means the planning authority has extra powers to 
control works and demolition of buildings to protect or improve the 
character or appearance of the area.
Cumulative Impact : A number of developments in a locality or a 
continuous activity over time that together may have an increased 
impact on the environment, local community or economy.
Curtilage : The area normally within the boundaries of a property 
surrounding the main building and used in close connection with it.
Custom and self-build housing : See section 3.7 . 
D
Development : Development is defined under Section 55 of the 1990 
Town and Country Planning Act as “the carrying out of building, 
engineering, mining or other operation in, on, over or under land, or 
the making of any material change in the use of any building or other 
land.” Most forms of development require planning permission (see 
also “permitted development”).
Dwelling : A self-contained building or part of a building used as a 
residential accommodation, and usually housing a single household.
F
Favourable conservation status : The Habitats Directive defines 
when the conservation status of the habitats and species it lists is to be 
considered favourable. The definitions are specific to the Directive; in 
summary, they require that the range and areas of the listed habitats, 
and the range and population of the listed species, should be at least 
maintained at their status when the Directive came into force in 1994 
or, where the 1994 status was not viable in the long term, to be restored 
to a position where it would be viable.
Flood Risk Assessment : An assessment of the likelihood of flooding in Appendices  179a particular area so that development needs and mitigation measures 
can be carefully considered.
G
General Permitted Development Order (GPDO) : A set of regulations 
made by the Government which grants planning permission for 
specified limited or minor forms of development.
H
Habitable Floorspace : The areas of a house which are usually lived 
in (e.g. living rooms, kitchens, bathrooms, corridors etc.). Habitable 
floorspace is measured using Gross internal floor area (GIFA), but 
should exclude areas not typically lived in.
For clarity, habitable floorspace includes:
 ●Areas occupied by internal walls and partitions, columns, piers 
chimney breasts, stairwells, lift-wells, other internal projections, 
vertical ducts, and the like
 ●Atria and entrance halls with clear height above, measured at 
base level only
 ●Voids over stairwells and lift shafts on upper floors
 ●Internal open sided balconies, walkways, and the like
 ●Structural, raked or stepped floors are treated as a level floor 
measured horizontally
 ●Corridors of a permanent essential nature
 ●Areas in the roof space and mezzanine areas converted for use 
with permanent access and a ceiling height of at least 1.8m at 
its highest point
 ●Service accommodation such as toilets, toilet lobbies, bathrooms, 
showers, changing rooms, cleaners’ rooms and the like
 ●Conservatories
And excludes: ●Perimeter wall thickness and external projections
 ●External open-sided balconies, covered ways and fire escapes
 ●Areas in the roof space not intended for use 
 ●Garages, workshops, greenhouses, garden stores, fuel stores and 
the like
 ●Loading bays, lift rooms, plant and utility rooms, fuel stores, tank 
rooms
 ●Canopies, open ground floors and the like
Heritage Asset : A building, monument, site, place, area or landscape 
identified as having a degree of significance meriting consideration 
in planning decisions because of its heritage interest. Heritage asset 
includes designated heritage assets, such as listed buildings and 
scheduled monuments, and non-designated assets identified by the 
local planning authority.
Historic Environment : All aspects of the environment resulting from 
the interaction between people and places through time, including 
all surviving physical remains of past human activity, whether visible, 
buried or submerged, and landscaped and planted or managed 
flora.
Housing Needs Assessment : An assessment of the number of homes 
needed in an area, normally carried out for or on behalf of the housing 
or planning authority. Assessing housing need is the first step in the 
process of deciding how many homes need to be planned for.
Housing Register : A list of all the people who want to rent social 
housing. The Housing Register for an area is maintained by the relevant 
Housing Authority.
I
Infill Development : The development of a relatively small gap 
between existing buildings.
Infrastructure : Basic services necessary for development to take 180place, for example, roads, electricity, sewerage, water, open space, 
play space, education and health facilities.
Irreplaceable habitat : Habitats which would be technically very 
difficult (or take a very significant time) to restore, recreate or replace 
once destroyed, taking into account their age, uniqueness, species 
diversity or rarity. They include ancient woodland, ancient and veteran 
trees, blanket bog, limestone pavement, and others.
L
Landscape Character : The distinct and recognisable pattern of 
elements that occur consistently in a particular type of landscape. It 
reflects particular combinations of geology, landform, soils, vegetation, 
land use and human settlement.
Listed Building : A building of special architectural or historic interest. 
Listed buildings are graded I, II* or II with grade I being the highest. 
Listing includes the interior as well as the exterior of the building, and 
any buildings or permanent structures (e.g. wells within its curtilage). 
Local Centre : The largest and most sustainable type of classified 
settlement in the National Park. These settlements have settlement 
boundaries and comprise:
Ashburton, Buckfastleigh, Chagford, Horrabridge, Moretonhampstead, 
Princetown, South Brent, and Yelverton.
Local Natural Network : The network of interacting natural processes, 
species and ecology which exist locally and support important 
biodiversity and ecosystem services.
Local Person : See section 3.3 .
M
Main Town Centre Uses : Retail development (including warehouse 
clubs and factory outlet centres); leisure, entertainment facilities 
the more intensive sport and recreation uses (including cinemas, restaurants, drive-through restaurants, bars and pubs, night-clubs, 
casinos, health and fitness centres, indoor bowling centres, and bingo 
halls); offices; and arts, culture and tourism development (including 
theatres, museums, galleries and concert halls, hotels and conference 
facilities).
Marketing Evidence : Evidence that a property has been marketed. 
Typically used to test whether there is demand for a property in its 
existing or a comparable use before planning permission is granted for 
a less desirable or more harmful use.
Marketing should be up-to-date and reflect current market conditions, 
having been finished not more than 6 months from the submission 
date. The type and extent of marketing will be influenced by the 
nature of the site. A large commercial site may be expected to market 
nationally, whereas a local shop might only attract local or regional 
interest. The marketing budget should reflect the site’s characteristics 
and value.
Marketing should last for as long as needed to comply with the relevant 
policy, typically 6-12 months. The strategy should be agreed through 
formal pre-application advice and as a minimum involve:
 ●appointment of a qualified and experienced agent;
 ●marketing at a realistic price or rent;
 ●erection of a prominent signboard on the site;
 ●production of agent’s particulars/brochure; and
 ●website entry appropriate to the use.
Marketing evidence will comprise a marketing report produced by the 
appointed agent providing a valuation and evidencing the agreed 
marketing strategy. As a minimum it should include:
 ●evidence of any updates to the marketing strategy, including 
price revisions or changes of approach
 ●photos of signboard, dated
 ●copy of brochure(s), dated
 ●details of targeted marketing, including address list and dates 
sentAppendices  181N
Net Gain (Biodiversity) : A measurable target for development 
projects where impacts on biodiversity are outweighed by a clear 
mitigation hierarchy approach to first avoid and then minimise 
impacts, including through restoration and / or compensation.
O
Older People : People over retirement age, including the active, 
newly-retired through to the very frail elderly, whose housing needs 
can encompass accessible, adaptable general needs housing for 
those looking to downsize from family housing and the full range of 
retirement and specialised housing for those with support or care 
needs.
Open space : All open space of public value, including not just land, 
but also areas of water (such as rivers, canals, lakes and reservoirs) 
which offer important opportunities for sport and recreation and can 
act as a visual amenity.
P
Permitted development (or permitted development rights) : 
Permission to carry out certain limited forms of development without 
the need to make an application to a local planning authority, as 
granted under the terms of the Town and Country Planning (General 
Permitted Development) Order.
Previously-developed land : Land which is or was occupied by a 
permanent structure, including the curtilage of the developed land 
(although it should not be assumed that the whole of the curtilage 
should be developed) and any associated fixed surface infrastructure. 
This excludes: land that is or has been occupied by agricultural or 
forestry buildings; land that has been developed for minerals extraction 
or waste disposal by landfill purposes where provision for restoration 
has been made through development control procedures; land in  ●copies of adverts with dates and rationale for choice of 
publication
 ●copy of webpage and dates
 ●details of any enquiries and viewings
 ●details of any reasons given for not proceeding by potential 
purchasers
 ●details of any offers and reasons turned down, if applicable
Material Planning Considerations : A material consideration is a 
matter that should be taken into account in deciding a planning 
application or on an appeal against a planning decision.
 ●Material considerations can include (but are not limited to):
 ●Overlooking/loss of privacy
 ●Loss of light or overshadowing
 ●Parking
 ●Highway safety
 ●Traffic
 ●Noise
 ●Effect on listed building and conservation area
 ●Layout and density of building
 ●Design, appearance and materials
 ●Government policy
 ●Disabled persons’ access
 ●Proposals in the Development Plan
 ●Previous planning decisions (including appeal decisions)
 ●Nature conservation
However, issues such as loss of view, or negative effect on the value of 
properties are not material considerations.
Major Development : There are two definitions of major development 
relevant to planning policy in National Parks, all policies referring to 
major development make it clear which definition should be used for 
the purposes of applying that policy. See section 1.5 .182accommodating households who are either current residents or have 
an existing family or employment connection. A proportion of market 
homes may be allowed at the local authority’s discretion, for example 
where essential to enable the delivery of affordable units without grant 
funding.
Rural Settlement : The National Park’s larger villages which are 
identified as classified settlements and have relatively good access to 
services. These settlements are defined by settlement boundaries and 
comprise:
Bittaford, Bridford, Buckfast, Cheriton Cross / Bishop, Christow, 
Cornwood, Dousland, Dunsford, Hennock, Ilsington, Liverton, Mary 
Tavy, South Zeal, Sticklepath, Walkhampton, and Whiddon Down.
Rural parish : Civil parishes which do not contain a Local Centre or 
larger settlement.
Rural worker : Workers of land-based enterprises located in the 
countryside. Traditionally comprising agriculture and forestry workers, 
but more recently including equestrian, horticultural and other rural 
land-based enterprises. Importantly, simply working the countryside is 
not sufficient to qualify as a rural worker.
S
Section 106 legal agreement : A legal agreement under section 106 
of the 1990 Town & Country Planning Act. Section 106 agreements are 
legal agreements between a planning authority and a developer, 
or undertakings offered unilaterally by a developer, that ensure that 
certain extra works related to a development are undertaken.
Setting (of a heritage asset) : The surroundings in which a heritage 
asset is experienced. Its extent is not fixed and may change as the 
asset and its surroundings evolve. Elements of a setting may make a 
positive or negative contribution to the significance of an asset, may 
affect the ability to appreciate that significance or may be neutral.
Settlement Boundary : A drawn boundary which represents the extent  built-up areas such as private residential gardens, parks, recreation 
grounds and allotments; and land that was previously-developed 
but where the remains of the permanent structure or fixed surface 
structure have blended into the landscape in the process of time.
Priority Habitats and Species for Dartmoor : Species and Habitats:
 ●of Principle Importance included in the England Biodiversity 
List published by the Secretary of State under section 41 of the 
Natural Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006; or 
 ●identified as priority species within Living Dartmoor and the 
Dartmoor Biodiversity Action Plan.
Public benefit : A common policy test which requires that a 
development be beneficial, in a way that is identifiable and capable 
of being proved by evidence (i.e. not based on personal views), 
to the general public or a sufficient section of the public which is 
proportionate to the project. 
Public recreation : Leisure activities which are available for the general 
public to do at any time, on land permanently open for public access 
and which are not ticketed or subject to any fees.
R
Ransom strip : A parcel of land needed to access an adjacent 
property, which is denied to the owner until payment is received. 
The strip of land can be between the property and a highway, or be 
located between two properties.
Redundant building : A building no longer needed or useful for its 
intended purpose, taking into consideration its current and potential 
use. For example, although a building may not be of use to one owner 
it may still be capable of serving a need for its intended use in the 
wider area. 
Rural exception sites : Small sites used for affordable housing in 
perpetuity where sites would not normally be used for housing. Rural 
exception sites seek to address the needs of the local community by Appendices  183(or built-up area) of a town or village. They are used in policy to identify 
land within, adjacent and outside a settlement.
Significance (for heritage policy) : The value of a heritage asset to 
this and future generations because of its heritage interest. That interest 
may be archaeological, architectural, artistic or historic. Significance 
can also be assessed using the four values of evidential, historical, 
aesthetic and communal based on Historic England’s Conservation 
Principles (2008). Significance derives not only from a heritage asset’s 
physical presence, but also from its setting.
Small-scale development : A common policy test recognising that 
the scale of development (i.e. size and massing of buildings, structures 
and other types of development, and the intensity of their use) is 
predominantly smaller in the National Park than it is outside the National 
Park, in larger towns and cities. When judging proposals against this 
requirement the prevailing scale of development in the surrounding 
area will be used as a benchmark for decision making.
Special Qualities (of the National Park) : The qualities, properties 
and characteristics, innate or acquired, that together summarise what 
is special about the National Park and worthy of protection.
Statement of Heritage Significance : A report required to be 
submitted in support of an application which has the potential to 
affect a heritage asset. It reports the sum of the cultural and natural 
heritage values of a place (i.e. its significance) and assesses how the 
proposals will affect them, positively or negatively.
T
Technical Housing Standards : Space standards for new residential 
accommodation. They are set nationally and serve as a benchmark 
for assessing proposals in the planning system. The standards can be 
found online .V
Vernacular : An area’s traditional style of architecture concerned with 
practical and functional designs appropriate for their climate. Heavily 
influenced by availability of local building materials and local building 
skills and techniques. Often resulting in characteristic and distinctive 
styles which are highly valued and difficult to replicate using modern 
techniques.
Viability : The extent to which a place, business or project is capable 
of commercial success.
Village and Hamlet : The National Park’s smallest and most sensitive 
settlement which are identified as classified settlement and have small 
scale housing and employment needs which need to be supported. 
These settlements have no settlement boundaries and comprise: 
Belstone, Dean Prior, Drewsteignton, Holne, Lustleigh, Lydford, Manaton, 
Meavy, North Bovey, North Brentor, Peter Tavy, Postbridge, Scorriton, 
Shaugh Prior, Sourton, South Tawton, Teign Village, Throwleigh, and 
Widecombe-in-the-Moor.184Appendix F: Land Use Class Order: 
The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended) 
puts uses of land and buildings into various categories known as ‘Use 
Classes’. These use classes are referred to in the policies of this plan 
and are provided here for reference purposes. The Order is periodically 
amended. 
Class B
B2 General industrial  - Use for industrial process other than one falling 
within class B1 (excluding incineration purposes, chemical treatment 
or landfill or hazardous waste).
B8 Storage or distribution  - This class includes open air storage.
Class C
C1 Hotels  - Hotels, boarding and guest houses where no significant 
element of care is provided (excludes hostels).
C2 Residential institutions  - Residential care homes, hospitals, nursing 
homes, boarding schools, residential colleges and training centres.
C2A Secure Residential Institution   - Use for a provision of secure 
residential accommodation, including use as a prison, young offenders 
institution, detention centre, secure training centre, custody centre, 
short term holding centre, secure hospital, secure local authority 
accommodation or use as a military barracks.
C3 Dwellinghouses - this class is formed of 3 parts:
C3(a) covers use by a single person or a family (a couple whether 
married or not, a person related to one another with members of the 
family of one of the couple to be treated as members of the family 
of the other), an employer and certain domestic employees (such 
as an au pair, nanny, nurse, governess, servant, chauffeur, gardener, 
secretary and personal assistant), a carer and the person receiving 
the care and a foster parent and foster child.
C3(b)  up to six people living together as a single household and receiving care e.g. supported housing schemes such as those for 
people with learning disabilities or mental health problems.
C3(c) allows for groups of people (up to six) living together as a single 
household. This allows for those groupings that do not fall within the 
C4 houses in multiple occupation definition, but which fell within the 
previous C3 use class, to be provided for i.e. a small religious community 
may fall into this section as could a homeowner who is living with a 
lodger.
C4 Houses in multiple occupation  - small shared houses occupied 
by between three and six unrelated individuals, as their only or main 
residence, who share basic amenities such as a kitchen or bathroom.
Class E
E(a) Display or retail sale of goods, other than hot food takeaway
E(b) Sale of food and drink for consumption (mostly) on the premises
E(c) Provision of:
 ●E(c)(i) Financial services,
 ●E(c)(ii) Professional services (other than health or medical services), or
 ●E(c)(iii) Other appropriate services in a commercial, business or service 
locality
E(d) Indoor sport, recreation or fitness (not involving motorised vehicles 
or firearms)
E(e) Provision of medical or health services (except the use of premises 
attached to the residence of the consultant or practitioner)
E(f) Creche, day nursery or day centre (not including a residential use)
E(g) Uses which can be carried out in a residential area without 
detriment to its amenity:
 ● E(g)(i) Offices to carry out any operational or administrative functions,
 ● E(g)(ii) Research and development of products or processes
 ● E(g)(iii) Industrial processesAppendices  185Class F
F1 Learning and non-residential institutions – Use (not including 
residential use) defined in 7 parts:
 ●F1(a) Provision of education
 ●F1(b) Display of works of art (otherwise than for sale or hire)
 ●F1(c) Museums
 ●F1(d) Public libraries or public reading rooms
 ●F1(e) Public halls or exhibition halls
 ●F1(f) Public worship or religious instruction (or in connection with such use)
 ●F1(g) Law courts
F2 Local community – Use as defined in 4 parts:
 ●F2(a) Shops (mostly) selling essential goods, including food, where the shop’s 
premises do not exceed 280 square metres and there is no other such facility 
within 1000 metres
 ●F2(b) Halls or meeting places for the principal use of the local community
 ●F2(c) Areas or places for outdoor sport or recreation (not involving motorised 
vehicles or firearms)
 ●F2(d) Indoor or outdoor swimming pools or skating rinks
Sui Generis
Certain uses do not fall within any use class and are considered ‘sui 
generis’. Such uses include: betting offices/shops, pay day loan shops, 
theatres, larger houses in multiple occupation, hostels providing no 
significant element of care, scrap yards, petrol filling stations and 
shops selling and/or displaying motor vehicles, retail warehouse clubs, 
nightclubs, launderettes, taxi businesses, casinos, hot food takeaways, 
public houses, wine bars, drinking establishments, venues for live music 
performance, cinemas, concert halls, bingo halls and dance halls.
Leg O’Mutton, Yelverton186
Staple Tor © Adrian OakesYou can ask for copy of this 
document in large print or 
another format. We will aim 
to provide for your needs as 
soon as possible.© Crown Copyright 2022
All images © DNPA unless otherwise stated.
Plans and maps contained within this document are 
based upon Ordnance Survey material and data 
© Crown copyright and database right 2022twitter@DartmoorPlanfacebook/DartmoorPlanwww.dartmoor.gov.uk/localplanDartmoor National Park Authority
Parke, Bovey Tracey, Newton Abbot
Devon, TQ13 9JQ
forwardplanning@dartmoor.gov.uk
+44 (0)1626832093188