EASTBOURNE LOCAL PLAN: 
 
GROWTH STRATEGY CONSU LTATION
REGULATION 18 CONSU LTATION  |  NOVEMBER 2022INTRODUCTION 
2 | Page  EASTBOURNE LOCAL PLAN: GROWTH STRATEGY CONSULTATION  
 Eastbourne Borough Council is preparing a 
new Local Plan which will guide the type, 
amount and location of development in the 
borough up to 2039.  
 
Following a previous consultation in 2019, 
the Council are now undertaking a public 
consultation on the le vel of housing and 
employment growth that could be 
accommodated in Eas tbourne and where it 
might be located, in order to inform the next 
stage in the preparation of the Local Plan.  
 
The Local Plan will seek to accommodate 
both housing and employment growth, and 
the purpose of this document is to seek your 
views on the way in  which those growth 
needs should be met within the borough over 
the period to 2039.  
 
This consultation fo cuses specifically on 
housing and employment  growth, including 
key development sites, and  as such is not a 
draft Local Plan. Other issues, such as 
addressing climate change, encouraging 
regeneration, and protec ting the natural, built 
and historic environments , will be included in 
the Local Plan once prepared, and this will 
be subject to a future public consultation.  
 
Further detail on the issues disc ussed in this 
consultation document is  provided within a 
series of Background Papers and supporting 
documents available from the Council’s 
website1. Responses to ‘Frequently Asked 
Questions’ is also available.  
 
We are asking for your views on the ‘Growth 
Strategy’ identified in this consultation 
document so that these can be considered 
before we determine how and where growth 
will be proposed in the Local Plan.   
 
1 www.lewes-eastbourne.go v.uk/eastbournelocalplan   The consultation is being undertaken 
between Friday 11th November 2022  and 
Friday 20th January 2023 . 
 
 Councillor Message 
 
As the Cabinet Member with 
responsibilities for planning 
for Eastbourne Borough 
Council, I am pleased to 
introduce the Local Plan 
Growth Strategy for public 
consultation. 
 
The Local Plan is  an important document 
as it will set out a vision and a strategy for 
the borough to help shape growth to 
2039, and this cons ultation is an 
important stage in identifying how much 
growth Eastbourne will be able to 
accommodate over the next 20 years.  
 
Whilst this consul tation paper focuses 
growth, the final Local P lan aims to 
achieve a balance between new homes 
and jobs, in an environment where 
people wish to live and work and have a 
quality of life, for both current and future 
generations.  
 
This is your opportuni ty, as residents and 
stakeholders, t o help guide the future 
development of the borough. I believe 
that it is vital for as many of you to 
provide your views, comments and 
feedback on the propos als as possible, 
and I would urge you al l to get involved in 
this consultation. 
 
Cllr Colin Swansborough 
Portfolio Holder for Climate Change, 
Place Services & Special Projects 
CONTEXT 
EASTBOURNE LOCAL PLAN: GROWTH STRATEGY CONSULTATION  Page |  3 
 The Local Plan is one of the most important 
documents shaping the future of Eastbourne. 
It is the key plannin g document setting out 
how we plan and manage growth, 
regeneration and dev elopment across the 
Borough, based on a vision of how we want 
Eastbourne to be in 20 years’ time. 
 
The Local Plan is us ed to guide decisions on 
the location, amount and type of development that the Borough needs.  This 
includes ensuring that new development 
contributes towards the town becoming 
carbon neutral; identifyi ng land and uses that are required to create a prosperous 
economy; protecting wh at we value in terms 
of the environment and heritage of the area; 
creating thriving comm unities that meet the 
needs of local resid ents; delivering the right 
types of homes in the  right locations; and 
providing effective infra structure to sustain 
future growth. 
 
As the South Downs Natio nal Park Authority 
is the local plannin g authority for the South 
Downs, Eastbourne Borough Council’s Local 
Plan will only apply to the area of the 
Borough that is outside of the National Park. 
 
 
 
The new Local Plan will set out a vision, 
objectives and devel opment strategy for the 
whole of the Borough co vering the period 
2019 to 2039, alongside a range of policies 
that will guide development and 
infrastructure requirements  to ensure that it 
helps to deliver that vision and strategy. 
 
The Local Plan will also include allocations 
for various land uses such as residential and 
employment. The Local Plan will help 
provide certainty to local residents, developers and other  stakeholders about 
what will happen in the Borough up to 2039. 
Once adopted, it will rep lace the existing 
Local Plan that was adopted in 2013. 
 
Whilst development ca n be controversial, it 
does provide the homes , jobs and other 
services and facilities that will be needed for 
future generations. This gro wth is required to 
help Eastbourne evolve  in response to 
changing circumstance s and remain a good 
place to live, work and visit in the future. 
CONTEXT  
4 | Page  EASTBOURNE LOCAL PLAN: GROWTH STRATEGY CONSULTATION  
 Work on the new Local Plan commenced in 
2018 when the current Local Plan (known as 
the Core Strategy) became fi ve years old. In 
2019, the Council undertook an ‘Issues & 
Options’ consultation2 to seek views on 
some of the initial options and ideas for the 
strategy for development and the ‘direction 
of travel’, including the vi sion and objectives, 
for the new Local Plan.    
 In relation to housing gro wth, the ‘Issues & 
Options’ identified six options for how new 
homes could be delivered  in Eastbourne, 
based on different densi ties and the way 
sites could be used to deliver housing. The 
options were not considered to be 
necessarily mutually excl usive and could be 
combined if this would form the most 
effective and sustainab le strategy for the 
number and distribution of housing over the 
plan period. 
 
 
 
2 www.lewes-eastbourne.go v.uk/ebissuesandoptions   A summary of responses made to the Issues 
& Options consultation relating to the 
questions on how Eastbourne will 
accommodate housing and employment land 
is provided as a suppo rting document to this 
consultation and is available on the website3. 
A full response to al l comments received on 
the Issues & Options consultation will be 
provided at a later dat e alongside the draft 
Local Plan. It is important to note that this 
Growth Strategy consultat ion builds upon, 
rather than supersedes, the Issues & 
Options consultation, so all comments made 
will be addressed in the next stage of the 
Local Plan’s preparation.    
 
Having reviewed the comments received on 
the Issues & Options, it is clear that a single 
approach on its own is unlikely to be able to 
address issues of housing and employment 
growth across the borough. 
 
Since the ‘Issues & Optio ns’ consultation, 
further evidence has been gathered through 
new technical studies to inform the 
preparation of the Local Plan. This evidence 
has been used, along with the responses to 
the ‘Issues & Options’, the updated national 
planning policy and guidance and the 
Sustainability Appraisal pro cess, to identify a 
‘Growth Strategy’ that is  the subject of this 
consultation. This Growth Strategy is based 
on a combination of Options D and E 
identified in the ‘Issues & Options’ 
consultation.  
 
It is important to note tha t this consultation 
document does not contai n draft policies and 
does not contain all of the detail that will 
eventually be included in the Local Plan. It is, 
however, an important step in policy 
development which builds on specific issues 
presented at the previous  consultation stage 
 
3 www.lewes-eastbourne.go v.uk/eastbournelocalplan  Options for Growth identified in the 
‘Issues & Options’: 
Option A:   Densities based on the 
prevailing character of the area 
surrounding the site; 
Option B:   Increasing the proportion of 
houses being delivered on sites; 
Option C:   Increasing the proportion of 
flats being delivered on sites;  
Option D:   Providing taller residential 
buildings in Town Centre; 
Option E:   50% increase on the 
prevailing density on all sites within the 
existing built-up area; 
Option F:   50% increase on the 
prevailing density on all sites of more 
than 0.5 hectares CONTEXT 
EASTBOURNE LOCAL PLAN: GROWTH STRATEGY CONSULTATION  Page |  5 
 to the draft plan whic h will be consulted upon 
next year, as ident ified in the Local 
Development Scheme. 
 
The number of homes and the amount of 
employment space that ca n be provided is 
heavily influenced by ‘showstoppers’ that 
provide a strong reason for restricting the 
overall scale, type or distribution of 
development in the plan area, as identified in 
the National Planning Policy Framework 
[NPPF] (2021). These are:  
• habitats sites and/or sites designated as 
Sites of Special Sc ientific Interest;  
• land designated as Green Belt, Local 
Green Space, an Area of Outstanding 
Natural Beauty, a National Park (or within 
the Broads Authority) or defined as 
Heritage Coast;  
• irreplaceable habitats;  
• designated heritage assets (and other 
heritage assets of archaeological 
interest); and  
• areas at risk of flooding or coastal 
change. 
 
These ‘showstoppers’ have been used at 
this stage in the process  as the basis for 
assessing the potentia l developability of 
sites. However, evidence  gathering is still 
on-going, and this may identify that some 
sites have some negative impacts that 
cannot be satisfactorily mitigated, and this 
could potentially res ult in some sites no 
longer being considered suitable for 
inclusion in the future draft Local Plan. 
 
Flooding from the se a, rivers and surface 
water is a significant issue that will impact 
future development in Eastbourne. Parts of 
Eastbourne, particularl y through Eastbourne Park, are classified as ‘functional floodplain’, 
which is defined as where water is stored in 
time of flood.  
 
Whilst ‘functional fl oodplain’ is a 
showstopper for develo pment, sites in areas 
with a lower risk of flooding have been 
identified in this cons ultation. Where sites 
have been identified as  having a risk of 
flooding, further work is being undertaken to 
assess the detailed nature of any risk, taking 
climate change impac ts into account, to 
ensure that any proposed  development sites 
can be made safe from flooding for its 
lifetime and is designed so that it will not 
increase flood risk elsewhere. 
 
In addition, the Pevens ey Bay to Eastbourne 
Coastal Management Scheme, which is 
seeking to deliver a £100 million coastal 
flood and erosion ris k management project 
to ensure that the town is resilient to coastal 
flooding in response to  the current climate 
emergency, is also a key consideration and 
future decisions on how thi s will be delivered 
will influence the on-going preparation of the 
local plan, including the  potential suitability of 
sites.  
 
There are also other important 
considerations that will affect the 
developability of sites. Further detailed work 
is being prepared to inform the on-going 
preparation of the Local Plan, including 
assessing the ecologi cal impacts of 
development in particul ar areas, identifying 
landscape and townscape impacts of 
development in different locations, and 
evaluating the financia l viability of 
development to ensure that sites and 
policies are realistic  and deliverable, 
including infrastructure necessary to support 
their development. GROWTH STRATEGY 
(for consultation purposes only)   
6 | Page  EASTBOURNE LOCAL PLAN: GROWTH STRATEGY CONSULTATION  
 Access to safe, se cure and affordable 
housing is fundamental  to supporting the 
health and independence of residents, 
creating sustainabl e communities and 
promoting economic growth. This means 
delivering new homes is necessary to meet 
the needs of a ch anging population, to help 
address the housing afford ability crisis and 
to attract and retain working age households 
that will contribute to the local economy.   
Similarly, the provi sion of new employment 
development provides more jobs and greater 
opportunities, especiall y for younger people 
and business start-ups , which increases the 
worth of the local economy and attracts 
value to the town.    
The NPPF requires that lo cal plans have an 
overall strategy for the  pattern, scale and 
quality of development, and make sufficient 
provision for housi ng, employment, retail, 
leisure and other commercial development 
needs. This means that the Local Plan must 
set out a housing req uirement for the plan 
period, identifying the number of homes that are required to be delivered each year. The 
Government checks deliv ery of housing in 
each planning authority through the Housing 
Delivery Test and the re are sanctions if the 
requirement is not met. 
 
The Government determines that the 
number of homes needed in Eastbourne is 
738 homes per year , or 14,760 homes over 
the plan period. This is ca lculated using the 
‘Standard Method’ that is set out in national 
policy.  
 
Whilst there is no equ ivalent to the ‘Standard 
Method’ for calculatin g employment needs, 
the Eastbourne and Wealden Employment and Economic Study (2022)
4 identifies a 
 
4 www.lewes-eastbourne.go v.uk/eastbournelocalplan  need for at least 76, 184 sqm of employment 
(office, industrial and warehouse) floorspace 
to be provided in Eas tbourne between 2021 
and 2039.  
 
The NPPF expects local  plans to meet their 
identified need for housing and employment 
uses, unless there are strong reasons for 
restricting the overa ll scale, type or 
distribution of developmen t in the plan area; 
or the adverse impacts of meeting the need 
would significantly  and demonstrably 
outweigh the benefits  when assessed 
against the NPPF as a whole. 
 
There are strong reasons why Eastbourne is 
unable to meet its development needs in full. The town is surrounded by the protected 
downland of the South Downs National Park 
to the west, the English Channel to the 
south, and the boundary with Wealden 
District to the north and east, and much of 
the land through the central area known as 
Eastbourne Park is fun ctional floodplain. 
These physical and environmental 
constraints limit the am ount of land that is 
available to develop. As such, the town does 
not have sufficient la nd to meet development 
needs in full, even at significantly increased 
densities. This means that the Government 
will require us to consider all sites with 
potential for development and to ensure that 
all opportunities are maxi mised so as many 
new homes and employment spaces are 
accommodated as possible  in a sustainable 
way.  
 
This means that the housing requirement 
for the local plan will be a capacity-based 
target, rather than a needs-based target.   
 
Under the Localism Act 2011, Eastbourne 
Borough Council currently has a duty to co-
operate with neighbour ing authorities and 
statutory organisations. Discussions are on-GROWTH STRATEGY 
(for consultation purposes only)   
EASTBOURNE LOCAL PLAN: GROWTH STRATEGY CONSULTATION  Page |  7 
 going with Wealden District Council 
regarding how much, if any, of Eastbourne’s 
unmet need can be accommodated outside 
of Eastbourne’s boundaries.  
 
The majority of new homes  will be delivered 
by making the most efficient use of 
previously developed land within the built-up 
area through increasin g the density of new 
development in loca tions that are highly 
accessible to services  and public transport, 
whilst also respecting the character of the 
local area. This would include seeking higher 
densities on sites in  the town centre through 
the provision of taller buildings. 
 
In identifying a capacity-based target for Eastbourne in the Local Plan, the following 
have been taken into account: 
• Sites have that already been completed 
within the first three years of the plan 
period 
• Sites that have a current planning 
permission where dev elopment has not 
yet been completed 
• An allowance for the delivery of homes on 
sites that cannot be identified in advance, 
which is based on past trends and 
adjusted to take into account on-going 
circumstances 
• Sites identified as being suitable, 
available and achi evable for future 
development through th e Land Availability 
Assessment (LAA).   
 A total of 557 new homes were built in the 
first three years of the plan period (2019 - 
2022) and there are 1,090 homes that have 
an existing planning perm ission across 135 
sites (as at 1st April 2022).  
 
Since 2006, a significant number of homes have been delivered through the sub-division of existing dwellings and the change of use 
of buildings from non-resid ential uses. It is 
not possible to identify where and when 
these developments will come forward, but it 
is a consistent sourc e of supply that is 
expected to continue. Therefore, an 
allowance has been made for 1,260 new 
homes being delivered through conversions 
and changes of use ov er the plan period, 
based on past trends and how these are expected to change in future. 
 
The Land Availability Assessment (LAA) has 
identified 197 sites tha t could deliver homes 
and employment space. This includes: 
• 137 small sites (providing less than 10 
homes each) within the existing built-up area that have the potential to provide 
407 homes via ‘infil l’ or redevelopment of 
existing sites 
• 38 medium-sized sites  (providing between 
10 and 25 homes each) within the 
existing built-up area that have potential 
to provide 564 homes vi a ‘infill’ or 
redevelopment of existing sites 
• 22 large ‘strategic’  sites that have 
potential to accommodate 2,523 new 
homes and 53,000 sqm of employment 
space through redevelopment of existing 
sites and extensions to the built-up area 
 
 This means that the Eastbourne 
Local Plan will make provision for 
6,401 new homes  (equivalent to 
an average of 320 new homes per 
year) and 53,000 sqm of 
employment floorspace  
(consisting of 13,000sqm of office 
use, and 40,000sqm of industrial 
and warehouse uses) over the plan 
period between 2019 and 2039. GROWTH STRATEGY 
(for consultation purposes only)   
8 | Page  EASTBOURNE LOCAL PLAN: GROWTH STRATEGY CONSULTATION  
 This ‘Growth Strategy’ aims to ensure a 
balance between: 
• Providing housing and employment 
opportunities for fu ture generations 
• Making the most efficient use of the 
limited amount of land available for 
development by increasing the density on 
sites in the most su stainable locations 
within walking distanc e of services and 
facilities (where lo cal character and 
townscape allows), thereby  reducing the 
need to travel and supporting local 
businesses 
• Protecting the residential and 
environmental amenity of existing and 
future residents 
• Mitigating the impacts  of climate change 
by avoiding developmen t within the areas 
at the highest risk of flooding 
• Safeguarding the most  valuable green, 
open spaces and habitats 
• Ensuring that infras tructure can meet 
future demands from growth 
 This means that growth is mainly focused on 
previously develope d land, mainly within the 
Town Centre and immedia tely surrounding 
neighbourhoods such as Seaside, Upperton 
and Meads. There are also a number of 
former industrial sites in Roselands & 
Bridgemere that can provide new homes. 
The distribution of homes by neighbourhood 
is identified in the graph below. Overall, in 
excess of 80% of the new homes provided 
would be on ‘brownfield’ land .  
 
However, not all new development can be 
accommodated on ‘brownfield’ land. The 
‘Growth Strategy’ also includes the 
development of ‘greenfiel d’ sites where there 
are no ‘showstoppers’ to development. This 
includes three sites located on the fringes of 
Eastbourne Park that will provide 390 new 
homes, and the expansion to the east of the 
town into the East Langney Levels, which 
will provide 587 new homes. 
 
Issues around afforda ble housing and the 
type, size and mix of homes will be 
addressed at the next stage in the local plan process.  
Number of homes anticipated to be delivered between 2019 and 2039 by neighbourhood 
 
GROWTH STRATEGY 
(for consultation purposes only)   
EASTBOURNE LOCAL PLAN: GROWTH STRATEGY CONSULTATION  Page |  9 
 New industrial and warehouse space 
amounting to 30,000 sq m will be provided 
via expansion adjace nt to the existing 
designated industrial estates off Lottbridge 
Drove. Office provision will be mainly 
focused on developm ent at Sovereign 
Harbour (Site 6), which wil l provide 10,000 
sqm of office floorspace and is carried 
forward from the previous Local Plan, with 
some additional office sp ace (3,000 sqm) 
being provided as part of a mixed-use 
development on land adjacent to the 
Enterprise Centre and Railway Station in the 
Town Centre. This ‘Growth Strategy’ represents an overall 
increase of 13% in th e existing number of 
homes in the town, and an increase of 15% 
in the existing emplo yment floorspace in the 
town, between 2019 and 2039.  
 
It is important to understand  that this level of 
growth would be provided in Eastbourne 
over 20 years. The potential complexity of 
some of the sites means that there are likely 
to be lower levels of housing delivery in the 
short-term, with the number of new home 
completions increasing later in the plan 
period. 
Housing growth within built-up area by neighbourhood 2019-2039 
 
23 - Moira House, Upper Carlisle Road
15 - Land in Southbourne
14 - Dairy Crest, Waterworks Road
7 - Former Bonners site, Langney Road
6 - Former Police Station, Grove Road
5 - Former Law Courts site, Old Orchard Road
4 - Former TJ Hughes site, T erminus Road
1 - Land adjacent to Enterprise Centre and Railway Station
16 - Former Gas Works, Finmere Road
 8 - Former Bedfordwell Road Depot
11 - East Sussex College site, Cross Levels Way
22 - Sovereign Harbour Site 7a
21 - Sovereign Harbour Site 6
18 - Land at East Langney Levels
12 - 2-4 Moy Avenue
17 - Land off Pevensey Bay Road
20 - Land North East of St Anthony’s Hill
9 - Land at T utts Barn Lane
10 - Fisherman’s Green, Royal Parade
2 - Junction Road Multi-Storey Car Park
3 - Former Debenhams site, T erminus Road
24 - Summerdown Playing Field, Compton Drive
25 - New Field, Upper Carlisle Road
26 - University of Brighton - Welkin campus, Carlisle Road
28 - University of Brighton - Aldro & Queenswood campus, Darley Road
 27 - University of Brighton - Hillbrow campus, Denton Road
13 - ESK, Courtlands Road
19 - Wood’s Cottages, Swanley Close
10 | Page EASTBOURNE LOCAL PLAN : GROWTH STRATEGY CONSULTATION  EASTBOURNE LOCAL PLAN : GROWTH STRATEGY CONSULTATION /g3 Page  | 11 GROWTH LOCATIONS
(for consultation purposes only)
(C) Crown copyright. All rights reserved. Eastbourne Borough Council. LA100025879 2022Scale
0 250 500 750 1,000 m
KEY
 
 Key Development Site (see pages 12-16)
 Housing Development          Employment Development Green Infrastructure          Community Infrastructure
 
 Sites with completed residential development (2019-2022) Sites with current permission for residential development Small sites identified in the Land Availability Assessment
 Medium-sized sites identified in the Land Availability Assessment  
 
 Built-up area           Open Space
 Main Road           Railway Waterbody           Watercourse
 Eastbourne Borough           South Downs National Park
KEY DEVELOPMENT SITES 
(for consultation purposes only) 
12 | Page  EASTBOURNE LOCAL PLAN: GROWTH STRATEGY CONSULTATION  
 A number of ‘key development sites ’ have been identified that coul d accommodate relatively large-
scale development for Eastbourne. The se are generally sites identified  in the Land Availability 
Assessment as being potential ly capable of accommodating more tha n 25 homes or 3,000sqm of 
commercial floorspace, but also in cludes large sites that have an extant planning permission to 
provide a full picture of where devel opment is expected to tak e place over the plan period. Further 
detail on these sites is provided in the Housing Background Paper.   
 
These ‘key development sites’ are not currently subject to any ‘showstopp er’ constraints and are 
likely to be considered for allo cation in the Local Plan. Howev er, it is recognised that a number of 
these sites do have issues  that would require mitigation if they were to come forward for 
development, and further work is being undertaken to understand these. 
 
 1 – Land adjacent the Enterprise Centre and Railway Station 
Currently allocated in the To wn Centre Local Plan, this site is a previously 
developed site, consisting of  a surface car park serving the Enterprise 
Centre and the Railway Station. The site could provide around 5,000sqm 
of retail space and 3,000sqm as an ext ension to the Enterprise Centre, 
and around 192 homes through the provision  of a tall building with 
replacement parking provided on the lower floors.  
 2 – Junction Road Car Park 
The site consists of a 6 -storey multi- storey car parking, located within the 
Town Centre. The current condition of the building means that it is unlikely 
to re-open as a car park, which means it would have the potential for 
redevelopment to provide around 80 ho mes through the provision of a tall 
building.  
 3 – Former Debenhams site, 152-170 Terminus Road 
The site is a vacant 3 -storey retail building wi thin the Town Centre, and 
size and layout of the existing buildin g means that it is unlikely to be 
reused for retail use as it curr ently is. The site has the potential to 
accommodate around 120 homes through the provision of a tall building 
with approximat ely 1,000sqm of retail and leisure space on the ground 
floor.   
 4 – Former TJ Hughes site, 177-187 Terminus Road 
The site is a former 4 -storey retail building and is currently subject to a 
proposal for the redevelopment of the site to provide 65 homes and 
around 700 sqm of retail space on the ground f loor. The development of 
the site is proposed to retain the existing  façade. The site is located in a 
sustainable location in the Town Centre, with good access to services and 
facilities and accessibi lity to public transport.  
Site plans: (C) Crown copy right. All rights reserved. Eastbourne Boro ugh Council. LA100025879 2022 
KEY DEVELOPMENT SITES 
(for consultation purposes only)   
EASTBOURNE LOCAL PLAN: GROWTH STRATEGY CONSULTATION  Page |  13 
  5 – Former Law Courts, Old Orchard Road 
The site of the former law court on Old Orchard Road is currently subject 
to a proposal for redevelopment to prov ide 35 homes, including provision 
of affordable housing. Being within the town centre, the site is in a 
sustainable location with good access to services and facilities and access 
to public transport, and it i s also adjacent to an existing residential area .  
 6 – Former Police Station, Grove Road 
The former Police Station on Gro ve Road has been vacant for a number 
of years since the Police reception mo ved to 1 Grove Road. The site 
currently has planning pe rmission of a change of us e to create 50 homes 
in a sustainable location close to services  and facilities with good access 
to public transport.   
 
 7 - 56 Langney Road 
The site is a 2 -storey retail unit in the town centre that is expected to 
become available for redevelopment later in the plan period. The 
redevelopment of the site, which could incorporate a taller building, could 
provide an additional 47 homes  within a sustainable location.  
 8 – Bedfordwell Road Depot 
The site is a former depot located of f Bedfordwell Road alongside the 
railway line. There is a proposal for a mixed -use development providing a 
total of 100 homes, which would include the conversion of the existing 
listed Pump House building to residential and commercial use. The site 
would also include green infrast ructure, and has the potential to facilitate 
access to the western part of Land at Tutts Barn Lane (Site 9).    
 9 – Land at Tutts Barn Lane   
This site on the edge of Eastbourne Park could be considered in two 
parts: the former railway sidings to the east of the site adjacent to the 
railway line and north of th e Bedfordwell Road development site, which 
could accommodate around 150 homes ; and the western p art of the site 
adjacent to the existing allotments (w hich would be retained) along Tutts 
Barn Lane, which could accommodat e a further 120 homes. 
 10 – Fisherman’s Green 
The site currently consists of surface  car park, tennis courts and 
community and commercial uses. The re is redevelopment potential for the 
site, and one option could be the provision of around 80 homes. Any loss 
of existing community uses and sports courts as a result of development 
should be re -provided. The site could be impacted by proposed solutions 
to coastal flooding d efences as part of the Coastal Management Scheme, 
which could mean it may be unavailabl e for development in future.  
KEY DEVELOPMENT SITES 
(for consultation purposes only)   
14 | Page  EASTBOURNE LOCAL PLAN: GROWTH STRATEGY CONSULTATION  
  11 – East Sussex College site, Cross Levels Way 
East Sussex College is seeking to rationalise the use of its Eastbourne 
campus which will release sur plus land, thereby releasing capital for 
investment into the educational provision at the campus. The surplus land 
could accommodate approximately 200 - 275 homes, including the 
potential for extra -care provision, in addition to enhanced educational 
accommodation for the college.  
 12 – 2-4 Moy Avenue 
Consisting of a derelict warehouse b uilding adjacent to a residential area, 
the site has planning permission for the refurbishment of the existing 
building including a change of use to residential, and the development of 
two further blocks to the rear of t he refurbished building to provide a total 
of 72 homes.  
 
 13 – ESK, Courtlands Road 
The ESK site on Courtlands Road consi sts of a retail warehouse and 
surface car park, located betwee n an industrial area and a residential 
area. There is a proposal for the redevelopment of th e site to provide 136 
homes through a mix of ho uses and flats, wi th around 300 sqm of 
commercial space also being provided.  
 
 14 – Dairy Crest, Waterworks Road 
The Dairy Crest site on Waterworks Ro ad, a former warehouse building 
located on the edge of an existing ind ustrial estate and adjacent to a 
residential area, has a current planni ng permission for the comprehensive 
redevelopment of the site to provide 60 ne w homes.  
 15 – Land at Southbourne 
The site is a greenfield site within Eastbourne Park but adjacent to the 
current built -up area. The northern part  of the side adjacent to Lottbridge 
Drove  has potential for the development of around 30,000 sqm of 
industrial  and warehouse space. The southern part of the site adjacent  to 
the existing residential area could be suitable for around 85 homes, with a 
clear  buffer provided between residential and employment uses.  
 16 – Former Gas Works, Finmere Road 
The site is a former gas works, locat ed between residential and industrial 
uses. T he site has been decommissioned, but its former use as a gas 
storage facility means that it will require demolition, decontamination and 
remediation. Once this has taken place, the site could potentially 
accommodate approximately 10,000 sqm of industrial and warehouse 
space, subject to alternative access arrangements being made.   
KEY DEVELOPMENT SITES 
(for consultation purposes only)   
EASTBOURNE LOCAL PLAN: GROWTH STRATEGY CONSULTATION  Page |  15 
  17 – Land off Pevensey Bay Road 
The development of this s ite would be part of an extension of the existing 
urban area into the East Langney Level s. Development would be focused 
towards the southern part of  the site adjacent to Pevensey Bay Road and 
could accommodate around 375 home s. The site would be required to 
provide appropriate open space a nd flood, landscape and ecology 
mitigation, and maintain adequa te buffers from existing watercourse.  
 18 – Land at East Langney Levels 
The development of this s ite would be part of an extension of the existing 
urban area into the East Langney L evels. The site would require flooding, 
ecological and landscape mitigation, bu t if these issues can be overcome 
it is considered that the site could potentially accommodate 212 homes.  
 
 19 – Wood’s Cottages, Swanley Close 
The site of two former residential properties within extensive grounds, 
previously  used as a brickworks that oper ated up until the 1940s. It is 
currently  subject to planning permission for the construction of 51 homes 
with parking, access and landscaping.  
 
 20 – Land North East of St Anthony’s Hill 
This is a greenfield site on the fringe of Eastbourne Park, adjacent to the 
Langney roundabout. The site is not par t of the functional floodplain, but 
does have potential flooding issues that need further investigation. T he 
site could accommodate 35 homes, ta king into account the irregular 
shape of the site and t he need to provide on -site mitigation. 
 
 21 - Sovereign Harbour Site 6 
Currently allocated for employment (office)  use, this sites currently 
contains one office building (Pacific Hous e) and the Sovereign Harbour 
Community Centre. The site could accommodate an additional 10,000 
sqm of office floorspace.  
 22 – Sovereign Harbour Site 7a 
An area of scrub / shingle located betwe en a doctor’s surgery and newly 
established park, the site is currently allocated for employment (office) 
use, but the high need for homes m eans that different uses now need to 
be considered. The site should still provide some employment- generating 
uses, but could also provide around 40 residential units.  
KEY DEVELOPMENT SITES 
(for consultation purposes only)   
16 | Page  EASTBOURNE LOCAL PLAN: GROWTH STRATEGY CONSULTATION  
  23 – Former Moira House School, Upper Carlisle Road 
The Former Moira House School site currently has planning permission 
for the change of use of some exi sting school buildings to residential use, 
and the new build development of additional houses within the site. The 
site would accommodate 52 homes plus amenity space and playspace. 
 
 Eastbourne College sites:  
24 - Summerdown Field,  Compton Drive 
25 – New Field, Upper Carlisle Road 
Eastbourne  College Incorporated is seeking to consolidate their 
operations  around College Field, including the potential disposal of some 
outlying  sites in order to fund the development of new and improved 
educational  facilities. Playing Fields at Summerdown Field, Compton  
Drive  and New Field, Upper Carlisle Road are located some distance  
from the main campus and there is potential, through better use of existing 
sites,  for these playing fields to be made available for development. The 
sites could both accommodate approxim ately 35 homes each, but m ay be 
subject  to alternative provision being made to compensate loss of existing 
playing  pitches.  
 
 
 University of Brighton sites:  
26 – Welkin site, Carlisle Road 
27 – Hillbrow site, Denton Road 
28 – Aldro and Queenswood sites, Darley Road 
The University of Brighton have confirmed their intention to relocate their 
Eastbourne facilities to Brighton, meaning that their current locations may 
become  available for redevelopment.  
The Welkin site  contains relatively ne w purpose-built student 
accommodation that could be converted to self -contained flats, with 
potential for additional development to the front of the site. In total, the site 
could provide around 113 homes.  
At the Hillbrow site , the buildings currently use d for offices and teaching 
accommodation  could be converted or redeveloped to residential use to 
provide around 2 5 homes whilst also retaining the existing sports centre 
and facilities.  
The Aldro and Queenswood sites , located adjacen t to each other on 
Darley Road, could be s uitable for future residential use. T he size of the 
Aldro site would lend itself to a mixed development of flats and houses 
providing around  154 homes, whilst Queenswood could also provide a 
further 57 homes.  
 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE  
EASTBOURNE LOCAL PLAN: GROWTH STRATEGY CONSULTATION  Page |  17 
 The provision of effective infrastructure alongside 
new housing and employment development is 
crucial in helping to create and maintain 
sustainable communities.  
 
Population forecasts indicate that the Growth Strategy identified in this consultation document 
would result in a population increase of around 
8,300 people (8%) over 20 years.  
 
Proposals for growth and development often raise concerns about the capacity of the existing 
infrastructure. The NPPF requires the Local Plan 
to make sufficient provision for infrastructure and 
we are working with infrastructure providers to 
assess the quality and capacity of infrastructure 
and its ability to meet forecast demand.  
 
 
 
An Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) is being 
prepared alongside the Local Plan to provide a 
comprehensive understanding of existing 
infrastructure capacity and pr ovision of services 
across the Borough and to identify any existing deficiencies and where improvements are 
needed to overcome constraints.  
 The current understanding in terms of 
infrastructure capacities and constraints is 
identified below, and further engagement with 
infrastructure provid ers will be undertaken 
through the course of loc al plan preparation. 
 
Transport 
An early assessment of the likely transport 
impacts of future growth has  been undertaken to 
understand the need for improvements to transport infrastructure to accommodate growth 
from Eastbourne and from the wider area.   
 
Transport modelling indicates that Local Plan 
growth could have severe impacts on the 
borough road network, but this is not a constraint to growth as the impacts can be mitigated. The 
preferred approach for mitigation is to firstly 
reduce the number of car trips by encouraging 
modal shift to more sustainable travel options, 
before considering options for increasing capacity on the road network.   
 
The ‘Issues & Options’ identified modal shift as a 
key priority for Eastbourne, so a framework of 
sustainable transport solu tions that explore the 
potential for modal shift and reduce forecast 
levels of car use has been identified. This 
includes initiatives such as:  
• planning for ‘15-minute’ neighbourhoods with 
easy access to key servi ces, public transport 
and active travel networks 
• providing ‘car-free’ development in accessible 
locations to reduce car ownership 
• Moving away from car dominated roads to 
create safe and conn ected sustainable travel 
corridors 
• Increasing capacity for public transport, 
including bus priority routes and junctions, 
and integration between bus, rail and 
sustainable travel.   
 
These measures could result in a 15% reduction 
in car use. However, some junction 
improvements will also be required, particularly 
on the A259 and A2021, to create some additional road capacity.  
 
Further modelling will be undertaken as the 
preparation of the Local Plan continues to 
provide more detailed analysis of how specific 
measures, journey-purp oses and corridors will 
create greater modal shift on the network. 
 
Health 
GP practices work together with community, 
mental health, social care, pharmacy, hospital 
and voluntary services in their local areas in It is important to remember that development will stil l come forward and 
will still create impacts on infrastructure 
even if a Local P lan is not put in place. 
Through a Local P lan, we can identify 
where and when development is likely 
to take place, and therefore plan for 
cumulative infrastru cture impacts and 
requirements in advance.  INFRASTRUCTURE 
18 | Page  EASTBOURNE LOCAL PLAN: GROWTH STRATEGY CONSULTATION  
 groups of practices know n as primary care 
networks (PCNs). 
 
There are three PCNs co vering Eastbourne, each 
of which is responsible for identifying future need 
for primary care health infrastructure provision in their areas through the production of an ‘Estates 
Strategy’. The Eastbourne PCNs are currently 
preparing their Estates Strategies, and 
Eastbourne Borough Council will work with the 
PCNs to ensure that they take into account future growth from the Local Plan. 
  
Education 
Forecasts based on the level of growth identified 
indicate that there is unlikely to be a need for additional early years, primary or secondary 
school places in Eastbourne beyond the capacity 
that is presently available. This is due to birth 
rates predicted to continue to fall over the plan 
period.    
However, there may be a future need for 
additional school places for pupils with Special 
Educational Needs and Disabilities to be created 
over the plan period. Further work and engagement will be undertaken with East Sussex 
County Council to understand how this would 
best be provided. 
 
Flood Defences 
The Environment Agency, East Sussex County 
Council and the Pevensey Levels and Cuckmere 
Water Levels Management Board maintain a 
complex system of water flows and flood 
defences across Eastbourne.   
Blue Heart Project, led by East Sussex County 
Council, is currently see king to better understand 
the local water catchment and mitigate the impact 
of flooding caused by cli mate change through 
technology to manage and monitor water levels 
in Eastbourne, which will better protect local 
homes and businesses from flooding in future.  
 
Pevensey Bay to Eastbourne Coastal Management Scheme is a partnership between 
the Environment Agency and Eastbourne Borough Council to manage the risk of coastal 
flooding and erosion from sea level rise over the 
next 100 years. The scheme will reduce the risk 
of flooding and coastal eros ion to an estimated 
10,000 residential properties, plus key 
infrastructure, businesses, heritage sites and nature conservation areas.  
 
As the project is in the early stages, there have 
been no decisions made about the future options 
for the coast. The current programme indicates that a more refined list of management solutions 
will be subject to consultation in summer 2023.  
 
Sewerage 
The Eastbourne Wastewater Treatment Works (WTW), which is administered by Southern 
Water, treats wastewater arising from 
Eastbourne. In conjunctio n with this, there are 
currently 52 wastewater pumping stations 
throughout the Borough, which help to convey the wastewater to the WTW.  
 
Southern Water are curr ently preparing an 
updated business pla n to determine where 
investment will need to be made in infrastructure such as WTWs to accommodate growth. 
However, it is currentl y understood that the 
Eastbourne WTW is likely  to have sufficient 
capacity to accommodate growth identified in the 
Local Plan.  
Water Supply 
South East Water is responsible for providing the 
Borough with a clean, safe supply of drinking 
water. As a ‘water stresse d area’, South East 
Water have prepared a Water Resources 
Management Plan, which estimates the amount 
of water needed from 2020 to 2080, and how 
those water needs can be met.  
 In addition to leakage reductions and water 
efficiency measures, the Water Resources 
Management Plan identifies that demand for 
water in Eastbourne will be met through an 
extension to the existing reservoir at Arlington, as well as transferring water from an improved Bewl 
water treatment works.   QUESTIONS  
EASTBOURNE LOCAL PLAN: GROWTH STRATEGY CONSULTATION  Page |  19 
  
How to Respond 
We are keen to receive  views on the Growth 
Strategy and you are welcome to respond to 
any or all of the questions we have set out. 
Your input will help in the preparation of the 
Eastbourne Local Plan, and will be really 
important in determining how the borough 
grows and develops in the future.    
 The consultation is o pen for a 10-week 
period between Friday 11th November 2022 
and Friday 20th January 2023.  All 
consultation responses should be received 
by 5pm on the closing date. 
 
The consultation, supporting documents and 
evidence can be accessed through the 
Council’s on-line consultation portal
5.  If you 
do not have internet access, the Growth 
Strategy Consultation is also available to 
read as a paper copy at Eastbourne Town 
Hall, Grove Road, Eastbourne, BN21 4UG. 
 
5 www.lewes-eastbourne.go v.uk/eastbournelocalplan    You can respond to the consultation by: 
• Submitting comments di rectly via our on-
line consultation portal 
• By sending comments either by email to: 
LocalPlan@lewes-eastbourne.gov.uk , or 
post to: Planning Po licy, Eastbourne 
Town Hall, Grove Road, Eastbourne, 
BN21 4UG. 
 
Please note that altho ugh the consultation 
will be publicised using social media, 
comments made via these routes cannot be 
considered as a formal response to the 
consultation.  Therefo re you are encouraged 
to make your comments via the channels 
identified above.  
 If you have any quest ions or experience any 
difficulty in submitti ng your representations, 
please contact us, the Pl anning Policy Team, 
via email at LocalPlan@lewes-
eastbourne.gov.uk  or by telephone on 01323 
410000 quoting ‘Eastbourne Local Plan’. 1. Do you agree with the ‘Growth S trategy’ outlined in this 
document? If not, which el ements do you disagree with? 
2. Have we missed a spatial option to deliver new homes and 
employment space? If so, what is it, and what evidence would be 
needed to ensure its deliverability  over the plan period? 
3. Is there any evidence to suggest that a ny of the key development 
sites should not be considered for allocation in the Local Plan? 
4. Are there any key development sites that have not been identified 
in this document? 
5. Do you have any other comments / suggestions about what the 
Local Plan should contain? NEXT STEPS 
20 | Page  EASTBOURNE LOCAL PLAN: GROWTH STRATEGY CONSULTATION  
 
  
Whilst this document focuses on housing 
and employment growth, work is also 
progressing on the other policy issues to be 
covered by the Local Plan. For example, a series of evidence base documents are 
currently being prepared covering a range of 
policy areas. Thi s work, alongside the 
outcomes of this consultat ion, will feed into 
the development of the next stage of the 
Local Plan.  A draft Local Plan wil l be published that sets 
out the preferred strate gy for growth, site 
allocations and policies , and it is expected 
that this will be subject to public consultation 
in late 2023. Follo wing this the plan will be 
submitted to Government to commence the 
examination process, and it is anticipated 
that the Local Plan wil l finally be adopted in 
late 2024. 
 
 
Planning Policy, Town Hall, Grove Roa d, Eastbourne, BN21 4UH 
LocalPlan@lewes-eastbourne.gov.uk  
www.lewes-eastbourne.gov.uk/eastbournelocalplan   