1 EAST LINDSEY LOCAL PLAN 
CORE STRATEGY  
ADOPTED JULY 2018  
Supporting Economic Growth for the Future  Adopted July 2018    1 
KEY DIAGRAM  5 
POLICIES MAP 1  6 
POLICIES MAP 2 - COASTAL ZONE/COASTAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.  7 
CHAPTER 1 - INTRODUCTION  9 
HOW WE ARRIVED HERE  10 
Our Vision 16 
Vision and Objectives for East Lindsey  16 
CHAPTER 2 - A SUSTAINABLE PATTERN OF PLACES, GROWTH AND  
HOUSING   
19 
Strategic Policy 1 (SP1) –  A Sustainable Pattern of Places  22 
Sustainable Development  23 
Strategic Policy 2 (SP2) -  Sustainable Development  23 
Housing Growth and the Location of Inland Growth  24 
Strategic Policy 3 (SP3)  – Housing Growth and the Location of Inland  33 
Growth  33 
Housing in Inland Medium and Small Villages  35 
Strategic Policy 4 (SP4) -  Housing in Inland Medium and Small Villages  37 
Specialist Housing for Older People  37 
Strategic Policy 5 (SP5) -  Specialist Housing for Older People  38 
Neighbourhood Planning  40 
Strategic  Policy 6 (SP6) –  Neighbourhood Planning  40 
CHAPTER 3 –  AFFORDABLE HOUSING  41 
Delivering Affordable Housing  41 
Strategic Policy 7 (SP7) –  Affordable and Low Cost Housing  44 
Rural Exceptions  45 
Strategic Policy 8 (SP8) -  Rural Exceptions  45 
Single Plot Exceptions  46 
Strategic Policy 9 (SP9) -  Single Plot Exceptions  46 
CHAPTER 4 - RAISING THE QUALITY OF OUR BUILT ENVIRONMENT 48 
Design  48 
Strategic Policy 10 (SP10) –  Design  54 
Historic Environment  56 
Strategic Policy 11 (SP11) –  Historic Environment  59 
 
2 Adopted July 2018   CHAPTER 5 – GYPSIES, TRAVELLERS AND SHOWPEOPLE  61 
Gypsies, Travellers and Showpeople  61 
Strategic Policy 12 (SP12) –  Gypsies, Travellers and Showpeople  63 
CHAPTER 6 –  EMPLOYMENT  65 
Employment  65 
Strategic Policy 13 (SP13) –  Inland Employment  68 
CHAPTER 7 –  DIVERSE ECONOMY, TOWN/VILLAGE CENTRES &  
SHOPPING   
70 
Town/Village Centres and Shopping  71 
Strategic Policy 14 (SP14) –  Town/Village Centres and Shopping  74 
CHAPTER 8 - WIDENING THE INLAND TOURISM AND LEISURE  
ECONOMY   
77 
Widening the Inland Tourism and Leisure Economy  77 
Strategic Policy 15 (SP15) –  Widening the Inland Tourism and Leisure  
Economy   
79 
CHAPTER 9 –  INLAND FLOOD RISK  81 
Inland flood Risk  81 
Strategic Policy 16 (SP16) –  Inland Flood Risk  83 
CHAPTER 10 –  COASTAL EAST LINDSEY  85 
Coastal East Lindsey  87 
Strategic Policy 17 (SP17) –  Coastal East Lindsey  89 
Strategic Policy 18 (SP18) -  Coastal Housing  90 
Strategic Policy 19 (SP19) -  Holiday Accommodation  91 
Addlethorpe Protected Open Space 93 
Strategic Policy 20 (SP20) –  Visitor Economy  96 
Strategic Policy 21 (SP21) –  Coastal Employment  97 
CHAPTER  11 - TRANSPORT AND ACCESSIBILITY  99 
Transport and Accessibility  99 
Strategic Policy 22 (SP22) –  Transport and Accessibility  102 
CHAPTER 12 -  PROTECTING AND ENHANCING OUR NATURAL  
ENVIRONMENT   
103 
Landscape  104 
Strategic Policy 23 (SP23) –  Landscape  106 
Biodiversity and Geodiversity  106 
Strategic Policy 24 (SP24) -  Biodiversity and Geodiversity  109 
Green Infrastructure  110 
 3 Adopted July 2018   Strategic Policy 25 (SP25) –  Green  Infrastructure  112 
CHAPTER 13 –  OPEN SPACE, SPORT  AND RECREATION  114 
Open Space, Sport  and Recreation  114 
Strategic Policy 26 (SP26) –  Open Space, Sport  and Recreation  117 
CHAPTER 14 –  RENEWABLE AND LOW  CARBON  ENERGY  118 
Renewable and Low Carbon  Energy  118 
WIND ENERGY POLICY  MAP 122 
Strategic Policy 27 (SP27) –  Renewable and Low Carbon  Energy  123 
CHAPTER 15 –  INFRASTRUCTURE AND  S106 OBLIGATIONS  126 
Strategic Policy 28 (SP28) –  Infrastructure and  S106  Obligations  129 
CHAPTER 16 –  REVIEWING  THE PLAN  130 
Strategic Policy 29 (SP29) Reviewing the  Local  Plan 130 
ANNEX 1 –  AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND HOUSING FOR VULNERABLE  
GROUPS, LOCAL CONNECTION CRITERIA - THE COASTAL  ZONE  131 
ANNEX 2 - SEQUENTIAL AND EXCEPTION TEST FOR DEVELOPM ENT IN  
THE COASTAL ZONE OF EAST  LINDSEY 134 
Sustainability Appraisal Form For Relevant Development in Areas of Coastal 
Flood  Risk 138 
ANNEX 3 - INDICATIVE THRESHOLDS FOR TRANSPORT ASSESSMENTS.  
146 
ANNEX 4 –  MINERALS SAFEGUARDING AREAS  POLICIES  MAP 149 
ANNEX 5 –  INTERN ATIONAL BIODIVERSITY DESIGNATION POLICIES  
MAPS  151 
ANNEX 6  - GLOSSARY  155 
ANNEX 7 –  LIST OF SUPERSEDED POLICIES  163 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 Adopted July 2018    
 
KEY DIAGRAM  
The illustration of ‘Coastal East Lindsey –  area at risk from flooding’ is illustrative only. 
The definitive boundaries are shown on the policies map.  
 
5 
Adopted July 2018    
 
POLICIES MAP 1  
6 
Adopted July 2018    
 
POLICIES MAP 2 - COASTAL ZONE/COASTAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.  
 
7 
Adopted July 2018   Protected  Open  
Space 
(SP25 & SP26)  Key to Policies Maps One & Two 
 
 
 
 
 
Flood Hazard 
Danger for Most 
(SP17,SP18 & SP19)  
Flood Hazard 
Danger for Some 
(SP17,SP18 & SP19)  
Flood Hazard 
Low Hazard  
(SP17,SP18 & SP19)  
 
Sites of Nature 
Conservation 
Importance (SP24)  
Lincolnshire Wolds 
AONB 
(SP23)  
Local Wildlife Sites 
(SP24)  
 
Local Nature 
Reserves 
(SP24)   
Serviced Holiday 
Accommodation Area 
(SP19)  
Coastal Amusement 
Areas  
(SP14 & SP20)  
 
Coastal Country Park 
(SP20)  
 
 
Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest 
(SP24)  
Foreshore 
(SP20)  
 
Ancient Woodland 
(SP11 & SP24)  
 
 
Local Geological Sites 
(SP24)  
 
National Nature 
Reserve 
(SP24)  
Protected Area 
Addlethorpe 
(SP19)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Sports and  
Recreation  Facility 
(SP26)  
Flood Hazard  
Danger for All 
(SP17,SP18 & SP19)  
Adopted July 2018   CHAPTER 1 - INTRODUCTION  
 
1.1 The Council is required to produce a local plan setting out its strategic 
priorities for its area, and policies for the growth and development across the 
District.  
 
This document is called the Core Strategy and it sets out the vision and  strategic 
policies for the growth and development of the District up to  2031.  
 
Spatial planning is broader than just the use of individual pieces of land. It looks 
at the roles of, and interaction between, places and spaces and the communities 
that use them. It takes account of community aspirations for places expressed, 
for example, through Community or Neighbourhood Plans and aims to balance 
the competing demands of economy, environment and community.  
 
The Core Strategy will; -  
 
• Lay down an overall spatial vision for the District up to  2031.  
 
• Include objectives to help achieve the  vision.  
 
• Present a strategy and strategic policies to meet all the  objectives.  
 
• Broadly direct growth and development across the  District.  
 
• Set challenging but realistic targets to assist in making sure that planned 
change actually  happens.  
 
The Council has also produced a Settlement Proposals Plan document which 
contains site allocations and areas shown on proposals maps which relate to the 
policies in the Core Strategy. The Council will seek to monitor the impact of its 
policies on these sites through its monitoring framework.  
 
In this document, we will try to avoid the use of jargon but there will be 
times when technical, legal or seemingly obscure terminology will be 
unavoidable. A glossary of such terms can be found at Annex 6. We will 
avoid the use of all but the most well-known acronyms. The term “we” 
in the document refers to East Lindsey District Council.  
 
The policies in this plan 2016 – 2031 supersede those listed at Annex 7 which 
comprises the East Lindsey Lo cal Plan 1995 Saved Policies identified by the 
Secretary of States Direction September 2007. 
 
The Core Strategy and Settlement Proposals Development Plan Document 
supersedes the 1995 (amended 1999) East Lindsey Local Plan in its entirety.  
 
 
 
 
 
9 Adopted July 2018   How We Arrived Here  
 
1.2 The Council;  
 
Gathered evidence from existing and new surveys and studies.  
 
• Consulted the public and organisations to understand the issues important 
to stakeholders and our  communities.  
 
• Consulted widely on the Issues and Options Document in November 2007 
and on a Draft Core Strategy in November  2009.  
 
• Consulted on a Draft Core Strategy for three months from November 2012 
to January 2013 and again from June 2016 to August  2016.  
 
• Carried out a Publication Version consultation 30th November 2016 to 25th 
January  2017 
 
• Carried out a Sustainability Appraisal of the key  issues.  
 
• Carried out an exercise to ensure the Core Strategy is in conformity with 
the National Planning Policy Framework. The Statement of Conformity 
can be found on the Councils  website.  
 
All the documents prepared for the Local Plan can be found on the Councils 
website www.e -lindsey.gov.uk  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 Adopted July 2018   East Lindsey’s Distinctive Characteristics  
 
• Extending over 1,762 square kilometres, East Lindsey is the third largest 
district in the UK. With 0.8 persons per hectare, it is also one of the most 
sparsely populated, with its 137,887 population spread among some 200 
settle ments.  
 
• The District does not have a single dominating urban centre. Instead, its 
distinctive widespread settlement pattern is a legacy of a history of small 
farming communities with local markets. 
 
• The average house price in the District of all properties  in 2015 was 
£139,000, with terrace houses averaging at £109,000 which is 4.74 times 
the average wage in the District.  
 
• The District is home to many more older people than the national norm and 
its coastal towns and villages are popular retirement  destinations.  
 
• Wages and skills are on the low side and the District has a higher than 
average self -employed work  force.  
 
• The District is a safe and healthy place to live with low crime rates and  very 
little noise, air, light or water pollution. Many residents have migrated to 
the District for the quality of  life. 
 
• There are pockets of social deprivation and unemployment is slightly higher 
than the national mean,  average  earnings  are relatively  low and dependence 
on benefits is high, particularly along the coast where seasonal and 
temporary employment is  common.  
 
• Four settlements (Louth, Horncastle, Alford and Spilsby) have built on their 
historic  market  town roles to grow and serve  wider  rural hinterlands.  On the 
coast, Mablethorpe also has a vibrant market and with Skegness has grown 
to serve both a local rural hinterland and a vibrant tourism market. These 
two different groups of settlements have contrasting characters. The  former 
have attractive town centres, with market squares and streets typified by 
red and ochre brick buildings with pantile or slate roofs. The latter have a 
much more mixed visual  character.  
 
• The Lincolnshire  Wolds  is the only Area of Outstanding  Natural Beauty  in the 
East Midlands region and covers one third of the District's  area. 
 
• The Dis trict retains an impressive sense of early history, typified by 
numerous  prehistoric  barrows,  ancient  tracks,  scheduled ancient  monuments 
and views of distant medieval church spires and towers.  
 
 
 
11 Adopted July 2018   • Between  the Wolds  and the coastline,  the landscapes north  and south  of the 
River Steeping  are classed  as marsh  and fen respectively.  They are generally 
flat and expansive, giving long distance views where "large skies" are a 
distinctive feature. To the south, the fens are generally devoid of trees and 
hedgerows, drainage channels being common features.  
 
• Between  the Wolds  and the Coast,  the land is typified  more by small  hedge - 
lined fields  and scattered  small villages  set within  clumps  of trees and aligned 
along low ridges set marginally above  the coastal flood  plain.  
 
• The 70 km North Sea coastline forms a clearly defined eastern edge to the 
District. Extensive  dune-backed  salt marshes  form internationally  recognised 
Special Protection Areas, SSSI`s, Ramsar  Sites, Special Areas of 
Conservation (SAC) and National Nature Reserves fronting the Humber 
Estuary  and the Wash.  These peaceful  and remote  areas are rich habitats  for 
varied coastal flora and fauna and are important havens on bird migration 
routes.  
 
• The holiday coast between Mablethorpe and Skegness is characterised by 
lively seaside resort activity. Caravan parks along the coastal plain, 
accommodating upward of 24,000 static vans, are a particular feature. In 
addition, this area contains pockets of wild coast and now encompasses a 
coastal country  park. 
 
• Farming remains the dominant land use across the District. Farm 
diversification is increasing with more farm -based and non- farm based 
tourism activities becoming a growing feature in the  countryside.  
 
• The District's relative isolation, dispersed settlements, and thinly spread 
public transport services all add to a high level of  car-dependency.  
 
• The District displays an important historic environment in the widespread 
distribution  of its listed  buildings  and conservation  areas,  Scheduled Ancient 
Monuments, six parks and gardens of special historic interest and a 
registered Civil War battlefield at Winceby, some of which are considered at 
risk on Historic England`s at Risk  Register.  
 
East Lindsey is also distinctive for what it does not have –  notably:  
 
• motorways;  
• out of town supermarkets  (the Council  has striven  to protect  the vitality  and 
viability of its town centres);  
• heavily  trafficked  roads  (with a few exceptions  at peak times  on the A16 and 
in summer on coastal access roads);  
• derelict land and many brownfield  sites. 
 
 
 
 
 
12 Adopted July 2018    
 
What are the Districts Issues that need to be addressed over the next 
15 years?  
 
1.3 If our spatial strategy and policies are to be effective, they must tackle 
those issues and challenges that are specific to East Lindsey and its 
communities as well as those on the national  agenda.  
 
The issues that have been identified are as follows; -  
 
Communities  
 
• The District has a high inward migration of elderly, eco nomically inactive 
and infirm people. This places pressure on existing services particularly on 
the coast.  
 
• Demographic imbalance is made worse by high outward migration of  young 
adults.  
 
• There is a relative lack of skilled employment opportunities and hig h levels 
of seasonal unemployment, leading to low income and poor job prospects.  
 
• A large percentage of the District is rural in nature, which on the one hand 
raises difficulties accessing essential services and facilities; however, both 
residents and visitors value the tranquil nature of the  District.  
 
• The District is mainly a healthy place to live but does have areas where 
long-term illness is high, especially along the coast. This reflects the 
demographic imbalance in the  population.  
 
• The District has low rates of crime and anti -social  behaviour.  
 
• Access to green infrastructure is relatively limited. Whilst there is an 
extensive rights of way network, there are comparatively few sites  with 
open or amenity  access.  
 
• There are localised pockets of soci al deprivation with a high dependency on 
benefits, particularly along the  coast.  
 
Housing  
 
• There are divergent views about where new housing should be built. On 
the one hand, some stakeholders feel that the villages should be allowed 
more housing whilst ot hers believe that too much building harms village 
character.  
 
 
13 Adopted July 2018   • Because the District is so rural, there is a limited supply of  previously 
developed sites for  development.  
 
• There is a significant shortage of affordable  housing.  
 
• Housing along the coast is at risk of  flooding.  
 
Transport  
 
• Rural isolation can create problems for those without access to  transport.  
 
• Car dependency in the District is high and residents do not want to give up 
the use of their  cars. 
 
• The District is not connecte d by rail to the rest of the country in any 
meaningful  way. 
 
Economy  
 
• Compared nationally, the District has a relatively low percentage of 
employees working full -time but a high percentage of self -employed 
workers. Lack of skilled workers can deter inward  investment.  
 
• The District is reliant on the two dominant industries of agriculture and 
tourism both of which are seasonal  employers.  
 
• The expanding growth in IT and electronic communication provides 
opportunities for further expansion for small, footloose (does not have a 
permanent base) and home based businesses. A lack of fast 
communication networks will slow down potential growth.  
 
• Coastal settlements where the need for regeneration has been identified 
are also at the greatest risk of  flooding.  
 
• Opportunities have been identified to widen the tourism offer through 
greener, more sustainable  tourism.  
 
Environment, landscape and biodiversity  
 
• The rural character of East Lindsey and the high quality of its landscape 
and natural environment have been highlight ed as  assets.  
 
• A key issue will be how to balance the need to respect the distinct 
character and landscape and to diversify the rural  economy.  
 
• As well as a need to protect biodiversity, there was a call from consultees 
to improve and extend it. 
 
 
 
14 Adopted July 2018   • There was an identified need to protect the historic landscape and heritage 
assets of the  District.  
 
• Unpolluted night skies should be protected because they contribute to the 
character of the Wolds and  Marshes.  
 
Climate change  
 
• Adapting to flooding and climate change is one of the most significant 
challenges to be faced by the District. The District faces both coastal and 
fluvial flood  risk. 
 
• Coastal flooding has the potential to affect some 38% of the District and 
the potential threat to  property and life needs to be balanced against the 
continuing need to encourage inward investment essential to ensure 
economic viability and the needs of the coastal population.  
 
• Water resources are a key consideration, including a lack of potable water 
and increased surface water  discharges.  
 
• The impact on the landscape and the food- growing potential of the 
countryside from sea level rise and the national demand for renewable 
energy is a major key concern for stakeholders.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 Adopted July 2018   Our Vision  
 
1.4 The Core Strategy vision and objectives for the development of East 
Lindsey up to 2031 have been identified  from- 
 
• the strategic plans of public service  bodies;  
• community consultation on the issues  and; 
• the evidence gathered through monitoring land use  change.  
 
The Core Strategy also aims to match its vision with the Council`s Corporate 
Strategy, so that, through shared action, their common priorities can effectively 
be tackled, in order to achieve the deliv ery of sustainable development  
 
East Lindsey District Councils Corporate Strategy  
 
Has as its overarching ambition to:  
 
1. Be adaptable and flexible, working closely with the community to provide 
relevant and valued  services 
 
2. Provide, enable and procure high quality services through the most 
appropriate and efficient  mechanisms  
 
3. Aim to meet community needs and aspirations in a time of severe spending 
restraint  
 
4. Know and understand our community, and work in partnership with  them 
 
5. Be aware of the external environment and be prepared as far as possible for 
future  challenges  
 
6. Secure efficiencies through collaboration and partnership with other agencies 
and organisations.  
 
The Core Strategy focuses on 6 key factors, as set out below and derived from 
these the Council has formed its key objectives, these run through the policies 
outlined in this document.  
 
Vision and Objectives for East Lindsey  
 
1.5 By 2031, East Lindsey will be a district with:- 
 
1. A network of thriving, safer and healthy sustainable communities, 
where people can enjoy a high quality of life and an increased 
sense of well -being and where new development simultaneously 
addresses the needs of the economy, communities and the 
environment.  
 
 
 
16 Adopted July 2018   2. Quality affordable and open market hous ing to try and meet the 
differing needs of the District’s  residents.  
 
3. A growing and diversified economy that not only builds on, and 
extends the important agriculture and tourism base but supports 
the creation of all types of employment.  
 
4. A commitment to address the issues of deprivation and rural 
isolation to make an inclusive, equal and diverse  district.  
 
5. A high quality environment that makes the most of its special 
qualities, particularly the coast, the Lincolnshire Wolds and the 
historic market towns; and 
 
6. A commitment to tackling the causes and effects of global climate 
change through local action.  
 
1.6 To achieve our vision of a network of thriving, safer and healthy 
sustainable communities, where people can enjoy a high quality of life and an 
increased sense of well -being and where new development simultaneously 
addresses the needs of the economy, communities and the environment, we 
will;- 
 
• Define a pattern of settlements and identify broad areas for 
growth.  
• Protect and enhance the vitality and viability  of our town  centres.  
• Require new development to contribute to improving the 
environmental quality of our spaces and  places.  
• Protect and commit to improve essential community facilities  in 
towns and  villages.  
• Ensure that infrastructure is capable of accomm odating planned 
growth.  
• Develop where possible on suitable previously used  land.  
• Support the work of communities in neighbourhood  planning.  
 
1.7 To achieve our vision of having affordable and good quality housing to 
meet the differing needs of the District’s residents, we  will;-. 
 
• Provide land for housing development to meet all residents  housing 
needs until 2031.  
• Enable the provision of affordable homes to meet local needs and 
reduce the current shortfall of supply.  
 
1.8 To achieve our vision of having a growing and diversified economy that 
not only builds on, and extends, the important agriculture and tourism base, 
but supports the creation of all types of employment, we  will;- 
 
• Encourage and enable business to locate and expand within the 
District.  
 
17 Adopted July 2018   • Encourage and enable rural and farm diversification schemes.  
• Widen and support opportunities for high quality, sustainable 
tourism throughout the  District.  
 
1.9 To achieve our vision of an inclusive, equal and diverse district that has 
addre ssed the issues of rural isolation and deprivation, we  will;- 
 
• Cater for the accommodation needs of Gypsies and  Travellers.  
• Support community led initiatives that improve access to services 
and facilities in our rural communities.  
• Help to tackle the causes  of coastal  deprivation.  
 
1.10 To achieve a high quality environment that makes the most of its special 
qualities, particularly the coast, the Lincolnshire Wolds and the historic market 
towns, we  will;- 
 
• Require new development to contribute to improving the 
environmental quality of our spaces and  places.  
• Conserve and enhance areas of international, national and locally 
designated wildlife sites, archaeology, natural history or landscape 
importance, in particular the Lincolnshire Wolds Area of 
Outstanding Natura l Beauty, the Coastal Country Park, and the 
Coastal Grazing Marshes and Lincolnshire  Limewoods.  
• Work with owners, partners and developers to conserve and 
enhance heritage assets and their  settings.  
• Ensure the protection of the links and connections between 
neighbouring areas to help safeguard wider natural and landscape 
character.  
 
1.11 To achieve our vision of a commitment to tackling the causes and effects 
of global climate change through local action, we  will;- 
 
• Maintain and enhance the District`s  biodiversity.  
• Encourage new development to be energy -efficient and carbon 
neutral.  
• Support the economy of the coastal communities whilst not putting 
more people at risk from  flooding.  
• Support new development to ensure it does not cause flood risk to 
existi ng properties and encourage new development to reduce 
flood risk to existing  properties.  
• Encourage new development to be water  efficient.  
• Locate development to minimise traffic  generation.  
• Support the use of renewable energy but balanced against the 
protection of the Districts distinct  landscapes.  
• Support the linking of areas of importance for biodiversity to assist 
in the provision of a green infrastructure  network.  
 
 
 
 
18 Adopted July 2018   CHAPTER 2 - A SUSTAINABLE PATTERN OF PLACES, GROWTH AND 
HOUS ING 
 
Where we want to be 
 
A district with a network of thriving, healthy and sustainable communities.  
 
Neighbourhood planning  is an embedded  idea that has assisted  in providing strong 
resilient communities.  
 
What will it look like  
 
Communities  that work together  to achieve  their common goals and objectives  as 
part of a pattern of settlements that allows the most sustainable patterns of 
growth and brings the widest economic, environmental and social  benefits.  
Delivery Objectives (how we are going to get there) 
Neighbourhood Plans  
East Lindsey Economic Action Plan  
Settlement Proposals Development Plan Document 2016 -  2031 
Greater Lincolnshire Local Enterprise Partnership –  Strategic Economic Plan 2016 
East Lindsey District Council Housing Strategy 2013 -  2018 
 
Evidence  
 
Preliminary Flood Risk Assessment 2011  
Joint Health and Well- Being Strategy for Lincolnshire 2013 -  2018 
Joint Lincolnshire Flood Risk and Drainage Management Strategy 2012 -  2025 
East Lindsey Sustainable Settlement Criteria  
East Lindsey Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 2016 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment 2016  
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (East Lindsey Affordable Housing 
Needs Assessment Update 2016)  
East Lindsey Retail and Economic Assessment 
East Lindsey Employment Land Review 2016 
Lincolnshire Coastal Study  
Rural Facilities Survey  
Demographic Projections for Coastal Districts in Lincolnshire March 2012 
Edge Analytics –  Update of the Demographic Evidence 2015 & 2016  
 
Why we have taken this approach  
 
2.1. The District is one of  the most sparsely populated parts of the country. 
Only 5% of the area, the towns, is identified as “urban” and there is no single, 
dominating urban centre. There are nearly 200 smaller rural settlements of 
varying size spread across the district, which have different roles reflecting their 
location and historical development. For some of these, their small population 
and physical isolation raises difficulties in accessing essential services and 
19 Adopted July 2018   facilities, this can place additional pressure on health and education services in 
larger settlements and this is recognised in the Settlement Pattern. There is 
general support for a settlement pattern that balances housing growth and 
restraint relative to the infrastructure and size of towns and larger villages.  
 
2.2. The Districts settlements do not exist in isolation. They form part of a 
wider pattern that stretches across Lincolnshire and includes the settlements of 
Boston, Grimsby and Lincoln. They are constrained by economies of scale,  which 
means that few of the smaller settlements can provide any or some of the 
essential services to meet their residents’ daily needs. It is more usual for  larger 
settlements to provide for smaller settlements and for groups or clusters of 
smaller settlements to  “share” services and facilities. This inter -relationship 
between settlements helps them to remain sustainable because the smaller 
settlements  feed into the services and facilities  in the larger  settlements  and to a 
lesser extent vice  versa.  
 
2.3. Settlements a re given their place in the pattern following a district -wide 
assessment of their services, facilities, roles, accessibility and relationship with 
nearby settlements. By identifying the role of settlements, the Council can start 
to see how settlements rela te to each other. This forms a clear baseline from 
which we can guide new growth based on capacity to provide and sustain a 
pattern of viable communities as set out. 
 
2.4. Towns - They provide a range of higher order district -wide services and 
facilities that because of economies of scale cannot, reasonably be expected in 
other settlements. These should mainly include  – 
 
• a range of convenience  shopping;  
• further education and vocational training facilities;  
• secondary education  facilities;  
• a choice of managed recreational and sporting  facilities;  
• access to public transport;  
• a defined retail catchment  area;  
• a defined employment zone with opportunities for inward investment;  
• a range of health and community  facilities; 
• a fire station and permanent police  station;  
• a permanent  library; 
• accessibility to green  infrastructure.  
 
2.5. Large Villages - These provide a range of facilities for their own needs 
and provide for some of the needs of smaller villages within their immediate 
sphere of influence. Typically, the facilitie s available include at least one 
convenience  store,  a primary  school,  rural workshops  and/or  a range  of premises 
for business use, a doctor and/or dentist, mains drainage, on the strategic road 
network, commuter bus service available and a range of community  facilities.  
 
2.6. Medium Villages - These provide some essential services such as shop, 
post office  or primary  school,  and some  job opportunities  for their residents, and 
may provide  basic services for neighbouring hamlets  and smaller  villages, but 
20 Adopted July 2018   look to towns  and larger  service  villages  to provide  a greater  range  of community 
facilities. They can also provide suitable locations for affordable housing to meet 
local needs  close to essential  services such as schools;  they mainly  are on mains 
drainage and have a shopper bus service,  etc. 
 
2.7. Small Villages –  There is a large number of smaller villages of differing 
sizes, which have a limited range of services or facilities. Very few have schools, 
food shops, or employment opportunities although most have places of worship, 
village halls and a public house and look to higher order settlements to meet  the 
vast majority of their needs. The majority do not have access to public  transport 
in the form of scheduled bus services or the main road network  and consequently 
are not considered suitable for major housing or employment  growth.  
 
2.8. Open countryside - which includes hamlets and isolated groups of 
houses.  These may have very limited  facilities  such as a church  or a public  house. 
There are also single  dwellings  and small  isolated  groups  of houses  in the District 
with no  facilities.  
 
2.9. In addition to the settlement pattern, other factors affect decisions and 
shape  the strategy  for the location  of growth.  These also affect  the choices about 
specific sites. These include:  
 
• Sites protected for their biodiversity or geodiversity  importance;  
• National and local landscape  designations;  
• Designated and non -designated heritage assets and their  settings;  
• Physical constraints such as areas liable to  flooding;  
• Local housing  needs;  
• Access to services, public transport,  etc; 
• Climate change factors, such as flooding;  
• Existing land use (for example, where development would result in loss of 
existing uses such as commercial land or land used for community 
facilities);  
• The availability and capacity of existing infrastructure and the scope to 
improve or expand infrastructure to meet demands arising from new 
development;  
• Access to employment, schools, shops and health  facilities.  
 
2.10. The Council will encourage and support communities to work together in 
clusters, and through Neighbourhood Planning to not only bring forward 
development that will help them to sustain themselves but to help them in 
deciding  which  settlement  is the most appropriate  in the cluster  to accommodate 
that development.  
2.11. Based on the factors set out above, the Council’s draft Core Strategy 
(2009) proposed a sustainable settlement pattern based on the spheres of 
influence of the seven main towns in the District and the adjoining centres of 
Lincol n, Grimsby and Boston. The Settlement Pattern has subsequently been 
updated to take into account changes in levels of service provision that have 
occurred within settlements and the consultation responses from the November 
2013 Draft Core Strategy  consulta tion exercise.  The Settlement Pattern  places 
21 Adopted July 2018   the settlements in the District in different categories based on the range of 
services, facilities and employment available in them.  
 
2.12. The Pattern provides a starting point.  Along with consultation, it provides 
valuable evidence that will help support the assessment of where new growth 
should be directed. This pattern will form the basic consistent framework for all 
the policies in this strategy. It does not provide a detailed assessment  of the 
character of the  settlements.  
 
Strategic Policy 1 (SP1) –  A Sustainable Pattern of Places  
 
1) The Settlement Pattern shall guide the distribution, scale and nature 
of future development.  
 
Towns, comprising, Louth, Skegness, Alford, Coningsby/Tatter shall, 
Horncastle, Mablethorpe/Sutton/Trusthorpe and Spilsby.  
 
Large  Villages,  comprising  Binbrook,  Burgh le Marsh,  Chapel  St Leonards, 
Grainthorpe, Grimoldby/Manby, Friskney, Hogsthorpe, Holton le Clay, 
Huttoft, Ingoldmells, Legbourne, Mareham le Fen, Marshchapel, North 
Somercotes, North Thoresby, Partney, Saltfleet, Sibsey, Stickney, 
Tetford, Tetney, Wainfleet All Saints, Woodhall Spa and  Wragby.  
 
Medium Villages, comprising, Addlethorpe , Alvingham, Antons Gowt, 
Bilsby, Bucknall, Covenhams, Croft (village), Donington on Bain, East 
Barkwith, East Keal, East Kirkby, Eastville/New Leake, Fotherby, 
Frithville, Fulstow, Gipsey Bridge, Hagworthingham, Halton Holegate, 
Hemingby, Hundleby, Kirkby on Bain, Ludborough, Ludford, Maltby le 
Marsh, New York, Mumby, N ew Bolingbroke, North Cotes, Saltfleetby 
Scamblesby, Skendleby, Theddlethorpes, Toynton All Saints, Utterby, 
Wainfleet St Mary, West Ashby, West Keal, Willoughby and Withern.  
 
Small villages, comprising; Aby, Anderby (village), Baumber, Belchford , 
Burgh on Bain, Candlesby, Conisholme, Croft Bank, Friskney Eaudyke, 
Goulceby, Great Carlton, Great Steeping, Hainton, Hatton, Horsington, 
Keal Cotes, Langrick, Little Steeping, Minting, Old Bolingbroke, Orby, 
Raithby, Revesby, Sausthorpe, South Elkington, South Reston, South 
Willingham, Stickford, Swaby, Tattershall Thorpe, Thimbleby, Toynton 
St Peter, Welton le Marsh, Welton le Wold.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 Adopted July 2018   Sustainable Development  
 
2.13. The Council  considers  the purpose  of planning is to achieve  the delivery  of 
positive sustainable development. This direction of travel will assist the District 
to grow as a place with all the social  implications  this involves, ensure  our natural 
and historic environment is respected and looked after and also importantl y 
ensuring our economy both rural and urban is encouraged to grow and flourish. 
 
Strategic Policy 2 (SP2) -  Sustainable Development  
 
1. When considering development proposals the Council will take a 
positive approach that reflects the presumption in favour of sustainable 
development contained in the National Planning Policy Framework. It 
will always work proactively with applicants jointly to find solutions 
which mean that proposals can be approved wherever possible, and to 
secure development that improves the  economic, social and 
environmental conditions in the  area.  
 
2. Planning applications that accord with the policies in this Local Plan 
(and, where relevant, with polices in neighbourhood plans) will be 
approved without delay, unless material considerations indicate 
otherwise;  and 
 
• Where there are no policies relevant to the application or 
relevant policies are out of date at the time of making the 
decision then the Council will grant permission unless,  
 
• Any adverse impacts of granting permission would signific antly 
and demonstrably outweigh the benefits, when assessed against 
the policies in the National Planning Policy Framework taken as 
a whole; or specific policies in that Framework indicate that 
development should be  restricted.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 Adopted July 2018   Housing Growth and the Location of Inland Growth 
2.14. The Government has introduced the National Planning Policy Framework 
(NPPF) replacing previous planning policy and related guidance, some of the key 
messages for the District contained in the document  are: 
 
• The Councils policies must be in conformity with the  NPPF.  
 
• The Council must be pro -active in its approach to the provision of new 
housing. This means being less reliant on “windfall sites”. These are 
sites which have not previously been identified/allocated for housing by 
the Council.  
 
• The Council must set its own housing target based on a robust 
evidence  base.  
 
• The Council should use the evidence base to try to ensure it meets the 
requirements for market and affordable  housing.  
 
• The Council should set out an approach to housing density.  
 
• In terms of the location of housing, the preference is to build in 
locations that offer a range of community facilities and have good 
access to jobs, key services and infrastructure, away from areas o f all 
types of flood  risk. 
 
2.15. The District faces a significant issue with regard to housing. 38% of East 
Lindsey is in an area of high coastal flood risk. This area is covered by the 
Environment  Agency`s  Coastal  Flood  Hazard  Map and is called  the Coastal  Zone. 
The map is shown on the policy map on page 7 and on page 84 of the plan and 
the zone covers  the red (danger  for all), orange  (danger  for most), yellow  (danger 
for some) and green (low hazard –  caution). In respect of the application of 
development  plan policies,  the whole  of the settlements  listed  in clause  1 of Policy 
SP3 are regarded as being within  the Coastal  Zone.  Therefore it is not realistic  to 
promote an option of large -scale housing growth in this area. However, to meet 
our objectives of having a network of thriving, safer and healthy communities, 
and to try and address the causes and effects of climate change, we believe  that 
we must deal with this issue head on. 
 
2.16. In the inland part of the District the towns and large villages provide the 
key facilities for many of the medium and small villages in the District. Some of 
these  smaller  villages  have their own flood risk issues  and a number  have reached 
a point when further growth would detrimentally alter their character. At the 
same  time, evidenc e shows  that there  is little correlation  between  growth  and the 
protection of services and those smaller rural villages would have to grow 
substantially in order to keep or attract new services such as shops into their 
settlements.  
 
 
 
24 Adopted July 2018   2.17. Future  housing growth  in the District needs  to be a response  to population 
growth  and social  trends.  It is the social  trend  element  that affects  East Lindsey’s 
population growth more so than natural growth. Even though the number of 
deaths exceeds the number of births the population of the District continues to 
grow. This growth is caused by in migration of mainly older persons. The 
District’s young people and those over 75 leave; in migration is outweighing out 
migration. In turn this older structure t o the population has implications for the 
number and type of houses and the housing market.  
2.18. The recent economic recession affected the District, with house building 
numbers falling and in migration slowing. This follows a national pattern. The 
plan must however  be able to respond and react to a potential return  to previous 
levels of migration and  growth.  
 
2.19. East Lindsey is a relatively self -contained housing market area with 77% 
of those working in the District living in the District. There are some wider 
linkages to Boston in the south and North East Lincolnshire in the north but 
migration to surrounding authority areas has only a relatively small net impact 
upon population change. For the purposes of this plan, East Lindsey has been 
treated as a single ho using market  area. 
 
2.20. Therefore the aim of the Plan is to achieve a balance that supports the 
more urban parts of the District, helps the retention of existing rural services 
through a sustainable settlement pattern and strong policies which protect local 
services  and facilities, and takes  into account  the issue of flood risk. To that end, 
it is essential that realistic targets for growth be established, that the Plan is 
flexible  and able to react to change  and the Council  deals with housing  growth  in 
areas of flood risk in a different way to those outside of  it. 
 
2.21. As a starting point, using evidence from the Council’s Strategic Housing 
Market  Area Assessment  Update  October 2016 and the household and population 
projections produced by Edge Analytics in 2016, t he objectively assessed need 
for the period 2011 to 2031 is 9620 homes, this equates to 481 homes a year. 
The starting point of the Local Plan for the purposes of establishing the need for 
housing is 2011 with the Plan running to  2031.  
2.22. In addition to the h ousing requirement between 2017 and 2031 based on 
an annual  average  of 481 homes  a year, the Council  has to set out how it is going 
to deal with any past shortfall of housing. As at the 1st March 2017 the District 
from the period 2011 to 1st March 2017 should have delivered 2886 homes 
against the housing requirement of 481 homes a year, as set out  below;  
 
Year  Annual Requirement  
of Housing  Completions of  
Housing  
2011 481 246 
2012 481 240 
2013 481 276 
2014 481 278 
 
25 Adopted July 2018   2015 481 405 
2016/17  481 356 
TOTAL  2886 1801 
Total Housing  
Shortfall 2886 -1801 = 1085  
 
The District had only delivered 1801 homes leaving a past undersupply which 
amounts to 1085 homes. Therefore the housing requirement from 2017 to 2031 
= 6734 (i.e. 481 x 14 years);  plus the shortfall from above  of 1085,  this equates 
to a total housing requirement of 7819 for the period 2017 to  2031.  
 
2.23. Historically, (completions  1981 – 2010)  an average  of approximately  33% 
of all housing growth in the District has occurred on the coast. This would 
correspond to approximately 2578 of the 7819 housing target. Previously this 
approximate amount of housing would have been allocated in the coastal zone. 
The Council has chosen a zero population growth scenario for the coast ; this will 
provide  a dwelling  growth  of 49 homes  per year or 735 dwellings  across  the plan 
period. This in effect means no significant growth in the coastal population but 
makes provision for the formation of new households which are calculated to 
increase by appro ximately 4.9%. Inevitably, there will be some non -preventable 
in migration as homes become empty and are sold on to incomers from outside 
the coastal zone. As at the 1st March 2017 the coastal zone had 1257 extant 
planning permissions for housing, as this is over the 735 homes set out in the 
chosen  scenario,  the Coastal  Zone will be restricted  to existing  commitments  only 
for the Plan period with some exceptions as set out in Strategic Policy 18 (SP18) 
Coastal East  Lindsey.  
 
2.24. This is the first time housing growth on the coast has been constrained to 
existing commitments. Whilst the Council has been monitoring this for the past 
three years, there is not enough data yet to evidence that the housing need in 
the coastal zone will still arise or that it will tran sfer inland if housing is 
constrained on the coast. Likewise there is no evidence to support that it will 
not. 
 
2.25. Demand for housing has been reduced across the District since the 
recession. The Council is uncertain about whether it will return to pre-recession 
levels. New build completions and sales of housing are rising again albeit slowly 
but there appears, on the surface, to be a downwards trend. Given the fact that 
the Council has an undersupply of housing and national policy is clear that plan  
makers should not apply constraints to the overall assessment of need, such as 
limitations imposed by the supply of land for new development, historic under 
performance, viability, infrastructure or environmental constraints, the Council 
has no evidenced  reason  for constraining  its overall  objectively  assessed  housing 
need.  
 
2.26. Given  that there  are 1257 housing commitments  with planning permission 
in the Coastal Zone, a minimum of 6562 homes will need to be provided inland, 
if the requirement of 7819 is to be achieved over the Plan period.  
 
26 Adopted July 2018   2.27. The coast is of such strategic importance to the District, future 
development in this area will be guided by discrete policy in the Core Strategy. 
This policy  is set out in Chapter  10 and aims to provide  strong  and flexible  support 
to economic, business, cultural and tourism growth in the areas covered by the 
coastal  flood hazard  zones.  This policy  is also designed to give positive  indications 
of what will and what will not be supported by the Council  in this important  area. 
The Coastal Housing target will be confined to existing commitments and details 
of this are also set out in Chapter  10. 
2.28. Because housing demand in the District and population growth is 
predicated on the in migration of mainly  older persons it is impossible to predict 
where new residents are going to want to live. The starting point requirement 
for the inland towns  and villages  is calculated  on the number  of households  in the 
Parish taken from the 2011 Census divided by the tot al number of households 
across the towns and large villages; this is shown as a percentage. This 
percentage is then multiplied by the District target total. This in effect means 
that the larger settlements will get more growth. It assumes that the need for  
housing will be proportional to the number of houses. As demand arises mainly 
from migration  it makes  no distinction  between  demand in the towns  and villages. 
 
2.29. This way of apportioning growth means that the Council is not allocating 
its growth into a few settlements but distributing it proportionally across the 
inland towns and large villages, as set out above, this reflects the way the 
population  has previously  grown  through  the in migration  of mainly  older persons. 
The predominance of house builders who operate in the District tend to be 
smaller, with the national companies only rarely developing in the District. The 
Council strongly supports these smaller more Lincolnshire based developers and 
builders because they form a key employment sector and use the services and 
supply chain in the District. Large urban extensions could in effect penalise the 
smaller developers who rely on the District for  employment.  
 
2.30 The other factor of concern around allocating large urban extensions in  
the towns  of the District would be their ability  to come  forward  and be delivered. 
Given  that the in-migrants  could  choose  to live anywhere  and there  is no evidence 
to show they all go to one or a few settlements  in the District. East Lindsey  could 
end up with many  windfall  developments  outside  of an allocated  urban extension 
and only slow growth or no growth on the allocated  sites.  
 
2.31. Work has started on analysing long term housing market trends around 
the District, particularly focusing on movement between Coastal and inland East 
Lindsey, the social dynamics of the District’s housing market and the level of 
demand.  
2.32. This work needs to be undertaken over at least a 5 year period, during a 
period  of normality  with regard  to the economy  and whilst policies  are in place in 
order to see any long term trends. At the moment this work is not considered 
robust enough to reliably inform new  policy.  
 
 
27 Adopted July 2018   2.33. The Council  will allocate  sites in the Settlement Proposals  Document  along 
with existing commitments to ensure the delivery of the 7819 housing 
requirement including the undersupply of housing for the period 2011 –  2016 
over the following trajectory, this will recover the shortfall over the plan period 
and is set out  below; 
 
2017/2018 – 565 – this is predicted delivery  
2018 to 2031 –  558 per year  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
Annual requirement inc shortfall Plus 5% Buffer  Cumulative completions  Housing Completions  OAN  
Forecast annual delivery  2000  
 
1800  
 
1600  
 
1400  
 
1200  
 
1000  
 
800 
 
600 
 
400 
 
200 
 
0 Housing Trajectory 2011 -2031  Adopted July 2018   2.34. As at 1st March 2017 table A below shows the position with regard to the 
delivery of the District`s housing growth in the Plan period 2016 -  2031.  
 
HOUSING REQUIREMENT 2017 – 2031  
 
This is a minimum figure not a ceiling  7819  
  
Commitments inland  3118 
Commitments coastal  1257 
Inland allocations as set out in Table B  3810 
  
Total – This includes a 4.68% margin above the 
housing requirement;  8185  
  
Other sources of housing could come forward in the 
inland area in line with policies SP3, SP5 and SP4 and 
in the Coastal Zone in line with policies SP18 but it is 
not possible to quantify this.   
 
 
TABLE A  
 
2.35. Table B below shows the total capacity of housing in each settlement 
across the inland towns and large villages from allocations as set out in the 
Settlement  Proposals  Document.  The allocation  figures  below  for each settlement 
are not intended as maximum figures. However the figure for Alford is the 
minimum amount of housing that should allocated in the Alford Neighbourhood 
Plan. For the purposes of neighbourhood planning in Alford, this is a strategic 
policy . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 Adopted July 2018   TABLE B 
SETTLEMENT  ALLOCATION  
ALFORD – This housing will be allocated in the Alford 
Neighbourhood Plan, this is the minimum amount of housing that 
should be allocated in that Plan.  66 
BINBROOK  0 
BURGH LE MARSH  148 
CONINGSBY/TATTERSHALL  417 
FRISKNEY  59 
GRAINTHORPE  9 
HOGSTHORPE  91 
HOLTON LE CLAY  314 
HORNCASTLE  0 
HUTTOFT  0 
LEGBOURNE  23 
LOUTH  1204 
MANBY/GRIMOLDBY  77 
MAREHAM LE FEN  113 
MARSHCHAPEL  0 
NORTH THORESBY  165 
PARTNEY  0 
SIBSEY  239 
SPILSBY  380 
STICKNEY  18 
TETFORD  0 
TETNEY  47 
WAINFLEET  96 
WOODHALL SPA  312 
WRAGBY  32 
TOTAL  3810  
 
30 Adopted July 2018   2.36. The Council  will ensure  that there  is an appropriate  variety  of house  types 
and sizes on developments. Given the older demographic of the District and  that 
young people move out, this will include support for the provision of smaller 
houses, including 1 bedroom units, and housing for older people, including extra 
care and single storey accommodation outside areas of high flood risk. This wil l 
provide choice and help meet local  needs.  
 
2.37. Growth is not just about housing. Depending on the level and nature of 
population growth then the demand for employment, health, leisure, recreation 
and retail services will expand commensurately and inevitably, settlements will 
expand and change in character.  
 
2.38. The District  does not have a history  of past industrial  development  so it is 
inevitable that growth will have to occur on green field sites. The Council will 
produce a brownfield land register, encouraging land owners of brownfield land 
in sustainable locations to put their sites forward for the register and will try, 
where it is applicable, to ensure that brownfield land is developed first. This can 
be found in Strategic Policy 10 (SP10)  Design.  
2.40. Empty hous es can blight a community and are an additional source of 
housing. The Council is committed to bringing empty houses back into use and 
has a target in its Housing Strategy of 15 such properties a year. The Council 
will if necessary support this commitment through the planning process.  
 
2.41. Overall the housing target for the inland area, adjusted to reflect current 
commitments, will influence the scale and location of sites required in individual 
settlements. The Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment will contribute 
to the identification of appropriate sites. This will aim to ensure that the release 
of sites can be managed over the plan period to maintain a 5 -year supply of 
deliverable houses plus a 5%  buffer.  
 
2.42. The protection and enhancement of the natur al, historic and built 
environment is considered a key factor in ensuring that housing growth 
contributes to and sustains the District’s communities. All housing  developments 
should be in accordance with all other relevant policies in this  plan. 
 
2.43. The NPPF states  that Local Authorities  may make  an allowance  for windfall 
sites in their five year housing land supply,  if they have compelling evidence  that 
such sites have consistently become available in the local area and will continue 
to provide  a reliable  source  of supply.  Historically,  windfall sites have contributed 
up to 50% of the District’s total housing supply. Many of these are very small - 
scale,  infill sites,  developed  by the local building  companies  in the District.  These 
small companies have provided housing ‘to order’ for customers, thus making 
them less susceptible to the wider economic fluctuations experienced by volume 
house builders and helping ensure a continuous level of  delivery.  
 
2.44. Because of the long historical trend of this type of delivery, the type of 
sites that are delivered  in this way and the local nature  of the delivery, the Council  
 
31 Adopted July 2018   will monitor  future  delivery  and consider  whether  it would  be appropriate  to have 
a windfall allowance in the 5 year supply during the review of the  plan. 
 
2.45. The usual  approach  with regard  to housing allocations  is to provide  a buffer 
or fall back in the allocations to ensure that if sites do not come forward then 
others can take up the housing need easily. Given that the Local Plan is going to 
be reviewed in 5 years, and at that time additional sites can be allocated if the 
need and evidence  arises.  Policy  SP3 therefore  sets out a minimum  inland  housing 
requirement of 6562 but the Settlement Proposals Document has an additional 
allocated margin above the housing requirement which is approximately 4.68% 
or 366 homes. The margin is the difference between the housing requirement 
and the supply of housing actually allocated the Settlement Proposals Document 
and provided through commitments  (non-allocated  sites with planning  permission 
as of March  2017)  
 
2.46. There are policies in the plan which support windfall development in 
specific circumstances (SP4, SP5, SP8, SP9, SP12 and SP18). While these allow 
for additional housing growth be yond that provided through allocations, it is 
important that windfall developments do not harm the character and amenity of 
settlements and that they do not compromise the achievement of a sustainable 
pattern of development. The towns within East Lindsey h ave a good level of 
services and facilities  and additional growth  through windfall  development  can be 
supported,  providing sites conform  to the policies  in the Plan and national  policy.  
 
2.47. The large villages generally have fewer services and facilities than the 
towns and it is, therefore, particularly important that windfall development is 
carefully managed so that, whilst some additional growth is supported over and 
above the site allocations, it does not harm the character and amenity of these 
settlements o r compromise the achievement of sustainable patterns of 
development.  
 
2.48. In the AONB  windfall development  must have regard  to the policies  within 
this Plan. Great weight should be placed on conserving the landscape and the 
scenic beauty  of the Area of Outstan ding Natural  Beauty, which  is the only one in 
Lincolnshire. 
2.49. The Council considers that the housing allocations in the Settlement 
Proposals Document and existing commitments will deliver the housing 
requirement and that there is enough flexibility in the provision of housing to 
significantly  boost  supply  and provide  choice  in the market.  Given  this the Council 
believes that the Plan gives it a 5 year supply of housing plus a 5% buffer. 
Information on the 5 year supply and the trajectory of housing over the  plan 
period can be found on the Council`s website as an appendix to this Plan, this 
information is updated on a yearly basis along with the Councils Monitoring 
Report.  
 
2.50. The Council will keep the buffer on the 5 year supply under yearly review 
and will increase  it to 20% if evidence  shows  that the demand across the District 
is improving yet housing is still not being brought  forward.  
 
32 Adopted July 2018   2.51. It is considered important that the Council keeps its housing trajectory 
under review. Given the number  of unknowns the Council is facing as a 
consequence of apparent lowering of demand and constraining housing growth 
on the Coast, the Council will continuously monitor housing development  by: 
 
• Monitoring monthly the starts on sites and completions of all ho using 
developments in the  District.  
• Corresponding on a half yearly basis with all the owners of sites in each 
relevant phase of the plan to ascertain surety on the deliverability of 
those  sites.  
• Working with developers as planning permissions are processed to 
establish at approval stage a timetable for the delivery of  sites.  
• Publishing on the Council’s website, at a minimum of half yearly, the 5 
year land  supply.  
• Monitoring the supply of affordable housing being brought  forward.  
• Carrying out evidence based work to try to gather a wider understanding 
of the demographic dynamics of the population of the  District.  
 
2.52. There are a number of factors in the Local Plan which mean there is 
uncertainty around delivery and impact of the policies, especially as this is th e 
first time the Council has constrained housing growth on the coast. The Council 
will carry out a full review of its housing policies with a review being submitted 
for examination by April 2022. This review will examine the impact of these 
policies  alongs ide the Coastal  Policies  SP17 to SP21 and re-assess the objectively 
assessed need for  housing.  
 
2.53. The Council has also put in place an East Lindsey Economic Action Plan. 
This Action Plan sets out all the projects the Council and its partners will 
undertake t o try and drive positive results into the economy of the District. It is 
also the vehicle which the Council will use to monitor, investigate and evidence 
the impact  of its policy  on the economy,  demographics  and society  of the District. 
 
Strategic Policy 3  (SP3) – Housing Growth and the Location of Inland 
Growth  
 
1. The overall  District  wide  housing  requirement  is 7819 homes  for the 
period 2017 - 2031. 
 
The requirement will be.  
 
• On the coast1: In the Coastal Zone approximately 1257 homes 
which are existing commitments. Housing on the coast will be 
constrained to these existing commitments with the exceptions 
set out in policies SP18 (SP18) Coastal East Lindsey, SP8 –  Rural 
Exceptions and SP9 –  Single Plot  Exceptions  
 
 
1 The Coa stal Zone is the area covered by the Environment Agency`s Coastal Flood Hazard Map, 
shown on polices map 2 and on page 84 of the plan. It covers the red (danger for all), orange 
(danger for most), yellow (danger for some) and green (low hazard – caution) z ones.  
33 Adopted July 2018   The whole of the following settlements are in the Coastal Zone; 
Addlethorpe, Anderby, Chapel St. Leonards, Croft, Ingoldmells, 
Mablethorpe, New Leake, North Cotes, North Somercotes, 
Saltfleetby All Saints, Saltfleetby St. Clement s, Saltfleetby St. Peter, 
Skegness, Skidbrooke + Saltfleet Haven, South Somercotes, Sutton 
On Sea, Theddlethorpe All Saints, Theddlethorpe St. Helen, 
Trusthorpe  
 
• Inland a minimum of 6562  homes  
 
2. The Council will ensure the delivery of the 7819 homes as follows 
including the shortfall from 2011 to  2016;  
 
 
Year Requirement  
2017/18  565 
2018/19  558 
2019/20  558 
2020/21  558 
2021/22  558 
2022/23  558 
2023/24  558 
2024/25  558 
2025/26  558 
2026/27  558 
2027/28  558 
2028/29  558 
2029/30  558 
2030/31  558 
 
 
3. Housing growth will be allocated in the Settlement Proposals 
Document. The inland towns and large villages which could 
potentially include allocations  are; 
 
Towns – Louth, Alford, Coningsby/Tattershall, Horncastle and 
Spilsby.  
 
Large Villages - Binbrook, Burgh le Marsh, Grainthorpe, 
Grimoldby/Manby, Friskney, Hogsthorpe, Holton le Clay, Huttoft, 
Legbourne, Mareham le Fen, Marshchapel, North Thoresby, Partney,  
 
34 Adopted July 2018   Sibsey, Stickney, Tetford, Tetney, Wainfleet (All Saints), Woodhall 
Spa and Wragby.  
 
4. Towns and large villages - Housing growth on windfall sites in 
appropriate locations** within the settlement and outside of, but 
immediately adjacent to the developed footprint*** will be 
supported.  
 
To qualify as an ‘appropriate location’, the site, if developed, 
would: 
• retain the core shape and form of the  settlement;  
• not significantly harm the settlement’s character and 
appearance;  and 
• not significantly harm the character and appearance of the 
surrounding countryside or the rural setting of the  settlement.  
• Be connected to the settlement by way of a  footpath.  
 
** ‘appropriate locations’ means a location which does not conflict, 
when taken as a whole, with national policy or policies in this Local 
Plan.  
*** ‘developed footprint’ of a settlement is defined as the 
continuous built form of the settlement and excludes:  
• individual buildings or groups of dispersed buildings which are 
clearly detached from the continuous built up area of the 
settlement;  
• gardens, paddocks and other undeveloped land within t he 
curtilage of buildings on the edge of the settlement where land 
relates more to the surrounding countryside than to the built up 
area of the  settlement;  
• outdoor sports and recreation facilities and other formal open 
spaces on the edge of the settlement.  
 
5. In the AONB windfall development must have regard to the policies 
within this Plan and great weight should be placed on conserving 
the landscape and scenic beauty of the Area of Outstanding Natural 
Beauty. Proposals for major development will only be sup ported in 
exceptional circumstances having regard to national policy.  
 
Housing in Inland Medium and Small Villages  
 
2.54. There are areas within the medium and small settlements that have 
buildings on them which may once have served a useful purpose but which no w 
have become run down and empty. Some of these sites have the ability to be 
either converted or redeveloped. Whilst the smaller settlements do not have the 
services and facilities  necessary  to sustain  systematic housing growth  or to justify 
a housing allo cation, it is important to ensure that they are not left with areas 
which could eventually cause blight and that the Plan is not silent on this issue. 
The Council  could include  these  sites within  the Brownfield  Register  but given  the 
35 Adopted July 2018   number of settlements this involves and the amount of resources needed to 
assess them versus  the low amount  of housing  it could  bring forward  it is believed 
that a bespoke policy consideration is more appropriate. Brownfield land in the 
context of this policy is that land as defined by the  NPPF 
 
2.55. The Council would always want these areas to be first considered for 
community or employment use, but if this does not prove possible these areas 
could be considered for housing. This is not about the development of  infill gaps 
or areas of open space which may appear untidy; the Council has powers under 
Section  215 of the Planning  Act to deal effectively  with these  types  of areas.  Also 
in medium and small  villages, some  open gaps have an important  visual meaning 
adding  to the rural character  of those  settlements  and it is felt that their retention 
is important.  If these  open spaces begin  to be lost, gradually  the character  of the 
settlement will change and over time they will become less rural in  appearance.  
 
2.56. Small infill development may be supported but it should not impact on 
green space, locally important habitat, important views or settings of other 
development, this type of development should therefore also conform to clause 
2 of Policy SP25 –  Green  Infrastructure.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36 Adopted July 2018   Strategic Policy 4 (SP4) -  Housing in Inland Medium and Small Villages  
 
1. Within the medium and small villages, the conversion and 
redevelopment of sites for housing will be supported, where those 
sites are brownfield or have agricultural buildings on them that 
have become disused. The following criteria will need to be 
complied  with: 
 
• It must be demonstrated that the site has been actively marketed 
for either a community, economic or leisure use at an appropriate 
price for a period of 12 months; and 
• Only that part of the site considered as brownfield should be 
reused or redeveloped and should not include areas of open 
countryside or adjacent open space.  
• Consideration should first be given to the conversion of any 
buildings on site where they do or could enhance the character of 
the area. If demolition is to be supported it would need to be 
clearly demonstrated that the existing building does not 
contribute to the character of the area, that th e building was 
unsafe or that it was not structurally possible to  convert.  
 
2. Housing will also be supported in the medium and small villages 
where it can conform to the following  criteria: 
• In an appropriate location* within the developed footprint** of 
the settlement as infill, frontage development of no more than 2 
dwellings.  
• Conforms to Clause 2 of Strategic Policy SP25 –  Green 
Infrastructure.  
 
*Appropriate location means a location which does not conflict, when 
taken as a whole, with national policy or policies in this Local Plan.  
** Developed footprint is defined as the continuous built form of the 
settlement and excludes individual buildings or groups of dispersed 
buildings which are detached from the continuous built up area of 
the settlement. It also excludes gardens, community and recreation 
facilities, land used for an active employment use.  
 
Specialist Housing for Older People  
 
2.57. The Council will work with its partners in supporting the provision of 
specialist housing for older people including extra  care developments, care 
villages, care homes and specialist single storey  dwellings.  
 
2.58. Lincolnshire as a County has the lowest provision of extra care housing  in 
the country. The District`s growth is mainly driven by the in migration of older 
people  and this section  of the population  therefore  make  up a large proportion  of 
 
37 Adopted July 2018   East Lindsey residents. It is important that they are able to exercise meaningful 
choice in their housing aspirations and have independent and positive lives.  
 
2.59. In accordance with the County Council’s extra care housing strategy, 
which  acknowledges  that one size does not fit all and that East Lindsey  has a high 
need for older persons housing. The Council will support all forms of homes for 
older people. This will help them exercise choice both in the market and rental 
sectors.  Housing for older people  will be supported in the towns  and large villages 
as the places with the most services and facilities to serve the needs of older 
people. Schemes should be able to demonstrate that locationally, socially and in 
terms of health requirements the needs of older residents are going to be 
positively  met. 
 
2.60. In the Coastal  Zone housing  for older people  is just as important,  but flood 
risk has to be taken  into account.  Specialist extra care development,  care villages 
and care homes will be supported but they must have provide suitable flood 
mitigation measures  and should have no ground floor  sleeping accommodation. 
In line with the requirements set out in policy SP18 –  Coastal Housing, this type 
of housing  will only relate  to a local need that will come  from those  already  living 
in the Coastal  Zone or older persons  who have relatives  living  in the Coastal  Zone 
where there is a need for them to come into the Zone for specialised housing 
near their families. Priority will be given to those already living in the Coastal 
Zone and be subject to the cascade local connection criteria set out in Annex 1 
of this  Plan 
 
2.61. Support will be given for affordable schemes, where accommodation is 
provided on a rental basis, as well as private schemes where units can be 
purchased on a leasehold basis. The nature and type of  service and 
accommodation in a scheme will determine the use class and therefore whether 
or not it needs to accord with the affordable housing requirements set out in 
Policy 7 (SP7) of the Core  Strategy.  
 
Strategic Policy 5 (SP5) -  Specialist Housing for Older People  
 
1. The Council will support specialist housing for older people in the 
towns and large villages providing it meets the following  criteria: 
 
• Development should be designed to meet the particular 
requirements of residents with social, physical,  mental and/or health 
care needs.  
 
• Development should be located where it is accessible to local 
facilities or it can be demonstrated that it can be made  accessible.  
 
• Development that demonstrates how occupiers/users will work 
with other local providers of services for older people will be  supported.  
 
• Development that supports upskilling and training in the local 
settlement will be  supported.  
38 Adopted July 2018   • Development in areas of flood risk in the coastal zone will be 
supported if there is no ground floor sleeping accommodation, 
appropriate flood mitigation is in place and it can be demonstrated that 
occupation will be taken up by a local need. Priority will be given to 
those already living in the coastal Zone (subject to the cascade local 
connection criteria set out in Annex 1), followed by those needing to 
move to the Coastal Zone to be near  relatives.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 Adopted July 2018   Neighbourhood Planning  
 
Why have we taken this approach?  
 
2.62. The Council  supports  neighbourhood planning  as a positive  mechanism for 
the delivery of growth with community involvement and support. Whilst the 
Council sets the amount of growth to be distributed across the District, and 
broadly how that growth will be distributed, neighbour hood planning allows 
communities  to plan where  that growth  is going to go and what it is going to look 
like. 
 
2.63. Neighbourhood Development  Plans  must be in general  conformity  with the 
adopted local plan and national planning policy, they are subject to both an 
examination and referendum.  
 
2.64. The Council must still ensure that growth is allocated and delivered in 
relevant  settlements  should  any neighbourhood  plan fail to be adopted. 
Memorandums of understanding will be sought on this matter from those town 
or parish councils undertaking a plan for an agreement of timetables for 
completion of neighbourhood plans.  
 
Strategic Policy 6 (SP6) –  Neighbourhood Planning  
 
1. The Council will support Neighbourhood Development  Plans.  
 
2. Should any settlements wishing to carry out  a neighbourhood 
plan fail to deliver their plan so that there is a gap in delivery, then the 
Council will move to fill that gap either through the Settlement 
Proposals Plan or a separate Development  Plan.  
 
3. If there is an interim period between plans which leaves a gap in 
the delivery of housing, sites that come forward will be strongly 
supported providing they conform to the other policies in this plan and 
the National Planning Policy  Framework.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 Adopted July 2018   CHAPTER 3 –  AFFORDABLE HOUSING  
 
Where we want to be 
 
All households have the ability to access good quality housing.  
 
There will be a wide choice of high quality homes to address the requirements of 
the District.  
 
The current shortfall in affordable housing will have been reduced.  
 
What it will look like  
 
Affordable housing will be energy efficient and of a high quality design.  
 
There will be an increase  in the numbers  of affordable  houses  delivered  in smaller 
rural settlements.  
 
Delivery Objectives (how we are going to get there) 
This strategy will be delivered through the following  
Settlement Proposals Development Plan Document 2016 -  2031 
East Lindsey Housing Strategy 2013 -  2018 
 
Evidence  
 
Lincolnshire Coastal Study  
Strategic Housing Market Assess ment (Affordable Housing Needs Assessment) 
2016 
East Lindsey Housing Strategy 2013 -  2018 
Economic Viability Assessment 2013 and Update 2015  
Edge Analytics Updating the Demographic Evidence 2015 and 2016  
 
Delivering Affordable Housing  
 
Why we have taken this approach  
 
3.1. The Council believes it is important to be flexible and proactive in 
the delivery of affordable housing to address the housing waiting list and 
the low income to house price ratio issues facing the District. Affordable 
housing is defined in the NPPF, and this policy is referring to this type of 
housing or any subsequent definition published in National  Policy.  
 
3.2. The East Lindsey SHMA (Affordable Housing Needs Assessment) 
2016 showed that there was a need for 2825 additional affordable homes 
over the 15 year plan period. This would provide for the unmet current 
needs for affordable housing in addition to the projected future growth in 
affordable  housing  need.  The table below  sets out how the Council  believes  
 
41 Adopted July 2018   it can meet that need. Additional provision is also expected to come from 
windfall development over the plan period.  
 
Identified need including backlog 2016 – 
2031 2825 or 188 a year for 14 years and 193  
for 1 year  
Completions 2016  -158 
Remaining need from  2017 – 2031 2667 
  
Supply   
Inland housing allocations  1162 
Inland commitments  598 
Coastal commitments  281 
Housing Capital Programme to be 
developed  107 
Community Led Housing project 
(funding from the Government £2m –  
received)  50 to 70  
Total 2198 to 2218  
 
3.3. In June 2016,  there  were 2029 households  on the Council’s  Housing 
Register. This number has reduced from 7160 in 2012 due to changes to 
the Council`s Housing Allocation Scheme; this removed those from the 
register with no local connection to Linc olnshire and those with minimal 
housing  need.  The number  of statutorily  homelessness  households  has also 
seen a small downward trend, however enquiries for homeless assistance 
remains high. The Council positively manages its housing services seeking 
to provide assistance or signpost those in need. The Council believes that 
proactively managing housing services reduces risk to vulnerable 
households and manages situations before residents get to the point of 
homelessness.  
 
3.4. The Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) 2016 calculates 
that the social  rented  sector  should provide  a minimum  of 43% of the total 
housing provision in the District. It is apparent from both the SHMAA and 
the Housing Waiting List that the level of need for affordable (and 
intermediate) housing constitutes a level of future  demand.  
 
3.5. The capacity  of developments  to contribute  an element  of affordable 
housing has been established through the District wide Economic Viability 
Assessment (EVA) 2015. Where affordable housing is de livered via 
developer contributions the Council will positively engage with those 
wishing to bring development forward to ensure that contributions meet 
housing needs without making development unviable. The Council 
acknowledges that there are a variety of  factors involved in bringing sites 
including the provision of infrastructure and site remediation, these can all 
have an impact  on the amount  of affordable  housing being brought  forward.  
 
3.6. When the issue of the viability of sites to deliver affordable housing 
is raised,  the Council will seek to be flexible. Developers  will have to 
42 Adopted July 2018   provide viability assessments if they believe a site is not viable and the 
affordable housing requirement cannot be met. Any disputed cases will be 
referr ed, at the expense of the developer,  to the services of an independent 
valuer such as District  Valuer. 
 
3.7. From the evidence in the Economic Viability Assessment. The 
Council has resolved to seek a contribution of 30% from all sites for 15 or 
more units in the medium and high value zones defined by the EVA, this  is 
in effect the whole District excepting Woodhall Spa which is a very high 
value area and the Coastal Zone which is defined as a low value  area. 
 
3.8. In the very high value area –  Woodhall  Spa, it is proposed that a 
higher percentage of affordable homes of 40% is  sought.  
 
3.9. No contributions  for affordable  homes  will be sought  in the low value 
areas which are the coastal flood hazard areas. Given this, affordable 
housing will still be supported as set out in Strategic Policy 18 (SP18) 
Coastal  East Lindsey  if it comes  forward  on sites in this zone and developers 
believe that they can deliver a viable  proposal.  
 
3.10.  To encourage  the timely  provision  of affordable  housing,  the Council 
will adopt  a flexible  approach  and in conjunction  with developers  and other 
stakeholders  consider  a range  of delivery  vehicles  and funding ¡nitiatives  to 
secure the necessary level of affordable housing. The majority of the new 
homes will be expected to be prov ided as part of market housing sites  and 
be funded by developer contributions. Where developer contributions are 
sought the Council's first choice will be mixed tenure sites and on- site 
provision, integrated throughout the site. However, the District must not 
solely rely on this form of provision, and to provide flexibility and enable 
the Council and developers to respond to changing economic 
circumstances, the level and nature of developer contributions will be 
assessed on a site -by-site basis and may rang e between (in no order of 
preference);  
 
• a combination of built plots on site and a financial contribution;  
• off site, provision of land made available by the  developer  
• A financial  contribution  equivalent  to 50% of market  value  for rented 
accommodation or 30% of market value for shared ownership. 
Market  values  will be taken  from a 12 month  assessment  of sold land 
registry prices looking at the settlement and district and taking the 
mean of the two  values.  
3.11.  Provision on alternative sites and financial contrib utions in lieu of 
on-site provision, will only be considered where the developer can show 
that it is impractical to make provision on site. Delivery will aim to be in 
the settlement from which the contribution came from or any nearby 
settlement to which th ere is a demonstrated  connection.  
43 Adopted July 2018   3.12.  Whilst there is an outflow of younger people from the District it is 
still considered important to try and ensure that housing is provided for 
those who want to buy their first home, in order to do thi s the Council will 
support  starter  home  provision  in conformity  with National  Planning  Policy.  
 
3.13.  The demand for rented properties in East Lindsey is high compared 
to shared  ownership  properties,  however  we accept  that a scheme  becomes 
more viable for a developer with an increase in shared ownership units so 
we are prepared to negotiate an increase in shared ownership to help the 
viability  of schemes.  This is dependent  on the location  of the scheme  though 
because we need to be as sure as we can be that th e Registered Provider 
would be able to sell the increased number of shared ownership units. The 
starting point for negotiations is 70% rented properties and 30% shared 
ownership.  
 
3.14.  With regard to the housing mix for affordable housing; from the 
SHMAA it would appear  as if the 50% of the 2825 need should be 2 bedroom 
properties  followed  by 25% of 3 bedroom properties  and a smaller  need for 
4 bedroom and 1 and 2+ bedroom flats. 
 
3.15.  The Council acknowledges that the need for affordable housing 
stretches right a cross the District and as its first preference will focus the 
development  of new affordable  homes  in the towns  and large villages. This 
will enable  home -makers  to take advantage  of the proximity  to job, services 
and community  facilities.  
 
Strategic Policy 7 (SP7) –  Affordable and Low Cost Housing  
 
1. The Council will support the delivery of affordable housing in 
the towns and large villages across the District. In the Medium  and 
High Value Areas, on sites of 15 or more houses the Council will 
seek a 30% developer contribution towards the provision of 
affordable housing. This will rise to 40% in the Very High Value 
area (Woodhall Spa parish) but there will be no requirement in the 
Coastal Flood Hazard  zone.  
 
2. Clause  1 shall  apply  unless  it is demonstrated  by a detailed  and 
robust site specific assessment, commissioned by the developer 
and carried out by an accredited person(s) for example a member 
of the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors, that the viability of 
the development would be compromised such t hat a reduced level 
of contribution would be  justified.  
 
3. The Council's  first choice  for affordable  housing  provision will 
be mixed tenure sites and on site provision, integrated throughout 
the site. 
 
 
44 Adopted July 2018   4. If on site provision cannot be made, the Council will accept 
any of the alternatives listed below  . 
 
 a combination of built plots on site and a financial contribution;  
 off site, provision of land made available by the  developer.  
 A financial contribution eq uivalent to 50% of market value for 
rented accommodation or 30% of market value for shared 
ownership. Market values will be taken from a 12 month 
assessment  of sold land registry  prices  looking  at the settlement 
and district and taking the mean of the two  values  
Rural Exceptions  
3.16.  An exception site is one where housing would not normally be supported 
unless warranted by exceptional circumstances. Where exception sites are 
proposed the Council will require clear evidence of local need which should be 
drawn from the Council’s Housing Register and local housing need assessments. 
Exception sites by their very nature are small scale and should not exceed local 
need in the settlement where development is  proposed.  
 
3.17.  The Council will ensure that any affordable hous ing delivered through the 
exceptions policy is managed and retained in the long- term for the benefit of the 
community where it is  built. 
 
3.18.  Applications for new houses associated with rural workers proposed in 
isolated  locations  will be scrutinised  thoroughl y, as inappropriate  development  in 
the open countryside is not acceptable. Proposals will need to clearly show it is 
essential to make permanent provision at or near the place of work. Sometimes 
temporary  accommodation  is required  for a period  in order to demonstrate  a need 
for this type of housing. When this is proposed the development will also have 
regard to the employment policies SP13 and SP21.  
 
3.19.  Because  the District  is rural in character  and the continuing  importance  of 
agriculture  as one of the mainst ays of the local economy  mean  that the provision 
and retention of housing to meet the needs of rural workers remains a priority, 
and the loss of dwellings in the countryside that already have an existing 
agricultural tie should be seen as a last resort. Su ch development should clearly 
demonstrate the necessity of that loss. 
 
Strategic Policy 8 (SP8) -  Rural Exceptions  
 
1. In and adjoining the medium and small villages, where local 
affordable housing need is proven, the development of small-scale, 
affordable  housing  sites  on land not otherwise  considered  acceptable  for 
housing , will be supported  providing:  
 
• They  do not result  in sporadic  development,  which is unrelated  to the 
form and scale of the existing  settlement;  
45 Adopted July 2018   • The number of dwellings is no greater than the identified  need.  
 
2. Applications for new houses associated with rural workers 
proposed in isolated locations will need to show  that: - 
 
• there is an established existing full- time functional need for the 
worker that requires a permanent presence on  site; 
• the activity should have been established for a minimum period of 
three years, be profitable for at least one of those years and be 
currently financially  sound;  
• the housing need cannot be fulfilled by an existing unit on the sit e 
or in the surrounding  area.  
 
3. Applications for the loss of a dwelling with an agricultural tie 
should clearly demonstrate that it is has been actively marketed for 12 
months in an appropriate place and at a price that reflects the 
occupancy  restriction.  
 
Single Plot Exceptions  
3.20.  To provide  a self-help solution  for individual households  in the towns, large, 
medium and small villages including the Coastal Zone the Council will consider 
schemes that enable families to use their own resources to provide low cost  
housing that meets their own needs within their community. The construction of 
such housing is funded from the householders own resources, which can include 
the sale of existing property as well as through a commercial mortgage. This will 
assist  families  to stay in local settlements  and support  the continued  sustainability 
of the Districts rural  communities.  
 
3.21.  Where a single plot exception site is proposed applicants will have to 
establish amongst others; need, strong local connections and that the proposed  
dwelling  is affordable  and will be occupied  by, the applicant. It will be required  to 
remain affordable in perpetuity and any future re -sale shall be fixed (typically at 
80% of market value). A fuller explanation of this Policy is provided in the 
accompanying Supplementary Planning Document.  
 
3.22.  The Council will monitor how effective this policy is in delivering and 
retaining affordable homes for local people during the review period of the  Plan. 
 
Strategic Policy 9 (SP9) -  Single Plot Exceptions  
 
1. In the towns,  large,  medium  and small  villages  of the Coastal  Zone  and 
the medium  and small  villages  inland,  the Council will support  single  plot 
development for affordable housing provided it meets all of the 
following:- 
 
• the applicant  can demonstrate  they are unable  to afford  a suitable 
home currently available in the  parish;  
 
46 Adopted July 2018   • the applicant has an evidenced local connection to the  parish;  
 
• the site is in or adjoining the settlement and does not constitute 
isolated or sporadic  development;  
 
• the dwelling is affordable to the applicant and will remain 
affordable to subsequent occupiers in perpetuity.  
 
• The area of the site does not exceed 0.1ha and typically, the 
internal floor  space  of the proposed dwelling  does  not exceed  100 
sqm or 110sqm where flood risk mitigation is  required.  
 
2. The resale market value of the development will be fixed at  80%.  
 
3. Flood mitigation should be provided in areas of flood risk as per the 
advice of the Environment  Agency.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
47 Adopted July 2018   CHAPTER 4 - RAISING THE QUALITY OF OUR BUILT ENVIRONMENT 
 
Where we want to be 
 
The rich and diverse historic and cultural heritage of East Lindsey is at the heart 
of local distinctiveness and the reinvigoration of our communities . Development 
is well designed and sustainable, enhancing local distinctiveness and quality of 
life. 
 
What it will look like  
 
Places are positively shaped by the history and heritage of the local area and 
respond to the challenges of climate change through  sustainable development 
and construction.  
 
New development has taken the opportunity to improve the character and 
quality of its surroundings.  
 
The area has become better known for the quality of its built environment.  
 
Delivery Objectives (how we are goi ng to get there) 
This strategy will be delivered through the following 
The use of a place -making checklist  
Evidence  
 
Conservation  Area Appraisals for Alford,  Horncastle,  Louth,  Spilsby,  Wainfleet and 
Woodhall Spa  2012 
East Lindsey Landscape Character Appraisal 2011 
Lincolnshire Design Guide for Residential Areas 
Louth Urban Design Study  
Lincolnshire Historic Landscape Characterisation 
Neighbourhood Plans  
East Lindsey District Council Water Cycle Study 2016  
 
Design  
 
Why we have taken this approach  
 
4.1. East Lindsey  has a rich and diverse  historic  and cultural  environment.  The 
District does not have a single built character but is made up of over 200 
settlements many with their own distinct identity. The introduction to  this 
document draws out some of the cha racteristics that influence East Lindsey’s 
shape and character.  
 
4.2. The environment should be valued for its own sake and there is a 
widespread acceptance of the importance of the familiar and cherished local 
scene.  The distinctive  character  of each town and village  is a source  of local 
48 Adopted July 2018   identity  and pride,  reinforces  community  confidence,  and enhances  quality  of life 
for the residents of the District. High quality environments also play a  significant 
role in attracting  visitors  and investm ent. Where  prepared,  Town  or Village  Design 
Statements will be a material consideration in the planning  process.  
 
4.3. Good design is important in shaping the places where we live, work and 
undertake leisure activities. It is not just about buildings. Development should 
respond to the established pattern and form of development, have a sense of 
character  and include  the spaces between  buildings,  how they relate  to each other 
and the street, the different uses of buildings and how they operate, and acces s 
around and between towns and villages. Good design is also an important factor 
in protecting and managing change within the wider landscape. Development 
proposals must show how they have taken into account and respected the 
distinctive character of their  setting. Where appropriate the Council will 
encourage  developers  of major  development  to enter  into a Planning Performance 
Agreement and agree a set of principles around good design.  
 
4.4. The quality of the environment also plays an important role in the heal th 
and well -being of the population. There are many facets of public health that 
benefit from carefully designed buildings and spaces. Specialist guidance is 
available on how the general design criteria in the place making checklist can be 
utilised to help  health conditions, such as dementia and obesity, as well as more 
general health and well -being. These should be considered when putting 
development proposals together. Developers are encouraged to carry out a 
Health Impact Assessment (HIA) commensurate wi th the size and nature of the 
development  to show how they have factored  this into their proposal.  This can be 
incorporated  into the design and access  statement (where  required)  to show how 
the health needs of the community have been taken into account in drawing up 
the proposal.  
 
4.5. Dark night skies are distinctive and valued characteristics of East Lindsey 
and should be protected. Light pollution can have negative impact on local 
amenity, intrinsically dark landscapes and nature conservation. Set against thi s 
is the need to ensure  safety  and security  through the use of appropriate  lighting. 
 
4.6. Landscaping is an essential part of the overall design of development. It 
should be fully integrated into any development proposals from the outset. The 
nature of landscaping needed will vary depending on the type of development 
and the environment within which it sits. Landscaping not only helps to bed 
development into its setting, it can also create green infrastructure for the wider 
community, providing habitats for wildlife, opportunities to adapt to climate 
change and, on larger sites, recreational opportunities and health  promotion.  
 
4.7. It is particularly important that housing developments create a positive 
living environment by integrating landscaping and open space with the built 
development. The use and retention of existing landscape and natural features 
such as trees, hedges and the natural formation of the ground is supported and 
positively  encouraged in development.  Due to the diverse  nature  of East Lindse y, 
the size, location  and type of residential  development  across the district  will vary 
49 Adopted July 2018   considerably. It is important that the approach to landscaping and open space 
reflects this, incorporating space for amenity landscaping, recreation, circulation 
and Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems (SUDS) appropriate to the site. From 
this requirement, it may be difficult to isolate and measure areas of open space, 
but as a guideline,  on housing sites over 1 hectare,  the Council  will require multi-  
functional  green  space,  for example,  recreation  areas,  landscaped cycle ways and 
footpaths, wildlife  areas.  Where  possible,  it should show how it links to the wider 
community  and other areas of green  space  to create  an innovative  and integrated 
development. The Council will be guided by the Natural England's Accessible 
Natural  Greenspace  Standards  (ANGst) in assessing  the level of open space  within 
a community  and how that provided through the development  contributes  to this. 
 
4.8. Accompanying the need for good design is the need to ensure our built 
environment  plans  for the effects  of climate  change  in terms  of both sustainability 
and the way it is constructed. There are many simple design approaches, such 
as passive solar gain, grey water recyclin g and choice of materials that can be 
incorporated into the design of proposals. Flood risk mitigation may affect the 
design of development, i.e. the need to raise floor levels or have non habitable 
ground floor rooms. This however should not compromise de sign nor should it 
affect the character of an area or impact on surrounding residential amenities. 
Flood risk is covered in more detail in Strategic Policies (SP16) Inland Flood Risk 
and Chapter 10 -  Coastal East  Lindsey.  
 
4.9. Where there is a choice, developm ent sites should be selected where 
they would generate fewest car movements and be  within  comfortable  
walking  distance of essential facilities. New development should ensure that    
it creates strong walking and/or cycling routes to key services linkin g in to 
existing routes where available. The use of suitable brownfield sites within 
existing settlements should always be given priority over more distant 
greenfield sites. Agriculture continues to play a significant role in the economy 
of the District. P rotecting the best and most  versatile  agricultural  land  (that 
of grade 1, 2 and 3a) is an important part of supporting this industry. In 
selecting sites for development, the preference should be to seek to utilise lower 
grade land to that of a higher  grade. 
 
4.10. The Council will encourage communities to join in clusters to develop and 
share key services and facilities, both to take advantage of the potential 
economies of scale, to cut down on the need for longer distance travel to higher 
order settlements a nd to improve health outcomes. However, brownfield sites, if 
left undisturbed for some time, can develop biodiversity interest and an 
assessment  will be needed  to show that the biodiversity  interest  of the site is not 
so significant that it would prevent o r restrict its future redevelopment. 
Development of Brownfield Land should ensure that any risk posed to human 
health, groundwater, and surface water from pollution is appropriately assessed 
and mitigated where necessary. Assessment of Brownfield Land shou ld be done 
in accordance with the Environment Agency’s guidance document CLR11 ‘Model 
Procedures for the Management of Land Contamination’.  
 
4.11. East Lindsey lies in an area under serious water stress and this can  cause 
deterioration  for the water  environment  in both the quality  and quantity  of water. 
50 Adopted July 2018   Given this development that will unacceptably deplete water resources or pose  a 
risk to the quality of the water table and aquifers will not be supported. Neither 
will development located around water sources be supported unless it includes 
adequate measures for their protection from pollution. Groundwater Source 
Protection Zones (SPZs) are areas of groundwater where there is a particular 
sensitivity to pollution risks due to the closeness of a drinking water source and 
how the groundwater  flows. They are used to protect  abstractions  used for public 
water supply and other forms of distribution to the public such as mineral and 
bottled  water  plants, breweries  and food production plants.  Development  in these 
sensitive areas to groundwater pollution will be expected to comply with the 
Environment Agency’s guidance document ‘Groundwater Protection: Principles 
and Practice (GP3). This is to prevent any contamination of the public water 
supply  and to avoid having to deal with the consequences of water pollution. 
Development  that includes  measures  to regenerate,  recycle,  re-use or reduce  the 
demand for, finite resources will be preferred. It is considered appropriate to 
implement  the need for new development  to be designed to Building  Regulations 
water  consumption standard  for water  scarce  areas which  is 110 litres per person 
per day. 
 
4.12. The Council will segregate new development from hazardous uses. 
Development  will not be permitted  if it will pose a threat  to the hazardous  use or, 
conversely, if it could be harmed by its materials or operation. This will be a 
special consideration for proposals in the hazard protection areas of Covenham 
Reservoir and Theddlethorpe Gas Installation and in the sa feguarding zones 
around North Cotes, Binbrook and Coningsby airfields, the high- pressure gas 
pipeline network, the bombing range at Donna Nook, Conoco Oil Terminal at 
Tetney Lock, Hatton Compressor Station, Skegness Airfield and Anglian Water 
Services at  Covenham.  
 
4.13. Whilst crime is relatively low in the District, good design can assist in 
reducing the opportunity for crime. The Council will seek to ensure that all new 
development  aims to address  this issue,  without  creating  a fortress  environment, 
quality building promotes health  outcomes.  
 
4.14. To help promote  good quality  design  that is accessible  for everyone  in the 
District, all dwelling houses and any major development that does not lie within 
an existing industrial estate in the District will be encouraged  to satisfy the 
Councils place -making checklist. This traffic -light tool kit will help achieve 
consistent high quality outcomes for housing and major development across the 
District irrespective of architectural styles or tastes. It will also help the publ ic 
and others commenting on planning application to understand the principles 
behind  the proposal.  There is a guide  to using  the tool kit available  on the Councils 
website.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
51 Adopted July 2018    
PLACE MAKING CHECK LIST  Achieves 
A good  
standard of 
design  Partially 
achieves 
with 
alterations 
could 
achieve a 
high 
standard  Does not 
achieve 
Needs to 
reconsider 
(How?  
what?)  
A sense of character – Does the 
development have a sense of 
character or could it be  
anywhere?     
Streets and spaces shaped by 
development – Does the 
development help to create well - 
defined streets with active edges,  
or does it turn its back on streets 
and spaces and sit in isolation?     
Architectural quality – Is the 
building fit for purpose? Does the 
building, irrespective of style, 
relate to its surroundings?  What 
about detailing? How does the 
building look at night?     
Easy for everyone to get 
around – Are the routes into and 
through the development direct, 
safe, attractive and easy for every 
one of all abilities to use? Does 
the development design  out 
crime? What is it like after dark?     
Interesting places – If possible, 
does the development include a 
variety of uses? Has the 
opportunity been taken to create  
interesting spaces?     
Landscaping – Does the 
development include appropriate 
landscaping and green space for 
habitats and wildlife? Have 
existing landscape and natural 
features been retained and/or 
enhanced? Do the spaces link to 
the wider community and other  
green spaces?     
 
52 Adopted July 2018   Built to last for generations – 
How could the building be used if 
the current (or proposed) 
occupier leaves? Does the 
building incorporate sustainable  
features and/or renewables?     
Strategically Important Sites - 
This section only refers to those 
sites that are considered so 
important in terms of their 
location within a settlement and 
their potential impact and 
influence on the wider visual or 
historic environment within that 
settlement.  
 
These sites will be expected to 
also conform  to a design brief 
agreed at pre application.  
 
Does the site conform to the 
design brief?     
Consultation – has there been 
public consultation on the 
development? If so, what form 
did that consultation take and 
how has it influenced the design?   
 
4.15. There will be occasions when the Council consider a site so important in 
terms  of its location  within  a town or village, that it will warrant  special  attention 
with regards  to design.  These sites will have a wide reaching  impact  and influence 
on the wider visual  or historic environment of a town or village. The Council will 
wish to ensure  that any development  on such a site conforms  to an agreed  set of 
principles, unique to that  site. 
4.16. On those occasions, and in order to speed up the planning application 
process, developers will be encouraged to agree, at pre application stage in the 
planning process, a short simple site -specific design brief. This will form part of 
the normal collaborative process between the applicant and the Local Planning 
Authority. Applicants are advised to contact the Council early in the application 
process to enter into discussions regarding these sites. If there has been no pre 
application discussions, then at the earliest opportunity during the application 
determination  process,  the releva nt officer  will set out the design  parameters  the 
Council expects for the site. This should be agreed with the developer. The 
Council will support on design grounds, development that complies with that 
brief.  
 
 
 
53 Adopted July 2018   4.17. The sites this section refers to are as  follows;  
• Gateway sites into a settlement (a site which lies at the entrance to a 
settlement and is therefore the first one that is seen on entering the built 
up area along the principal routes into the  settlement).  
• All retail applications  over 0.25ha  
• Applications over 0.5ha within a designated town  centre  
• Applications on sites over  4ha 
 
4.18. There are a number of publications from the Commission for Architecture 
and the Built Environment  (CABE), which  provide  good guidance  to applicants.  In 
addition, the good practise set out in By Design –  Urban Design in the Planning 
System  Toward  Better  Practice;  Planning and Access for Disabled  People,  A Good 
Practice  Guide;  Safer  Places,  the Planning System  and Crime  prevention;  Building 
for Life; By Des ign, Better Places to Live; the Lincolnshire Residential Design 
Guide (published 1996) still contains good design principles to guide applicants. 
With regard  to the design  of streets  and highways,  the Council will look to Manual 
for Streets, its supporting and accompanying documents  and any documents  that 
supersede it, as its  guide.  
 
Strategic Policy 10 (SP10) –  Design  
 
The Council will support well-designed sustainable development, which 
maintains and enhances the character of the District’s towns, village s 
and countryside by:- 
 
1. Where possible supporting the use of brownfield land for 
development, unless it is of high environmental value, seeking to use 
areas  of poorer  quality  agricultural land in preference to that of a higher 
quality.  
 
2. The use of high quality materials and where the layout, scale, 
massing, height and density reflect the character of the surrounding 
area.  
 
3. Ensuring it is easy for everyone to get around by incorporating safe 
and attractive roads, cycleways and footways that enable people of all 
abilities to access shops, jobs, schools and other community  facilities.  
 
4. Providing on-site landscaping to integrate the development into its 
wider surroundings and make provision for open space.  
 
5. Development  will be supported if it is designed  to minimise  glare  and 
light spillage, it does not unacceptably harm the rural or dark -sky 
character  of a settlement  or landscape  or any nearby  residential amenity; 
it respects the local historic environment; and it does not unacceptably 
harm or reduce the saf ety of highways, cycleways and  footways.  
 
54 Adopted July 2018   6. The design of new and altered buildings or areas will be 
supported where they adequately take into account the safety and 
security of the users of the facilities both during the day and at night 
and that of neighbouring  residents.  
7. Development will be supported where it can demonstrate that its 
design incorporates sustainable features and/or renewables and that 
the development could be adapted in the future for other uses in that it 
is developmen t that will become a high quality integrated part of the 
built environment over many generations.  
8. Supporting development that includes measures to recycle, re -use 
or reduce the demand for finite resources. New development should be 
designed to Building Reg ulation water consumption standard for water 
scarce areas, to not exceed 110 litres per day per  person.  
 
9. Development around water sources will only be supported if it 
contains  adequate  protection  preventing  pollution from  entering  into the 
water  source.  
 
10. Development will only be supported around hazardous uses if it 
contains adequate provision to mitigate against threat from the 
hazardous use and does not conflict with that  use. 
 
11. The following developments will be supported on design grounds if 
they satisf y a site -specific design brief.  
 
• Gateway sites into a  settlement  
• All retail applications over  0.25ha  
• Applications over 0.5ha within a designated town centre  
• Applications on sites over  4ha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55 Adopted July 2018   Historic Environment  
 
Where we want to be  
 
The significance of heritage assets of East Lindsey will be key considerations in 
all relevant development. They will help shape the social, environmental and 
economic heart of our communities, add to the visitor economy and will be 
enhanced for the enjoyment of future generations.  
 
What it will look like  
 
The area has become better known for the quality of its historic environment.  
 
New development has taken the opportunity to improve the historic character 
and quality of its surroundings.  
 
Settlements will have retained their strong sense of identity and historic 
character.  
 
The condition of heritage assets ‘at- risk’ has been improved and their 
sustainable future secured.  
 
Delivery Objectives (how we are going to get there)  
This strategy will be delivered through the following 
The use of a place -making checklist  
Economic Development Strategy and Local regeneration schemes  
Appropriate  and positive  use of planning  tools and statutory  powers  including  (but 
not limited to) s106 agreements, Article 4 Directions and enforcement powers.  
 
Evidence  
 
Conservation  Area Appraisals for Alford,  Horncastle,  Louth,  Spilsby,  Wainfleet  and 
Woodhall Spa and future appraisals as and when they are produced and/or 
reviewed.  
Lincolnshire Historic E nvironment Records 
Lincolnshire Heritage at Risk Survey 
Lincolnshire Design Guide for Residential Areas 
Louth Urban Design Study  
Lincolnshire Historic Landscape Characterisation 
Manual for Historic Streets  
Parish Plans  
Village Design Statements 
Neighbourho od Plans  
Heritage Assessments submitted as part of the planning process 
Conservation Management Plans  
 
 
 
56 Adopted July 2018   4.19. The rich architectural heritage of East Lindsey is an important part of its 
diversity and its character. At the time of writing, there were 17 Conservation 
Areas in the District; Character Appraisals have been prepared for six of these. 
These Appraisals should be considered when drawing up any development 
proposals  within  these  areas.  There are currently  over 1400 listed  buildings,  along 
with over 150 Scheduled Ancient Monuments, all of which contribute to the 
historic context of the towns, villages and countryside of East Lindsey.  
 
4.20. The District’s historic environment not only contributes to its character, 
social, environmental and c ultural value but also adds significant benefits to its 
economic  value  in the form of tourism  to its vibrant market  towns  and the historic 
landscapes of the Lincolnshire Wolds AONB and open coast. The cumulative 
visual impact  of development  on the historic  environment  can have a detrimental 
effect and the Council will guard against such effects on the significance of any 
heritage  asset.  
 
4.21. Designation as a Conservation Area does not commit an area to a fixed 
point in time but rather  it identifies  opportunitie s for the management  of change. 
Conservation Areas are intended to not only protect individual buildings but also 
to conserve and enhance the general character and appearance of an area. 
Building uses, local materials and the way they are used, the appeara nce, scale 
and form of buildings, the pattern of development, street furniture, surfacing, 
and spaces between  buildings,  trees,  green  space  and traffic  impact  are all factors 
that influence the appearance, quality and character of a Conservation Area. 
Similarly, Conservation Areas cannot be divorced from their surroundings and 
development adjoining a Conservation Area can have an impact on its  setting.  
 
4.22. Heritage assets encompass many different features within the historic 
environment; these include buil dings, gardens, landscapes, buried remains. The 
Historic  Environment  Record  (HER) for Lincolnshire  is held by Lincolnshire  County 
Council and provides comprehensive information on all known heritage assets, 
whether designated or not. The HER is a dynamic r esource, which is updated 
regularly with information from a wide variety of sources, including field work. 
The HER can be accessed  by anyone  with interest in the historic  environment  and 
is a valuable source of information for anyone considering submitting a planning 
application.  
 
4.23. National planning guidance recognises that there may be buildings and 
sites within  a local planning  authority’s  area that are not designated but still make 
a contribution to local character due their heritage value. These are referred to 
as non -designated heritage assets. Such assets can be building, monuments, 
sites, places, areas or landscapes. Sites will be assessed considering their 1. 
Historic Interest - reflecting a link to important events or people, or historic use 
of a site; 2. Archaeological Interest  – which  may include  structures  or may relate 
to buried remains or other features such as ridge and furrow; or 3. Architectural 
Interest – where the design, construction or craftsmanship helps to reinforce a 
particular type  of architecture or local character. In respect of Archaeological 
Interest, the Council will seek advice from Lincolnshire County Council’s Historic 
Environment  Team  the National planning guidance  states  that Local Planning 
57 Adopted July 2018   Authorities  may identify  non-designated heritage  assets and the Council  feels that 
the value of these buildings, structures and areas should be recognised. The 
Council  will identify  these  non-designated heritage  assets from a range  of sources 
including neighbourhood plans, parish plans, village design statements and 
planning applications. These will be made available on the Council’s website and 
mapped on the Council’s  in-house  digital  mapping system,  so that the information 
relating to them is available to be used when assessing development proposals. 
Information relating to these non -designated heritage assets will be passed to 
the HER. 
 
4.24. Empty buildings are a wasted asset and carefully conserved old buildings 
can help to revitalise run -down areas, creating more hom es, job opportunities 
and a better  living  environment.  Heritage -led schemes  for regenerating buildings, 
and areas of our towns and villages, can breathe new life into communities, 
finding appropriate new uses for buildings and enhancing the appearance of t he 
public realm. The historic environment also contributes to sustainable 
development with traditional materials such as timber, thatch and  lime. 
 
4.25. There are some heritage assets in the District which are at risk. 
Redevelopment or enabling development which does not harm the asset could 
assist these endangered assets back into productive use and conserve them for 
future generations to enjoy. Such development will be supported, particularly 
where a use would benefit the wider  community  
 
4.26. To ensure that a flexi ble approach is taken with regard to development  in 
the District’s  historic  built environment,  the Council  will support  development  that 
sustains and enhances  the quality  of the District’s  historic  built environment.  The 
architectural and historic significance of a structure should always be carefully 
considered before any alterations are made. Conservation of any Listed Building 
is always the priority. Where the new use will breathe life into a building and its 
surroundings  and having special  regar d to its significance, the Council  will support 
proposals.  
 
4.27. The District has distinctive historic town and village centres with well-  
preserved  traditional shop fronts.  This adds to the visitor  attraction, supports  the 
local economy and makes a positive contribution to the sustainable economic 
viability of these settlements. Where possible these shop fronts should be 
repaired and retained, where it can be clearly evidenced that this cannot be 
achieved  the Council  will support  proposals  to replace  or alter them including  new 
signage  providing  the historic  integrity  of the heritage  asset  is not compromised.  
 
4.28. Archaeological remains are a finite and non -renewable resource, often 
highly fragile and vulnerable to damage. They are part of our national identity 
and are valuable for their role in education, leisure and tourism. The Council will 
not support development that has a harmful impact on Scheduled Monuments 
(SMs) or their settings. In accordance  with the NPPF,  information  on the heritage 
significance of a site should be supplied with all planning applications to enable 
assessment of the impact of development on historic assets. Dependant on the 
assessed  impact, there  may be a requirement  to undertake  pre-determination  
58 Adopted July 2018   evaluation in orde r that an appropriate mitigation strategy can be incorporated 
in the development. This might include preservation in situ or preservation by 
record dependant on the work being proposed and the significance of any  assets 
affected. Consultation with Lincolns hire County Council's planning archaeologists 
is advised.  
 
4.29. The historic landscape and woodland of the District is considered an 
important asset. In the District there are 6 Registered Parks and Gardens and 1 
Registered Battlefield at Winceby  which retains its original features and 
landforms.  The Lincolnshire  Wolds  Area of Outstanding  Natural  Beauty  lies within 
the District with its unique landscape and character. All these are a major asset 
in creating  varied  and attractive  landscapes  set in their own historic  context. The 
Council will support development which preserves and enhances the quality of 
the historic landscapes of the District. The Council will be guided by the 
Lincolnshire Historic Landscape  Characterisation.  
 
4.30. The Council will supp ort those communities who wish to alter or promote 
Article 4 Directions or Conservation Areas in their settlement. The Council will 
look for opportunities to improve the historic environment through public realm 
works and if possible Section 106 agreements  and take a positive role in the 
enforcement of unauthorised works to heritage assets where those works 
compromise the significance of those assets or their  setting.  
 
Strategic Policy 11 (SP11) –  Historic Environment  
 
1. The Council will support proposals tha t secure the continued 
protection and enhancement of heritage assets in East Lindsey, 
contribute to the wider vitality and regeneration of the areas in which 
they are located and reinforce a strong sense of place.  
 
2. Proposals will be supported where  they:  
 
• Preserve or enhance heritage assets and their  setting; 
• Preserve or enhance the special character, appearance and setting 
of the District’s Conservation Areas. Proposals should take into 
account the significance of Conservation Areas including spaces, 
street patterns, views vistas and natural features, and reflect this 
in their layout, scale, design, detailing, and  materials;  
 
• Have particular regard to the special architectural or historic 
interest and setting of the District’s Listed Buildings. Proposals 
will be expected to demonstrate that they are compatible with the 
significance of a listed building including fabric, form, setting and 
use; 
 
• Do not harm the site or setting of a Scheduled Monument; any 
unscheduled nationally important or locally  significa nt 
59 Adopted July 2018   archaeological site. Appropriate evaluation, recording or 
preservation in situ is required and should be undertaken by a 
suitably qualified party;  
 
• Preserve or enhance the quality and experience of the historic 
landscapes and woodla nd of the District and their  setting;  
 
• Are compatible with the significance of non-designated heritage 
assets in East  Lindsey;  
 
• Do not have a harmful cumulative impact on heritage  assets;  
• Promote a sustainable and viable use which is compatible with the 
fabric, interior, surroundings and setting of the heritage asset, 
and; 
 
• Conserve heritage assets identified as being at risk, ensuring the 
optimum viable use of an asset is secured where it is consistent 
with the significance of the heritage asset. This ma y include 
redevelopment or enabling development, particularly where a use 
would benefit the  wider.  
 
3. The Council will support proposals for replacement shop fronts or 
alterations to shop fronts, including new signage, affecting heritage 
assets where it can be evidenced that retention and repair cannot be 
achieved and providing the materials and design protect and enhance 
the special interest of the building and its setting. Retention and repair 
of shop fronts will normally be expected where these contribute to the 
significance of a heritage  asset.  
 
Definition of Heritage Assets  
 
Designated heritage assets in East Lindsey are;  
 
Listed buildings (including attached and curtilage structures) 
Conservation Areas  
Scheduled Monuments 
Registered Battlefields 
Registered parks and gardens  
Non-Designated heritage assets in East Lindsey are; 
Buildings of local interest  
Sites of archaeological interest  
Unregistered parks and gardens and other landscape features 
Buildings, monument, place, areas or landscapes positively identified as 
having significance in terms of the historic environment as identified in 
the Lincolnshire Historic Environment Record or through 
Neighbourhood Plans and the development management  process.  
60 Adopted July 2018   CHAPTER 5 –  GYPSIES,  TRAVELLERS AND SHOWPEOPLE 
 
Where we want to be 
 
The Council will know what the need for Gypsy, Traveller and Showpeoples sites 
is and work toward meeting that need so that the travelling community and 
settled community can live in harmony with each other.  
 
What it will look like  
 
Gypsies, Travellers and Showpeoples sites will be located in suitable places, 
accessible to services and facilities to meet the identified need. 
 
Delivery Objectives (how we are going to get there) 
This strategy will be delivered through the following 
Settlement Proposals Development Plan Document  
 
Evidence  
 
Lincolnshire Coastal Study  
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 2016 
Landscape Character Assessment 2011 
Gypsy and Traveller Needs Assessment 2012  
Update to the Gypsy and Traveller Needs Assessment 2016 
 
Gypsies, Travellers and Showpeople  
 
Why have we taken this approach  
 
5.1. Although the permanent site provision is not a significant issue locally, 
there is an issue with the provision of transit pitches in the coastal area of the 
district and there is a national shortfall in permanent accommodation provision 
for Gypsies, Travel lers and Showpeople. The Council has a duty to ensure that 
the local evidence for such accommodation is not only kept up to date but also 
that there is a pathway to delivery of any local shortfall identified. The Council`s 
2016 Updated Gypsy  and Traveller  Accommodation  Assessment  (GTAA) identified 
the following needs for the period 2016 to  2028;  
 
• 20 stopping/transit pitches  
• 13 permanent  pitches. 
• 2 residential plots for Show and Circus People2 
 
 
2 A pitch means a pitch on a Gy psy and Traveller site and provides an individually serviced household unit with an 
amenity building and sufficient parking space for up to three caravans and support vehicles. A plot (often called a “yard”) 
usually takes into account space for the storage of the equipment Travelling Show and Circus People need.  
61 Adopted July 2018   5.2. The Council aims to allocate sites in the Settlement Proposals Document 
to meet the above needs within the first five years of the life of this plan. The 
Assessment did not identify a need beyond the first five years but the Council 
acknowledges that it must ensure that there is continuous delivery of sites if 
further need arises and when the Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation 
Assessment is reviewed. To ensure that the evidenc e continues to be robust in 
regard to Gypsies and Traveller provision, the Council will carry out by the time 
the review of the Local Plan is submitted for examination a further Gypsy and 
Traveller Accommodation Assessment and any further provision will be  included 
in that  review.  
 
Stopping/Transit Pitches  
 
5.3. The GTAA 2016 recommends that the Council should provide 20 
stopping/transit  pitches  the broad  locations  of which  should be in the coastal  area 
of the  District.  
 
Travelling Show and Circus People and Permanent Gypsy and Traveller 
Pitches  
 
5.4. Because of the low number of permanent pitches and residential plots for 
Show  and Circus  people  required and the very specific  requirements  set out in the 
GTAA, these pitches and plots should be provided firstly in th e locations as per 
the GTAA or any subsequent assessment and secondly in any suitable inland 
location where there is an evidence of need and in accordance with the criteria 
set out in this  policy. 
 
5.5. Through the Settlement Pattern, the Council has identified towns, and 
large villages  as the locations  best able to ensure  access to services and facilities. 
To ensure  that the Travelling  Community  has access to these  facilities  the Council 
will support  new Gypsy  and Traveller  sites and sites for Travelling  Show  and Circus 
People  that are adjacent  to or in reasonable  proximity  to these  settlements. Many 
of the Districts settlements pedestrian pavements end at the edge of the 
settlement, this could preclude many suitable sites so the Council will support 
proposals where it is demonstrated that they have safe access to the nearest 
town, or large settlement with pedestrians and vehicles being segregated or be 
accessible by public transport.  
 
5.6. Medium villages have less services and facilities than towns and large 
villages but some do offer a limited range of services. The Council will therefore 
support new sites in reasonable proximity to medium villages or in medium 
villages but given the smaller character of these villages, these sites should be 
small scale, no more th an 3 pitches or plots and even with an extension should 
not exceed  this. 
 
5.7. The Council  recognises  that in general  culturally  Travelling  families  live and 
travel together in their extended family units and therefore where there are 
existing permanent sites w ith permission, including any new provision in the 
future,  the Council  will support  their extension  providing  it is for an identified  
62 Adopted July 2018   existing family need that stems from the site, this will allow a family to stay and 
grow together.  
 
5.8. The Council recognises that like the settled community Travelling families 
have visitors of family and friends to their sites, it is important therefore to 
consider this in the layout of extensions and new sites and to support it. This will 
also assist in reducing the amount of unauthorised stopping.  
 
5.9. The Council recognises that the Travelling Community often work from 
their sites and will support this providing it can be shown that the use can be 
accommodated on the site without harming either the characte r of the area or 
the amenities of those living on the site or around the  site. 
 
5.10.  With regard  to Travelling  Showpeople,  their sites are very often for winter 
quarters, but this means that those that cannot travel anymore because of age, 
infirmity or because they are at school have to leave for periods of time. 
Therefore the Council will support permanent occupancy of Showman’s sites 
unless they are in high flood risk. 
 
5.11.  The Council  will try to facilitate  and support  delivery  of the evidenced  need 
for sites from all available sources including delivery from private landowners as 
well as the public sector. The Council will consider utilising commuted sums as 
set out in the Affordable Housing policy to further delivery of sites and will seek 
Government grant funding where  appropriate.  
 
5.12.  To foster relationship building with the Travelling Community, the Council 
acknowledge that the experts in how sites should be set out are the Community 
itself and will actively support and encourage the Community to work with them 
with regard  to the design  and layout  of sites; because  ownership and participation 
in the early stages of development proposals is one of the keys to acceptance, 
good relationships and community  cohesion.  
 
5.13.  The Council will use the following criteria, in order to provide a basis for 
decision making. The criteria will also be used to identify sites in the Settlement 
Proposals Development Plan document.  
 
Strategic Policy 12 (SP12) –  Gypsies, Travellers and Showpeople  
 
1. The Council will support new permanent Gypsy and Traveller sites 
and sites for Travelling Showpeople adjacent to or in reasonable 
proximity to a town or large  village.  
 
Sites should:  
 
• Demonstrate that there is safe access to the nearest town, or large 
settlements amenities by means of pedestrians and vehicles being 
segregated or be accessible by public  transport;  
• Have safe transport access to the principal road  network;  
 
 
63 Adopted July 2018   • Be provided with on -site services for the provision of water, power, 
drainage, sewage disposal and refuse/waste  disposal;  
• Be appropriate in scale and form to its surroundings and be capable 
of being integrated into their surroundings without causing 
unacceptable harm to the character, appearance and amenities of 
the area;  and 
• Not be located in an area of flood  risk. 
 
2. The Council will support new permanent Gypsy and Traveller sites 
and sites for Travelling Showpeople in or in reasonable proximity to 
medium villages providing they meet the above criteria but they should  
be small scale with no more than 3 pitches or  plots.  
 
3. If the site is to include an employment use, then it must be shown 
that the use can be accommodated on the site without causing 
unacceptable  harm.  
 
4. The Council will support the extension to existing sites with 
permission providing it is linked to an identified need on the parent 
site. In the medium villages any extension should not result in the total 
number of pitches or plots on the site exceeding  three.  
 
5. The Council will support areas set aside on sites for  visitors.  
 
6. On Travelling Showpeoples sites the Council will support a 
permanent occupancy except in areas of high flood  risk. 
 
7. The Council will support transit or temporary stopping Gypsy and 
Traveller sites and sites for Travelling Showpeople in  reasonable 
proximity to the nearest town, large or medium settlements in areas of 
flood risk in accordance with the above criteria and provided they are 
only occupied between the 15th March and 31st October in any one year, 
or the following Sunday, if the  31st does not fall on a  Sunday.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
64 Adopted July 2018   CHAPTER 6 –  EMPLOYMENT  
 
Where we want to be 
 
A strong and diverse economy built on the strengths of its traditional industries 
but also supporting new economic opportunities.  
 
Growing employment sites in and alongside towns and large villages.  
 
A rural economy that is diverse and contributes to sustaining villages or networks 
of villages.  
 
A skilled workforce that is able to meet the needs of an expanding economy, in a 
District that has good access to modern communications.  
 
What it will look like  
 
Most employment will be located in the larger centres of population to benefit 
from the economies of scale and reduce the need for excessive travel.  
 
Smaller settlements will provide hubs for local business where they can provide 
local employment at an appropriate scale and help support local services.  
 
Delivery Objectives (how we are going to get there) 
This strategy will be delivered through the following  
East Lindsey Economic Develo pment Strategy 2006 -  2020 
East Lindsey Economic Action Plan  
Greater Lincolnshire Local Enterprise Partnership –  Strategic Economic Plan 2016 
Settlement Proposals Development Proposals Document 2016 -  2031 
 
Evidence  
 
Greater Lincolnshire Local Enterprise P artnership – Strategic Economic Plan 2016 
Employment Sites Review 2016  
Lindsey Action Zone  
East Lindsey Retail & Leisure Studies 
East Lindsey Economic Baseline 2016  
 
Employment  
 
Why we have taken this approach  
 
6.1. East Lindsey is a large, sparsely populated, rural area. The economy is 
founded on agriculture  and tourism  supported by a network  of market  and coastal 
towns that provide the main focus for economic, commercial and retail activity. 
The majority  of businesses  employ  10 or fewer  people  and provide  support  to key 
sector activity as well as servicing the wider  economy.  
 
65 Adopted July 2018   6.2. Small businesses dominate the rural economy with nearly 90% of 
agricultural enterprises employing 5 or fewer people. Both the agricultural and 
the tourism  sectors are characterised  by low earnings  and the district has amongst 
the lowest incomes in the East  Midlands.  
 
6.3. As part of the objective of maintaining a sustainable approach to 
development, future strategic economic growth will continue to be guided into 
the centres of higher population to benefit from the economies of scale and 
reduce the need for excessive travel. We will respond positively to any 
opportunity to attract businesses that can contribute significantly to, and help 
diversify the District's  econom y. 
 
6.4. The mainstay  of the Council’s  strategy  for economic  development  has been 
to develop, along with partners, employment sites to support growth. Located 
alongside the larger settlements they provide space for new and existing firms  to 
develop  and grow on sites with good access to the road network  and local centres 
of population.  These locations  also provide  the potential to enhance  opportunities 
to develop business clusters, and to provide business centres and step- up units 
identified as mechanisms for delivering a stronger  economy.  
 
6.5. The Council  has established  the need for inland  employment  totalling  of 24 
ha of additional land for employment  through its Employment  Sites Review  2016. 
It has used a trend based calculation and also looked at the Council`s  2016 
Economic Baseline Study, consulted with the Council`s Estates Section which 
monitors and manages the land owned by the Council for employment and has 
provided information  on market  signals.  1ha of this land will be required at Alford, 
and this will b e allocated through the Alford Neighbourhood Development Plan 
who will provide their own employment land policy. In other settlements specific 
sites will be identified in the Settlement Proposals Document which will also 
identify existing employment land to be safeguarded for employment  purposes.  
 
6.6. It is important  that the District remains  flexible  with regard  to employment 
land, being supportive if positive opportunities come forward. The employment 
land allocations for each of the towns are set out  below. 
 
• Alford – An allocation will be made of 1  ha. 
 
• Coningsby/Tattershall – An allocation will be made of 1 ha to the south of 
the existing industrial estate.  
 
• Horncastle  – An allocation  will be made  of 5 ha, to the south of the existing 
industrial estate. The Council recognises that there is an issue with the 
highway infrastructure in Horncastle which may preclude this allocation 
coming  forward  during the Plan period.  The Council  therefore  proposes  that 
there should be a fall -back position taken and will bring forward an 
additional 5 hectares of employment land in  Louth.  
 
• Louth  – There are 9 ha of land to the west of the A16 which  has the benefit 
of planning permission. This land will be allocated to ensure that there  is 
66 Adopted July 2018   sufficient capacity to meet the anticipated short to medium term need. In 
addition  it is proposed  that the 5 ha of land to the north  of Fairfield  Industrial 
Estate is identified as the proposed future direction of growth and the 
Council will support this land coming forward to meet any deficiency 
identified by future  reviews.  
 
• Spilsby – An allocation will be made of 3.0  ha. 
 
6.7. The areas of land which are already employment use within the existing 
industrial estates  in the District should  also be safeguarded for employment  uses. 
In order to provide space for traditional industrial estate type activities, on both 
the allocated  sites and existing  employment  sites,  the uses will be predominantly 
B1, B2 and B8. In Louth however, the industrial estate does already incorporate 
other  uses such as leisure  and business/offices, which  would normally  be situated 
in the town centre. However, these are larger sites which because of their size, 
and the compact and historic nature and layout of Louth town centre, have 
gravitated onto the indus trial estate. The Council would wish to continue to be 
flexible in its approach to assessing these sites in order to protect the historic 
character  of the town centre,  while providing  opportunity  for such uses within  the 
town.  
 
6.8. Whilst there are allocations  for employment land in the towns, the  Council 
also recognises that the large villages have services and facilities which support 
growth. The Council will therefore support sites coming forward for employment 
use within the large  villages.  
 
6.9. Any new additional employment land should be located so that it easily 
connects  to the road network  and is intergraded into its setting  in terms  of layout 
and landscaping.  
 
6.10.  In addition to ensuring that adequate space is available to meet future 
need on industrial estates the Council will support the expansion of existing 
businesses  and also seek to remove  the impediments  to development  through the 
introduction of Local Development Orders and encourage community initiatives 
such as Neighbourhood Development Orders, as a means of easing the controls 
on local  enterprise.  
 
6.11.  The Economic  Baseline  2016 study  of the District identifies  remoteness  and 
under -representation of knowledge intensive based industries as a weakness in 
the local economy. Improving accessibility and communications by making 
greater use of information technology provides opportunities to redress that 
imbalance, and we also aim to market the high quality of life and working 
conditions in the District, to attract and nurture new business  enterprises.  
 
6.12.  Low skill levels are identified as a potential drawback to building a  diverse 
economy. The Council will seek to raise skill levels by working with developers, 
higher education and further education providers to ensure that education 
opportunities such as wor k place apprenticeships are maximised on employment 
sites and in association with new  developments.  
 
67 Adopted July 2018   6.13.  The Council does not wish to introduce inappropriate or large -scale uses 
into unsustainable or sensitive locations in the countryside or the small hamlets 
where  they will detract  from the high quality  landscape  of the Lincolnshire  Wolds 
AONB and rural character of the District. However, because a large proportion  of 
the District is rural in nature, opportunities to create employment and build on 
agriculture and tourism, at an appropriate scale and which do not harm the 
character of an area, will be actively encouraged in the large, medium and small 
villages where they can provide local  employment.  
 
6.14.  We will particularly support initiatives  that re -use existing buildings in the 
villages  for business  uses,  and bring about  environmental  improvements.  Re-use 
in these  cases will need to be appropriate  and sensitive  particularly  if the buildings 
are considered a heritage asset and should avoid ha rming the buildings’ 
significance and provided it does not impact on protected species such as bats 
and owls. 
 
6.15.  To ensure the long- term viability of farm holdings we will support 
additional  uses. These  additional  uses should be subordinate  to the farm use and 
should not jeopardise the future operation of the  farm.  
 
6.16.  The forecast increase in the use of new communication technologies and 
changing work patterns will result in opportunities for an increase in remote 
working and the likely growth in home working.  The Council is supporting the 
County Council in assisting with funding for broadband in the District and will 
support businesses in all the named settlements that take advantages of these 
working practices including mixed -use development (shared 
employment/residential development).  
 
6.17.  Employment on the coast is covered further under Strategic Policy 21 
(SP21) Coastal East Lindsey and these two policies should be read in conjunction 
with each other when considering economic  development.  
 
6.18.  The Council  will review  the requirement  for employment  land in the review 
of the Local Plan and will, at that time, take a holistic approach to the evidence 
base. This will include looking at trends and combining this with market signals 
and intelligence, consultation and public information, evidence of oversupply or 
market failure. This will be part of the review of the Local Plan to be submitted 
by April 2022 and if additional employment land is required or is needed to be 
taken out of the Plan it will be considered at th at time. 
 
Strategic Policy 13 (SP13) –  Inland Employment  
 
The Council will support growth and diversification of the local economy 
by: 
 
1. Building on the role of the inland towns as the focus for business 
development  by identifying  and protecting  additional land for 
 
 
68 Adopted July 2018   employment uses B1, B2 and B8. The following will be allocated in the 
Settlement Proposals DPD and Alford Neighbourhood Development  Plan: 
 
• Alford – 1 hectare  
• Coningsby/Tattershall - 1 hectare  
• Horncastle – 5 hectares  
• Spilsby  – 3 hectares  
• Louth –14 hectares  
 
2. The existing employment sites will be identified in the Settlement 
proposals DPD and will be safeguarded for employment purposes. 
Development will be supported for B1, B2 and B8  uses.  
3. On the Louth industrial estate  the Council will firstly  support  uses for 
B1, B2 and B8. The Council will also support uses for leisure, 
business/office and retail providing it complies with all of the following 
criteria; 
• It can be demonstrated that no suitable alternative site is available 
for the use within the town centre or edge of centre or nearer the 
town centre than the site  proposed.  
• It can be demonstrated that the site has been actively marketed for 
a B1, B2 or B8 use for a period of no less than 12  months.  
• Retail will be supported p roviding development also conforms to the 
criteria set out in Strategic Policy SP14 of this  Plan.  
 
4. Supporting proposals which bring forward employment land in or 
adjoining the large villages across the  District.  
 
5. Supporting new employment land elsewhere where it is in or 
adjoining a settlement or is an extension to an existing employment use 
and can be easily connected to the road network and is integrated into 
its setting in terms of layout and  landscaping.  
 
6. Strengthening  the rural  economy  by supporting  in the large,  medium 
and small  villages: 
 
• Development where it can provide local employment.  
 
• The re -use of buildings for rural business.  
 
7. Supporting  farm  diversification schemes  where they are subordinate 
to the farm use and do not jeopardise the farm  business.  
 
8. Supporting businesses in all the named settlements as set out in 
Policy  SP1, (including  homes  based  activities)  that operate  primarily,  but 
not exclusively, through electronic  communication.  
 
 
 
69 Adopted July 2018   CHAPTER 7 –  DIVERSE ECONOMY, TOWN/VILLAGE CENTRES & 
SHOPPING  
 
Where we want to be 
 
The District`s town and village centres will be healthy, vibrant, and viable and 
will have a rich variety of shops and services to draw people in from the whole 
catchment  area. They will include  a variety  of multiple  and independent  retailers. 
 
Town  and village  centres  are easily  accessible  with safe and convenient  car parks. 
Shopping will be set within a high quality and attractive built environment and 
public  realm.  
 
Essential community facilities  and services in the towns and villages are both 
protected and enhanced.  
 
Smaller rural settlements will continue to provide facilities and services.  
 
What it will look like  
 
New development in all the towns will have widened the range of shopping, 
busines s, cultural, health  and leisure  facilities. This will complement  and enhance 
the unique character of the District’s historic market towns, assist in the viability 
and vibrancy  of the District’s  coastal  towns, yet still provide  a wide choice  of shops 
and services.  
 
A range of accessible key services and facilities will serve all key settlements in 
the Settlement Pattern. 
 
The loss of key community essential services and facilities would have been 
minimised.  
 
Delivery Objectives (how we are going to get there) 
This strategy will be delivered through the following:-  
East Lindsey Economic Development Strategy 2006 -  2020 
East Lindsey Economic Action Plan  
Greater Lincolnshire Local Enterprise Partnership –  Strategic Economic Plan 201 6 
Settlement Proposals Development Plan Document 2016 -  2031 
Neighbourhood Development Plans  
 
Evidence  
 
Lincolnshire Coastal Study  
Alford, Louth & Horncastle Retail Study 2012 & Update 2014 
Lindsey Action Zone  
East Lindsey Town Centre Quarterly Review 
East Lindsey Retail & Leisure Study 2008  
 
70 Adopted July 2018   East Lindsey Economic Baseline Study 2016 
Small Coastal Towns Benchmarking Study 2011  
 
Town/Village Centres and Shopping  
 
Why we have taken this approach  
 
7.1. East Lindsey’s towns have developed from their historic role, as market 
towns  serving  an economy  based  on agriculture, into more complex  business  and 
community centres, including the tourism based coastal towns. Their vitality and 
viability  is underpinned by the weekly,  open markets  and high quality independent 
shops and they continue to provide the focal point for community life as they 
change to adopt new patterns of retailing and social (including online)  activity.  
 
7.2. It is important that the town centres in Alford, Horncastle, Louth, 
Mablethorpe, Skegness and Spilsby are clearly defined on the Settlement 
Proposals Map to provide a clear structure for those wanting to invest in them. 
These areas will be based on readily  defined areas where a mix of retail, social 
and commercial uses  predominates.  
 
7.3. The two coastal towns of Skegness and Mablethorpe are primary retail 
destinations but also provide for tourist and leisure activities that require a 
different  approach to respo nd to potentially  conflicting  demands.  To that end, the 
Plan aims to maintain the integrity of primary shopping frontages for retail 
usesbut will support amusements in the defined coastal amusement areas as 
shown in the Settlement Proposals Document. The a pproach to amusements, 
foreshore and holiday accommodation in the coastal towns are dealt with in the 
Coastal East Lindsey  Policy.  
 
7.4. Typically, the inland towns do not have the population mass needed to 
support a large retail business base, and all lose expenditure to larger, nearby 
centres such as Lincoln, Boston and Grimsby. As retail studies have shown this 
varies between centres and is reflected in their viability and vitality. Whilst the 
larger, inland towns of Louth and Horncastle have retained a relat ively high 
proportion of small, independent retailers and have low vacancy rates, with 
supermarkets  of between  1250 and 1400 sqm in Louth  (3 stores)  and one of 1000 
sqm net (Horncastle); Alford  and Spilsby  have fewer  shops,  smaller  supermarkets 
(between 750 and 1000 sqm gross) and fluctuating vacancy  levels.  
 
7.5. Importantly, the viability and vitality of our market towns is a product of 
the balance  between  the blend  of shops,  open markets,  their traditional character, 
ambience  and compa ct size and, in the case of smaller  centres  such as Alford  the 
proximity of large ‘superstores’ in nearby higher order centres. Collectively, they 
create the quality that makes the towns attractive to shoppers and visitors  alike. 
 
7.6. Where possible the Council will expect all new major retail uses to locate 
in or alongside the primary shopping areas where they can contribute to the 
vitality and viability of the town centre. Where, due to their size, proposals for 
food-stores are incapable of being locate d in a town centre, proposals will need 
to show how they have followed a sequential approach to site  selection.  
71 Adopted July 2018   7.7. Based  on the findings  of the Retail & Economic  Assessment  Update  (2014) 
the need for further convenience retail floor space  within Louth has been met up 
to 2018. Alford has a need for 1000 sqm net floor space by  2018.  
 
7.8. By 2028 capacity for convenience and comparison floor space is expected 
to increase in line with the figures shown in the table  below. 
 
Location  Convenience flo or space  Comparison floor space  
Louth  691 sq. m net  3719 sq. m net  
Horncastle  377 sq. m net  1163 sq. m net  
Alford  1209 sq. m net  684 sq. m net  
 
7.9. Given the small size of the Districts towns and their fragile retail economy 
as evidenced in the Retail and Economic Assessment Update 2014, it is felt 
necessary that proposals involving an edge of or out of centre location will need 
to show how they have met the sequential test to show there  are no other  suitable 
sites nearer or in the centres. With regard to i mpact assessments the same 
economic fragility of the Districts town centres means that it is important to 
ensure  that proposals  for convenience  and comparison  retail proposals  over 1000 
sq. m net have no adverse impact. Over and above the impact test  requirements 
set out in paragraph 26 of the NPPF, as part of any impact assessment such 
proposals will also require evidence to show that they are accessible to, and well 
connected to the centre and that they will generate the linked trips necessary to 
ensure the future viability and vitality of the town. The design of such schemes 
should also ensure  that they are connected to the town centre  in that they should 
not turn their back on the town centre,  should  be an integral part of the character 
of the stree t scene, incorporating parking so that it does not dominate the street 
scene.  
 
7.10.  Most of our town centres are characterised by their compact nature -  a 
legacy of being built on historic road patterns and traditional building styles. As 
well as contributing to their attraction, their physical form constrains the options 
for development and the design of new development will be required to respect 
those  qualities.  
 
7.11.  The Settlement Proposals document will show the extent of the town 
centres  and the Primary  Shopping Area as defined  by primary  shopping frontages. 
In the primary shopping frontages, retaining the predominance of Class A1 retail 
is considered most important  to maintaining  the attractiveness  of the town centre. 
Most have already been diluted by th e introduction of cafes, pubs and offices 
which are part and parcel of the town centre offer. The policy aims to retain a 
strong retail core and provide an appropriate mix of uses that reflects the 
characteristics of each centre.  The exception  to this will be Coningsby/Tattershall. 
These two settlements though forming a single urban unit have their own 
individual  centres  which  in themselves  do not operate  like a town,  in that they do 
not have the level of shops  and facilities  as individuals  that you would  find in what 
is classed  as a town.  They do not operate  within  a clearly  defined single  town 
72 Adopted July 2018   centre  and therefore in the Plan do not have a town centre boundary. Therefore 
the town centre aspects of this policy do not apply to this settlement and clause 
10 of this policy will apply. The Council will monitor the impact of this over the 
review period of t he Plan and if there appears to be an impact on the town the 
Council will reassess whether the town requires a town centre boundary.  
 
7.12.  Where units lie vacant for a considerable time, despite the best 
endeavours of agents to re -let or sell them for retail us e, and it is considered 
better for the health of the town centre as a whole than for the unit to remain 
empty  for a further  and indeterminate  period;  the Council  will consider  alternative 
uses. 
 
7.13.  The continued success of the town and village centres will al so depend on 
maintaining  and improving  the environment,  the public  realm  and accessibility.  In 
particular the Council will look to enhance the distinct, historic environment and 
heritage assets, by ensuring all schemes deliver high quality design in town and 
village centres as set out in Chapter 4 –  Raising the Quality of our Built 
Environment and the Place Making checklist.  
 
7.14.  In order to protect employment land for their primary industrial uses of 
B1, B2 and B8, retail uses will not be supported unless the re are exceptional  and 
justified  reasons for doing  so and it can be shown  that the viability  and vitality  of 
nearby centres will not be undermined as a result. Employment land where  retail 
will be supported, will be subject to the criteria set out in Strategic Policy SP13 
and in this policy. This particularly applies to Louth which historically has 
supported more retail uses as part of the overall use of the employment land in 
that settlement.  
 
7.15.  Encouraging and protecting the vibrancy and vitality of the coastal towns 
is considered an important priority for the Council. In the coastal towns the 
Council has always sought to distinguish between tourism based businesses and 
traditional town centre  activities  by the identification  of discrete  zones.  The zoning  
approach will be maintained through the Settlement Proposals DPD. Coastal 
amusements are a popular attraction but, left unchecked, they can spread into 
shopping areas and impact on the cohesiveness, vitality and viability of the town 
centre. National Plan ning Policy has a strong focus on protecting the vitality and 
viability  of town centres,  which  supports  the desire  to see the role and function  of 
town centres  protected.  
 
7.16.  The loss of facilities  is also a feature  of village  life, so much so that although 
there are shops in the larger villages, fewer than 50% of medium villages have  a 
food shop. The viability of those that remain is likely to be tested in the future  as 
the convenience  of home -shopping and one-stop shopping in the larger  towns  and 
sub-region al centres of Grimsby, Lincoln and Boston influences choice. This 
strategy aims to limit the future loss of essential services in the villages and will 
look to encourage  initiatives, such as shared  accommodation  (shops  in pubs)  and 
community schemes to support their  retention.  
 
 
 
73 Adopted July 2018   7.17.  In the smaller villages, local shops and services in the villages take on a 
proportionately higher level of importance than in more urban settings and 
proposals to reinforce provision at a locally appropriat e scale will be supported. 
The Council considers local shops and services a key element to ensure 
communities, including clusters of villages, remain sustainable and therefore 
there  is a presumption against  the loss of local shops  wherever  possible, for once 
lost, they rarely  reappear.  
 
7.18.  Proposals involving the closure of community facilities will need to be 
supported by evidence to show that they are no longer required. In the case of 
shops and pubs evidence should be provided to show that the business has been 
offered  for sale or rent at a reasonable  price for at least 12 months  and has been 
advertised in the relevant trade  publications.  
7.19.  The Council has not in this Plan allocated sites within the town centres, or 
edge of centres of Louth and Horncastle for retail, leisure or office uses. This is 
because of the small amount of retail need and the fragile nature of the town 
centres.  Their viability  and vitality  needs  to be protected  and this is considered to 
be best carried out at the present time through the assessment of the impact of 
individual applications; The Alford Neighbourhood Plan should assess the need 
within that  settlement.  
7.20.  The Council  will however,  carry out a full review  of policy  SP14 – Shopping 
by April 2022. This review will include Retail and  Economic Assessments for all 
the towns across the District and if this evidence concludes there is an identified 
need which  has not come  forward  during the period  of the review,  site allocations 
will be made  for the plan period  in connection  with retail,  leisure,  office  and other 
main town centre  uses.  
7.21.  In addition to retailing, schemes that improve access to community and 
environmental  facilities  and enhance  the quality  of life for communities  as a whole 
will be supported. These could include public art, local nature reserves, 
allotments, recycling facilities, and village hall enhancement schemes. The 
Council will support projects that are identified in a Parish Plan or other 
appropriate community plan and managed by the community. This is a strong 
positiv e indicator of community ownership and long -term commitment, adding  to 
the project viability and strengthening community  cohesion.  
 
7.22.  The Council  will reassess retail need in the towns  during the 5 year review 
of the Local Plan to ensure the policy remains up to date and relevant to the 
Districts retail need.  
 
Strategic Policy 14 (SP14) –  Town/Village Centres and Shopping  
 
The town centres in Alford, Horncastle, Louth, Mablethorpe, Skegness 
and Spilsby, and the primary frontages will be defined on the  Settlement 
Proposals Map.  
 
 
 
74 Adopted July 2018   The Council will support the development of shopping, commercial 
leisure, office, tourism, cultural services and community services and 
facilities  that contribute  to the vitality  and viability  of town  centr es in the 
District by: - 
 
1. Expanding or improving the town centre’s retail, business, office, 
tourism, leisure, commercial and cultural facilities.  
 
2. Supporting Class A1 retail uses and over the shop residential 
accommodation within the primary shopping  frontages.  
 
3. Proposals for ‘edge of’ and ‘out of centre’ retail schemes will be 
subject to the sequential test to establish and ensure that there are no 
suitable, available sites in the Town Centre which should be brought 
forward  first.  
 
4. Requiring proposals  for retail, leisure and office development in 
‘edge of centre’, or out of centre locations with a floor space in excess  of 
1000 sqm net to include  an impact  assessment  which  must  demonstrate;  
 
• That the proposal will not be detrimental to existing, committ ed and 
planned public and private investment in a centre or centres in the 
catchment area of the  proposal.  
• That the proposal will not harm town centre vitality and viability, 
including  local  consumer  choice  and trade  in the town  centre and the 
wider area, up to five years from the time the application is  made.  
• For major schemes where the full impact will not be realised in five 
years, the impact should also be assessed up to ten years from the 
time the application is  made.  
• That the design of any proposal connects to the town centre in that 
it should not turn its back on the town centre; be an integral part of 
the character of the street scene, incorporating parking so that it 
does not dominate the street  scene  
 
5. Supporting housing on suitable sites and conv ersions of redundant 
shops in the secondary shopping area only where it is shown that 
shopping is not a continued viable use. In such cases, the agent/owner 
will be required to show that there is no demand for the unit through re- 
let or resale and that it  will not compromise the future development of 
the centre for retail and community  uses.  
 
6. Supporting coastal amusement centres only in the locations 
identified within the Settlement Proposals Development Plan Document.  
 
7. Supporting key visitor and shopper a ttractions whose design 
contributes to the historic character of centres.  
 
 
75 Adopted July 2018   8. Elsewhere in the District the Council will support new retail shops, 
where they are ancillary to and meet a clear need in selling by -products 
from, and incidental to, an established commercial use (such as a 
business premises or  farm).  
 
9. Proposals for retailing will only be supported on employment land 
where  
 
• the sale of goods that are ancillary to the main industrial use,  or; 
 
• the use provides an essential service to the employee community 
on the  site. 
 
• The exception to this is the Louth employment land where retail 
development will be supported in conformity with Clause 3 of 
Strategic Policy SP13 and clause 4 set out  above.  
 
10. The Council will support  proposals  for the development  of community 
and cultural services and facilities (including shared use) where they 
provide  or maintain essential  services  and add to the quality  of life of the 
communities in the District. Unless there is overwhelming justification 
for their removal, services and facilities that are key to the wellbeing of 
the local community should be retained and support for their loss will be 
seen as a last resort. This justification should  include; 
 
• why there is no long er a need for that facility; and 
• that it is no longer viable in the longer term; and 
• that it cannot be rented or sold as a going  concern.  
 
Any such  application should  be accompanied  by evidence  that the service 
or facility  has been  advertised  for a minimum  period  of twelve  months  in 
an appropriate publication and at an appropriate price or rental before 
being released for other  uses.  
 
11. Where a proposal involves the loss of a village shop or pub the 
criteria above will apply and it must also be demonstrated t hat there is 
no other alternative business use for the  site. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
76 Adopted July 2018   CHAPTER 8 - WIDENING THE INLAND TOURISM AND LEISURE 
ECONOMY  
 
Where we want to be 
 
The range of tourism and leisure activities will have diversified across the 
District. The District position as a leading visitor destination will be enhanced. 
There will be strong economic connections between tourism and local 
businesses, the local environment and local produce. The green, cultural, 
heritage and sporting offer wil l complement the strong traditional offer.  
 
What it will look like  
 
The economies of the District’s towns and villages will be supported by 
enhanced facilities for recreation and tourism. The rural economy will be 
supported by new tourism opportunities connected to a network of venues 
across the District which support a range of cultural and leisure events, local 
ecology, landscape and history.  
 
New tourism  and leisure  development,  including farm diversification  schemes  will 
have been directed to the locations most appropriate for their individual needs. 
This will provide opportunities for the local  community.  
 
Delivery Objectives (how we are going to get there) 
This strategy will be delivered through the following  
Lincolnshire Wolds AONB Management Plan 201 3 - 2018 
East Lindsey Economic Action Plan  
Lincolnshire Enterprise Partnership –  Strategic Economic Plan 2016 
Settlement Proposals Development Plan Document 2016 –  2031 
Neighbourhood Development Plans  
Destination Management Organisation  
 
Evidence  
 
England a Strategic Framework for Tourism 2010 -2020 
Government Tourism Policy March 2011  
STEAM report 2015  
East Lindsey Landscape Character Assessment 2011 
Widening the Inland Tourism and Leisure Economy 
Why we have taken this approach  
8.1. Coastal tourism is covered i n the strategic policy which covers Coastal 
East Lindsey. This policy covers the tourism and leisure economy inland. The 
coastal economy is set out in Chapter 10 –  Coastal East  Lindsey.  
 
77 Adopted July 2018   8.2. Inland,  the District’s  attraction  is built on the attractive  open countryside, 
and the unique  character  of the historic  towns  and villages. The contrast  between 
the Wolds AONB and the woodlands of the Central Lincolnshire Vale provide for 
different interests. Local accommodation facilities are well placed to cater for 
those looking for a holiday with an environmental focus. The countryside offers 
great potential for walking, cycling holidays or visits based around nature 
conservation. The Lincolnshire Wolds AONB is a valuable asset for tourists and 
particular emphasis needs to be given to its special character to maintain and 
protect those qualities in line with National Planning  Policy.  
 
8.3. The waterways of the District (such as the River Witham and Louth 
Navigation) also have the potential to add to the tourism offer of the District. 
The countryside and small historic settlements also provide visitor attractions 
with strong links to historic and literary personalities such as Alfred Lord 
Tennyson, Sir John Franklin, Sir Joseph Banks and Captain John Smith . Tourism 
development  in these  areas can provide  opportunities  to explore  the heritage  and 
landscape whilst maintaining those qualities that attract  visitors. 
 
8.4. East Lindsey  is in a strong  position  in terms  of tourism. It has a variety  of 
attractions that complement and contrast with each other. The strategy for 
tourism recognises the importance of a diverse and dynamic tourist industry. Be 
that an appreciation of the qualities of the District’s historic environment, the 
quiet enjoyment  of our countryside  or the close proximity  to other  key attractions 
in surrounding areas including Lincoln and Market Rasen. Early consultation on 
issues showed broad support for an approach that sought to extend the holiday 
season, support tourism with an environmental focus and support small local 
tourist businesses.  
 
8.5. Alford, Horncastle, Louth, Spilsby, Coningsby/Tattershall and Woodhall 
Spa offer their own individual visitor experiences. The Council will encourage 
opportunities  to increase  the tourism  potential of these  towns and villages, where 
development adds to the quality of the environment and to the attractiveness  of 
the area. Other settlements, such as Wainfleet, also have the potential to 
accommodate new visitor facilities to support the local economy. The other 
villages and hamlets across the District are also well placed to provide for  visitor 
accommodation  to serve  both local attractions  and as a base to explore  the wider 
area. 
 
8.6. Whilst static caravan and log cabin accommodation has been a form of 
accommodation in the District, the Council is mindful of the visual impact that 
static holiday caravans can have, unless their layout and landscaping is well 
thought  out. Careful  consideration  needs  to be given to how proposed  new static 
caravan and log cabin developments fit within their wider setting and the 
surrounding existing landscape. Touring caravans are also a popular form of 
accommodation, as is camping, particularly for those looking for a more 
spontaneous, low -key holiday. In addition to the normal design and la ndscaping 
requirements,  access to these  sites is an important consideration. Regard should 
be given  to the character  of the existing  settlement  in the scale,  cumulative  
78 Adopted July 2018   impact  both in landscape and visual terms, traffic impact and design and the 
impact on the host community. Well designed and well thought out tourism 
development can be an asset to the wider community as well as attracting 
visitors. 
 
8.7. Through the Settlement Pattern the Council  has identified  towns,  large and 
medium villages as the locations best able to ensure access to services and 
facilities. To ensure that those visiting the District have access to these facilities 
the Council will support caravan and log cabin  development that are in close 
proximity to these settlements. Many of the District’s settlements pedestrian 
pavements end at the edge of the settlement, this could preclude many suitable 
sites so the Council will support proposals where it is demonstrated  that they 
have safe access to the nearest town, large or medium settlement with 
pedestrians and vehicles being  segregated.  
 
8.8. Storage of caravans during the out of season period is an important 
consideration as the normal screening from surrounding landscaping is sparser 
during the winter months, therefore caravan storage should also not have an 
impact on the wider landscape of an area. 
 
8.9. Serviced holiday accommodation (hotels and bed and breakfast premises 
and self -catering lets) have an important ro le in providing for visitors and the 
Council  will support  these.  There may be opportunities  for conversion  of buildings 
in more rural locations  in order to provide  accommodation,  particularly  as part of 
farm diversification schemes. Proposals should be sensitive to the historic 
environment and where relevant, on sites where buildings are of historic 
significance, give due regard to both a building’s historic setting and unique 
character. Proposals should not impact on protected species such as bats and 
owls. Holiday accommodation granted in locations where housing development 
would  not normally  be granted,  or which  is not suitable  for winter  habitation, will 
be subject to planning conditions to prevent its use as a place of permanent 
residence.  
 
Strategic  Policy 15 (SP15) –  Widening the Inland Tourism and Leisure 
Economy  
 
1. The Council will support quality tourism facilities and attractions 
where they:  
 
• Extend and diversify the tourism and leisure economy, and 
provide additional employment  opportunities; 
• Provide opportunities for the enjoyment of the District’s wider 
countryside and historic towns and  villages;  
• Do not cause unacceptable harm to the landscape, biodiversity or 
heritage  assets;  
• Are of a scale and intensity compatible with their  surroundings.  
 
2. New build development for serviced holiday accommodation (hotels 
and bed and breakfast premises) should be located in or  adjoining  
79 Adopted July 2018   existing towns and large villages. Conversions or part conversions of 
existing buildings into serviced holiday accommodation will be 
supported, providing they are appropriate in scale and form to the 
proposed location: and in all cases the development: 
 
• Does not cause unacceptable impact to heritage assets or their 
setting; 
• Do not cause unacceptable harm to  protected or important species 
or habitats; 
• Is capable of being integrated into its surroundings without 
unacceptable harm to the character, appearance and amenities of 
the area;  and 
 
3. The Council will support  new and extensions  to caravans,  log cabins, 
chalets, camping and touring site development where sites are in close 
proximity to a town, large or medium village, providing it can be 
demonstrated that they add to the built and natural environment by the 
provision of extensive landscaping and green infrastructure, do not 
cause  unacceptable  harm  to the wider  landscape,  protected  or important 
habitats, heritage assets and their settings, and they have safe access 
to the relevant settlement with vehicles and pedestrians being 
segregated.  
 
4. Caravan storage w ill be supported provided it does not have an 
impact on the wider landscape of an area.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
80 Adopted July 2018   CHAPTER 9 –  INLAND FLOOD RISK  
 
Where we want to be 
 
Development will take account of flood risk from fluvial and pluvial sources to 
minimise the risk to people and property.  
 
What it will look like  
 
New development has taken account of climate change and flood risk to 
minimise its carbon footprint and minimise the threat to property from flooding.  
 
Delivery Objectives (how we are going to get there) 
This strategy will be delivered through the following  
Settlement Proposals Development Plan Document 2016 -  2031 
Development Management process which include; Design and Access 
Statements; the Flood Risk Development Matrix;  
Joint Flood Management Strategy for Lincolnshire 2012 -  2025 
Lincolnshire Enterprise Partnership –  Strategic Economic Plan 2016  
 
Evidence  
 
East Lindsey Landscape Character Appraisal 2011 
Lincolnshire Design Guide for Residential Areas  
East Lindsey Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) (2016) 
Investigations resulting from Section 19 of the Flood and Water Management Act 
Preliminary Flood Risk Assessment 2011  
East Lindsey Water Cycle Study 2016  
 
Inland flood Risk  
 
Why we have taken this a pproach?  
 
9.1. East Lindsey’s  200 settlements  have their own identities, which  have been 
influenced as much by their geographical  location  as society  itself. That historical 
influence on location and the changing trends in society will continue to have an 
impact  on future  development  and the physical  capacity  of the towns  and villages 
to accommodate future  development.  
 
9.2. Climate  change  underpins  the approach  to dividing  the District into coastal 
and inland elements to respond to expected sea level changes. The expected 
impact inland is to be more directly linked to ‘localised’, extreme weather  events 
and the resultant threat of flooding from rivers and other sources including 
surface and foul water  systems.  
 
9.3. The major  threat to property  inland  comes from the main rivers  and drains 
that cross the District. It is a particular issue for more intensively developed 
settlements  that have grown  up around river crossings – such as Louth  and 
81 Adopted July 2018   Horncastle  and in the flood plains  bordering  the River Witham  and from the larger 
drains serving the  Fens.  
 
9.4. The Council’s broad strategy to flood risk management inland will be to 
guide housing development away from areas that are identified as being at risk 
as part of a sequential approach to the identification of potential sites. The 
Environment  Agency’s  Flood  Zone Mapping will inform  this approach.  The Council 
believes it is important to support development for business, leisure and 
commercial uses in the towns and large villages where commercial activity 
coincides with flood risk. Directing development away from these areas could 
result in sites becoming empty and blighted, causing visual and amenity harm. 
Therefore, it will be accepted that the sequential test is satisfied where it can be 
demonstrated that accommodating the development on sequentially safer sites 
would undermine the commercial integrity of an existing commercial  area 
 
9.5. The Council will also use the guidance in the Flood Risk Vulnerability and 
Flood Zone Compatibility table as set out in the C ouncil`s Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment  and the NPPF Technical  Guidance  to establish  the testing  criteria  that 
will be applied by the Environment Agency, for sites which lie within Flood  Zones 
2 and 3. 
 
9.6. Site-specific flood risk assessments will be required to establish the 
potential risk of flooding from river and other sources and establish the most 
appropriate means of mitigation, and meet the requirements of the Flood and 
Water Management Act.  
 
9.7. Evidence  from past events  will help guide  new housing  development  away 
from areas of greatest  risk. New development  should  not be used as a justification 
for new flood defences, but the Council will support improvements to existing 
flood defences, the creation of new flood defences and infrastructure associated 
with emergency planning and any other forms of flood defences such as green 
infrast ructure, washlands and flood storage  areas.  
 
9.8. Flood storage is an important way of managing the flows of water and 
helps protect businesses and homes during major events. The Council considers 
it important to ensure that identified flood storage areas are not developed on, 
thus preventing those areas from operating  effectively.  
 
9.9. To address the more extreme weather conditions that have already been 
occurring in the District with increased frequency since 2007 and have been the 
cause of contaminated surface water flooding, it would be expected that surface 
water  connections  to the combined or surface  water  system  should  only be made 
in exceptional circumstances, where it can be demonstrated that there are no 
feasible  alternatives  and where  there  is no detriment  to existing  users;  Given  this 
it is important that the design of new development must incorporate  appropriate 
measures to provide adequate surface and foul water disposal, this will protect 
new and importantly  existing  development.  The Council  will expect  this to involve 
the use of Sustainable  Urban Drainage  Systems  as a first option  along  with other 
appropriate design features (such as green roofs and permeable  surface  
82 Adopted July 2018   treatments), existing water features should be retained and incorporated into 
new drainage systems to maintain the aquatic biodiversity value of sites and to 
provide a local source of flora and fauna. Development should demonstrate that 
there will be no impact on surface water flow routes or ordinary watercours es as 
this can cause flooding downstream.  
9.10.  Sustainable Urban Drainage can also benefit the natural environment  and 
create a more integrated form of development. The Council would support 
development that involves an integrated approach to sustainable draina ge. This 
can include a variety of options including the delivery of green infrastructure, 
provision of trees and new woodland, amenity areas, improvements to 
biodiversity and improvements to the quality of water bodies as set out in the 
Water Framework  Directive.  
 
9.11.  Just as important as surface  water  drainage  is the treatment and disposal 
of foul water, it would be expected that all new development must show how it 
provides this  adequately.  
 
9.12.  Whilst housing development will normally be guided away from areas o f 
flood risk, the Council has to take into account that there will be occasions when 
sites within  the areas of inland  flood risk (zones  2 and 3) will require  regeneration. 
It is important  that these  areas do not become  blighted  and cause  amenity  issues 
in settlements. These are brownfield sites that have become empty, buildings 
that have become disused and run down or a combination of both. On those 
occasions, the Council will expect developers to evidence that they have tried to 
develop/market sites for a business, leisure or commercial use. This is because 
alternative uses to housing in areas of high flood risk will always be preferred. 
Brownfield  sites in towns,  large villages, medium and small  villages  that are only 
partly in areas of flood risk will be supported for housing, providing that the 
development only takes place on the area of low flood risk and does not conflict 
with any other policies for town centre development in this  plan. 
 
9.13.  The Council must ensure that development itself does not lead to an 
increased risk to those who occupy it. For example bungalows in areas of flood 
risk mean that people are sleeping at night at ground floor level. This can be 
mitigated against by incorporating into design flood mitigation measures such as 
raising floor levels.  
 
Strategic Policy 16 (SP16) –  Inland Flood Risk  
 
1. The Council will support development for business, leisure and 
commercial uses in areas of inland flood risk where it can be 
demonstrated that accommodating the development on a sequentially 
safer site would undermine the overall commercial integrity of the 
existing area. Such developments must incorporate flood mitigation 
measures in their  design  
 
2. The Council will support housing in areas of inland flood risk, 
providing all the following criteria a re complied  with:  
 
83 Adopted July 2018   • A site is in need of regeneration and is not suitable for a business, 
leisure and commercial  use. 
• The site is brownfield  and has become  empty,  buildings  have  become 
disused and run down or a combination of both.  
• Applications  should  evidence  that they have  tried  to develop/market 
sites for a business, leisure or commercial use, this includes active 
marketing for a minimum of 12  months.  
 
3. Brownfield sites in towns, large villages, medium and small villages 
that are o nly partly in areas of flood risk will be supported for housing 
providing that the development takes place on the area of low flood risk 
and does  not conflict  with any other  policies  for town  centre  development 
in this  plan.  
 
4. Any housing development in areas of inland flood risk should not 
have ground floor sleeping accommodation unless it can be 
demonstrated that flood mitigation measures can be incorporated into 
its design.  
 
5. The Council will not support development in identified flood storage 
areas.  
 
6. All new development must show how it proposes to provide 
adequate surface water disposal, including avoiding impacting on 
surface water flow routes or ordinary watercourses. The Council will 
expect this to involve the use of Sustainable Urban Drainage Syste ms 
along with other appropriate design features, including the retention of 
any existing water features on a  site. 
 
7. Surface water connections to the combined or surface water  system 
should only be made in exceptional circumstances where it can  be 
demonstra ted that there are no feasible alternatives and where there is 
no detriment to existing  users.  
 
8. The Council will support development that demonstrates an 
integrated approach to sustainable drainage that has positive gains to 
the natural environment.  
 
9. All new development must show how it can provide adequate foul 
water treatment and disposal or that it can be provided in time to serve 
the development.  
 
10. The Council will support improvements to the existing flood 
defences, the creation of new flood defences, i nfrastructure associated 
with emergency planning, washlands and flood storage  areas.  
 
11. Where required by national planning policy development proposals 
in areas at risk of flooding must be accompanied by a site -specific flood 
risk assessment.  
 
84 Adopted July 2018   CHAPTER 10 – COASTAL EAST LINDSEY  
CHAPTER 9 – COASTAL EAST LINDSEY  
CHAPTER 10 –  COASTAL EAST LINDSEY  
 
Combined  Flood  Hazard  Map of East Lindsey  Areas  at risk of flooding  from 
breach  of sea defences,  due to an event  with a 0.5%  chance  of occurring 
in any one year 1 in 200 -year event in 2115 (Any new modelling  work to update   
this map will supersede the map shown)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Flood Hazard Rating  Colour Code  Hazard Classification  
0 to 0.75   Very Low Hazard - Caution  
0.75 to 1.25   Danger for Some  
1.25 to 2.0   Danger for Most 
More than 2.0   Danger for All  
THE COASTAL ZONE  
 
85 Adopted July 2018   The coastal area of East Lindsey is defined by the area shown on the Coastal 
Flood Hazard Maps and is considered so important in terms of its size, economic 
impact, make up of population and its issues around coastal flood risk that it 
warrants a policy in its own right. Below is the policy, which is based upon the 
approach of limiting housing growth withi n the defined area. This policy should 
not be read in isolation. Development proposals will also be assessed against 
other relevant policies in the Plan, particularly with regard to environmental and 
visual considerations, the historic environment and heritage assets and 
town/village centres and shopping and dealing with fluvial and pluvial flood risk.  
 
Where we want to be 
 
The coast will have a strong, diverse and growing economy and business sector.  
 
The coast provides all year round tourism. Skegness and Mablethorpe continue 
to offer safe, traditional family holidays but the offer has grown to incorporate 
the wild, beautiful and natural landscape of the District’s coast.  
 
The population of the coast will remain broadly stable and those living on the 
coast are able to access good quality housing.  
 
A negative issue like flood risk will have become a positive part of the coast, 
where our communities are well informed, self -prepared and resilient and we 
will work with all our partners to ensure that this is th e case.  
 
What it will look like  
 
The coast will be a vibrant place where people want to live, invest, visit and work. 
 
The coast’s economy will have grown and diversified. There will be more all year 
round tourism and holiday accommodation. Towns and paris hes will be actively 
engaging and working  with businesses and site owners  to provide  a better  quality 
of life for their  communities.  
 
Sufficient housing would have been built to accommodate the needs of the 
existing population.  
 
The Coastal Country Park will be a flourishing area within the coast with farming 
at its core, providing all year round tourism, access to the coast and business 
diversification in line with the objectives of the Park, and a place for local people 
and visitors to go and enjoy its landscape and biodiversity.  
 
Flood mitigation, design and emergency planning would have become an 
integral part of all development along the coast and this will help to make our 
communities more safe and secure.  
 
Delivery Objectives (how we are going to ge t there) 
 
86 Adopted July 2018   This strategy will be delivered through the following  
 
East Lindsey Economic Development Strategy 2006 -  2020 
East Lindsey Economic Action Plan  
Joint Lincolnshire Flood Risk and Drainage Management Strategy 2012 -  2025 
Herita ge/Wild Coast Partnership  
Lincolnshire Enterprise Partnership –  Strategic Economic Plan 2016 
Settlement Proposals Development Plan Document 2016 -  2031 
GLLEP Coastal Vision 2016  
 
Evidence  
 
Employment Sites Review 2016 
Lindsey Action Zone  
East Inshore and Offshore Marine Plan 2014 
East Lindsey Retail & Leisure Study 2008 
East Lindsey Economic Baseline Study 2016  
Small Coastal Towns Benchmarking Study 2011  
Hidden Communities in Caravans Project 2011 (Sheffield Hallam University and 
East Lindsey District Coun cil) 
Environment Agency Coastal Flood Hazard Mapping 
Lincolnshire Coastal Study  
Demographic Projections for Coastal Districts 2013  
Edge Analytics –  Update of the Demographic Evidence 2015 & 2016 
Shoreline Management Plans –  Flamborough Head to Gibraltar Po int and 
Gibraltar Point to Hunstanton 2011  
Greater Lincolnshire Local Enterprise Partnership Water Management Plan 2016 
Joint Lincolnshire Flood Risk and Drainage Management Strategy 2012 –  2025 
Humber Flood Risk Management Strategy Estuary Strategy 2008  
East Lindsey Water Cycle Study 2016  
 
Coastal East Lindsey  
 
Why we have taken this approach  
 
10.1. The area of East Lindsey that lies within the Coastal Flood Plain makes  up 
38% of the land area of the District. The issues associated with the coastal area 
are varied and require a multi -pronged approach. The key issue to delivering 
sustainable development on the coast is climate change, the anticipated impact 
it will have on future sea levels and the increasing threat of tidal flooding. It is 
vital that the Coun cil takes a holistic complete approach to policy making on the 
coast.  
 
10.2. Second generation Shoreline Management Plans have now been adopted. 
These look at coastal processes including tidal patterns, wave height, wave 
direction and the movement of beach and s eabed materials. They assess the 
risks from coastal flooding and erosion arising from rising sea levels along the 
whole  East Lindsey  coastline  and offer  a vision as to  how  the  coast can   be 
87 Adopted July 2018   managed in a sustainable manner over the next hundred years. Although not 
statutory plans, they will influence the future development potential along the 
coast.  
 
10.3. The present Shoreline Management plans advocate a “Hold the Line” 
policy. The defences along the coast are robust but will require a long term 
strategy for their future renewal and maintenance. The Council was a partner in 
the Lincolnshire Coastal Study and that study, along with consultation, has 
assisted the Council in drawing up this  policy.  
 
10.4. In coastal areas, local planning author ities should take account of the UK 
Marine Policy Statement and marine plans. For the Coast of East Lindsey there is 
the adopted East Inshore and Offshore Marine Plan which the Council will have 
regard  to. 
 
10.5. The Council recognises that coastal communities m ust not be allowed to 
decline  through  lack of action  and it must therefore  work with partners  to ensure 
there are opportunities to overcome deprivation, reinvigorate the economy and 
improve the quality of  life. 
 
10.6. The Greater Lincolnshire Coastal Vision’s ambitions are to sustain and 
grow coastal businesses and the economy; to sustain and develop coastal 
prosperity through infrastructure and to protect and sustain the coastal 
environment. The Council strongly supports these ambitions and has set out a 
progr amme in its Economic Action Plan to work with partners over the 5 year 
review period of the Local Plan to deliver projects which deliver these ambitions, 
support and strengthen the coastal flood defences and bring about tangible 
change on the ground. The C ouncil recognise that delivery of the Coastal Vision 
may begin to generate infrastructural impacts for some key inland communities 
as movements  to the coast  increase;  this will also be monitored  during  the review 
period.  
 
10.7. It is recognised that there  is a need for an integrated  approach to resolving 
the social, health and economic issues in the coastal area including the need to 
diversify the economy and tackle the facets of multiple deprivation associated 
with low income. To that end, the Council will place  a high level of weight on 
proposals that support economic growth and the creation of year round jobs in 
the coast. In addition the council supports tourism development that broadens 
the range of the present  offer.  
 
10.8. All relevant development in areas of flo od risk has to show how it has 
passed the sequential and exception tests. With regard to the Sequential Test 
this steers development to areas of lowest risk. One of the aims of the Coastal 
Policy is to make it clear to those wishing to develop what will an d will not be 
supported by the Council. Part of this work is to make the process of submitting 
and understanding the process around planning easier.  To aid in this, Annex  2 of 
this Plan sets out how relevant development meets the sequential test in the 
coastal zone, this then precludes this exercise from the application process.  For 
 
 
88 Adopted July 2018   development deemed to have passed the Sequential Test, it must then 
demonstrate how it passes the Exception Test, this is also set out in Annex 2. 
 
10.9. For th e Exception test, the very term exception means that it is 
development beyond that which would normally be allowed. It is important that 
development not listed in Annex 2 does demonstrate that it provides wider 
sustainability benefits. In order to assist t hose wishing to develop the Council 
will test development against its Sustainability Objectives set out in the Annex. 
Whilst the Council strongly supports economic growth on the coast, all relevant 
development should score positively and demonstrate that i t provides wider 
environmental, social and economic benefits to the wider  community.  
 
10.10.  Site-specific flood risk assessments will be required to establish the 
potential risk of flooding from coast, river and other sources and establish the 
most appropriate m eans of mitigation, and meet the requirements of the Flood 
and Water Management  Act. 
 
10.11.  It is considered very important, given the major change in the way 
development, particularly housing, is to be considered in this policy that the 
Council both monitors and reviews this policy. Review of the whole Strategy is 
considered essential to ensure the plan is delivering its objectives. However, 
irrespective of whether the Council does review its full Plan within the first five 
years, the Council will carry out a full review of the Coastal Policy at the end of 
the first five years of the life of the Plan. This review will examine the 
demographic  and economic  impact  of the policy  and its issues on the coastal  area. 
 
Strategic Policy 17 (SP17) –  Coastal East Lindsey  
 
The Coastal Policy applies to the following settlements  
 
Addlethorpe, Anderby, Chapel St Leonards, Croft, Ingoldmells, 
Mablethorpe, New Leake, North Cotes, North Somercotes, Saltfleetby All 
Saints, Saltfleetby St Clements, Saltfleetby St Peter, Skegness, 
Skidbroook cum Saltfleet, South Somercotes, Sutton on Sea, 
Theddlethorpe All Saints, Theddlethorpe St Helen and Trusthorpe.  
 
1. The Council  will give a high priority  to development  that extends  and 
diversifies  all-year  round  employment  opportunities,  contributes  directly 
to the local economy, infrastructure or extends and diversifies the 
tourism  market.  
 
2. The Council will support improvements to the existing flood 
defences, the creation of new flood defences and infrastructure 
associated with emergency  planning.  
 
3. New and replacement community buildings will be supported, 
providing they are located within or adjoining an existing  settlement.  
 
 
 
89 Adopted July 2018   4. Development will need to demonstrate that it satisfies the 
Sequential and Exception Test as  set out in Annex 2 of this  Plan.  
 
5. All relevant development will need to provide adequate flood 
mitigation.  
 
Strategic Policy 18 (SP18) - Coastal Housing  
 
10.12.  Because  of the threat  of flood risk, unconstrained housing  growth  with its 
associated increase in population cannot be justified. This would place more 
people at risk. The Coastal Study recommended that housing should be limited 
to only the amount of development required to maintain the existing population 
and should not incl ude strategic housing growth. Based on evidence from the 
2012 population and household projections and looking at a zero population 
growth scenario (formation of new households in the coast from the existing 
population), that would mean provision should be  made for 735 homes over the 
plan period.  
 
10.13.  However, that does not mean that there will be no housing development 
in the coastal area. As at the 28th February 2016 there were already 1308 
housing commitments in the coast, a technical over -supply, based agai nst the 
target 735, of approximately 546 dwellings. This will mean that for this plan 
period up to 2031 rates of development will be lowered in the coast by just over 
30% compared to previous build rates. Therefore, no more new market housing 
will be permi tted in the coastal zone during the Plan period other than that set 
out in paragraphs 3, 4, 5 6, 7 and criterion B1, B2 and B3 
 
10.14.  Even though housing growth is largely being constrained to existing 
commitments, some sites which already have the benefit of pl anning permission 
may reapply during the plan period for improved layouts, designs or flood 
mitigation. The Council would not wish to constrain the opportunity for 
improvement on sites and therefore, would support these  amendments.  
 
10.15.  The Council understands  that sites which have served a useful purpose 
can become run down, empty and cause blight to a neighbourhood. Whilst the 
Council would always encourage and support the reuse of land in the Coast for 
employment, leisure or tourism uses and if in an appropr iate location, retail, this 
is not always possible. The Council will therefore support open market housing 
on such sites in the towns, large and medium villages.  
 
10.16.  The coastal area has the highest need for affordable housing in the 
District. Whilst opportun ities may be limited for affordable housing, the Council 
recognises that there will still be the need, despite the risk of flooding, to  ensure 
that those who do not have the financial ability to access open market housing 
still have an opportunity to conti nue to reside in the communities they currently 
live and work. Therefore, the Council continues to support the provision of this 
type of housing within the coastal  area. 
 
 
 
90 Adopted July 2018   10.17.  The population of East Lindsey has a predominance of older people and 
this demographic is reflected in the Coastal Zone. Strategic Policy 5 (SP5) sets 
out support  for specialist housing  for older persons  including  in the Coastal  Zone.  
 
10.18.  The Council must also support specialist housing for specific identified 
vulner able or minority  groups  and so, with regard  to this type of housing,  believes 
that it is justifiable to step outside the restricted housing provision. This type of 
housing cannot  be met from within  the existing  stock. All new affordable  housing 
and housing  for vulnerable  or minority  groups  in the Coastal  Zone will be subject 
to the cascade local connection criteria set out in Annex 1 of this Plan. 
 
1. The Council will support  sites  which already  have  planning  permission 
for housing  if they come  forward  with improved layouts,  designs  or flood 
mitigation providing the numbers of homes do not  increase.  
 
2. The Council will support open market housing on sites in towns,  large 
and medium villages providing they meet the following  criteria: 
 
• The site is a brownfield  site 
• The site has become disused, empty and/or the buildings on it have 
become damaged and are causing unacceptable  harm.  
 
• It must be demonstrated that the site has been actively marketed 
for either a community, economic or leisure use at an appropriate 
price for a period of 12 months; and 
 
• It must be demonstrated that the site is not viable for development 
for either a community, economic or leisure  use. 
 
3. In addition to the housing permitted by clauses 1 and 2 above, the 
Council will support  affordable  housing  and specialised  forms  of housing 
for vulnerable or minority groups in the towns and large villages in the 
Coastal Zone, providing there is an evidenced local need. All new 
affordable housing and housing for vulnerable or minority groups in the 
Coas tal Zone will be subject to the cascade local connection criteria set 
out in Annex 1 of this  Plan.  
 
4. Housing will not be permitted with ground floor sleeping 
accommodation.  
 
5. Flood mitigation should be provided as per the advice of the 
Environment  Agency.  
 
Strategic Policy 19 (SP19) - Holiday Accommodation  
 
10.19.  Part of the success  of the coast  relies  on the availability  of accommodation 
for visitors; this includes all types of accommodation including caravans, log 
cabins, chalets, camping and touring sites and serviced holiday accommodation 
such as hotels  and bed and breakfast  establishments.  These facilities  also provide  
91 Adopted July 2018   employment, training, and some living accommodation for owner/occupiers and 
are part of a buoyant  coastal  economy.  The most appropriate  sustainable  location 
for serviced  holiday  accommodation  is within  the settlements  in the coastal  area. 
 
10.20.  The Council produces a report every year called the STEAM report which 
analyses the holiday provision and the tourism economy on the coast. The 
tourism economy has grown since 2014 and the Council would expect this to 
continue over the Plan period, this will be monitored by a number of indicators 
including the results of the STEAM report.  
 
10.21.  The areas which have the greatest predominance of hotels and bed and 
breakfast accommodation are called the Service Holiday Accommodation Areas. 
It is important to protect these areas as they support the tourism industry as a 
whole, providing valuable holiday overnight stay provision . The Council has a  
presumption against the loss of hotels and bed and breakfast accommodation in 
the Serviced  Holiday  Accommodation  Areas  as defined in the Settlement  Proposals 
Development  Plan Document.  Therefore,  the onus will lie with any developer  who 
proposes  to remove  this type of development  from a defined  area along  the coast, 
to have to show why there is firstly, no longer a need for that hotel or bed and 
breakfast  business  and it should  be shown that it is no longer  viable  in the longer 
term and that it cannot be sold as an on -going concern. Any hotel or bed and 
breakfast should be advertised for a minimum period of six months before being 
released for other uses. Conversions of hotels into flats or houses in multiple 
occupation will need to demonstrate they will b e safe from the risk of flooding 
and, given the predicted depths should a breach of the tidal defences occur, that 
is likely to preclude the provision of ground floor sleeping accommodation.  
 
10.22.  Whilst the Council supports development that adds to the tourism and 
employment opportunities on the coast, it will seek to limit the negative 
environmental  impacts  resulting  from this type of development,  in particular, the 
area between Ingoldmells and Addlethorpe will be protected from any further 
caravan development  during the plan period to prevent further coalescence of 
these  settlements  and place a level of protection  on this green  open space,  as set 
out in the Map below. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
92 Adopted July 2018    
 
Addlethorpe Protected Open Space  
 
10.23.  In the rest of the coastal  area, outside  the area shown on the above  map; 
caravans, log cabins, chalets, camping and touring site development should be 
sited either in or alongside existing  settlements.  
 
10.24.  With regard to those developments which are in or alongside existing 
settlements, it is important to ensure that they do not spread beyond the edge 
of those settlements without the appropriate safeguards, such as additional 
landscaping,  footpath  connections  and protection  for important  habitats.  Without 
these safeguard development can become isolated and in effect become 
development in the open countryside.  
 
10.25.  The Council would not wish to prevent existing sites which are already 
located away from settlements from expanding, but the protection of the open 
countryside  is a priority  both locally  and nationally. With regard  to new sites they 
will only be supported outside a settlement where they can show that they are 
directly connected to a tourism facility; new or existing. Directly connected 
means  that the site should be part of that tourism  business  and not a stand -alone 
business. They must also demonstrate how the users of the site will access the 
nearest town, large or medium settlement safely, with pedestrians and vehicles 
being segregated  or be accessible  by public  transport.  Both existing  and new sites 
in these locations must respect the character of the countryside, not impact on 
the wider landscape or adversely impact on protected or important habitats or 
species.  
93 
Adopted July 2018   10.26.  The alteration  of buildings  for holiday  accommodation forms  an important 
type of tourism development adding to the choice of offer in the coast. The 
Council is supportive of this type of accommodation but needs to ensure that it 
does not become  accommodation  for permanent  living  in areas  of flood risk which 
would not normally be supported.  
 
10.27.  There are approximately 24,490 static caravans in the coastal strip. In 
addition  to the benefits  to the local economy;  this number  of caravans brings  with 
it an influx  of visitors  during the year which  does have an impact  on local services, 
notably on healthcare. The Council will work with health providers to minimise 
the impact on this service and it is important to take into account that recent 
research (July 2011) has shown that there are a sign ificant number of people 
choosing to reside in static caravans as their main home. It is calculated that up 
to 6,000 people, 3,500 households, may be involved. The Council does not wish 
to encourage these numbers to increase because of the added pressures to the 
health  service  and also a caravan  is classed  as a vulnerable  development  in terms 
of flood risk and therefore  will not support  all year round  occupancy  or permanent 
living in caravans in the coastal  area. 
 
10.28.  Evidence shows that the period November to March carries the highest 
risk of flood events, caravans are classed as vulnerable development and 
mitigation is not sufficient during an event to ensure reduced risk. Therefore all 
caravan  sites in the coastal  zone in the high risk areas will only be supported with 
an occupancy condition placed on them of the 15th March to 31st October or the 
following Sunday. The Council needs to balance risk against the impact on the 
economy of the coast so these dates, take in the Easter and October half term 
holida ys which  are acknowledged busy times  for the holiday  industry  in the Coast. 
Where it is proposed to extend the site area or redevelop an existing site that 
currently has a different occupancy period to that in Policy SP19, providing that 
the development  would not increase  the number  of caravans,  log cabins  or chalets 
on the site, the occupancy limits in this policy will be applied flexibly so that no 
disadvantage should result, i.e. the existing occupancy period will be  retained.  
 
1. The Council will support proposals for hotels and bed and breakfast 
accommodation within the towns, large, medium and small villages in 
the coastal area providing proposals do not have any ground floor 
sleeping  accommodation.  
 
2. Within the defined Serviced Holiday Accommodation area s, 
development  will be supported for the change  of use or removal  of hotels 
and bed and breakfast accommodation if there is evidenced justification 
to show:  
 
• There  is no longer  a need  for that hotel  or bed and breakfast  business 
and; 
 
 
 
 
94 Adopted July 2018   • That it cannot be sold as an on-going concern. Any hotel or bed and 
breakfast  should  be advertised  for a minimum  period  of six months 
before being released for other  uses.  
• Conversions  of hotels  into flats or houses  in multiple  occupation  will 
need to demonstrate they will be safe from the risk of flooding.  
3. Change of use of buildings for holiday accommodation will be 
supported provided they meet the following  criteria: 
 
• Should not be sold separately from the parent landholder; and. 
• Do not have any ground floor sleeping accommodation; and 
• Maintain for inspection by the Local Planning Authority, an up to 
date register of names and main addresses of all those occupying 
the development.  
4. No further caravan development will be permitted in the ar ea 
between Ingoldmells and Addlethorpe to prevent further coalescence of 
these settlements and place a level of protection on this green open 
space between  them.  
 
5. The Council will support new and extensions to caravans, log cabins, 
chalets, camping and tou ring site development where sites adjoin or  are 
in a town,  large  or medium  village,  providing  it can be demonstrated  that 
they add to the built and natural environment by the provision of 
extensive landscaping and green infrastructure, do not cause 
unacceptable harm to the wider landscape, protected or important 
habitats and they are connected to the existing settlement by road and 
footpath.  
 
6. The Council will support caravans, log cabins, chalets and camping 
and touring  sites in the open  countryside  only where it can be shown  that 
these sites do not cause unacceptable harm to the character of the 
countryside, on the wider landscape, on protected or important habitats 
or species. New sites must demonstrate that they are directly related to 
an existing tourism facility and show how users of the site will access 
the nearest town, large or medium settlement with pedestrians and 
vehicles being segregated or be accessible by public  transport.  
 
7. Occupancy of caravan, log cabin, chalets, camping and touring sites 
will be limited to between 15th March and 31st October in any one year, 
or the following Sunday, if the 31st does not fall on a Sunday, except 
where it is proposed to extend the area of or redevelop an existing site 
that currently has a different occ upancy period, but where no net 
increase or an overall reduction by an improved layout or density in the 
number of caravans, log cabins or chalets would result. In such cases,  
 
 
95 Adopted July 2018   the existing occupancy period will continue to be applied  to the whole 
site. 
 
8. The Council will not support all year round occupancy or permanent 
living in caravans in the coastal area.  
 
Strategic Policy 20 (SP20) –  Visitor Economy  
 
10.29.  Both the Skegness and Mablethorpe Foreshores are important, vibrant 
places, which  enhance the visitor offer to each town. They are also an integral 
part of each town with residents  and visitors  moving  between  and using the shops 
and facilities both in the centres of the towns and the foreshores. It is important 
the Council  supports  and encourages  appropriate  development  on the foreshores 
of Skegness and Mablethorpe to ensure that both these areas continue to thrive 
and grow. Part of the foreshores have sand dune and associated sand dune 
habitat and any development should demonstrate tha t will not harm these 
important habitats.  
 
10.30.  Sutton on Sea is a gentler, quieter resort than either Mablethorpe or 
Skegness and makes its own unique contribution to the coastal economy. It is 
important that the Council supports that contribution including initiatives to 
extend the holiday season without damaging the quieter character of the 
settlement.  This will continue  to ensure  that there  is a choice  to the holiday  offer 
along the  coast.  
 
10.31.  Alongside the traditional holiday offer, the coast also offers a wild and 
unspoilt tourist destination to the north of Mablethorpe, between Sutton on Sea 
and Chapel St Leonards and south of Skegness. The East Lindsey coast has long 
stretches  of open undeveloped,  natural  coastal  frontage,  diverse  biodiversity,  bird 
and s eal watching, open skies and tranquillity. The New England Coast path, the 
long distance National Trail around the coast of England, will enhance people’s 
enjoyment of and connection with the coasts wildlife, landscape and historic 
interests.  
 
10.32.  The Lincolns hire Coastal  Country  Park between  Sutton  on Sea and Chapel 
St Leonards also provides access to the countryside linking local facilities with 
coastal access points through a series of footpaths. Work is also being carried 
out around the south end of Skegnes s including Gibraltar Point National Nature 
Reserve. This project aims to increase access to the wild coast and offer an 
alternative tourism experience. The Council will support proposals that support 
this type of tourism  offer,  to increase  the choice  offered  to visitors  coming  to the 
coast.  
 
1. The Council will support development in the Skegness Foreshore 
that builds on the holiday attractions. In addition to holiday 
amusements it will support the following uses A3, food and drink, C1, 
hotels and hostels , D1, non -residential institutions (d, e and g) and D2, 
assembly and  leisure.  
 
 
96 Adopted July 2018   2. A1 (non -food) retail may be supported where it involves ancillary 
uses to uses on the Skegness Foreshore. Retail development must 
demonstrate that the prop osed development would not affect the 
viability of the existing town centre.  
 
3. The Council will support  development  of the Mablethorpe  Foreshore, 
which adds to, raises the quality of, or widens the scope of the holiday 
facilities and  attractions.  
 
4. Development on the Skegness and Mablethorpe Foreshores must 
demonstrate that it will not cause unacceptable harm to the associated 
sand dune habitat along those  foreshores.  
 
5. The Council will support development in Sutton on Sea including 
along its foreshor e which supports the economy and lengthens  the 
holiday  season  but does  not detract  from  the character  of the settlement.  
 
6. The Council  will support  development  of the Wild Coast  Vision of the 
Coastal Country Park where it conforms to the principles of sustainable 
development set out in the policies of this  Plan.  
 
Strategic Policy 21 (SP21) –  Coastal Employment  
 
10.33.  The Council has assessed the need for additional employment land 
through its Employment Land Review. That document indicates that the 
anticipate d demand in Skegness over the Plan period can be met through 
safeguarding the existing  employment  siteon  Wainfleet Road (approx.  30ha)  and 
a site on Burgh Road site (approx.  9.5ha). Both sites have the benefit  of planning 
permission and access roads have been provided. Evidence shows that there is 
no need to consider making a further allocation of employment land in 
Mablethorpe due to a lack of demand over the previous plan period, though this 
will continue  to be monitored  during the review  period  of the Plan. Both the sites 
in Skegness and the existing employment land in Mablethorpe will be set out as 
safeguarded employment land in the Settlement Proposals DPD. As such they 
will be safeguarded  for uses B1, B2 and B8, excepting  a site to be allocated  for a 
transit Gypsy/Traveller site on the Mablethorpe employment land. With regard 
to retailing on employment land in the Coastal Zone this will be supported but 
only where it is ancillary to the main industrial use and/or provides an essential 
service to the em ployee community on the  site. 
 
10.34.  There is a Vision  for Skegness  with a potential  for future  employment  and 
leisure opportunities connected to a relief road for Skegness. Whilst these plans 
are in their very early stages,  the Council  supports  the principle  of this vision  and 
all other opportunities for employment and leisure in the  town.  
 
10.35.  Because a proportion of the coastal area is rural in nature, opportunities 
to create  employment  in the coastal  large, medium and small villages  where  they 
can provide local employment and help support local services will be supported. 
The Council will particularly support initiatives that re -use buildings for  business  
97 Adopted July 2018   uses, and bring about environmental improvements. This should not impact on 
protected sp ecies such as bats and owls.  
 
10.36.  To ensure the long -term viability of farm holdings on the coast, support 
will be given for additional uses. These uses should be subordinate to the farm 
use and should not jeopardise the future operation of the  business.  
 
1. The Council will safeguard 39.5 ha of employment land in 
Skegness. The existing employment land in Mablethorpe will be 
safeguarded and shown as employment land less an area for a 
Gypsy/Traveller Transit site. This will be set out in the Settlement 
Proposals DPD. The Council will support B1, B2 and B8 uses on these 
sites.  
 
2. Proposals for retailing will only be supported on employment 
land where:  
 The sale of goods that are ancillary to the main employment use, 
or; 
 The use provides an essential service to the employee community 
of the  site. 
3. The Council will support the rural coastal economy by supporting 
development in the large, medium and small villages where  it: 
 
 Provides local employment and help support local services;  
 Re-uses buildings for rural business.  
4. Farm diversification schemes will be supported on the coast where 
they are subordinate to the farm use and do not jeopardise the farm 
business.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
98 Adopted July 2018   CHAPTER 11 -  TRANSPORT AND ACCESSIBILITY  
 
Where we want to be 
 
A District of interconnected settlements, where residents have good access to 
basic facilities, and which is underpinned by an effective public transport system.  
 
In urban locations, pedestrian and cycle routes take priority over vehicular  traffic 
and provide good, safe access to town centres and employment sites.  
 
Sufficient car parking is available to support the need within settlements.  
 
What it will look like  
 
Priority is given to new foot, cycle and bus ways in new development.  
 
Most development will be located in the centres of higher population to benefit 
from the economies of scale and reduce the need for excessive travel.  
 
Smaller settlements will provide transport hubs for residents and local business  
 
Delivery Objectives (how we are going to  get there) 
This strategy will be delivered through the following  
East Lindsey Economic Development Strategy 2006 -  2020 
East Lindsey Economic Action Plan  
Lincolnshire Enterprise Partnership –  Strategic Economic Plan 2016 
Settlement Proposals Development P lan Document 2016 -  2031 
4th Lincolnshire Local Transport Plan 2013 -  2023 
Manual for Streets 1 and 2 
Historic Manual for Streets  
 
Evidence  
 
Parking surveys for Louth, Alford, Horncastle and Skegness 
Countryside Access and Rights of Way Improvement Plan 20 07-2012 
 
Transport and Accessibility  
 
Why we have taken this approach  
 
11.1. East Lindsey  is a large, rural area characterised  by clusters  of small villages 
grouped around and dependent upon towns and large villages for the majority of 
their needs. Consequently,  many villages are remote from essential services and 
the main road network. Car ownership levels are high, and access to facilities 
depends on the extensive network of minor roads that criss -cross the  District. 
 
 
 
99 Adopted July 2018   11.2. Economies of scale m ean that scheduled public transport is limited to a 
number of routes, primarily along the strategic road network, between the main 
transport hubs. Whilst these provide a good local service, that meets the needs 
of commuters  and shoppers  to the larger  centres, services in the more rural parts 
of the District tend to be occasional and irregular. However, the rural part of the 
District is covered by the demand responsive CallConnect service, which in the 
context of what is viable  in a rural area is relatively  good,  despite  the more limited 
evening and weekend services, particularly out of holiday  season.  
 
11.3. Commercial bus links run between Skegness and the rest of the coastal 
strip with, Skegness also having a town service, Louth similarly has a “nipper” 
town bus  service. The Poacher Community Rail line which operates between 
Nottingham -Grantham -Boston and Skegness is the Districts only rail connection, 
which  allows  tourists  access into the resort.  The only other  key settlement served 
by the line in the District is Wainfleet All Saints; with halts at Havenhouse and 
Thorpe  Culvert. 
 
11.4. In addition  to the growth  in commuter  journey  numbers,  there  is increased 
dependence on private cars to access facilities for significant numbers in the 
sparse rural settlements. The Council supports new transport infrastructure 
bought forward by the Lincolnshire County Highway Authority which seeks to 
provide accessibility improvements across the  District  
 
11.5. The Council  is realistic  enough to understand  that it is nearly  impossible  to 
reduce vehicle usage in the smaller rural settlements of the District. However, 
where possible in the smaller rural settlements, development which is supported 
through the policies  contained within  the Core Strategy  should be located  as near 
to any existing  key facilities, such as doctors, schools and shops etc. as possible 
and improved pedestrian and cycle links should be sought to the settlements 
centre.  
 
11.6. To ensure  continued  access to facilities, particularly  education  and health, 
and to minimise  the need for travel, within  the towns, large and medium villages 
new housing development should be located as near as possible to facilities. In 
the towns, the Council will also seek to make provision for public transport links 
within new  developments.  
 
11.7. Increasing the numbers of residents walking and cycling around the 
district is an important part of improving health and the quality of their 
experience; pedestrian and cycle movements should be given priority in all 
developments and where possible new pedestrian and cycle routes should be 
linked to existing ones. 
 
11.8. However, accessibility is not just about walking and cycling, accessibility 
relates to all users of public and private space. The Council will support 
development that has been shown to be planned taking into account disabled 
users and parents/carers with buggies and young children.  
 
 
 
100 Adopted July 2018   11.9. All development  should  be shown  to link with the existing  road and public 
transport systems operating within the District. In terms of thresholds  for 
Transport Assessments/Statements and Travel Plans, the Council will use the 
Indicative thresholds set down in Annex 3 of the Core  Strategy. 
 
11.10.  Easy access to parking is considered critical to the vitality of the District’s 
town and village centres. Any loss of existing parking facilities must be 
accompanied  by a robust  parking survey  demonstrating that the loss will not affect 
the ability of shoppers to access the facilities in town centres. The Council will 
continue  to monitor  parking facilities  in Louth,  Skegness  and Horncastle  to ensure 
that there is sufficient to meet the needs of these towns’ shoppers and will also 
assist those communities who wish to carry out their own surveys in connection 
with neighbourhood  planning.  
 
11.11.  Whilst the Council considers that the setting of rigid parking standards  for 
residential and non -residential development stifles creative design and can 
contribute to vehicle -dominated development, all development that generates 
vehicle movements should provide an appropriate level of  parking, which 
minimises the need for hard, non- porous surfaces. As a minimum, all housing 
developments should provide a single parking space per dwelling. The only 
exception to this will be within town centre locations and living accommodation 
above reta il units, where it may be difficult to provide suitable parking 
arrangements and occupants are located in close proximity to services making 
owning a vehicle less likely. For business and leisure developments, parking 
provision should include parking for motorcycles, bikes and people with 
disabilities. Vehicles should be able to access and exit development  safely.  
 
11.12.  The Council  will take its guidance  on standards  for design  and layout of its 
streets and roads from the Department for Transport documents; Manual for 
Streets 1, Manual for Streets 2 and The Historic Manual for Streets and any 
subsequent documents that supersede  them.  
 
11.13.  The County  Council  as Highways  Authority  has been considering the traffic 
impact on the existing road network of various devel opments in the Horncastle 
area. As part of this work, the A158/ A153 Bull Ring junction has been identified 
as being at capacity and that a solution is required to address both access to the 
coast  and the operation  of the network  through Horncastle.  The most appropriate 
solution is in the form of a potential bypass. At this stage a funding strategy is 
being developed. This will include the support of both the private sector through 
the Greater Lincolnshire Local Enterprise Partnership (GLLEP) and the Local 
Planning Authority. The Council will support Lincolnshire County Council in 
seeking a viable solution to this issue and being a contributor to the funding 
solutions required. Gathering the evidence to support this work is part of the 
Council's Local Plan 5  year review, and this Council will work in partnership with 
Lincolnshire County Highway Authority during the review period. The wider 
Coastal Access priorities are identified by the GLLEP as an important aspect for 
the countywide transport strategy and wi ll be a key part of the 5 year  review.  
 
 
 
101 Adopted July 2018   Strategic Policy 22 (SP22) –  Transport and Accessibility  
 
The Council will support accessibility and seek to reduce isolation in the 
District by:- 
 
1. Supporting development in or adjoining towns, large and medium 
villages where it is accessible to key  facilities . 
 
2. Supporting development which is shown to link with the existing 
road and public transport systems operating within the District. Large 
scale developments such as food retail units of 800sq. m and larger  and 
80 residential dwellings or more will be accompanied by a transport 
assessment and travel plan. The indicative thresholds for transport 
assessments can be found at Annex 3 of the Core Strategy.  
 
3. Supporting  development  that gives  pedestrian  and cycle  movements 
priority.  
 
4. Supporting development that has been shown to be planned taking 
into account disabled users and parents/carers with buggies and young 
children.  
 
5. Requiring any development which involves the loss of an existing 
car parking facility in the towns or large villages to be accompanied by 
a robust parking  survey.  
 
6. Requiring all housing developments to provide a minimum of one 
parking space per dwelling, except in the case of infill and 
redevelopment plots within the defined town centres, where it can be 
demonstrated  that;  
 
• Providing no car parking would not be detrimental to road safety 
or the flow of traffic; or 
• That the provision of parking space would be harmful to the 
character of the  area.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
102 Adopted July 2018   CHAPTER 12 -  PROTECTING AND ENHANCING OUR NATURAL 
ENVIRONMENT  
 
Landscape, Green Infrastructure, Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
 
Where we want to be 
 
The rich and varied landscape of East Lindsey continues to be valued by local 
residents a nd visitors. 
 
The Lincolnshire Wolds Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty continues to be 
protected for its special landscape quality.  
 
The highly sensitive landscape areas of the District have retained their character 
and special qualities. 
 
The amount of greenspace in the District will have increased and be well 
connected.  
 
Biodiversity is thriving and new areas have been created and maintained while 
existing areas are maintained and enhanced.  
 
What it will look like  
 
Change to the landscape will have been managed sensitively to retain local 
diversity and distinctiveness. New development will be integrated within its local 
landscape.  
 
East Lindsey will contain a network of high quality, well -connected greenspaces 
that support  flourishing  wildlife  habitats  and species  and help promote  active  and 
healthy lifestyles.  
 
New green spaces will have been created within and around communities, linked 
to existing  green  infrastructure, to help meet the needs  of the growing population. 
Habitats for wildlife will have b een protected, enhanced and expanded to enable 
species to adapt to the changes brought about by climate  change.  
 
Delivery Objectives (how we are going to get there)  
 
This strategy will be delivered through the following  
 
Lincolnshire Wolds AONB Management Plan 2013 -  2018 
Coastal Country Park  
Heritage/Wild Coast Partnership Lincolnshire Limewoods, 
Lincolnshire Chalk Streams Project 
Settlement Proposals and Neighbourhood Development Plans  
Partnership Plans including Lincolnshire Biodiversity Action Plan and Geodiversity 
Action Plan  
 
 
103 Adopted July 2018   Evidence  
 
East Lindsey Landscape Character Assessment 2011 
East Lindsey Green Infrastructure Audit  
Lincolnshire Biodiversity Action Plan 
Lincolnshire Geodiversity Action Plan 
Lincolnshire Wolds Management Plan 
Data held in Lincolnshire Environmental Records Centre including Local Wildlife 
Site data  
 
Why we have taken this approach  
 
Landscape  
 
12.1. East Lindsey  displays a rich and varied  landscape,  much of which  has been 
recognised through national and internatio nal designations for its special quality 
and character, or for the habitat it provides. This includes the Lincolnshire  Wolds 
Area of Outstanding  Natural  Beauty  (AONB), the only such designation  in the East 
Midlands, which covers about one third of the  District.  
 
12.2. The landscape  also contains  a variety  of important and designated historic 
areas that have shaped,  and in turn been shaped by, the history  of East Lindsey. 
These include the English Civil War Battlefield at Winceby  and the formal 
landscapes of the District’s Registered Historic Parks and Gardens. The District’s 
Conservation  Areas  and listed  buildings  also form an integral  part of the landscape 
character of East Lindsey. Each has their own character and it is important that 
any new development or alterations within these areas, or that affect a listed 
building, or which affects their setting, preserves or enhances their distinctive 
qualities.  
 
12.3. The European Landscape Convention highlights the need to develop 
policies  dedicated  to the protection, management  and planning  of the landscape. 
Part of this approach includes  the National Landscape  Character  Areas  (as defined 
by Natural England). The District comprises four distinct National Character 
Areas: the Lincolnshire Coast and Marshes, Lincolnshire Wolds, Central 
Lincolnshire Clay Vale and the  Fens.  
 
12.4. The Council's Landscape Character Assessment 2009 further defines 
thirteen  landscape  character  areas,  each with their own distinctive  characteristics 
and sensitivity to ch ange. The character areas within the assessment fall within 
four levels; these vary from moderate to low to highly sensitive. The highly 
sensitive landscapes should be given the highest protection. This will be used to 
help assess and influence the design and layout of new development. The 
District’s landscapes will be conserved or where appropriate enhanced and 
restored in line with the recommendations of the Landscape Character 
Assessment. Landscape character does not follow administrative boundaries and 
collaboration with neighbouring authorities is important to ensure a coherent 
strategy for the  landscape.  
 
104 Adopted July 2018   12.5. There is much in the landscape  to be protected  for its special  qualities  and 
natural history value, and in some cases its tranquillity, but it also provides 
opportunities to enrich the quality of life for our communities and to add to the 
rural economy,  especially  by appealing  to tourists  and visitors.  Our strategy  here 
is to ensure  that we balance  the need to protect  the most valuable  resource  whilst 
also releasing its community and economic  potential.  
 
12.6. All proposed development, in its location and design, will be required to 
adhere to these principles and shall be guided by the Council's Landscape 
Character Assessment, th e emerging Lincolnshire Historic Landscape 
Characterisation Assessment and the East Midlands Landscape Character 
Assessment.  
 
12.7. The Council will welcome development that adds to the distinctive 
character of the landscape and will encourage development that uses its 
landscape  setting  to grow the local economy  for the benefit  of local communities, 
provided it does not harm the landscape's character in the  process.  
 
12.8. The Lincolnshire  Wolds,  which  were designated as an Area of Outstanding 
Natural Beauty in 1973 for their distinctive and high quality landscapes, are 
particularly sensitive to change. Whilst we expect them to expand their role as a 
visitor destination, this should not be at the expense of the distinctive landscape 
or of the quality of life of the co mmunities within them. The close spatial and 
functional relationship between the small settlements and the landscape should 
be retained, as should the more significant views within, out of and into, the 
Wolds. The Council will give careful consideration to  any applications in the 
Lincolnshire Wolds AONB in respect of its ability to protect and enhance the 
setting of this distinctive landscape. The highest level of design should be 
expected in these nationally designated landscapes and, in the case of major 
development, consideration will be given to the need for the development to be 
in that location. New initiatives  and countryside  management  will be directed  and 
co-ordinated through the statutory Lincolnshire Wolds AONB Management Plan, 
drawn up in partner ship with the Council. The Council endorses all of the 
objectives and policies in the Management Plan and shall make sure that all new 
development in, or affecting the setting of, the Wolds aligns with them and vice 
versa.  
 
12.9. The Lincolnshire coast is a unique and highly distinctive landscape feature 
in the East Midlands Region. As such, it is a valuable resource. Whilst we will 
encourage further high quality development and changes to the built up coast to 
reinforce  and improve  the tourism  offer,  we will permit  only those  uses, including 
non-invasive green tourism, along the naturalistic coast, which do not impose 
themselves upon, or harm the distinctive character of, the landscape. A 
Heritage/Wild Coast Partnership is being developed extending along the entire 
undeveloped, natural East Lindsey coastline. Once established, this will be,  along 
with the Coastal  Country  Park initiative,  one of the key mechanisms  to addressing 
this challenge.  
 
 
105 Adopted July 2018   Strategic Policy 23 (SP23) –  Landscape  
1. The District`s landscapes will be protected, enhanced, used and 
managed to provide an attractive and healthy working and living 
environment. Development will be guided by the District`s Landscape 
Character Assessment and landscapes defined as highly sensitive will 
be afforded the greatest  protection.  
2. Development will be supported where it allows for greater public 
access to the countryside and naturalistic coast, supports visitors to 
the District and helps provide additional employment opportunities, 
provided t his does not compromise landscape quality or the 
biodiversity objectives of the  plan.  
3. The Council will ensure that the distinctive character of the 
District’s landscapes whether they are of cultural, natural or historic 
significance, will not be compromise d. In particular, the highest level 
of protection will be given to the Lincolnshire Wolds Area of 
Outstanding Natural Beauty, which is designated at a national level 
because of its landscape  quality.  
 
4. The Council will support development that conserves and  enhances 
designated and historic landscapes (Winceby Battlefield, Lincolnshire 
Wolds, Coastal Country Park, Conservation Areas, Historic Parks and 
Gardens, setting of listed buildings within the landscape) as focal 
points for widening and improving the visitor  experience.  
 
Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
 
12.10.  Biodiversity is a term commonly used to describe the variety of life on 
Earth. This encompasses the whole of the natural world and all living things  with 
which we share the planet. It includes plants, animals, and even invisible micro - 
organisms and bacteria that, together, interact in complex ways with the 
inanimate  environment  to create  living  ecosystems.  Geodiversity  is the term used 
to refer to physiographical and geomorphological features, such as rocks, 
minerals, fossils, soils and  landforms.  
 
12.11.  Biodiversity is a key indicator of the health of our environment and 
contributes greatly to our quality of life. Enhancing biodiversity is one of the key 
principles of sustainable development. It also has considerable economic and 
social benefits. Biodiversity is dynamic; however, some species and habitats can 
be highly susceptible to the harmful effects of change. Changes in climate, 
agriculture, settlement patterns and other human activities have led to a de cline 
in biodiversity in the District over the last 50 years. The District Council, along 
with other public bodies, has a duty under The Natural Environment and Rural 
Communities (NERC) Act to have regard to biodiversity conservation when 
carrying out its functions. This is referred to as the "Biodiversity Duty". The aim 
of the biodiversity duty is to raise the profile of biodiversity, so that the 
conservation  of biodiversity  becomes  properly  embedded in all relevant  polices  
106 Adopted July 2018   and decisi ons made by public authorities. Conserving biodiversity includes 
restoring and enhancing species populations and habitats, as well as protecting 
them. The UK Biodiversity Action Plan Biodiversity 2020 highlights the need to 
reverse this decline and bring a bout a step change in habitat creation and 
recreation and to increase the connectivity of sites.  
 
12.12.  The Lincolnshire BAP forms part of a national initiative to provide action 
plans for the nation’s most threatened and declining species and habitats. The 
BAP includes actions and activities relating to development and the planning 
process. The Council will apply the policies of the Plan to meet the objectives of 
the Lincolnshire  BAP. Species  and habitats  listed  on the Natural Environment  and 
Rural Communities (NERC) Act 2006 Section 41 as species and habitats of 
principal importance should also be  safeguarded.  
 
12.13.  There are a number of sites recognised at a local level for their nature 
conservation or geological value. These sites have been identified for features  
including their rarity, diversity, fragility or because they are typical of the local 
biodiversity or geodiversity of the District. The Council will seek to protect these 
sites when assessing development proposals. The important sites that meet the 
select ion criteria published by the Greater Lincolnshire Nature Partnership are 
called Local Wildlife Sites (LWSs) or Local Geological Sites (LGSs). There remain 
sites from the previous regime of designation, Sites of Nature Conservation 
Importance  (SNCI) and Regionally  Important  Geological  Sites (RIGS), which  have 
not yet been tested against the new criteria published by the GLNP. Until such 
time as these sites have been resurveyed and an assessment made of their 
current ability to meet the criteria, these sites  remain designated and this policy 
still applies to them. The Council will keep the evidence base up to date 
throughout  the lifetime  of the Plan including  a list of sites and any changes  to the 
evidence base in the Annual Authority Monitoring  Report.  
 
12.14.  Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) give legal protection to a  suite 
of the best sites for wildlife and geology in England. They are notified and 
approved by Natural  England.  These sites are protected  for both their own nature 
conservation value o r geological, and as part of a national network of such  sites, 
the Council values these sites and acknowledges their legally protected status.  
 
12.15.  The District includes sites of international importance for biodiversity, 
including parts of the Wash  and Humber  Estuaries.  These include  designations  of 
Ramsar  Sites, Special Protection  Areas  (SPAs) and Special Areas of Conservation 
(SACs). There are a number of policies within the Core Strategy that may bring 
forward development proposals, the location and nature of which may affect the 
intrinsic value of these sites. Development proposals likely to have an adverse 
impact on these sites should be subject to a Habitat Regulations Assessment, 
including an ecological assessment of the impact of the proposed development, 
in combination with any other plans and projects. Details of mitigation and 
enhancement measures should also be provided, along with details of site 
management to explain how this will be achieved. The Local Plan itself is  subject 
to Habitats Regulation  Assessment (under The Habitats Regulations) throughout 
its preparation  to ensure  that its policies  and proposals  do not have an adverse  
107 Adopted July 2018   impact  on internationally important sites. The Council will monitor the impact of 
local plan policies and proposals and visitors at the above relevant sites by 
assessing visitor access each year to see how and if they increase and will take 
appropriate action to  mitigate any effects.  
 
12.16.  When assessing any proposal for development which may impact on a 
protected habitat or species, or priority habitats and species identified in the 
Lincolnshire Biodiversity Action Plan or Natural Environment and Rural 
Communities (NERC) Act 2006, the Council will require the developer to provide 
up to date information to enable a proper assessment of the site to be made. 
Considering how the proposal  seeks  the preservation,  restoration  and re-creation 
of these habitats and the prote ction and recovery of species populations. This 
may take the form of information from the Lincolnshire Environmental Records 
Centre or other appropriate source and may require the carrying out of a  habitat 
or ecological survey for the site. In assessing su ch proposals, the Council will 
firstly  seek to incorporate  the habitat  or species within  the development  and seek 
its enhancement through the proposals. Where this is not possible, harm or 
disturbance to the habitat or species will be kept to a minimum and appropriate 
mitigation sought. Only where this is not possible will the Council consider 
compensation.  At the time of writing  the Plan, East Lindsey  is not within  a Nature 
Improvement Area (NIA) but work on this is ongoing. Where development is 
within a Nature Improvement Area (NIA) it should contribute to the aims and 
aspirations of the  NIA. 
 
12.17.  There  are a variety  of ways that development  can impact  upon a site, and 
not all of these will be direct. Sites protected for their biodiversity importance 
may be h ighly susceptible to changes in water levels and pollution of water 
courses and ground water  from nearby  development  and from air pollution  caused 
by increased traffic movements and operational needs of development. Soil is a 
finite resource, and fulfils m any roles that are beneficial to society. As a 
component of the natural environment, it is important that soils are protected 
and used sustainably.  Soils of high environmental  value  (e.g. wetland  and carbon 
stores such as peatland) should also be considered as part of ecological 
connectivity. More detailed guidance on this matter can be found in the Defra 
Code of practice for the sustainable use of soils on construction  sites.  
 
12.18.  Ancient Woodland and Veteran Trees are an irreplaceable resource that 
cannot  be replicated  through normal  biodiversity  offsetting  processes,  due to the 
time it has taken for them to reach their current status. The national inventory 
of ancient  woodland  is held and updated  by Natural  England.  The Woodland Trust 
has a record of  identified veteran trees and can provide further advice if it is 
considered that a tree not yet identified would fulfil the criteria. In determining 
planning applications, the Council will look to the Standing Advice for Ancient 
Trees  and Woodlands  publis hed by the Forestry  Commission  and Natural England. 
Development involving, or with the potential to affect, an area of  ancient 
woodland or a veteran tree will need to provide the highest level of evidence to 
demonstrate that there is significant community benefit to the development 
proceeding and that the minimum  damage  occurs as a result of the development  
 
 
108 Adopted July 2018   12.19.  Sites identified for their biodiversity interest, at whatever level, do not 
exist in isolation and the linking of a network of s ites increases their range and 
extent, this also makes a valuable contribution to the integrity of both individual 
sites and overall  levels  of biodiversity  across the District. This connectivity  should 
not stop at a site boundary or even District boundaries and opportunities may 
exist to create  or strengthen links that support  biodiversity  on a landscape -scale. 
Linear  features,  such as hedgerows,  verges  and watercourses can play a valuable 
role in helping to develop networks of sites and in allowin g species to migrate.  It 
assists in the adaptation of landscapes and ecosystems to climate change. The 
Council has undertaken a Green Infrastructure Audit, identifying existing 
networks of habitats across the District. From this work, it is possible to ide ntify 
how any opportunities for further habitat creation fit into this network and gives 
sites the best opportunity to establish themselves and the expansion and linking 
of these  sites will be supported.  This can also be used to inform  the development 
planning process and other opportunities for habitat creation. The Council will 
seek to enhance the biodiversity of the District through the determination of 
planning applications. The Council will seek to retain natural features, including 
trees and hedgerows on site, wherever possible. It will also seek the creation of 
new areas for wildlife, including the planting of native tree species, to help 
strengthen existing biodiversity networks. The Council is a partner in a number 
of initiatives, su ch as the, Lincolnshire Limewoods, the Coastal Country Park, 
Heritage/Wild Coast Partnership and the Lincolnshire Chalk Streams Project. 
Initiatives such as these help to improve understanding of the natural 
environment  and provide  further  opportunity  for the enhancement  of biodiversity.  
 
Strategic Policy 24 (SP24) - Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
 
1. Development proposals should seek to protect and enhance the 
biodiversity and geodiversity value of land and buildings, and minimise 
fragmentation and maximise opportunities for connection between 
natural habitats.  
 
2. The Council will protect sites designated internationally, nationally 
or locally for their biodiversity and geodiversity importance, species 
populations  and habitats  identified  in the Lincolnshire  Biodiversity  Action 
Plan and the Natural Environment and Rural Communities (NERC) Act 
2006. Development,  which could  adversely  affect  such  a site, will only be 
permitted in exceptional circumstances:  
 
• In the case of internationally designated sites, where there is no 
alternative solution and there are overriding reasons of public 
interest for the  development;  
• In the case of nationally designated sites, there is no alternative 
solution and the reasons for the development clearly outweigh the 
biodiversity val ue of the site; or 
• In the case of locally designated sites, and sites that meet the 
criteria  for selection  as a Local  Site, the reasons  for the development 
clearly outweigh the need to protect the site in the long  term.  
 
 
109 Adopted July 2018   3. In exceptional circumstances, where adverse impacts are 
demonstrated to be unavoidable and development is permitted which 
would damage the nature conservation or geological value of a site, the 
Council will ensure that such damage is kept to a minimum and wil l 
ensure  appropriate  mitigation,  compensation or enhancement  of the site 
through the use of planning conditions or planning obligations. 
Compensation measures towards loss of habitat will be used only as a 
last resort where there is no alternative. Where a ny mitigation and 
compensation measures are required, they should be in place before 
development activities start that may disturb protected or important 
habitats and species. Proposals to provide or enhance a site will be 
supported.  
 
4. Where new habitat is created it should, where possible, be linked  to 
other similar habitats to provide a network of such sites for  wildlife.  
 
5. Planning permission will only be granted for development which 
directly or indirectly leads to loss or harm to ancient woodland or aged  
or veteran trees, in exceptional circumstances, where the developer can 
demonstrate that the wider benefits of that loss clearly outweigh the 
protection of the  trees  
 
Green Infrastructure  
 
12.20.  Green Infrastructure (GI) is the umbrella term used to describe al l the 
different elements that form the network of natural and semi -natural spaces 
within and around our towns and villages, and in the open countryside. The use 
of the word green  in this context can be confusing as it is often misunderstood to 
mean parks,  woodlands  and other  areas that are literally  green,  but the term can 
be used to cover a wider range of spaces and includes rivers and other water 
features, and importantly in East Lindsey’s situation, includes the coastline. GI 
covers a variety of types of  spaces, including (but by no means exclusively) 
woodland, parks and gardens, green lanes, public rights of way, churchyards, 
sports facilities, water courses and beaches and  dunes.  
 
12.21.  Ideally,  GI should  come  from a range  of different  types,  forming  an overa ll 
network. GI is an important component part of place making and quality of life. 
It has many benefits to the environment and to both individuals and the 
community as a whole. It  can: 
 
• Foster environmental  appreciation;  
• Help provide space for biodiversity  and networks to help the migration 
of species;  
• Help improve health and childhood development by providing 
opportunities for physical activity and diverse and flexible 
environments for  play; 
• Improve general well -being and quality of  life; 
• Provide the setting for both formal and informal  recreation;  
• Safeguard our landscapes and enhance the setting of heritage  assets;  
110 Adopted July 2018   • Help shape our sense of place and community identity and provide the 
setting for different sectors of the community to co me together; 
• Provide opportunities for climate regulation through assisting urban 
cooling, flood water storage, sustainable urban drainage schemes 
(particularly when it is integral to large new developments) and also 
provide the space for biodiversity to r espond to changes in  climate;  
• Provide a filter for airborne pollution;  and 
• Play a role in improving the desirability of places to live and  invest.  
 
12.22.  It is often assumed that rural areas must be well blessed with green 
infrastructure, given the relatively low density of population and the large 
swathes of open land, which contribute to its landscape character. However, 
much of this land is given over to agriculture and is not primarily managed for 
wildlife or public access. Settlements have often developed incrementally over 
long periods, with a significant amount of development coming forward in the 
form of individual plots or small developments, limiting the opportunities to plan 
for green space at the community  scale.  
 
12.23.  The Council has undertaken an audit of Green Infrastructure within the 
District. There are two strands to this audit; one is focused on the networks of 
sites for biodiversity (which may or may not be publically accessible) and the 
second  looks at the accessible  natural  and semi-natural  green  space  available  for 
use by the wider community. In the case of the accessible green space, these 
have been assessed against the Accessible Natural Green Space Standards 
formulated by Natural England, which allows the Council to identify those areas 
that would benefit  from additional  Green  Infrastructure.  The Audit has shown that 
there is a need to diversify and add to the types of GI within and around many 
communities, and this will continue as communities experience future growth. 
The type and nature  of the open space  will depend  on the scale and nature  of the 
development. Open space provision can cover a range of types and may include 
the requirement for equipped play for younger children, as well as more formal 
sport and recreation  provision  and informal  areas for less structured activity. The 
Council will be guided by the Fields in Trust Standards in assessing the level and 
type of  need.  
 
12.24.  Given current levels of accessible green space, it is important that what 
we do have is safeguarded. If, in exceptional circumstances, the Council does 
permit development on an existing piece of green space identified through the 
Settlement Proposals DPD, it will be a condition of that permission that an 
equivalent piece of green space is provided so that there is no net  loss. 
 
12.25.  The Council will support projects by the community or other local groups 
to create  accessible  green  space  throughout  the District. On housing sites over 1 
hectare, the Council will require multi- functional green space, for example, 
recreation areas, landscaped cycle ways and footpaths, wildlife areas. Where 
possible, it should show how it links to the wider community and other areas of 
green space to create an innovative and integrated development. This may 
require  the applicant to provide  up to date information  on biodiversity  of the site, 
111 Adopted July 2018   to enable a proper assessment of the site to be made, of how the site links to 
other sites in the local area. This may take the form of information from the 
Lincolnshire Environmental Reco rds Centre or other appropriate source and may 
require the carrying out of a habitat or ecological survey for the site. The linking 
of sites and the creation  of access corridors  can be supported by the Public  Rights 
of Way (PRoW) network, which provides va luable connections between sites for 
both people and wildlife. Gardens can also play an important role in providing 
space for residents to enjoy and wildlife to forage and migrate. However, these 
should be in addition to any requirement for wider community  green 
infrastructure required by this  policy.  
 
12.26.  In drawing up the Settlement Proposals DPD and supporting communities 
to develop their own Neighbourhood Development Plans; the Council will seek  to 
protect existing green space and will look for opportunitie s to link existing sites 
through its allocations. The protection and safeguarding is not expressly limited 
to greenspace identified through the Settlement Proposals DPD. There may be 
areas that are delivered  as new space  over the lifetime  of the plan, or which  have 
been overlooked in the assessment. Also, the Settlement Proposals DPD only 
contains plans for the Towns and Large Villages, so there will be green spaces in 
other  settlements  which  warrant  the same  consideration  through the Plan. These 
spaces wi ll be judged against the same criteria used to assess the sites in the 
Settlement Proposals DPD and these are set out in the  policy.  
 
Strategic Policy 25 (SP25) –  Green Infrastructure  
 
1. The Council will safeguard and deliver a network of 
accessible green infrastructure  by:- 
 
• Protecting  and safeguarding  all greenspace  identified  through the 
Settlement Proposals DPD so that there is no net  loss;  
• Maximising opportunities for new and enhanced green 
infrastructure and publically accessible open spaces in and 
around all communities;  
• Seek opportunities to connect existing green infrastructure to 
improve  the network  of spaces  and accessibility  for both the local 
population and  wildlife.  
 
2. In the case of sites not identified  on the Inset  Maps,  development  will 
only be permitted on open spaces provided unacceptable harm will not 
be caused to their appearance, character or role in  providing:  
 
• the setting for a designated or non-designated heritage  asset;  
• an important element in the street scene or a well-defined visua l 
relief in an otherwise built up frontage; particularly in the case  of 
ribbon development extending into the  countryside;  
• a locally important  habitat;  
• a prominent site at the entrance to settlements that provides  the 
setting for the built  environment;  
 
112 Adopted July 2018   • a frame for or enabling an important  view;  
• a landscaped area forming part of structural open space within a 
development  site; 
• informal amenity or recreation space; or, 
• formal  public  greenspace,  such  as parks  and gardens  and 
allotments . 
 
3. Where the Council does support development on an existing piece 
of green space identified through the Settlement Proposals DPD, it will 
be a condition of that permission  that an equivalent  piece of green  space 
is provided in terms of size, type and accessibility to the community so 
that there is no net  loss.  
 
4. On housing  sites  over 1 hectare,  the Council will require  the provision 
of multi-functional green infrastructure, for example, recreation areas, 
landscaped cycle ways and footpaths, wildlife  areas.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
113 Adopted July 2018   CHAPTER 13 –  OPEN SPACE, SPORT AND RECREATION  
 
Where we want to be 
 
A District with a healthy and active population with high levels of public 
participation in sports and recreational pastimes, both within formal sporting 
facilities but also on increased levels of open space across the District.  
 
All communities will have access to quality open spaces for outdoor recreation.  
 
The District will contain a range of sports facilities approp riate to the size and 
needs of the community they are located.  
 
What it will look like  
 
Most large sports and formal recreational facilities will be located in the larger 
centres  of population  to benefit  from the economies  of scale and reduce  the need 
for excessive  travel. 
 
Smaller  settlements  will provide  hubs for local residents  where  there  will be sports 
and recreational facilities at an appropriate scale to help support healthy and 
active local communities.  
 
Delivery Objectives (how we are going to get there) 
This strategy will be delivered through the following 
Lincolnshire Sports Partnership  
Evidence  
 
Open Space, recreational and sports facilities assessment 
Lincolnshire Joint Strategic Needs Assessment 2012  
Joint Health and Wellbeing Strategy for Lincolnshire 2013 -2018 
 
Open Space, Sport and Recreation  
 
Why we have taken this approach  
 
13.1. There are a number of key challenges in providing leisure services in the 
District. These include an ageing population, large geographical area with 
predominantly small rural communities, poor access to public transport, a heavy 
reliance on private transport, significant levels of deprivation and poor health – 
all factors that affect levels of use of leisure facilities and  services.  
 
13.2. Within the Council’s Community P lan for a Sustainable Future under the 
themes  of ‘Health  and Wellbeing’  and ‘Older  People’,  an increase  in the uptake  of 
physical activity throughout the community is a key objective within the wider 
aim of tackling serious health issues. Increased opportu nities to  undertake  
114 Adopted July 2018   physical activity and increased uptake of existing schemes and facilities are 
identified measures to achieve this objective, which need to be supported and 
facilitated through the Local Plan.  
 
13.3. Since the 1st of January 2015 Magna Vitae Trust for Leisure and Culture 
have assumed responsibility for managing and operating the District Councils 
formerly  run leisure,  culture  and health  facilities  and services  across East Lindsey. 
The Charitable trust are now responsible for the day to day operation and 
continued  development  of facilities  such as the Embassy  Swimming Pool and The 
Meridian Leisure  Centre.  
 
13.4. An audit and needs assessment of open spaces, recreational and sports 
facilities in the District has been recently undertaken. It has indicated no clear 
evidence of any significant quantitative deficiency in the level of indoor sports 
facility  provision.  However,  there  are discrepancies  between  the level of provision 
within the Towns and some  villages.  
 
13.5. School facilities, which are available for community use, formed part of 
this assessment  and access to school  sports  facilities  comprises  a strong  element 
of the Districts  provision  of sports  facilities.  Due to a reliance  on access to sporting 
facilities at schools across the District, the Council will seek continued and 
increased access to these sports facilities for organised and community use, 
outside of school hours in order to foster community participation. The loss of a 
school in a community can often remove the only access to sport and recreation 
facilities in a village. It is important that Parish Councils and other community 
groups have the opportunity to take on such facilities, as, once they are lost to 
other uses, they are lost forever. As well as  protection through this policy, 
Chapter 7 –  Diverse Economy, Town/Village Centres and Shopping, also affords 
protection to key community  facilities.  
 
13.6. Green spaces are important to local communities. The availability of  open 
space, sport and recreation fac ilities are key factors to the quality of life and 
physical well- being of residents and can, by adding to the attractiveness of the 
District, encourage potential investors to the area and stimulate economic 
growth.  
 
13.7. The Council is keen to raise and sustain  an awareness of the health and 
other benefits of leisure pursuits amongst all ages of the local population. Local 
allotments and parish gardens form an important element of this provision. Not 
only do they provide an opportunity for an active lifestyle, they contribute to  the 
supply of healthy food and engender community spirit. It is important that 
protection is given to existing allotments throughout the District and that efforts 
are made to provide more where demand exists.  
 
13.8. The audit of Sport and Recre ation facilities has identified a district wide 
deficiency in the level of outdoor sport and recreation provision. Residential 
development increases the demand for open space, recreation and sports 
facilities and this in turn has a cumulative impact on the  level of existing 
provision.  Therefore,  if development  is proposed  in areas where  there  is a 
115 Adopted July 2018   deficiency in existing provision or in a situation where the development itself  will 
create an issue of deficiency, the Council will require  the provision of new or 
improved open space, recreational or outdoor sports facilities on developments 
of 10 houses and above.  
 
13.9. The Council will assess the level of provision required on a site by site 
basis using the number and type of houses proposed, the level of existing 
population  and the amount  and type of existing  open space/sport  provision  within 
the settlement. The standards set out below, based on the Fields in Trust 
Standards, will be used in determining the level of provision required from new  
development. On site provision is preferable but where this is not feasible, 
including for reasons relating to the scale of the development proposed, off site 
contributions for improving the quality of existing provision within the 
accessibility standard ranges as set out below will be considered. Open space 
provision can cover a range of types and may include the requirement for 
equipped play for younger children, as well as more formal sport and recreation 
provision and informal areas for less structured  activity. The application of these 
standards will reflect the local circumstances in the individual settlement where 
the development is proposed.  
13.10.  Open Space, Sport and recreation standards  
 
Open Space typology  Quantity Guideline 
(hectares per 1,000 
popula tion) Walking Guideline 
(walking distance: 
metres from  
dwellings)  
Playing pitches  1.20 1,200m  
All outdoor sports  1.60 1,200m  
Equipped/designated 
play areas  0.25 LAP’s – 100m  
LEAP’s – 400m 
NEAP’s – 1,000m  
Other outdoor  
provision (MUGAs and 
skateboard parks)  0.30 700m  
Amenity Green Space  0.60 480m  
 
13.11.  Application Standards for equipped/designated play  space  
 
Scale of 
development  Local 
Area for  
Play 
(LAP)  Locally 
Equipped  
Area for Play 
(LEAP)  Neighbourhood 
Equipped Area  
for Play 
(NEAP)  Multi-Use 
Games Area 
(MUGA)  
10-200     
201-500     
501+      
 
13.12.  On large -scale developments, facilities will be provided in step with 
population  growth  and will be designed as an integral  part of the development.  
 
116 
Adopted July 2018   The developer will also need to show how new open space facilities will be 
maintained.  
 
13.13.  Existing  facilities  will be safeguarded from alternative  uses,  unless  suitable 
and equivalent alternative facilities can be made available within the same 
catchment or the existing facilities can be shown as surplus to requirements 
through a robust and up to date assessment of  need.  
Strategic Policy 26 (SP26) –  Open Space, Sport and Recreation 
The Council will support development that facilitates the Council’s  
aspiration to increase participation in sports and physical activity. The 
Council will safeguard, expand, enhance and promote access to sports 
and recreational facilities and open spaces:  
 
1. Development resulting in the loss of indoor or outdoor sports and 
recreational facilities or open spaces will only be supported  where:  
 
• The building or land has been demonstrated to be redundant for 
a sports use through a robust and up to date assessment of 
need and has been marketed for at least 12 months at a price 
that reflects its condition and market value,  or 
 
• The building or land is to be replaced by improved facilities 
offering equivalent provision that helps meet the 
sporting/recreational needs of the District and optimises access 
by sustainable transport modes,  or 
 
• The development is for alternative sports and recreational 
provision, the needs for which clearly outweigh the  loss.  
 
2. New residential developments of 10 and over should provide 
quality and accessible sports and recreational facilities in order to meet 
the need it generates in line with the standards set out above in 
paragraphs 13.10 and 13.11 of the supporting  text.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
117 Adopted July 2018   CHAPTER 14 –  RENEWABLE AND LOW CARBON ENERGY 
 
Where we want to be 
 
Renewable energy development will have been directed to the most appropriate 
locations, dependent on the needs of the technology and the character and 
sensitivities of the area. 
 
What it will look like  
 
The scale of development will reflect the capacity of the landscape and local 
environment to accommodate it, including any cumulative impact from other 
development.  
 
New small and micro generation schemes, to meet the needs of local businesses 
and communities, will have been assimilated into the local landscape through 
choice of tec hnology, siting and design.  
 
Delivery Objectives (how we are going to get there) 
This strategy will be delivered through the following 
The use of a place -making checklist  
Evidence  
 
East Lindsey Landscape Character Assessment 2011 
Lincolnshire Biodiversity Action Plan  
 
Renewable and Low Carbon Energy  
 
Why we have taken this approach  
 
14.1. The Council is keen to encourage the exploitation of a range of  renewable 
energy3 and low carbon4 sources that have  potential in East Lindsey, including 
passive  and photovoltaic  solar,  biomass,  wind power,  anaerobic  digestion,  ground 
and air source heating and aquifer thermal energy where this will not impact 
adversely on local communities, biodiversity, heritage assets or landscape 
character and  appearance.  
 
14.2. The Council  considers  that the District’s  most valued landscapes should be 
protected from development, which is likely to have an unacceptable impact on 
these areas. National Character Areas divide England int o 159 distinct natural 
areas,  defined by a combination  of landscape,  biodiversity,  geodiversity  and 
 
3 Renewable energy is the name used to cover forms of energy that occur naturally and are readily replaced. This 
includes energy from digestible material such as energy crops or agricultural waste as well as from the sun, wind, water 
and the earth. 
4 Low Carbon energy is that produced from processes or technologies that produce power with substantially lower 
carbon dioxide emissions than conventional fuels. T his includes renewable sources of power and also technologies such 
as nuclear power, carbon capture and storage, combined heat and  power.  
118 Adopted July 2018   cultural and economic activity. In addition, the Council’s Landscape Character 
Assessment  2009 divides  the District into thirteen  areas.  It defines  the distinctive 
landscape  characteristics of each area and explains  their relative  sensitivity  to all 
types of development and change. These will provide the basis for the Council’s 
judgement on the impac t of a development proposal on the landscape, and it is 
to these  documents  that the Council  will expect  all Environmental  and Landscape 
Impact  Assessments to relate  when submitted  in support  of a planning  application 
for renewable energy projects. The East Lindsey Landscape Character 
Assessment identifies two areas, the Tetney to Gibraltar Point Naturalistic Coast 
and the Wainfleet Wash  Saltmarsh,  as being  highly  sensitive  to change  and where 
any development  is likely to detract  from the character  of the area. It is therefore 
felt appropriate to give these areas the highest level of protection from large - 
scale development.  
 
14.3. Similarly, the Lincolnshire Wolds Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty 
(AONB) is protected at a national level solely for its landscape quality, for the 
purpose of protecting and enhancing its natural beauty. It is the only area so 
designated  in the East Midlands  and, as such,  is of major  significance  both locally 
and nationally. Polic y 23 of the Core Strategy affords the AONB the highest  level 
of landscape protection, in line with national policy. Any development in the 
AONB, or which impacts upon it, or its setting, is carefully considered for its 
impact on the character of the landsc ape. Where those impacts are judged to be 
so significant that they outweigh the benefits, proposals will be rejected. The 
Council will support local communities and businesses in pursuing sources of  low 
carbon energy generation. However, within the Lincolnshire Wolds where 
following assessment the benefits are outweighed by the impact of the 
development that support will not be  forthcoming.  
 
14.4. Whilst the sensitivity of special landscapes may prevent large scale 
renewable energy projects, the Council will enco urage the development of local, 
small scale5 and micro energy solutions that contribute towards the self - 
sufficiency  (in energy  terms) of local communities  and businesses.  In such cases, 
the impact on local amenities will be  a key consideration.  
 
14.5. The Council will take into account the locational requirements of different 
types of renewable energy production. Some do not have specific locational 
requirements and can be located in less sensitive locations. Other forms of 
produc tion have a specific siting requirement due to the nature of the energy 
source.  Only development  that must be located  in the countryside  because  of the 
nature  of the power  source,  or because  it is a small -scale unit providing  power  to 
a dwelling, farm or rural enterprise would be permitted there. Large scale 
development that does not have these special locational requirements should be 
located within or alongside centres of population to minimise the effects of 
distribution  and its impact  on the landscape  and, where  appropriate,  should  have 
direct access to the strategic road network in order to facilitate the delivery  and 
 
5 Small scale is defined as those proposals falling outside those energy developments listed in Schedule 2 of the EIA 
Regulations 2011, including the installation of more than 2 turbines or the hub height of any turbine or other structure 
exceeds 15 metres and also industrial installations for the production of electricity, steam and hot water where the 
development area exceeds 0.5 h ectare. Schemes which are larger than this will be considered as large scale for the 
purpose of the policy.  
119 Adopted July 2018   removal of fuel and waste products. The quality of the District’s water 
environment  should  be protected  and development  should not have an impact  on 
residential amenity, for example with regard to visual intrusion, noise, smell, 
odour or vibration.  
 
14.6. The unique local character of the District is made up of many elements, 
including its landscape,  biodiversity, historic  assets and other  features  of cultural 
importance. This includes not only the site or feature itself, but also its setting. 
There are a number of sites and species of importance for nature conservation 
which are designated at a national level and sites along the coast  which are 
protected  at an international level.  Renewable  energy  proposals  are likely to have 
a number of impacts and applicants should show how they have sought to 
minimise harm to such valuable and important assets. Rigorous assessment is 
needed to ensur e that the impact of the development on these assets does not 
outweigh any potential benefits of the proposal. Other policies of the Core 
Strategy deal with these matters in greater detail and they should be used, in 
conjunction with this policy, in that a ssessment. The quality of the local 
environment is an important part of the economy of the District, particularly 
tourism. Any assessment of renewable energy proposals should reflect the 
economic and tourism impacts of the  development.  
 
14.7. Grid connection  from new renewable  energy  development  can also have a 
significant impact on the landscape and heritage assets. The routing of cabling 
and siting of sub- stations should be an integral part of the assessment of the 
overall proposal. East Lindsey’s landscape is particularly open and noted for its 
big skies. Overhead lines can have an unacceptable impact a considerable 
distance from the parent development if they are not sensitively routed. This is 
especially true in sensitive landscapes, such as the Lincolnshi re Wolds Area of 
Outstanding Natural Beauty, where power companies have been involved in 
projects to underground cables for the benefit of the landscape. The Council 
consider that the presumption should be for the undergrounding of cables or the 
use of exi sting infrastructure in the first instance. Where this is not possible, 
developers will be expected to provide a reasoned justification and demonstrate 
what steps are to be taken to minimise impact on the  landscape.  
 
Solar Power  
 
14.8. There has been increasing  interest in the development  of solar farms  across 
the District. Careful consideration needs to be given to the siting of these 
proposals. Solar farms can, depending on their scale, require a large land take. 
National policies exist seeking to prioritise the use of previously developed land 
and minimising  the use of the best and most versatile  agricultural  land and these 
matters should be given due consideration in assessing any application. Impact 
of the proposals on biodiversity, and ability of the scheme to accommodate this, 
may also be a factor on both brownfield and greenfield sites. Although often 
sitting low in the landscape, solar farms can still have an impact locally, in long 
distance  views  or where  overlooked  from higher  ground.  Proposals  should set out 
how the impact  on the landscape  has been considered in site selection  and should 
be accompanied  by a landscaping scheme,  showing how the impact  of the 
120 Adopted July 2018   proposal  has been mitigated. Proposals  should  also take account  of the impact  on 
heritage assets. Assessing the level of harm either directly or on the setting of 
that asset and showing how any potential impact has been addressed through 
siting, scale, layout and landscaping of the  proposal.  
 
Wind Energy  
 
14.9. On 18 June 2015 the Secretary of State for Communities and Local 
Government issued a Ministerial Statement which related to wind energy 
development. The National Planning Practice Guidance (NPPG) on wind energy 
development was amended as a result of the statement. The NPPG no w advises 
that local planning authorities can only approve proposals for wind energy 
development if: the development site is in an area identified as suitable for wind 
energy development in a Local or Neighbourhood Plan; and following 
consultation, it can be demonstrated that the planning impacts identified by 
affected local communities have been fully addressed and therefore the  proposal 
has their backing. In accordance with the Ministerial Statement, the Council has 
assessed the District in relation to its suitability for wind turbine development. 
Having regard to various constraints, most of the district is potentially suitable 
with the exception  of areas D1 (Wainfleet Wash  Saltmarsh)  and K1 (Donna  Nook 
to Gibraltar Point Naturalistic Coast) in the Council’s Landscape Character 
Assessment (see map below). These areas are identified as having a high 
sensitivity to change and also contain internationally protected sites for 
biodiversity. Therefore the whole District is identified as suitable for wind  energy 
development at a strategic level, with the exception of areas D1 and K1. As 
individual sites are brought forward, the requirement of the second clause of  the 
Ministerial Statement in respect of the planning impacts of individual sites will 
then be assessed  against the criteria in the policy. The area suitable for wind 
energy is shown on the Policies Map below. The Council has prepared a 
background paper, setting out and mapping some of the main constraints on the 
development of wind energy.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
121 Adopted July 2018    
WIND ENERGY POLICY MAP  
 
14.10.  Wind turbine development impacts on the landscape, but it is the degree 
to which the landscape can accommodate the development that will determine 
whether the proposal is acceptable. The Council will expect to receive a rigorous 
impact assessment with any planning application. It is important that wind 
turbines,  through accumulation and intervisibility, do not come  to dominate  or 
122 
Adopted July 2018   define the landscape of the District, which is an important economic, tourism, 
cultural and biodiversity resource. Cumulative impact is an important planning 
consideration. Cumulative impact includes the impact of turbines located off 
shore.  
 
14.11.  In considering  proposals  for wind energy  development  the Council  will take 
into account; whether the number, siting, scale, design and size of the turbines, 
or associated grid connection would have an unacceptable impact on landscape 
character, either individually or when assessed cumulatively with existing or 
proposed  development; whether the development would cause nuisance to local 
communities from noise (applying the criteria of ETSU -R-97), shadow flicker, 
electromagnetic  interference or other  adverse  impacts.  The Institute  of Acoustics 
published a Good Practice Guide on the Application of ETSU -R-97 for the 
Assessment and Rating of Wind Turbine Noise in May 2013. This should also be 
used in assessing applications for wind  turbines.  
 
14.12.  The benefits of renewable energy developments are a material 
consideration and will be weighed in the balance alongside all other material 
considerations.  
 
14.13 Government policy emphasises the role of planning in supporting the 
transition to a low -carbon future, addressing a wide range of issues from the 
support for renewable and decentralised energy, encouraging the reuse of 
existing resources, increased energy efficiency, security of supply and moving 
to zero carbon homes. The Council’s Policies, be they formally adopted planning 
policies or policy approaches in other aspects of i ts work, should support these 
endeavours.  
 
14.14. Included within this is the need to deliver well- designed, sustainable 
buildings and local environments to support this objective. Sustainable 
development is about considerably more than reducing carbon emi ssions and 
other methods for assessing development are about a whole range of issues, 
including but not wholly related to the production and use of energy. The Local 
Planning Authority has to work within the building regulations and other 
regulatory regime s, but there are opportunities within these to allow 
development to meet these objectives while reflecting the local character of the 
area in which it sits and including where appropriate their importance as a 
heritage asset. The Council will continue to s eek locally appropriate solutions 
where possible.  
 
Strategic Policy 27 (SP27) –  Renewable and Low Carbon Energy  
 
1. Large -scale renewable and low carbon energy development, 
development for the transmission and interconnection of electricity, 
and infrastructur e required to support such development, will be 
supported where their individual or cumulative impact is, when 
weighed against the benefits, considered to be acceptable in relation 
to: 
 
 
123 Adopted July 2018   a) residential amenity; 
 
b) surrounding landscape, to wnscape and historic landscape 
character, and visual  qualities;  
 
c) the significance (including the setting) of a historic garden, park, 
battlefield, building, conservation area, archaeological site or 
other heritage  asset;  
 
d) sites or features of biodiversity or geodiversity importance, or 
protected  species;  
 
e) the local economy;  
 
f) highway safety; and 
 
g) water environment and water  quality  
 
2. Wind energy developments will be supported in the areas shown 
on the policies map, provided where their individual or cumulativ e 
impact is, when weighed against the benefits, considered to be 
acceptable in relation to the criteria a) to g) set out at Clause 1  above.  
 
3. Development within or affecting the setting of the Lincolnshire 
Wolds Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, and lands cape areas defined 
as highly sensitive within the East Lindsey Landscape Character 
Assessment, will only be permitted in exceptional circumstances, where 
the development is in the public interest and considering the  following: 
 
a) The need for the development , including any national considerations, 
and the impact of permitting it, or refusing it, upon the local economy; 
and 
 
b) the cost of, and scope for, developing elsewhere outside the 
designated area, or meeting the need for it in some other way; and 
 
c) any detrimental effect on the environment, the landscape and 
recreational opportunities, and the extent to which that could be 
satisfactorily  moderated.  
 
3. The presumption will be for connecting cables to be placed 
underground, or use made of existing or replac ement infrastructure (of 
the same size and scale) along existing routes to carry any additional 
base load  cabling.  
 
4. Small scale and micro renewable energy development will be 
supported where their individual or cumulative impact, when weighed 
against the b enefits, is not considered to have an unacceptable impact 
on residential amenity; the context and setting of any areas of cultural 
124 Adopted July 2018   or historic importance or heritage assets; and local landscape character 
and visual qualities.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
125 Adopted July 2018   CHAPTER 15 –  INFRASTRUCTURE AND S106 OBLIGATIONS  
 
Where we want to be 
 
The Core Strategy and the Settlement Proposals Development Plan Document 
(DPD) will provide the framework for infrastructure and service providers to 
deliver their services in a planned way to meet the needs of new development.  
 
Communities will be well served by the essential services and facilities that 
contribute to a network of sustainable settlements. One, th at is attractive to 
business and visitors, where the strategy for the delivery of new development is 
matched by the provision of the necessary infrastructure in terms of utilities, 
cultural and educational facilities etc.  
 
What it will look like  
 
Infrastru cture refers to a wide range of services and facilities that may or may 
not be immediately apparent to the user. A significant amount of infrastructure 
such as gas, electric, water and wastewater sit in the background. Schools, 
health facilities (social in frastructure) are more apparent but may only be 
present in larger settlements where there is sufficient population to maintain it 
as a local service. In all cases the impact of infrastructure development will be 
minimised.  
 
Delivery Objectives (how we are going to get there) 
This strategy will be delivered through the following  
East Lindsey Economic Development Strategy 2006- 2020 
East Lindsey Economic Action Plan  
Greater Lincolnshire Local Enterprise Partnership –  Strategic Economic Plan 2016 
Settlement Pro posals Development Plan Document 2016 -  2031 
 
Evidence  
 
East Lindsey Infrastructure Delivery Plan 2016 
Lindsey Action Zone  
East Lindsey Economic Baseline Study 2015 
Telecommunications - Mobile Operators Authority Register  
 
Infrastructure  
 
Why we have taken  this approach  
 
15.1. Infrastructure defines a wide range of services, some, such as water 
supply  and sewage  disposal  that are fundamental  to the quality  of life, and others 
that are less obvious (green infrastructure and cultural facilities) but are still  
important to future sustainability.  
 
 
126 Adopted July 2018   15.2. The District Council is not directly responsible for the delivery of many 
infrastructure elements but, as part of the Local Plan, it is working closely with 
service  providers  to ensure  they facilitate the necessary  infrastructure  to support 
new development or, like schools, they can be programmed into budgets for 
delivery in the future to meet the anticipated future  demand.  
 
15.3. This information is being collated through the Infrastructure Delivery  Plan 
(IDP) which  aims to identify  known infrastructure  requirements  at both a strategic 
(major schemes) and local level. At this time it is not proposed to introduce a 
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) on new developments. Due to the low 
residual value of land within the District as evidenced within the Economic 
Viability Assessment the demands of CIL charging could render development 
unviable. The need for and potential benefits from CIL and any other 
infrastructure  mechanism that may replace  it will howev er be regularly  reviewed. 
Those  developing sites are strongly  encouraged to bring forward  sites in a timely 
and prompt  way. 
 
15.4. Access to infrastructure  is often pre-determined by population  and location 
and, in an area where people and places are widely dispersed; it is neither 
practical nor feasible to provide a wide range of services for all. Future provision 
will be a response to the proposed growth of settlements. The growth strategy 
will be delivered  through the Settlement Proposals  Development  Plan Document.  
 
15.5. The Council will seek to avoid any significant adverse impacts from new 
infrastructure schemes, including those affecting the character of the landscape 
either singly or cumulatively. Impact assessments will be required to show what 
alternative options, which reduce or eliminate those impacts, have been 
considered. Major infrastructure schemes include proposals for the transmission 
of resources across the District such as gas, electricity, telecommunications,  and 
highways that contribute to wider  objectives.  
 
15.6. The most significant amount of new development will be directed to the 
larger, more sustainable settlements. The Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), 
identifies  existing  levels  of infrastructure  provision  and will be updated and evolve 
in line  with the delivery timetable of development through the Settlement 
Proposals Development Plan Document. The IDP will also serve to inform 
decisions on developer contributions, and will assist with the decision making 
process for planning applications in the  District  
 
15.7. Major  developments  of 10 or more dwellings  and other  major  schemes  will 
be required to contribute towards the provision of infrastructure for which they 
create a need. This could include the following, although it is not an exhaustive 
list: 
• Roads and other transport  facilities,  
• flood defences,  
• schools and other educational  facilities,  
• medical facilities,  
• sporting and recreational facilities, and/or  
127 Adopted July 2018   • open spaces.  
 
15.8. Lincolnshire County Council, the Police and NHS England/Clinical 
Commissioning Groups deliver the key elements of social infrastructure across 
the area. These are education, highways, social services, fire, health and police. 
The Council works with these partners to programme the delivery of their 
services, so that the necessary  infrastructure  can be provided in a timely  fashion. 
The anticipated requirements for each service are set out in the  IDP. 
 
15.9. At a local level the IDP, which has been prepared alongside relevant 
infrastructure providers and authorit ies, provides a baseline assessment of the 
existing infrastructure in the District. The IDP identifies variations in the level of 
provision and where a shortfall in provision exists. The key issues it identifies 
relate  to waste  water  recycling  and the potential shortfall  in school  provision  and 
health services over time, as development occurs in different settlements.  
 
15.10.  Anglian Water has identified demand locally as ‘characterised by mixed 
household and industrial customers, with the addition of seasonal demands by 
the tourist industry  along  the coast.’  It identifies  exceptionally  high peak demands 
during periods of hot dry weather when holidaymakers visit the coast, resulting 
in periods of unpredictable demand requiring a large peak output compared with 
average in the Skegness  area. 
 
15.11.  Their more detailed assessment of the different elements in their  system 
shows that there are issues across the network. The East Lindsey Phase 2  Water 
Cycle  Study  2016 shows  that though there  are some  issues in the network  overall, 
there are no issues which indicate that the planned scale, location and timing of 
planned development within the District is unachievable from the perspective of 
supplying water and wastewater services and preventing the deterioration of 
water quali ty in receiving waters. Surface water and drainage systems for new 
developments are dealt with in more detail in Chapter 9 -  Inland Flood Risk and 
Chapter 10 –  Coastal East  Lindsey.  
 
15.12.  Where there is insufficient capacity available within the foul sewage or 
water supply networks, evidence should demonstrate how this will be addressed 
as part of the planning application  process.  
 
15.13.  Electricity distribution in the district is through the successors to the 
former Yorkshire and East Midlands Boards. They have prepa red high -level 
assessments of their distribution networks in the District which do not identify 
significant issues with delivery in the  future. 
 
15.14.  Most of the District is connected to the gas distribution  network.  
 
15.15.  The main provider of telecommunications in the District is BT. There is 
also an extensive mobile network in the district providing coverage for most, 
despite  the extensive  and sparse  nature  of the area. The Council  will support  the 
delivery of telecommunications including broadband to meet the changing  needs  
 
128 Adopted July 2018   of local communities  and business,  within  the framework  of government  policy  to 
ensure their impact on the area is  minimized.  
 
15.16.  Policies  elsewhere in the Plan support  the development  of locally  provided 
community infrastructure such as village halls and playing  fields.  
 
15.17.  Green infrastructure, open space and recreation are covered by Chapters 
11 and 12 in the Plan and have their own policies.  
 
15.18.  The Council will continue to monitor infrastructure requirements across 
the lifetime of the Plan. The IDP will be reviewed yearly to ensure information 
contained within it remains relevant and clearly represents the infrastructure 
requirements of the District.  
 
Strategic Policy 28 (SP28) –  Infrastructure and S106 Obligations  
 
1. Infrastructure schemes will be supported provided they are 
essential  in the national interest;  contribute  to sustainable  development, 
and respect the distinctive character of the  district.  
 
2. Infrastructure schemes should be accompanied by an impact 
assessment that shows how the proposal impacts on the landscape or 
local setting of the area, including individual and cumulative effects. It 
should identify what steps have been taken to minimize its effects and 
the alternative options that have been cons idered.  
 
3. The Council will support the delivery of infrastructure where it 
contributes to sustaining local communities.  
 
4. Developer  contributions  on major  schemes  (10 or more  dwellings  or 
major other development) will be sought towards the delivery of 
infras tructure where it is shown to be necessary for the development to 
proceed.  
 
5. The Council will only support proposals for development where it 
has been shown that adequate capacity is available, or can be provided 
by the utility providers to meet the additio nal loads associated with 
serving the  development.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
129 Adopted July 2018   CHAPTER 16 –  REVIEWING THE PLAN  
 
Strategic Policy 29 (SP29) Reviewing the Local Plan  
 
16.1. The Local Plan runs from 2017 –  2031, but there are some policies in the 
Plan which  mean that the Council is taking a different policy direction from the 
past, most notably the policies around flood risk and housing restrictions along 
the coast. It is important that this is monitored and there is a clear pathway to 
reviewing  the Plan against any impacts  on the Coastal  Zone and inland  from these 
policies.  
16.2. Alongside the coastal policies, housing is an important factor which must 
be considered in relation to both inland East Lindsey and the coast. Part of any 
monitoring and further work to b e undertaken is a review of the District`s 
objectively assessed need for housing and whether the District is still within a 
self-contained housing market. Linked into this will be the need to liaise with 
statutory  partners  around matters  of infrastructure  and any arising  housing need 
from neighbouring authorities.  
16.3. The Council also need to monitor the impact and effectiveness of its 
policies on windfall development coming forward in the towns and large villages. 
With regard to the medium and small villages, the impact of infill development 
will need to be assessed, particularly with regard to whether these settlements 
are becoming more or less sustainable and whether the policies for windfall are 
undermining the overall plan for  housing.  
16.4. Linked into the above, is a need to ensure that there is sufficient 
employment land and whether it is necessary to allocate more land or less 
reflecting any changes to the economic circumstances of the District, market 
signals and business circumstances. These changes cou ld also mean the need to 
consider  allocations  for retail, leisure  and office  space  and in order to do this there 
will be the need for further retail studies on all the towns in the District and 
consideration as to whether the town centre boundaries are  correct. 
16.5. In order to ensure  that the Council  monitors  and manages  any changes  to 
the District the Council  will carry out a review  of the Local Plan, with an emphasis 
on the above. The review being submitted for examination by April  2022.  
Strategic Policy 29 (SP29) – Reviewing the Local Plan 
1. The Council will review the Local Plan (Core Strategy and 
Settlement Proposals DPD). The review being submitted for 
examination by April 2022  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
130 Adopted July 2018   ANNEX 1 –  Affordable Housing and Housing for  Vulnerable Groups, 
Local Connection Criteria - The Coastal Zone  
 
The Coastal Area has the highest need for affordable housing in the District. The 
Council recognises that there will still be the need, despite the risk of flooding, 
to continue providing affordable housing within the Coastal Area.  It is 
important to ensure that those who do not have the financial ability to access 
open market housing still have an opportunity to continue to reside in the 
communities they currently live and work. It is als o important to ensure that 
affordable housing is not occupied by those from outside the coastal zone, thus 
bringing more residents in need into an area of high flood risk. The Council 
must also support housing for specific identified vulnerable or minority  groups.  
 
Below is set out a list of some examples of housing for vulnerable or minority 
groups, this list is not exhaustive but those wishing to develop should 
demonstrate that there is a local need. All housing in the Coastal Zone will be 
subject to the cascade criteria set out below to ensure that the housing does go 
to those in local need.  
 
Migrant workers –  A hostel or house housing migrant workers who live and 
work in the coast but need improved living conditions.  
Older persons –  specialised housing i s covered by policy SP5 and is a small 
group of adapted interlinked or separate older persons housing linked to an 
existing care facility or extra care facility but allowing independent living, this 
could be new development or extensions to existing develo pment.  
Physical disabilities –  adapted housing for those with physical disabilities.  
Substance misuse –  Hostel or house in multiple occupation with attached 
support for residents either on or off site.  
Ex-Offenders –Hostel or housing in multiple occupation  with attached support 
for residents either on or off site.  
Rough sleepers –  Hostel or housing in multiple occupation with attached support 
for residents either on or off site.  
Teenage parents –  Hostel or housing in multiple occupation with attached 
suppor t for residents either on or off site or a small group of independent units.  
Learning disabilities -  Hostel or housing in multiple occupation with attached 
support for residents either on or off site or a small group of independent units 
to allow for indep endent living with some support.  
Mental health disabilities - Hostel or housing in multiple occupation with 
attached support for residents either on or off site or a small group of 
independent units to allow for independent living with some support.  
Young People – this covers 16 –  25 years emergency housing and support and 
could be a Hostel or housing in multiple occupation with attached support for 
residents either on or off site or a small group of independent units.  
131 Adopted July 2018   Gypsies and Trav ellers – this would only apply to those that already live in the 
Coastal Zone but wished to move into bricks and mortar housing  
 
Local Connection Criteria  
 
First priority is to those residents or those with a local connection to the 
settlement within the C oastal Zone in which the housing is being built specified 
in criteria 1. 
 
If all the properties cannot be allocated from i –  iii (in order) in criteria 1 
nominations  will be sought  in accordance  with criteria  2 and so on. In these  cases 
local connection ta kes priority over need.  
 
Priority Criteria  
 
1) Place of development (5 years or  more):  
 
(i) Was born in the  town/village  of and lived for 5 years or more;  or 
 
(ii) has permanently resided for 5 years or more in the town/village  of 
  ; or used to permanently live in the  town/village  of for 
5 years or more but has been forced to move away because of the lack of 
affordable  housing;  
 
or 
 
(iii) has been permanently employed in the  town/village  of for 5 
years or  more.  
 
2) Adjacent parishes within the Coastal Zone  of  . (5 years or 
more):  
 
(i) was born in one of the adjacent  parishes  of  and 
lived for 5 years or more.  
 
or 
 
(ii) has permanently resided in one of the adjacent  parishes  of;  for 5 
years or  more;  
 
or 
 
(iii) used to permanently live in one of the adjacent  parishes  of;  for 
5 years or more but has been forced to move away because of the lack of 
affordable  housing;  
 
or 
 
(iv) has been permanently employed in one of the adjacent parishes  of 
           for 5 years or more.  
132 Adopted July 2018   or 
 
(v) needs to reside in the  town/village  of to give or receive family 
care and  support;  
 
3) Place of development (less than 5  years):  
 
(i) Was born in the  town/village  of and lived for less than 5 years; 
or 
(ii) has permanently resided for less than 5 years in the town/village  of 
  ; or used to permanently live in the  town/village  of for 
less than 5 years but has been forced to move away because of the lack 
of affordable  housing;  
 
or 
 
(iii) has been permanently employed in the  town/village  of for 
less than 5  years.  
 
4) Adjacent parishes within the Coastal Zone  of  (less 
than 5  years)  
 
(i) has resided for less than 5 years in the adjacent  parishes  of    
or 
(ii) has lived in the adjacent parishes  of for less than 
5 years but has been forced to move away because of the lack of 
affordable  housing;  
 
or 
 
(iii) has been employed in the adjacent  parishes of    
for less than 5 years;  or 
 
(v) needs to reside in the  town/village  of to give or receive family 
care and  support;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
133 Adopted July 2018   ANNEX 2 - SEQUENTIAL AND EXCEPTION TEST FOR DEVELOPMENT IN 
THE COASTAL ZONE OF EAST LINDSEY  
 
The Coastal  Zone is the area covered  by the Environment  Agency`s  Coastal  Flood 
Hazard Maps. The zone is split into four  areas.  
 
1. Red – Danger for  All 
2. Orange – Danger for  Most 
3. Yellow – Danger for  Some  
4. Green – Low hazard  (caution)  
Chapter 10 -  Coastal East Lindsey sets out the Council`s policy approach to 
development in the Coastal Zone. This policy sets out development the Council 
will and will not support in this area of flood risk.  
 
All relevant  development  in areas of flood risk has to show how it has passed  the 
Sequential and Exception tests. With regard to the Sequential Test this steers 
development to areas of lowest risk. One of the aims of the Coastal Policy is to 
make it clear to those wishing to develop what will and will not be supported by 
the Council. Part of this work is to make the process of submitting and 
understanding the process around planning easier. To aid in this, this Annex to 
the Plan sets out how relevant development meets the Sequential test in the 
coastal  zone.  Development  suppor ted by the policy  is deemed  to have passed  the 
Sequential Test, it must then demonstrate how it passes the Exception  Test. 
 
For the Exception test, the very term exception means that it is development 
beyond that which would normally be allowed. It is important that all relevant 
development  still does demonstrate  that it provides  wider  sustainability  benefits. 
In order to assist those wishing to develop the Council will test development 
against its Sustainability Objectives set out below. Whilst the Cou ncil strongly 
supports economic growth on the coast, all relevant development should score 
positively and demonstrate that it provides wider environmental, social and 
economic benefits to the  community.  
 
All relevant  development  will need to provide  a site-specific flood risk assessment 
which should identify and assess the risks from all forms of flooding to and from 
the development.  It should  demonstrate  how these  risks will be managed  so that 
development remains safe throughout its lifetime, taking into account climate 
change.  
 
Listed below for information are the Flood Risk Vulnerability Classifications from 
the National Planning Policy Framework  
 
ESSENTIAL INFRASTRUCTURE  •Essential transport infrastructure 
(including mass evacuation routes) which 
has to  cross the area at risk.  
• Essential utility infrastructure which has 
to be located in a flood risk area for 
operational reasons, including electricity  
generating power stations and grid and  
134 Adopted July 2018    primary  substations; and water 
treatment works that need to remain 
operational in times of flood.  
•Wind turbines.  
WATER COMPATIBLE  • Flood control  infrastructure.  
• Water transmission infrastructure  and 
pumping  stations.  
• Sewage transmission infrastructure  and 
pumping  stations.  
• Sand and gravel  working.  
• Docks, marinas and  wharves.  
• Navigation facilities.  
• Ministry of Defence defence 
installations.  
• Ship building, repairing and dismantling, 
dockside fish processing and refrigeration 
and compatible activities requiring a 
waterside location.  
• Water- based recreation (excluding 
sleeping  accommodation).  
• Lifeguard and coastguard stations.  
• Amenity open space, nature 
conservation and biodiversity, outdoor 
sports and recreation and essential 
facilities such as changing  rooms.  
• Essential ancillary sleeping or residential 
accommodation for staff required by  uses 
in this category, subject to a specific 
warning and evacuation plan.  
HIGHLY VULNERABLE  • Police and ambulance stations; fire 
stations and command centres; 
telecommunications installations  required 
to be operational during flooding.  
• Emergency dispersal  points.  
• Basement  dwellings.  
• Caravans, mobile homes and park 
homes intended for permanent 
residential use. 
• Installations requiring hazardous 
substances consent.  (Where there is a 
demonstrable need to locate such 
installations for bulk storage of materials 
with port or other similar facilities, or 
such installations with energy 
infrastructure or carbon capture and 
storage installations, that require  coastal 
or water -side locations, or need to be 
located in other high flood risk areas,  in 
these instances the facilities should be 
classified as ‘Essential Infrastructure’).  
MORE VULNERABLE  • Hospitals  
•Residential institutions such as 
residential care homes, children’s homes,  
 
135 Adopted July 2018    social services homes, prisons and 
hostels.  
• Buildings used for dwelling houses, 
student halls of residence, drinking 
establishments, nightclubs and  hotels.  
• Non–residential uses for health services, 
nurseries and educational 
establishments.  
• Landfill and sites used for waste 
management facilities for hazardous 
waste.  
• Sites used for holiday or short- let 
caravans and camping, subject to a 
specific warning and evacuation plan.  
LESS VULNERABLE  • Police, ambulance and fire stations 
which are not required to be operational 
during flooding.  
• Buildings used for shops; financial, 
professional and other services; 
restaurants, cafes and hot food 
takeaways; offices; general industry, 
storage and distribution; non- residential 
institutions not  included in the ‘More 
Vulnerable’ class; and assembly and 
leisure.  
• Land and buildings used for agriculture 
and forestry.  
• Waste treatment (except landfill*  and 
hazardous waste  facilities).  
• Minerals working and processing (except 
for sand and gravel  working ). 
• Water treatment works which do not 
need to remain operational during  times 
of flood.  
• Sewage treatment works, if adequate 
measures to control pollution  and 
manage sewage during flooding events 
are in place.  
 
SEQUENTIAL TEST  
 
With regard to the Coastal Zone and Strategic Policies SP17, 18, 19, 20 and 21 
Coastal East Lindsey, the following developments will be deemed to have  passed 
the Sequential Test.  
 
Essential Infrastructure   
Water Compatible   
Holiday Accommodation (static caravans, touring  
caravans, camping, log cabins, chalets, hotels, bed and 
breakfast accommodation)   
Hazardous Substance installations – other than that set 
out above  X 
 
136 Adopted July 2018   Employment developments (other than those associated 
with holiday accommodation)   
Community buildings or uses   
Residential  X 
Social Housing   
Housing for specified vulnerable people as set out in the 
Councils Housing Strategy   
Specialist housing for older persons where there is an 
identified care need   
Housing on brownfield blighted land as set out in SP13a   
 
Please Note: The National Planning Policy Framework states that the Sequential 
Test does not need to be applied to change of use except for a change of use to 
a caravan, camping or chalet site, or to a mobile home or p ark home site.  
 
EXCEPTION TEST  
 
The Exception Test is split into two parts. For the Exception Test to be passed: 
Part 1: it must be demonstrated  that the development  provides  wider 
sustainability benefits to the community that outweigh flood risk, informed  by a 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment where one has been prepared;  and 
 
Part 2: a site -specific flood risk assessment must demonstrate that the 
development will be safe for its lifetime taking account of the vulnerability of its 
users, without increasing f lood risk elsewhere, and, where possible, will reduce 
flood risk overall.  
The table below indicates which type of development is deemed to have passed 
Part 1 of the Exception Test. All other development must demonstrate that they 
pass the Test using the Su stainability Appraisal Form set out below.  
 
Essential Infrastructure   
Water Compatible   
Holiday Accommodation (static caravans, log cabins, 
chalets)   
Holiday Accommodation (Hotels, bed and breakfast 
accommodation, touring caravans and camping)   
Employment developments (other than those associated 
with holiday accommodation)   
Wider community buildings or uses   
Social Housing   
Housing for specified vulnerable people as set out in the 
Councils Housing Strategy   
Specialist housing for older persons where there is an 
identified care need   
Housing on brownfield blighted land as set out in SP13a   
 
 
 
 
 
137 Adopted July 2018   Sustainability Appraisal Form For Relevant Development in Areas of 
Coastal Flood Risk  
 
The table below sets out the Council’s Sustainability Objectives, against which it 
will test development proposals. Applicants should provide commentary to 
reflect how their proposals will contribute to the objectives.  
 
SA Objective  Sustainability Appraisal  
 
Questions  
Will the option / proposal:  Commentary  Positive/ 
Negative 
Contribution  
1. Protect  and 
enhance the 
quality and 
distinctiveness 
of the areas’ 
biodiversity 
(native plants 
and animals) 
and 
geodiversity.  Protect and provide 
opportunities for improving  
/ enhancing sites 
designated for their nature 
conservation value / 
geodiversity value (local 
and national levels)?  
 
Protect the habitats and 
species protected by 
International and UK law?    
 Help achieve Lincolnshire 
Biodiversity Action Plan 
(BAP) targets?  
 Help to avoid / reduce the 
loss of / decline in 
seminatural habitats, 
agricultural habitats, urban 
habitats / geological 
resources?  
 Conserve species and 
protect the districts overall  
biodiversity?  
2. Protect  and 
enhance the 
quality and 
distinctiveness 
of the area’s 
landscapes, 
townscapes 
and historic 
environment.  Protect and provide 
opportunities to enhance 
the distinctive landscapes 
(e.g. Conservation Areas, 
Lincolnshire Wolds AONB) 
within the district?  
 
Will it maintain and, where 
possible, increase the area 
of high -quality green 
infrastructure within the 
district – e.g. woodlands, 
public rights of way etc?    
 Will visual aspects / 
amenity be compromised?  
138 Adopted July 2018     
Provide opportunities to 
enhance the townscapes 
within  the district – e.g. 
promotion of the repair 
and re -use of historic 
buildings?  
 
Maintain and Enhance the 
character / distinctiveness 
of towns and villages 
(including conservation 
areas)?  
 
Protect or enhance known 
features of historical, 
archaeological, or cultural 
interest, including their 
setting.  
 
Protect areas associated 
with a known high risk 
archaeological resource 
where actual and / or 
quality / quantity of finds 
is not known e.g. features 
associated with buried  
archaeology?    
3. Protect 
natural 
resources 
from 
avoidable 
losses and 
pollution and 
minimise the 
impacts of 
unavoidable 
losses and 
pollution.  Contribute to effective 
management of water 
resources (surface and 
ground waters) via a 
reduction in water 
consumption (domestic,  
commercial, industrial, 
agricultural)?  
 
Will it contribute to 
effective management of 
water resources (surface 
waters) via storage of 
excess precipitation?  
 
Reduce diffuse and point 
source water pollution 
(e.g. from STWs, 
commercial, industrial and 
agricultural sources) and 
therefore contribute to 
‘good ecological status’ for 
all water bodies.  
 
Protect the habitats and 
species reliant on the    
139 Adopted July 2018    water  environment e.g. in 
rivers, canals, lakes, ponds 
and adjacent areas of 
wetland habitats?  
 
Avoid an increase in light 
pollutants, particularly in 
more rural areas and the 
Lincolnshire Wolds AONB?  
 
Protect the best and most 
versatile agricultural land?  
 
Encourage appropriate use 
of finite resources, waste 
reduction and re -use and 
recycling of material for all 
new developments  
(construction and 
operational phases)?    
4. Avoid the 
risk of 
flooding 
(where 
possible) and 
fully mitigate 
against the 
impacts of 
flooding 
where it 
cannot be 
avoided.’  Will it minimise flood risk 
to people, property, 
agricultural land and other 
assets from rivers and 
from drainage 
infrastructure e.g. resulting 
from intense or prolonged 
precipitation?  
 
Will it minimise flood risk 
to people, property, 
agricultural land and other 
assets from coastal 
inundation e.g. via storm 
surges?  
 
Increase flood risk to 
people, property, 
agricultural land and other 
assets downstream of the 
proposed development?    
5. Promote 
viable and 
diverse 
economic 
growth that 
supports 
communities 
within the 
district.  Promote sustainable 
economic growth?  
 
Contribute to a low carbon 
economy in accordance 
with the principles set out 
in the Stern Report 
(October 2006)?  
 
Provide diversity in the 
economy and encourage 
sustainable business  
development?    
140 Adopted July 2018     
Encourage the rural 
economy and support farm 
diversification?  
 
Assist the provision of 
appropriate land and 
premises for business 
activity?  
 
Support the growth of 
sectors that offer scope to 
reduce out -commuting, 
e.g. to Lincoln, Grimsby 
and Boston?  
 
Improve access to 
education and training, 
and support provision of 
skilled employees to the 
economy?  
 
Improve opportunities for 
and access to, affordable 
education and training 
(basic skills, advanced 
skills)?  
 
Promote employment 
opportunities and the 
diversification of 
employment opportunities 
(including skilled 
opportunities – 
professional and 
managerial occupations) 
and reduce the 
outmigration of skilled  
workers?  
 
Enable tourism  
opportunities to be 
exploited?    
6. Prioritise 
appropriate 
re-use of 
previously 
developed 
land and 
minimise the 
loss of the 
best 
agricultural  
land and  Promote the efficient re - 
use of land and buildings 
for new developments and 
ensure that more dense 
developments are well 
designed and are 
associated with good public 
transport systems to help 
achieve the most 
sustainable pattern and 
types of development?    
141 Adopted July 2018   greenfield 
sites.   
Protect the best and most 
versatile agricultural land?    
7. Improve 
accessibility to 
key services, 
facilities 
amenities and 
green 
infrastructure 
including the 
promotion of 
sustainable 
modes of  
access.  Improve access to local 
services, facilities, places 
of employment and green 
infrastructure for all 
residents throughout the 
district?  
 
Provide improved and 
sustainable public modes 
of transport in both urban 
and rural areas and reduce 
the need to travel by car?    
8. Increase 
reuse and 
recycling rates 
and minimise 
the production 
of waste.  Reduce waste generated as 
part of all building 
programmes?  
 
Reduce household waste?  
 
Increase waste recovery 
and recycling (domestic,  
commercial etc)?    
9. Support 
inclusive, safe 
and vibrant 
communities.  Help achieve the most 
sustainable pattern and 
types of development with 
a view to developing 
sustainable communities?  
 
Improve the quality of life 
for communities by 
allowing residents to 
become actively involved 
in decision making at a 
local level?  
 
Maintain, enhance and 
create green infrastructure 
assets (e.g. green space) 
across the district 
accessible to the whole 
community?  
 
Promote more diverse and 
cohesive communities?  
 
Improve the availability 
and accessibility of key 
local services and facilities, 
including health, education 
and leisure (shops, post  
offices, pubs etc.) that also 
reduces the need to travel?    
142 Adopted July 2018     
Reduce the fear of crime, 
the actual levels of crime, 
antisocial behaviour and 
improve public safety?  
 
Promote and encourage 
design principles that 
positively reduce crime and 
antisocial behaviour?    
10. Ensure 
that local 
housing needs 
are met.  Support the provision of a 
range of house types and 
sizes, including affordable 
housing, to meet the 
identified needs of all 
sectors of the community?    
 Enable first time buyers to 
purchase a home?  
 Ensure the adoption of 
sustainable construction 
and design principles in  
line with the Code for 
Sustainable Homes?  
11. Increase 
energy 
efficiency and 
ensure 
appropriate 
sustainable 
design, 
construction 
and operation 
of new 
developments.  Contribute to a reduction 
in energy/resource 
consumption (e.g. 
domestic, commercial, and 
industrial).  
 
Lead to an increased 
proportion of energy needs 
being met from renewable 
sources e.g. at domestic 
and commercial scales?    
 Ensure all new housing 
incorporates at least some 
energy saving measures?  
 Lead to local developments 
built to a high standard of 
sustainable design?  
 Reduce waste generated as 
part of all building 
programmes?  
 Reduce household waste 
and increase waste 
recovery and recycling 
(domestic, commercial 
etc.)?  
143 Adopted July 2018   12. Encourage 
and provide 
the facilities 
and 
infrastructure 
for healthy 
lifestyles”  Ensure that adequate 
health facilities and 
infrastructure is available 
for present and future 
generations?  
 
Ensure health facilities are 
accessible to all sectors of 
the community?  
 
Reduce health inequalities 
across the district?  
 
Promote healthy and active 
lifestyles?  
 
Maintain, enhance and 
create green infrastructure 
assets (e.g. green space, 
recreation and sports 
facilities, semi -wild/rural 
places) across the district  
accessible to the whole 
community?    
13. Positively 
plan for,  and 
minimise the 
effects of, 
climate 
change.  Minimise flood risk to 
people, property, 
agricultural land and other 
assets from the sea, from 
rivers and from surface 
water drainage 
infrastructure?  
 
Increase flood risk to 
people, property, 
agricultural land and o ther 
assets downstream of the 
proposed development?  
 
Contribute to effective 
management of water 
resources (surface waters) 
(e.g. storage of excess 
precipitation)?  
 
Promote appropriate 
energy production 
technologies at the district 
scale?  
 
Contribute to a reduction 
in emissions of  greenhouse  
gases within the district?    
 
 
144 Adopted July 2018   In order to comply with Part 2 of the Exception Test applicants will need to 
undertake a site -specific Flood Risk Assessment (Please note that even where 
National Planning Policy does not require the Exception Test to be applied, all 
proposals  within  the Coastal  Zone will still need to undertake  a site-specific  Flood 
Risk Assessment  to demonstrate  that the development  will be safe for its lifetime 
[NPPF, Footnote  20]). 
 
Applicants  are advised  to refer to the Advice  Matrix  within  the Council’s  Strategic 
Flood Risk Assessment for guidance on the mitigation requirements that will be 
expected  to be incorporated  into proposals  in order to demonstrate  that they will 
be safe. The Council will seek bespoke advice from the Environment Agency, 
where appropriate, to confirm if Part 2 of the Exception Test is  passed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
145 Adopted July 2018   ANNEX 3 - INDICATIVE THRESHOLDS FOR TRANSPORT ASSESSMENTS.  
 
These thresholds are for guidance purposes and should not be read as absolutes. 
In some circumstances, a transport assessment may be appropriate for a smaller 
development  than suggested by these  thresholds.  In others,  a transport  statement 
may be appropriate for larger developments than suggested by these thresholds. 
Early pre -application discussions between developers and the local planning or 
highways authority is therefore strongly  recommended.  
 
Thresholds based on size and scale of land use  
 Land Use  Use/description of 
development  Size No 
assessment  TS TA/TP  
1 Food retail 
(A1) Retail sale of food goods to 
the public –  food 
superstores, supermarkets, 
convenience food  stores.  GFA <250 sq. m  >250 <800  
sq. m  >800sq. m  
2 Non-food retail 
(A1) Retail sale of non -food goods 
to the public; but includes 
sandwich bars –  sandwich or 
other cold food  purchased  
and consumed off the 
premises, internet cafes.  GFA <800 sq. m  >800  
<1500 sq.  
m >1500 sq.  
m 
3 A2 Financial 
and 
professional 
services Financial services such as 
banks and building societies, 
professional services (other 
than health and medical 
services) and including 
estate and employment 
agencies. It does not include 
betting  offices  or  pay   day 
loan shops -  these are now 
classed as  “sui generis” uses  GFA <1000 sq. m  >1000 <  
2500 sq. m  >2500 sq.  
m 
4 A3 
Restaurants 
and cafes  Restaurants and cafes – use 
for the sale of food for 
consumption on the 
premises, excludes  internet  
cafes (now A1)  GFA <300 sq. m  >300  
<2500 sq.  
m >2500 sq.  
m 
5 A4 Drinking 
establishments Public houses, wine bars or 
other  drinking  
establishments (but not night 
clubs).  GFA <300 sq. m  >300 <600  
sq. m  >600 sq. m  
6 A5 Hot food 
takeaway  For the sale of hot food 
for consumption off the  
premises.  GFA <250 sq. m  >250 < 500 
sq. m  >500 sq. m  
7 B1 Business  Offices  (other  than those  that 
fall within A2), research and 
development of products  and 
processes, light industry 
appropriate in a  residential  
area. GFA <1500 sq. m  >1500  
<2500 sq.  
m >2500 sq.  
m 
8 B2 General 
Industrial  Use for industrial process 
other than one falling within 
class B1 (excluding 
incineration  purposes, 
chemical treatment or  landfill  
or hazardous waste).  GFA <2500 sq. m  >2500  
<4000 sq.  
m >4000 sq.  
m 
9 B8 Storage or 
distribution  Storage or distribution 
centres – wholesale  
warehouses, distribution 
centres and repositories.  GFA <3000 sq. m  >3000  
<5000 sq.  
m >5000 sq.  
m 
 
146 Adopted July 2018     This includes open air 
storage      
10 C1 Hotels  Hotels, boarding and 
guest houses where no 
significant element of 
care is provided  
(excludes hostels).  Bedroom  <75 
bedrooms  >75 <100  
bedrooms  >100  
bedrooms  
11 C2 
Residential 
institutions  Residential care  homes, 
hospitals,  nursing  
homes,  boarding  
schools,  residential  
colleges  and training 
centres.  Beds <30 beds  >30<50  
beds >50 beds  
12 C2A Secure 
Residential 
Institution  Use for a provision of secure 
residential accommodation, 
including use as a prison, 
young offenders institution, 
detention centre, secure 
training centre, custody 
centre, short term holding 
centre, secure hospital, 
secure local authority  
accommodation or use as a 
military barracks.  Resident  <250  
residents  >250 <400  
residents  >400  
residents  
13 C3 Dwelling 
House  C3 Dwellinghouses - this 
class is formed of 3 parts: 
 
C3(a) covers use by a single 
person or a family (a couple 
whether married or not, a 
person related to one 
another with members of  the 
family of one of the couple  to 
be treated  as members  of the 
family of the other), an 
employer and certain 
domestic employees (such  as 
an au pair, nanny, nurse , 
governess,  servant,  
chauffeur,  gardener, 
secretary and personal 
assistant), a carer and the 
person  receiving  the care and 
a foster parent and foster 
child.  
 
C3(b): up to six people living 
together as a single 
household and receiving  care 
e.g. supported h ousing 
schemes such as those for 
people with learning 
disabilities or mental health 
problems.  
 
C3(c) allows for groups of 
people (up to six) living 
together as a single 
household. This allows for 
those groupings that do not 
fall    within    the    C4 HMO  
definition,    but    which  fell  Dwelling 
unit <50 units  >50 <80  
units >80 units  
147 Adopted July 2018     within  the previous C3 use 
class, to be provided for i.e. 
a small religious community 
may fall into this section as 
could a homeowner who is 
living with a lodger.      
14 D1 Non - 
residential 
institutions  Clinics, health centres, 
crèches, day nurseries, day 
centres, schools, art  galleries 
(other than for sale or hire), 
museums, libraries, halls, 
places of worship, church 
halls, law court. Non - 
residential education  and 
training centres.  GFA <500 sq. m  >500  
<1000 sq.  
m >1000 sq.  
m 
15 D2 Assembly 
and leisure  Cinemas, music and concert 
halls, bingo and dance halls 
(but not night clubs), 
swimming baths, skating 
rinks, gymnasiums or area 
for indoor or outdoor sports 
and recreations (except for 
motor sports, or where  
firearms are used).  GFA <500 sq. m  >500  
<1500 sq. 
m >1500 sq.  
m 
16 Others  For example: Stadium, retail 
warehouse, amusement 
arcades, launderettes, petrol 
filling station, taxi business, 
car/vehicle hire business and 
the selling and displaying of 
motor vehicles, nightclubs, 
theatres, builders yards, 
garden centres, hire shops,  
dry cleaners.  TBD Discuss with 
Highways 
Authority  Discuss with 
Highways 
Authority  Discuss with 
Highways 
Authority  
 
Thresholds based on other considerations  
 Other considerations  TS TA TA/TP  
1 Any development that is not in conformity with the adopted development 
plan.    
2 Any development generating 30 or more two -way vehicle movements in 
any hour.     
3 Any development generating 100 of more two -way vehicle movements 
per day.     
4 Any development proposing 100 or more parking spaces.     
5 Any development that is likely to increase accidents or conflicts among 
motorised users and non -motorised users, particularly vulnerable road 
users such as children, disabled and elderly people.    
 
6 Any development generating significant freight or HGV movements per 
day, or significant abnormal loads per year     
7 Any development proposed in a location where the local transport 
infrastructure is inadequate. –  For example, substandard roads, poor 
pedestrian/cyclist facilities and inadequate public transport provisions.   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
148 Adopted July 2018   
ANNEX 4 –  MINERALS SAFEGUARDING AREAS POLICIES MAP  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
149 Adopted July 2018    
 
   Key to Minerals Safeguarding Areas  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       150   Area of  
Outstanding 
Natural Beauty  
 Sand and Gravel  
Minerals  
Safeguarding Area 
 Site Specific  
Minerals  
Safeguarding Area  
 Lincolnshire 
County Council 
Allocated Minerals 
Site  
  
Site Specific 
Safeguarding Area  
Adopted July 2018   ANNEX 5 –  INTERNATIONAL BIODIVERSITY DESIGNATION POLICIES 
MAPS  
151 
Adopted July 2018    
 
 
 
152 
Adopted July 2018    
 
 
 
153 
Adopted July 2018   Key to International Designations 
 
 
 
Area of Outstanding 
Natural Beauty 
(SP23)  
 
Ramsar Site 
(SP24)  
 
 
Special Protection 
Area  
(SP24)  
Special Area of 
Conservation 
(SP24)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
154 
Adopted July 2018   ANNEX 6 - GLOSSARY  
 
These may not be dictionary definitions of the terms used. Rather, they 
relate to their meaning in this document.  
 
Affordable housing  
 
Housing which meets the needs of households where they cannot be met 
by the normal housing market.  
 
Ancient Woodland  
 
Land that has had continuous woodland cover since 1600 AD as designated by 
Natural England.  
 
Annual Monitoring Report  
 
A document produced each year by the Council to monitor progress on 
the Local Development Scheme and to judge the effectiveness of the 
Local Devel opment Documents.  
 
Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB)  
 
An area with a statutory national landscape designation with the primary 
objective of conserving the natural beauty of the landscape. The 
Lincolnshire Wolds AONB was designated in 1973 and cover s about one 
third of the area of East Lindsey.  
 
Biodiversity  
 
The full variety of life on earth or, more particularly in a local area; the 
balanced mix of plant and animal species and their habitats.  
 
Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP)  
 
A strategy to conserve and increase the variety of plants and animals at a 
local level, in a manner that contributes to the national and global health 
of species.  
 
Brownfield site  
 
A site on which development has previously taken place. In its Planning 
Guidance, the Government excludes agricultural land and buildings from 
this broader definition.  
 
Carbon footprint  
 
 
 
155 Adopted July 2018   A measure of the total amount of greenhouse gases produced directly or 
indirectly by an activity, usually expressed in equivalent terms of carbon 
dioxide (CO2). 
 
Catchment area 
 
An area from which people are drawn to a particular town or service. This 
is also known also as "hinterland" or "sphere of influence".  
 
Comparison goods  
 
Shopping items that are usually bulkier and more expensive than 
convenience goods. They can include furniture, electrical appliances, 
clothes, etc.  
 
Convenience goods  
 
Everyday shopping items such as most foods, toiletries, newspapers, etc.  
 
Conservation Area  
 
An area designated to conserve and enhance the character o f the 
(usually) built environments of historic or architectural importance, or 
natural areas of particular nature or landscape importance.  
 
Corporate Plan  
 
The Councils Corporate Plan which sets out its objectives and aims.  
 
Development Plan  
 
The collectiv e name for all of the different spatial planning documents for 
an area. In East Lindsey this will be the Core Strategy, the Settlement 
Proposals Plan and Neighbourhood Plans.  
 
Development Plan Documents  
 
These are the policy -related documents of the Local Plan and comprise 
the Core Strategy, Development Control Policies, Settlement Proposals, 
Proposals Map and any Area Action Plans that are needed.  
 
European Landscape Convention  
 
The European Landscape Convention -  also known as the Florence 
Convention, - promotes the protection, management and planning of 
European landscapes and organises European co -operation on landscape 
issues. The convention was adopted on 20 October 2000 in Florence 
(Italy) and came into force on 1 March 2004 (Council of Europe Treaty 
Series no. 176).  
 
156 Adopted July 2018    
Farm diversification 
 
The establishment of enterprises unrelated to mainstream farming but 
which are operated as part of the farm holding to help maintain its 
viability. Such activities should be compatible with the ir countryside 
setting.  
 
Greenfield site  
 
A site on which development has not previously taken place.  
 
Green Infrastructure  
 
The District's network of protected sites, nature reserves, green paces, 
woodlands and other green linkages including river and canal corridors, 
significant drainage channels and disused re -vegetated railway lines, 
which are important wildlife corridors.  
 
Gypsies and Travellers  
 
Persons of nomadic habit of life whatever their race or origin, including 
such persons who on grounds of  their own or their family's or dependents' 
educational or health needs or old age have ceased to travel temporarily 
or permanently, but excluding members of an organised group of 
travelling showpeople or circus people travelling together as such.  
 
Gypsy a nd Traveller Accommodation Assessment (GTAA)  
 
An assessment of the accommodation needs of gypsies and travellers.  
 
Habitat Regulation Assessment  
 
An assessment of the effects of plans, policies and programmes on sites 
of international importance for biodiv ersity.  
 
Housing need  
 
The quantity of housing required for households who are unable to find 
suitable housing without financial help.  
 
Infrastructure  
 
The necessary basic services upon which all development depends, 
including sewage, electricity and gas supplies, roads, water, etc  
 
Inward Migration  
 
157 Adopted July 2018   The movement of people into an area; in the case of East Lindsey it is 
mainly made up of older people either economically active but coming to 
the end of their working life or retired.  
 
Landscape Character  
 
A distinct, recognisable and consistent pattern of elements in the 
landscape that makes one landscape different from another, rather than 
better or worse.  
 
Local Development Documents  
 
The collective name for Development Plan Documents, Supplementary 
Planning Documents and the Statement of Community Involvement.  
 
Local Development Scheme  
 
A document that sets out a programme and timetable for the preparation 
of Local Development Documents.  
 
Local Geological Sites (LGS)  
Areas designated for geology/geomorphology by the local authority and 
protected through the local plan. A newer designation and one of a 
number of designations unde r the umbrella term local sites.  
 
Local Wildlife Sites  
 
Sites which have been assessed against the Lincolnshire Local Wildlife 
Sites criteria, produced as part of the Lincolnshire BAP, and found to 
contain wildlife features of local significance worthy of protection.  
 
Major Development  
 
The term 'major development' is taken to be as defined by the Town and 
Country Planning (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 
2000.  
 
Market housing  
 
Housing, for sale or rent, whose price is determined by the open market.  
 
Nature Reserves  
 
These sites are declared by Natural England. They are among the best 
examples of their type of habitat and are designated to protect their 
sensitive features and also for the study of the habitat. They also enjoy a 
degree of public access.  
 
 
158 Adopted July 2018   Open countryside  
 
The area outside towns, villages and other settlements, which is largely 
free from built development on a significant scale and where the 
countryside character dominates.  
 
Place -making check list  
 
Design tool the Council, owners of sites and developers/agents can use to 
ensure their proposals meet the high design expectations of the Council.  
 
Planning Obligation (or Section 106 Agreement)  
 
A legal agreement between the local planning authority and a d eveloper, 
relating to a planning consent, which covers matters outside the scope of 
a normal planning consent. They are intended to require the Developer to 
provide or contribute towards services or facilities off or on site, the need 
for which generated by the  development.  
 
Planning Performance Agreement (PPAs)  
 
These are documents used in the planning application process and are 
about improving the quality of planning applications and the decision 
making process through collaboration. They bring together the Local 
Planning Authority (LPA), developer and key stakeholders, preferably at 
an early stage, to work together in partnership throughout the planning 
process. They are essentially a collaborative project management process 
and tool that provide greater  certainty and transparency to the 
development of scheme proposals, the planning application assessment 
and decision making.  
 
Ramsar Sites  
 
These are wetlands of international importance designated under the 
Ramsar Convention, which is an intergovernmental  treaty. There are 
three Ramsar Sites affecting East Lindsey; the Humber Estuary, the 
Wash, and Gibraltar Point. These sites are also covered by other 
designations relating to their nature conservation importance.  
 
Residual Value of sites  
 
Residual value is the value left after the cost of putting land to a particular 
use (such as building homes) is subtracted from the revenue generated 
from the land when it is in that use. A homebuilder assessing the value of 
a piece of land therefore has to estimate the v alue of the homes that can 
be built on the site and the cost of building them.  
 
Safe Walking Distance  
 
159 Adopted July 2018   In policies 8, 11 and 13 this means that a settlements amenities must be 
able to be accessed from a proposed development safely. If  along a 
roadway there should be a footway, grass verge or pavement that is wide 
enough to ensure pedestrians do not conflict with vehicles or if across 
countryside the journey should be safe in that it should not cross fields 
with animals in, dykes, ditch es or areas of flooding and pedestrians 
should not conflict with vehicles.  
 
Scheduled Ancient Monument  
 
These are archaeological sites or historic buildings considered to be of 
national importance by the government. The current legislation, the 
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979, supports a formal 
system of Scheduled Monument Consent for any work to a designated 
monument. Scheduling is the only legal protection specifically for 
archaeological sites.  
 
Settlement  
 
A well- defined grouping o f buildings, predominantly residential but 
including other uses, which have a recognisable form or identity and 
collective function. A loose cluster of dwellings in the countryside would 
not normally fall within this definition for the purposes of the Loca l Plan.  
 
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)  
 
A site of national importance for wildlife or geology, designated by Natural 
England (formerly English Nature) for protection.  
 
Site of Nature Conservation Importance (SNCI)  
 
A site of local importance b ecause of its naturalness, size, rarity, 
diversity, fragility or typicalness, in East Lindsey. Sites were identified by 
the Lincolnshire Wildlife Trust but which have not yet been reassessed by 
Local Wildlife Sites criteria.  
 
Special Area of Conservation ( SAC)  
 
Internationally designated wildlife sites, designated under the EU Habitats 
Directive.  
 
Special Protection Area (SPA)  
 
An international designation by Natural England (formerly English Nature) 
to protect the habitat of threatened species of wildlife.  
 
Spatial planning  
 
 
 
160 Adopted July 2018   Spatial planning goes beyond traditional land use planning to bring 
together policies for the development and use of land with other policies 
and programmes that influence the nature and function of places and 
spaces. 
 
Statement of Community Involvement  
 
A document that sets out the ways the local planning authority intends to 
involve the community in the preparation, alteration and review of all 
Local Development Documents and in significant development control 
decisions.  
 
Strategic Environmental Assessment  
 
The name used internationally to describe environmental assessment of 
policies, plans and programmes. The European SEA Directive 
(2001/42/EC) requires that formal environmental assessment is carried 
out on some plans and programmes, including the documents in the Local 
Plan. It forms part of the Sustainability Appraisal.  
 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment  
 
An assessment usually undertaken by a Local Authority at a district -wide 
level that considers both fluvial and tidal flood risk and examines the risks 
involved for developing in different locations.  
 
Supplementary Planning Documents  
 
Prepared by the Council, these provide guidance to supplement the 
policies and proposals set out in the Development Plan Documents. They 
will not form part of the Development Plan or be subject to independent 
examination but they are subject to consultation.  
 
Sustainability Appraisal 
 
A process -  required by the Planning and Compensation Act 2004 -  
whereby the economic, soci al and environmental effects of the emerging 
strategy and policies of the Local Plan are tested against agreed 
sustainability objectives at different stages throughout the preparation of 
the Plan.  
 
Sustainable Development  
 
The most widely -used definition o f sustainable development is that of the 
Brundtland Commission of 1987: -  "development that meets the needs of 
the present without compromising the ability of future generations to 
meet their own needs". The Government has translated this into four 
aims of  sustainable development, all to be achieved at the same time and 
to be mutually compatible. They  are:- 
 
161 Adopted July 2018   - social progress that recognises the needs of  everyone;  
- effective protection of the  environment;  
- prudent use of natural resources;  and 
- maintenance of high and stable levels of  economic  growth  and 
employment.  
 
Sustainable Community  
 
Community which uses its resources to meet current needs while ensuring 
that adequate resources are available for future generations  
 
Sustainable Drainage  Systems (SUDs)  
 
An alternative to the traditional ways of managing and, where possible, 
re-using water runoff from buildings and hard surfaces. It is designed to 
increase absorption by permeable surfaces to reduce the risk of on and 
off-site flooding and to relieve pressure on rainwater drainage systems.  
 
Travelling Showpeople  
 
Members of a group organised for the purpose of holding fairs, circuses or 
shows (whether or not travelling together as such). This includes such 
persons who on the grounds of their  own or their family's or dependents' 
more localised pattern of trading, educational or health needs or old age 
have ceased to travel temporarily or permanently, but excludes Gypsies 
and Travellers  
 
Windfall sites  
 
Sites that are considered suitable for development but are not specifically 
identified as such in the Development Plan, this is because of the 
uncertainty surrounding their availability.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
162 Adopted July 2018   ANNEX 7 –  LIST OF SUPERSEDED POLICIES 
 
A3 Local Areas and Settlement Hierarchy  
A4 Protection of General Amenities  
A5 Quality of Design and Development  
ENV3 Foul and Surface Water Disposal  
ENV15 Action Area Redevelopment Sites  
ENV16 Sites for Environmental Improvement  
ENV19 Local Sites of Nature Conservation  Importance  
ENV20 Protection of Water Quality  
ENV21 River Corridors  
ENV24 Protection of Open Spaces and Frontages  
C1 Development and Demolition Affecting a Conservation Area  
C2 Development and Demolition Affecting a Listed Building  
C5 Historic Buildings  
C7 Historic Landscapes  
C8 Planning for Disadvantaged Groups of People  
C10 Advance Directional Signs  
C11 Lincolnshire Wolds Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty and Areas of 
Great Landscape Value  
C12 Protection of Buildings in the AONB & AGLV  
C14 Coastal Conservation Areas – CCA1 and CCA4  
C15 Coastal Conservation Areas – CCA2 and CCA3  
DC4 Intensive Livestock Units  
DC5 Replacement Dwellings In The Countryside  
DC6 Re -use of Old Buildings In The Countryside  
DC7 Conversion of Farm Buildings into Houses  
EMP1 Land Allocated for Industry  
EMP2 Business Support Facilities  
EMP3 Other Sites for Industry  
EMP4 Business Parks  
EMP9  Telecommunications  
T1 Tourism Strategy  
T2 Main Coastal Holiday Areas  
T3 Holiday Service Centres  
T4 Mablethorpe and  Skegness Foreshores  
T5 Coastal Amusement Centres  
T6 Amusement Centres Elsewhere  
T7 Main Tourist Attractions  
T9 Hotel/Guesthouse/Bed and Breakfast Accommodation  
T10 Loss of Hotels  
163 Adopted July 2018   T12 New Visitor Accommodation  
T13 Static Holiday Caravans  
T14 New Static Holiday Caravan Parks  
T15 Touring Caravan or Camping Sites  
T16 Holiday and Seasonal Occupancy  
T19 Visitor Transit Services  
H1 Allocated Housing Sites  
H6 Low Cost Housing  
H9 Creating Extra Accommodation In Existing  Premises  
H10 Infilling and Subdivision of Gardens  
H12 Design of New Housing  
H14 Residential Caravan Sites for Gypsies  
S1 Shopping in Towns  
S4 Loss of Shops  
S5 Retailing From Industrial Estates or Premises  
S6 Neighbourhood Shops  
S7 Village Shops  
S8 Shops in the Countryside  
S9 Hot Food Takeaway Premises  
REC1 Sport and Recreation Strategy  
REC2 Main Sport and Formal Recreation  
REC3 Loss of Sport and Formal Recreation Facilities  
REC4 Local and Informal Recreation  
REC6 Local Country Parks  
REC9 Countryside Recreation: Outdoor  
REC10 Countryside Recreation: Indoor  
REC11 Noisy Sports  
REC13 Golf Courses  
REC14  Commercial Horse Riding  Facilities  
CF2 Loss of Key Community and Social Facilities  
TR3 Road Design in New Development  
TR4 Protection of Existing Car Parking Spaces  
TR8 Tourist Parking Facilities  
TR9 Lorry Parks  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
164 Adopted July 2018    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
165 