East Riding Local Plan Update 
2020 - 2039
PROPOSED SUBMISSION STRATEGY  
DOCUMENT UPDATE - OCTOBER 2022
www.eastriding.gov.uk2
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateExplanatory Note  ............................................................................... 6
1 Introduction  ................................................................. 9
Local Plan 2016 ........................................................................ 10
The East Riding Local Plan Review and Update ..10
Other documents  ................................................................... 11
2 Key Spatial Issues ..................................................... 13
The wider context ................................................................. 14
People and places ................................................................... 16
The environment  .................................................................... 17
The economy  ............................................................................ 19
3 Vision, Place Statements, Objectives and 
 Key Diagram  .............................................................. 21
The vision for the Local Plan Update ........................ 22
Place statements  ..................................................................... 23
Objectives for the Strategy Document Update .... 32
Key diagram  ............................................................................... 35
4 Spatial Strategy ......................................................... 37
Sustainable development  .................................................. 38
Addressing climate change  ............................................... 41
Focussing development ...................................................... 45
Supporting development in Villages and the 
Countryside  ............................................................................... 50
Delivering housing development .................................. 54
Delivering employment land ........................................... 61
Delivering retail development ........................................ 63
Connecting people and places ....................................... 67
Strengthening blue/green infrastructure  .................. 71
5 A Healthy and Balanced Housing Market ......... 77
Creating a mix of housing ................................................. 78
Providing Affordable Housing  ......................................... 85
Providing for the needs of gypsies and travellers .. 91
Making the most efficient use of land ........................ 92
6 A Prosperous Economy .......................................... 95
Supporting the growth and diversification of the
East Riding economy ............................................................ 96
Developing and diversifying the visitor economy  ..................................................................... 101
Supporting the vitality and viability of centres .. 106
Enhancing sustainable transport  ................................ 109Supporting the renewable and low carbon 
energy sector  ........................................................................... 111
Protecting mineral resources  ........................................ 119
7 A High Quality Environment .............................. 123
Integrating high quality design  ...................................... 124
Promoting a high quality landscape ........................... 130
Valuing our heritage ............................................................ 134
Conserving and enhancing biodiversity and geodiversity  .................................................................... 139
Managing environmental hazards  ............................... 153
8 A Strong and Healthy Community ................... 165
Providing infrastructure and facilities .......................166
Supporting community services and facilities  .....167
Providing public open space for leisure 
and recreation  ........................................................................ 169
9 Delivering Growth through a 
 Sub Area Approach ............................................... 175
Beverley and Central sub area .................................... 177
Bridlington and the Bridlington Coastal 
sub area  ...................................................................................... 187
Driffield and Wolds sub area ........................................ 199
Goole and Humberhead Levels sub area ............ 206
Holderness and Southern Coastal sub area ....... 214
The Vale of York sub area ............................................. 222
10 Delivery, Monitoring and Review ...................... 231
Delivery  ..................................................................................... 232
Monitoring  ............................................................................... 232
Reviewing  ................................................................................. 233
Monitoring Framework  .................................................... 234
Appendix A: Planning Policies to be replaced ............. 238
Appendix B: List of Villages ..................................................... 239
Appendix C: Glossary of key terms .................................. 240
3 ContentsLIST OF POLICIES
Policy S1: Sustainable development
Policy S2: Addressing Climate ChangePolicy S3: Focussing DevelopmentPolicy S4: Supporting development in Villages and the CountrysidePolicy S5: Managing the Scale and Distribution of New DevelopmentPolicy S6: Delivering employment landPolicy S7: Delivering Town Centre DevelopmentPolicy S8: Connecting People and PlacesPolicy S9: Strengthening blue/green infrastructurePolicy H1: Providing a mix of housing and meeting needsPolicy H2: Providing Affordable HousingPolicy H3: Providing for the needs of gypsies and travellersPolicy H4: Making the most efficient use of landPolicy EC1: Supporting the growth and diversification of the East Riding economyPolicy EC2: Developing and diversifying the visitor economyPolicy EC3: Supporting the vitality and viability of centresPolicy EC4: Enhancing sustainable transportPolicy EC5: Supporting the renewable and low carbon energy sectorPolicy EC6: Protecting Mineral resourcesPolicy ENV1: Integrating high quality designPolicy ENV2: Promoting a high quality landscapePolicy ENV3: Valuing our HeritagePolicy ENV4: International, National and Local Sites of Importance for BiodiversityPolicy ENV5: Enhancing biodiversity and geodiversityPolicy ENV6: Managing environmental hazardsPolicy C1: Providing infrastructure and facilitiesPolicy C2: Supporting community services and facilitiesPolicy C3: Providing public open space for leisure and recreationPolicy A1: Beverley and Central sub areaPolicy A2: Bridlington Coastal sub areaPolicy A2A: BridlingtonPolicy A3: Driffield and Wolds sub areaPolicy A4: Goole and Humberhead Levels sub areaPolicy A5: Holderness and Southern Coastal sub areaPolicy A6: Vale of York sub area
4
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateLIST OF TABLES
Table 1: East Riding Local Plan Objectives
Table 2: How the Local Plan will address the challenges of climate changeTable 3: Housing requirement in Rural Service Centres and Primary VillagesTable 4: Housing requirement to 2039Table 5: Retail requirements and recommendationsTable 6: Key Blue/green Infrastructure features in the East RidingTable 7: Description of types of specialist accommodation suitable for older peopleTable 8: Affordable housing provisionTable 9: Key tourism accommodation requirementsTable 10: Examples of Energy TypesTable 11: Designated heritage assets within the East RidingTable 12: Non-designated heritage assets within the East RidingTable 13: Biodiversity and geological designated SitesTable 14: Guide to appropriate development within the CCMATable 15: Open space standards of provisionTable 16: Sequential approach for major town centre use development
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1: The East Riding Local Plan StructureFigure 2: The East Riding in its wider contextFigure 3: Key DiagramFigure 4: The East Riding Settlement NetworkFigure 5: The Strategic Transport NetworkFigure 6: Blue/green infrastructure corridorsFigure 7: Affordable Housing AreasFigure 8: Tourism Character AreasFigure 9: Wind Turbine Impact Risk ZonesFigure 10: Wind energy Landscape sensitivity strategyFigure 11: Simplified minerals resources map of East RidingFigure 12: Important Landscape AreasFigure 13: Recreational Pressure Mitigation ZonesFigure 14: Environmental hazardsFigure 15: Local Plan sub areasFigure 16: Beverley and Central Sub AreaFigure 17: Bridlington Coastal sub areaFigure 18: Driffield and Wolds sub areaFigure 19: Goole and Humberhead Levels sub areaFigure 20: Holderness and Southern Coastal sub areaFigure 21: The Vale of York sub area
5 List of Policies, Tables and FiguresExplanatory Note
This document is the Proposed Submission version of the Allocations Document Update. It is the version that East Riding 
of Yorkshire Council considers to be suitable for examination by an independent planning inspector. The document has been drafted in a style to show the ‘final’ wording to allow users to consider what an adopted version of the document would look like. It is not the final version of the document. 
We have considered all the responses provided to us from previous consultation documents, including the Options 
Document (2018) and the Draft Local Plan Update (2021) , and have reflected on significant amounts of evidence and studies to develop the policies within this document. 
This consultation marks one of the last stages in the process and seeks your views before it is submitted to the 
Government for examination. The examination will be undertaken by a planning inspector who will test the document to determine whether it is ‘sound’. All comments (or representations) made on this document will be provided to the planning inspector for consideration as part of the examination. 
Comments at the Proposed Submission stage should only be made in relation to the issues outlined below, which will be 
considered by the independent planning inspector. The role of inspector is to assess whether the Local Plan Update has been prepared in accordance with the duty to cooperate, legal and procedural requirements and it is a sound planning document.
Legal and procedural compliance  - the Local Plan Update will be checked to ensure it is legally compliant and has:
 
 been prepared in accordance with the Council’s Local Development Scheme;
  been subject to consultation with the public and relevant bodies in accordance with the regulations and in general  
 compliance with the Statement of Community Involvement ;
  been subject to a Sustainability Appraisal that considers the economic, social and environmental impacts of  
 proposed policies; 
  considered the duty to cooperate – that is, has the plan been prepared in cooperation with other local authorities  
 and prescribed bodies, such as the Environment Agency, to address strategic and cross-boundary issues; and
  had regard to national policy. 
Soundness  - to be found sound the Local Plan Update must be:
  Positively prepared  – providing a strategy which, as a minimum, seeks to meet the area’s objectively assessed  
 needs; and is informed by agreements with other authorities, so that unmet need from neighbouring areas is  
 accommodated where it is practical to do so and is consistent with achieving sustainable development;
  Justified  – an appropriate strategy, taking into account the reasonable alternatives, and based on proportionate evidence;
  Effective  – deliverable over the plan period, and based on effective joint working on cross-boundary strategic  
 matters that have been dealt with rather than deferred, as evidenced by the statement of common ground; and
  Consistent with national policy – enabling the delivery of sustainable development in accordance with the policies  
 in this Framework and other statements of national planning policy, where relevant.
If your comment relates to the way the Council has prepared the Local Plan it is likely to be a matter of legal and 
procedural compliance. Comments concerned with the actual content of the Local Plan Update are likely to be concerned with the soundness of the Plan.
1 It is also referred to as a ‘Regulation 19’ draft, fulfilling the requirements of the Town and County Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations 2012.  
2 The Draft Local Plan Document Update included the Draft Strategy Document Update, Draft Allocations Document Update, Draft Policies Update and a range of supporting documents.  
3 Both documents can be found here: www.eastriding.gov.uk/planning-permission-and-building-control/planning-policy-and-the-local-plan
6
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateHow do I get involved?
You can read this document in libraries, Customer Service Centres and on our website.
Your response must state whether you consider the Local Plan Update to be legally/ procedurally compliant,  
or is sound, giving reasons. You should also identify any changes that would need to be made to the document.
Please clearly identify which policy or part of the document you are responding to using the consultation 
representation form that is available on our website: www.eastriding.gov.uk/localplanreview
Representations can be submitted using the online form or returned to the Council at:  
forward.planning@eastriding.gov.uk
or, if you do not have access to the online form or email, via post at:  
Forward Planning  
East Riding of Yorkshire Council County Hall  
Beverley  
HU17 9BA
All representations need to be made by 11:59pm on 5 December 2022.For general enquiries, please use the email address above or call (01482) 391701 .
All representations will be made available to the independent planning inspector. Your details will be retained and 
used in accordance with the Council’s Privacy Notice available at:  www.eastriding.gov.uk/council/governance-and-spending/how-we-use-yourinformation/find-privacy-information/privacynotice-for-forward-planning 
Hearing Sessions 
As part of the examination the independent planning inspector holds hearing sessions into various matters that he or she has identified. Anyone who has made representations to this version of the Local Plan Update and who is seeking a change to the Plan has the right to appear and be heard by the inspector at the hearing, however the inspector determines how and when this happens. You should make it clear in your representation whether you wish to participate (speak) at the examination hearing. This is different to observing the examination which anyone is welcome to do without prior notification. Your written representations have equal weight with the comments made in person at the hearing sessions.
7 Explanatory Note8
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update1. Introduction
9 Introduction1  Introduction
1.1 The Local Plan provides the framework for managing development and addressing key planning issues in the East 
Riding. It is used to guide investment decisions and determine planning applications. In the case of the latter, it forms part of the ‘development plan’ for the area. Decisions on planning applications should be made in accordance with the Local Plan unless material considerations indicate otherwise. 
1.2 It sits alongside other plans for the area including the Joint Minerals Plan (adopted 2019), the Joint Waste Local Plan (adopted 2014) and neighbourhood plans where these are in place. 
Local Plan 2016 
1.3 A number of documents make up the Local Plan. First, the Strategy Document sets the overall direction for the Local Plan, setting policies to guide decisions on planning applications and was adopted in 2016. Second, the Allocations Document allocates sites for new development and different land uses (such as housing, retail, industry or open space). This was also adopted in 2016. Finally, the Bridlington Town Centre Area Action Plan (AAP) provided specific policies to guide development and contributed to the urban renaissance of Bridlington Town Centre. Adopted in 2013, the AAP covered the period to 2021. 
The East Riding Local Plan Review and Update
1.4 The process of reviewing the Local Plan began soon after its adoption in 2016. By 2018, the Council had prepared an Options Document which it published for consultation in November 2018. The next stage was the Draft Local Plan Update in 2021 which included revised versions of the Strategy Document, Allocations Document and Policies Map. These documents are complemented by a Policies Map that shows allocations for particular land uses or designations, such as areas of open space, which relate to specific policies in the Local Plan. Figure 1 below shows the structure of the East Riding Local Plan Update and its relationship with other planning documents. 
Figure 1: The East Riding Local Plan Structure
East Riding Local  
Plan UpdateStrategy
Document UpdateAllocations
Document Update
Joint Minerals 
PlanJoint Waste 
Local Plan
Neighbourhood Development Plans
Policies Map
Supplementary Planning Documents
Supplementary Planning DocumentsOther documents part of the Development Plan
Supporting documents
10
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update1.5 Reviews of Local Plans are required by national planning policy and should take account of any changes in national 
policy, any significant changes in evidence that helps to inform local planning policies, and address issues identified as a result of monitoring the performance of the Plan. In the East Riding’s case, the Inspector’s report of the examination of the 2016 Local Plan also identified a limited number of areas that should be part of any review. 
1.6 As such, the review did not start from a blank sheet of paper. Changes have only been required where national policy pulls in a slightly different direction or where new evidence identifies a revised approach, for example, the amount of retail floorspace likely to be required in the future. The key objectives from the Bridlington Town Centre AAP have been subsumed into the Local Plan Update.
1.7 This document incorporates the Council’s approach to these issues and takes account of the experience of implementing the 2016 Local Plan. It should be read in conjunction with the Allocations Document Update, published alongside this document, as this sets the framework for the scale and distribution of development required to meet the area’s needs to 2038/39. The Strategy Document Update, Policies Map Update, accompanying SA Report, evidence base and background documents are available to view and download from our website:  www.eastriding.gov.uk/erlocalplan
Other documents
1.8 Local Plans can be supported by Supplementary Planning Documents (SPDs), which add further guidance to the interpretation and delivery of policies within the documents listed above. These are not subject to independent testing and do not have ‘Development Plan’ status. A number of SPDs have already been prepared and are already used in decision making. 
1.9 A Town or Parish Council can prepare a Neighbourhood Development Plan (NDP) to set out a shared vision and planning policies for their area. Once adopted by East Riding of Yorkshire Council, NDPs form part of the statutory Development Plan and would be used to make decisions on planning applications.
1.10 All material relating to the Local Plan and other documents can be found on the Council’s website: 
www.eastriding.gov.uk/planning-permission-and-building-control/planning-policy-and-the-local-plan
Please note that this chapter is likely to change at the point of the Document’s adoption to reflect on the final stage of the 
preparation process (e.g. examination) and to update the tense of the paragraphs.
11 Introduction12
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update2. Key Spatial Issues
13 Key Spatial Issues2  Key Spatial Issues
2.1 The East Riding is one of the largest 
local authorities in the country in terms of population and area, covering over 930 square miles. It has a population of approximately 342,200 people, dispersed over 300 individual settlements. The largest town is Bridlington with a population of around 34,000 people. The other major settlements are Beverley Goole, Driffield and the Major Haltemprice Settlements to the west of Hull: Anlaby/ Willerby/ Kirk Ella; Cottingham and Hessle. Around half the population lives in rural communities.
2.2 Geographically, the East Riding is bounded to the east by the North Sea and lies north of the Humber Estuary. The Holderness coastline begins at Spurn Point at the mouth of the Humber Estuary and extends north to the chalk cliffs of Flamborough Head. Between these two points are the seaside resorts of Bridlington, Hornsea and Withernsea.  The coastline is mostly composed of boulder clay and in parts is the fastest eroding coastline in northern Europe.
2.3 Holderness itself forms the eastern strip of the East Riding. It is low-lying, undulating countryside and includes the River Hull which flows south from Driffield. The Yorkshire Wolds, which are rolling hills curving north from near Hessle and spreading out through the centre of the East Riding before ending abruptly at the cliffs of Flamborough and Bempton, form the middle ridge of the authority area. On the edge of the Wolds are the market towns of Driffield, Pocklington and Market Weighton. To the west is the Vale of York and Humberhead Levels area. This is a flat, low-lying area which includes the towns of Goole and Howden. The River Derwent forms much of the East Riding’s western boundary.
The wider context
2.4 The East Riding is bordered by eight other local authorities (Figure 2). To the north by Scarborough and Ryedale District Councils, to the west by the City of York, Selby District and Doncaster Metropolitan Councils and by North Lincolnshire and North East Lincolnshire to the south. The Lincolnshire councils are separated from the East Riding by the Humber Estuary except in the far south west of the East Riding where it has a land border with North Lincolnshire. The East Riding envelopes the City of Hull on three sides with the city’s southern boundary formed by the Humber Estuary. Some of the East Riding’s relationships with other locations are stronger than others, for example, the East Riding has strong ties with the cities of Hull and York, which is reflected in the extension of these cities’ economic and housing markets into the East Riding. There are daily movements of people between these places for employment, entertainment, education and shopping purposes. Hull’s ‘travel to work area’ covers a large part of the East Riding and its influence and role are important issues for the Plan. Hull City remains a prime focus for development and regeneration activity and a successful city will bring a number of benefits to the East Riding.
14
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateFigure 2: The East Riding in its wider context
2.5 There has been a strong history of joint working between the Council and Hull City Council, particularly through the 
preparation and adoption of their respective Local Plans and previously through a Joint Planning Statement (JPS) which outlined how the two authorities were committed to working together positively under the duty to cooperate. The two authorities have worked with key strategic principles and a commitment to: the regeneration and transformation of Hull; realising the potential of the Humber Ports alongside the growth of the renewable and low carbon energy sector; and protecting the integrity of the internationally important environmental and biodiversity designations around the Humber Estuary. More recently, the Humber Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP) has been replaced by the Hull and East Yorkshire Local Enterprise Partnership (HEY LEP), which manages the Getting Building Fund and sets out the priorities to support growth in the region’s economy and secure funding for Transport, Housing and Skills Projects 
2.6 Additionally, York is a powerful economic driver for the region and a destination for many East Riding workers. It is also a popular retail and visitor destination. Movements between East Riding and York is on a lower scale than those between Hull and the East Riding, but it presents a number of planning challenges and opportunities such as traffic management, affordable housing provision and economic development. The City of York Council’s emerging Local Plan sets out a strategy based on meeting the City’s needs within its own area. Employment growth is matched by housing provision, which includes a significant increase in the proposed level of housing growth, to become a more sustainable city and potentially reduce in-commuting from other areas, such as the East Riding.
2.7 Elsewhere, the links between the East Riding and other local authorities are less prominent, but naturally, those settlements on the edges of the East Riding may look to other areas when accessing services and facilities.
2.8 There are also environmental features that cross boundaries and require a coherent approach from each of the respective local planning authorities. For example, the Yorkshire Wolds extend into Ryedale and Scarborough, the Lower Derwent Valley spans the boundaries of the East Riding, York and Selby, and Thorne Moor extends into Doncaster and North Lincolnshire. Equally, the challenge of managing flood risk and development in the River Hull basin will require, where necessary, cross-boundary delivery.
2.9 The Humber Estuary is an important nature conservation asset in its own right, and supports the Humber Ports complex, which comprises significant employment sites on both banks of the Humber. Although the Estuary physically divides the two banks, the presence of the port complex provides the area with a powerful economic focus and identity.
15 Key Spatial Issues2.10 Planning for, and managing development in, the East Riding requires consideration of a wide range of factors from 
global challenges to local issues. This section details some of the key aspects of East Riding life that the Local Plan Update will need to influence, address or facilitate.
People and places
2.11 The East Riding is a collection of different places, each with its own unique  identity and character . There are coastal resorts, 
market towns, estate villages, port towns and suburban areas, and their character is shaped by their role and history. It is also influenced by a number of elements, including the architecture, street patterns, presence of green spaces and the form of the landscape. The area is rich in character and quality. There are more Conservation Areas than in any other local authority in the country and a wide variety of habitats, from the ancient flood meadows of the Lower Derwent Valley to the chalk grasslands of the Yorkshire Wolds.
2.12 These features, alongside the rural nature of the area, make the East Riding a desirable place to live. As a result, population growth is projected to continue over the plan period, although at a slower rate of population growth when compared with England. Most of this growth is driven by net in-migration particularly from Hull. Although this projection is based on past trends and does not take account of future planning policy, particularly through this Local Plan Update, it is clear that the number of people living in the East Riding will increase over the plan period. 
2.13 Within the broad trend of population growth, the East Riding’s age profile shows an increasingly ageing population . 
There are far more people over the age of 50 within the East Riding compared with the national and regional averages, which may also be attributed to high levels of people over the age of 65 moving to the area upon retirement. Conversely, younger age groups, particularly the 20-29 year age ranges, are under-represented. Both trends have an important impact on spatial planning, the local economy and the way services are delivered.
2.14 The growth in population and the trend for residents to live in smaller households, places pressure on the demand for new housing. Local evidence also highlights a high need for more affordable housing, with particular affordability  issues 
in rural parts of the authority. The Plan, therefore, needs to make provision for increasing the supply of affordable housing, balancing the needs and demands derived from demographic change with other policy objectives.
2.15 The pressures of population growth and an attractive environment creates considerable pressure for development in rural areas . The attraction of living in a rural area creates a level of demand which can fuel house price rises 
and significantly affects the affordability of housing for local people. This barrier to housing is one element of rural deprivation . Another element includes a lack of access to services where the vitality of rural areas suffers greatly.  
As services and facilities in rural areas retract, due to market pressures and the rising cost of fuel, there are those who can afford to access services elsewhere and those who cannot. The challenges for spatial planning in rural areas can be summarised as:
 
 Supporting the vibrancy of settlements;
  Delivering more affordable housing;
  Helping to maintain a network of key local services and facilities;
  Supporting existing public transport provision and improving accessibility through a variety of means;
  Supporting rural enterprises and rural diversification; and
  Protecting and enhancing the countryside, and managing different uses for land (e.g. biodiversity, tourism,  
 agriculture, energy).
16
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update2.16 Outside rural areas, there are parts of the East Riding’s towns which exhibiting features of deprivation and 
disadvantage. For example, parts of Bridlington, Goole and Withernsea are affected by higher levels of unemployment, lower levels of skills and educational attainment, and particular health challenges. Here, there is a need to support a wider transformational agenda to address issues of market failure and deprivation. 
2.17 However, it remains important to recognise that the majority of the East Riding’s residents enjoy a high quality of 
life. There are many areas of relative affluence, particularly in Beverley, to the west of Hull and close to the City of 
York boundary. Life expectancy levels are higher than the Humber and national averages, whereas the proportion 
of children eligible for free school meals, and the overall rates of crime, are lower than that of the Humber and the 
country as a whole.
People and places statistics
  Approximately 342,200 residents (about half live in rural communities of less than5,000)
  Higher than average proportion of older people (26 per cent of over 65s compared with  
 19 per cent nationally)
  High proportion of White British residents (96 per cent compared with 80 per cent nationally)
  Parts of Goole, Bridlington and Withernsea within the 10 per cent most deprived areas of the country
  High levels of owner occupancy housing (75 per cent compared with 63 per cent nationally)
  House prices higher than the regional average (£205,000 compared with £182,500)
The environment
2.18 Changes to the climate over the plan period are likely to increase and this is particularly important for the East Riding as the consequences are potentially severe. Some of the predicted changes include: more intense rainfall and varied groundwater recharge rates; increased flooding and coastal erosion from rising sea levels; and more extreme temperatures in winter and summer months. The area may also experience an increase in the likelihood of periods  
of drought.
2.19 With the exception of the Yorkshire Wolds, the East Riding is a predominantly low-lying area. The presence of the rivers Hull, Derwent, Ouse, Aire and Trent, as well as the Humber Estuary, means that a large proportion of the East Riding is at risk from various 
forms of flooding. Many towns and villages are within high risk ‘flood zones’, comprising over 20,000 households in 
total. One of the key challenges for planning in the East Riding is to support sustainable development and balance this against the risks associated with flooding.
2.20 The East Riding’s rich and diverse landscape, open spaces and coastal areas are a source of great pleasure to local people and visitors alike. This includes an extensive (1,600km) Public Right of Way network, which includes the 
Yorkshire Wolds National Trail and the Trans Pennine Trail. There are also areas of high landscape quality that are of 
local importance, including parts of the Yorkshire Wolds and the Lower Derwent Valley, and nationally designated 
Heritage Coast at Flamborough Headland and Spurn Head. Much of the landscape is shaped by agriculture and 
there are significant areas of high-quality agricultural land across the East Riding. These areas make a valuable contribution to the nation’s food production capacity, as well as providing employment for people living in the area. 
17 Key Spatial IssuesThe use of agricultural land for food production 
faces competition from other land uses, such as housing, employment, flood management schemes and energy crops.
2.21 There are many sites that are designated because of their international, national or local ecological importance. These include sites such as Hornsea Mere, the Humber Estuary, Thorne and Hatfield Moor, Flamborough and Filey Coast, and the Derwent Valley, all of which should be protected and, where possible, enhanced. Development around these designations must be carefully considered and managed so as to protect their integrity. For example, developments within the Hornsea Mere SPA area are required to be ‘nutrient neutral’ to protect the hydrological system from nutrient pollution. The East Riding is home to a wide variety of habitats such as lowland heath, saltmarshes and flood meadows. There are also important fisheries within the Plan area, some of which are internationally renowned. The River Hull, for example, is the most northerly chalk stream in the world, and its status as a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) reflects its importance. Outside of designated areas, the East Riding has a rich biodiversity with important species such as water voles, kittiwakes and great crested newts. Habitats and ecological areas are intrinsically important, but they also provide ecosystem services such as flood alleviation, carbon capture and recreational opportunities. Environmental protections and recovery were brought into UK law via the Environment Act (2021), and include biodiversity net gain, which will be mandatory by 2023.
2.22 The East Riding also has an important and diverse historic environment, containing outstanding buildings of national importance, local landmarks that act as place makers, as well as undesignated archaeological landscapes, such as the Yorkshire Wolds. It has the second highest number of designated historic assets in Yorkshire and the Humber with over 2,500 Listed Buildings and 350 Scheduled Monuments. Additionally, there are over 100 Conservation Areas illustrating the East Riding’s rich historic character. Unfortunately, some of the East Riding’s historic assets are ‘at risk’.
The environment statistics
  Over 2,500 Grade II Listed Buildings, over 200 Grade I and II* Listed Buildings, and around 350  
 Scheduled Monuments. 
  Two Ramsar sites (protected wetland sites), six Special Protection Areas, five Special Areas of  
 Conservation and two European Marine Sites.
  Over 50 Sites of Special Scientific Interest.
  As much as 20 per cent of residential properties and 23 per cent of commercial properties, as well as 20  
 per cent of the area’s agricultural land is at risk of tidal flooding.
  As much as 11 per cent of the area’s residential properties, and 22 per cent of commercial properties, are  
 at risk of surface water flooding.
  Erosion rates along parts of the Holderness Coast can reach an average of 2-4m each year (sometimes as  
 much as 20m for individual cliff losses).
  Nearly half (approximately 47 per cent ) of the East Riding comprises agricultural land classed as ‘excellent’  
 of ‘very good’.
18
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateThe economy
2.23 The planning system is a key tool in promoting 
and safeguarding sustainable economic growth and jobs. The East Riding’s local economy is relatively diverse, however it has typically been dependent on small businesses, a limited number of major employers (mainly in manufacturing) and the public sector. This has contributed to a number of challenges in the East Riding economy, including low productivity, small business growth, below average earnings and skill shortages in some sectors. However, the economy is evolving as more focus is directed towards the creative industries, emerging manufacturing sectors and sub-sectors, agrotechnology research and development, and the energy sector’s transition to low carbon. The East Riding Economic Strategy 2018-2022 aims to build on the East Riding’s natural strengths, such as those in food, manufacturing and the renewable energy sector while continuing to address longstanding challenges in productivity, innovation, business growth, skills demand and existing pockets of deprivation in urban, rural and coastal areas. 
2.24 A number of these priority sectors place increasing demands on land. Local evidence has been prepared, which highlights the need to identify sufficient employment land to accommodate the predicted growth and shift in employment over the plan period. The evidence also highlights where the greatest potential for economic growth exists and where the Plan should make provision and enable employment activity. For example, it notes the attraction of the A63 and M62 corridor, as it connects the East Riding with the port of Hull and markets across the UK.
2.25 Agriculture in the East Riding is an important sector and is primarily arable with cereals, particularly wheat, barley and oilseed rape making up the bulk of crops. Production levels and efficiencies are high in the area’s horticultural industry with the East Riding providing a wealth of produce from potatoes and peas to asparagus and beetroot. Additionally, the East Riding also supports the emerging biofuels industry by providing bioethanol plants (biomass crops) to power stations. Within the Yorkshire and Humber region, recorded in the Defra Farm Business Survey 2019, grazing livestock farms accounted for 32 per cent of farmed area in the region, and while pig farms accounted for a much smaller proportion of the farmed area, the region accounted for 37 per cent of the English pig population. Trends in agriculture include larger farms, which require larger buildings for storage and ‘industrial processes’, and decentralised energy provision on site such as wind turbines and biomass facilities.
2.26 The renewable and low carbon energy sector is a significant and rapidly growing sector in the UK economy. With its estuary, ports and associated marine assets, the Humber is uniquely placed to benefit from this growth. Current infrastructure within the East Riding provides capacity for up to 20 per cent of the UK’s peak gas demand through the Langeled Pipeline. The existing ports complex is the UK’s largest by tonnage (and the fourth largest in Europe) and is located within 12 hours sailing of 80 per cent of all the North Sea offshore wind farms zones, and potentially 60 per cent of the entire European market. Due to the high transport costs associated with transporting offshore wind turbines, this gives the Humber a significant competitive advantage over other locations.
2.27 In 2021, the Hull and East Yorkshire Local Enterprise Partnership (HEY LEP) started work on the region’s future economic direction, replacing the Humber Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP) and the York, North Yorkshire and East Riding partnership (LEP), and enables the area’s businesses and workforce to benefit from a broad range of support, The HEY LEP, which manages the Getting Building Fund, sets out the priorities to support growth in the region’s economy and green industries, whilst meeting decarbonisation targets. The East Coast and Humber Estuary play a leading role in the emerging renewable energy sector, in particular offshore wind farms, with the Government setting out a detailed prospectus for the Humber as a Centre for Offshore Renewable Engineering (CORE).
2.28 Enterprise Zones have been designated by the Government, which include a variety of sites across the Humber area, with the East Riding offering over 150 hectares of strategic development Enterprise Zones along the A63/M62 transport corridor. Overall, five sites in the East Riding have Enterprise Zone status at Elloughton cum Brough, Melton, Goole, Salt End and Hedon Haven. A series of financial incentives have been put in place, alongside simplified planning approaches, to attract and support businesses in the renewable and low carbon energy sector. The Government’s announcement on the Freeport initiative also provides opportunities for the East Riding economy with specific tax sites earmarked at Goole and Hedon/Preston (Hull East).
19 Key Spatial Issues2.29 Whilst the highway network is generally unconstrained, there are stretches that are under ‘stress’ in terms of traffic 
volume and speeds, or may become stressed without intervention. Localised congestion issues also exist in some of the major settlements including Goole, Beverley and Bridlington. These are some of the consequences of relatively high car ownership and usage in the East Riding. Development in parts of the East Riding that experience congestion will connect to sections of highway in neighbouring local authorities, particularly the City of York and Kingston upon Hull.
2.30 Public transport provision is reasonable in the larger settlements but is not a suitable option for many people in the rural parts of the East Riding. Managing accessibility and widening transport choice is therefore a feature of the Plan that supports the Local Transport Plan’s (2015-2029) long term 14-year strategy for delivering and improving transport services across the East Riding.
2.31 A range of different mineral deposits are present in the East Riding and there are important sources of sand and gravel, chalk and crushed rock. Mineral development is different from other forms of development because minerals can only be worked where they naturally occur. Therefore, a balance must be struck between the importance of the mineral deposit and non-minerals surface development, which may prevent extraction of the mineral resource in the future.
The economy statistics
  Relatively high employment rate (77 per cent compared with 75 per cent nationally) 
  Around 140,000jobs in the East Riding - a ratio of 0.72 jobs per person of working age (compared with  
 0.85 nationally)
  Levels of pay for people residing in the East Riding residents are higher than those of people working in the  
 East Riding (£492 per month compared with £442)
  Significant net outflows of people for employment to Hull (33,000), York (5,500) and Selby (2,500)
  A higher than national average of people employed in agriculture, manufacturing and the public sector. Low  
 proportion of people employed in finance and business sectors
  Over 15,855 VAT-registered businesses (343 businesses per 10,000 people compared with 317 nationally)
20
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update3. Vision, Place Statements, 
Objectives and Key Diagram
21 Vision, Place Statements, Objectives and Key Diagram3  Vision, Place Statements, Objectives and Key Diagram
3.1 A crucial aspect of managing development and responding to the many challenges is to consider what the area will 
be like in the future. This document includes a vision and a set of objectives for the Local Plan Update outlining a number of guiding principles for planning policies and investment decisions.
The vision for the Local Plan Update
3.2 The following vision reflects the key spatial issues, challenges and opportunities for the East Riding. It describes, in broad terms, what the East Riding will be like by 2039 and how growth and development will have been managed sustainably. This vision sets the context for the Local Plan Update and is the driver of the objectives and policies of the Strategy Document Update.
3.3 As a large and diverse area, it is very challenging for the overarching Local Plan Update vision to express the aspirations of individual places. To address this, place statements have been prepared for identified settlements and for rural areas.
3.4 The vision and place statements have been developed taking into account information from a number of sources, including the East Riding Economic Strategy, plans prepared by Local Enterprise Partnerships (LEPs), individual town strategies and the plans of neighbouring local authorities. This has sought to ensure that the vision and place statements reflect the distinctiveness of the East Riding and the aspirations held for the area over the period  to 2039.
3.5 Neighbourhood Plans prepared for individual areas in the East Riding are likely to expand upon the Local Plan vision and place statements and will also help to deliver the aspirations and policies of the Plan. It is also possible that local communities could, through a Neighbourhood Plan, seek to establish place statements for other settlements not covered in this Plan. 
22
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateEast Riding Local Plan Vision
By 2039, the East Riding will be characterised by  
economically prosperous, vibrant and distinctive  urban and rural communities in which residents  and visitors can enjoy a high quality of life and  healthy lifestyles, businesses can thrive and the  natural environment can flourish. The economy  will have grown. The varied towns and villages, the  rich and diverse landscapes, historic environment,  countryside, coastal areas and habitats that give the  East Riding such character, will continue to be  valued by residents and visitors alike. Growth and  new development will have been delivered in a  sustainable manner, making the most efficient  use of land, buildings, resources and infrastructure. Investment in infrastructure will have taken place as required to support this growth, benefiting both new and existing residents. Overall, development will have ensured that people are connected to housing, services, facilities, a range of sustainable and active transport modes and economic opportunities to meet their everyday needs, and will have complemented and supported regeneration initiatives underway in both the East Riding and City of Hull. 
Most new development will have been delivered in the Major Haltemprice Settlements and the East Riding’s Principal 
Towns and Towns, supporting their role as the key centres for population, employment, services and facilities, including main town centre uses and retail. Development will maintain and enhance the long-term vitality and viability of town centres. Key Employment Sites along the M62/A63 East-West Multi-Modal Transport Corridor will have continued to develop, providing opportunities for indigenous businesses and inward investment, and supporting the growth of key sectors such as the renewable energy industry. In the more rural parts of the East Riding, more limited development, including new services and facilities, employment and housing, will have occurred in Rural Service Centres and Primary Villages, with Rural Service Centres acting as small service hubs for their rural catchments. Limited development will have been promoted in Villages and uses appropriate to a rural location will have been supported in the Countryside. The loss of important community facilities will have been resisted. This will have helped to meet the needs of their local communities and maintain the vibrancy of rural areas. Across the East Riding, the network of settlements will have a choice of homes and the services to sustain their communities and catchments to meet present and future needs, thereby minimising the need to travel. An appropriate mix of housing size, tenure and affordability will be provided to meet the specific needs of groups. Safe environments and communities will be created where people want to live. New development will have minimised the risk from climate change, particularly flooding, coastal erosion and sea level rise and minimise impact on amenity of existing communities. High standards of design will reinforce local identities across the East Riding and the distinctiveness of the area’s settlements and landscapes, whilst also ensuring efficient use of energy. The opportunities presented by the renewable and low carbon energy sector will have been embraced and maximised, creating employment opportunities, helping to decarbonise the East Riding as far as possible, reducing greenhouse emissions and increasing fuel security. Other methods will also be implemented to tackle climate change, such as tree planting and carbon capture. Developments will be located where they will maintain or improve the quality of local water resources.
The Council will have worked closely with communities, stakeholders and developers to protect, conserve and enhance the 
diverse natural, built and historic assets of the East Riding. Town and parish councils will have been supported to develop Neighbourhood Plans to guide the development of their areas. There will have been a net gain in biodiversity, and enhanced networks of green infrastructure and woodland and valued green spaces will have brought people closer to nature and supported the wide range of recreational opportunities, wildlife species and habitats across the East Riding.
Place statements
3.6 The place statements complement the overarching Local Plan Update vision for the East Riding and clarify the role of the larger settlements in meeting the vision. They have been used to help guide the development of these settlements over the plan period through the Allocations Document Update and will be important for reaching decisions on individual planning applications.
23 Vision, Place Statements, Objectives and Key DiagramThe Major Haltemprice Settlements
Anlaby, Willerby and Kirk Ella
By 2039, Anlaby, Willerby and Kirk Ella will have each maintained their character and identities, while supporting the 
regeneration and development of the City of Hull. The high quality of life that residents of these areas enjoy will have been safeguarded and reinforced. Development of the most suitable sites, incorporating a mix of housing, will have helped meet housing demand and strengthened the area’s role as a sustainable place to live and work.
Important and valued green spaces that separate Anlaby from Hessle, and Willerby from Cottingham, and that 
reduce the risk of flooding to these communities, will have been maintained, and where possible enhanced, to improve the network of green infrastructure and support biodiversity. Flood alleviation schemes will have been implemented to manage the risk of flooding, and the quality of drinking water supplied by the Springhead borehole will have been protected as part of wider measures to manage potential pollutants.
The distinct centres of Anlaby and Willerby Square will have been strengthened through small-scale retail, 
community and leisure developments. This will have enhanced their ability to serve the needs of their communities. In the centre of Kirk Ella, the village feel will have been maintained.
Enhanced walking, cycling and public transport routes will have strengthened the excellent transport links between 
the settlements and the City of Hull. The continuation of employment uses at the Great Gutter Lane Industrial Estate and along Springfield Way, and new employment development in Anlaby and at Willerby Hill, will provide jobs close to home and units suitable for businesses to thrive.
Cottingham
By 2039, Cottingham will have strengthened its role as a desirable and sustainable place to live and work, while the  re-use of existing buildings, will have helped meet housing  demand and provide new employment opportunities.  Its character will have been maintained with the new buildings  reflecting local distinctiveness.
The centre of the village will continue to thrive, with a  
healthy mix of businesses, shops and services that meet  many of the local population’s needs. 
The excellent links that Cottingham has to the City of Hull and connections to other Haltemprice Settlements by 
sustainable modes of transport will have been enhanced, reducing the need to rely on the private car. The train station will continue to be a particular asset for the village, while opportunities for walking and cycling will have been increased.
Important and valued green spaces that separate Cottingham from Hull and Willerby will have been maintained 
and, where possible, enhanced to improve the network of green infrastructure and support biodiversity. They will continue to serve an important role in managing the risk of flooding to the village itself, helping to ensure the health, safety and well-being of residents and property. Flood alleviation schemes will also have been implemented to manage the risk of flooding, and the quality of drinking water supplied by the Cottingham borehole will have been protected as part of wider measures to manage potential pollutants.
24
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateHessle
By 2039 the town-like qualities and character of Hessle will have been strengthened, while supporting the 
regeneration and development of the City of Hull. It will continue to serve an important role as a district centre, with shops and services that meet many of the local population’s needs. Its position on the A63/M62 East-West Multi-Modal Transport Corridor will have helped drive economic growth, and the Humber Bridgehead employment site will have been sensitively developed into a unique business and office park, attracting significant inward investment to the area, and supporting the growth and diversification of the economy. This will have been complemented by other employment areas, which will continue to support the growth of the local economy.
Housing demand will have been met through the re-use of previously developed land and on allocations on the 
most suitable sites. These will continue to maintain the integrity and separate identity of the town and strengthened it as a sustainable place to live and work.
The risk of flooding from the Humber Estuary will have been minimised, and important and valued green spaces 
between Hessle and Anlaby will have been maintained and, where possible, enhanced. This will support networks of green infrastructure and biodiversity and, in certain parts, continue to manage the risk of flooding in the town and so help to ensure the health, safety and well-being of residents and property. The Foreshore and Country Park that lie at the foot of the Humber Bridge will also continue to attract visitors and serve an important role for recreation and biodiversity.
Transport investment will have responded to the planned growth and ensured that a variety of viable transport 
options, particularly for walking, cycling and public transport, are available for people and businesses travelling between Hessle, the other Haltemprice Settlements and the City of Hull. The train station will continue to be a particular asset for the town.
Principal Towns
Beverley
By 2039 Beverley will have strengthened its role as an attractive, thriving  and prosperous historic market town and visitor destination. The elements  that contribute to Beverley’s distinctive character and historic fabric,  such as its conservation areas and numerous listed buildings, will have  been protected and enhanced. It will have been ensured that development  complements and protects the town’s attractive built character, landscape  setting and key views of the Minster and St Mary’s Church. The housing  demands of the growing population will have been met through the re-use  of previously developed land and on greenfield sites in suitable locations,  focusing particularly on the south of the town. These developments will  be designed to manage the risk of flooding from the River Hull, the  Beverley and Barmston Drain and Beverley Beck. 
Beverley’s already thriving and prosperous town centre will have been further improved, and enhancements to 
public spaces will have increased the town’s attractiveness as an outstanding visitor destination and focal point for retail, leisure, community, cultural and recreation facilities. The mixed-use development at Flemingate will continue to provide complementary retail, office, education and leisure space beyond the town centre, and contribute to strengthening the role of the town.
25 Vision, Place Statements, Objectives and Key DiagramThe town’s economy will have been strengthened by the development of new and existing employment sites, which 
enable existing businesses to expand and attract new, high value knowledge-based businesses. This will have been complemented by modern education and training facilities. Tourism will continue to be an important part of the economy, with the town’s racecourse, churches, historic markets and buildings, Beck, ancient common lands and diverse range of leisure facilities, continuing to support its unique tourism offer. These will be enhanced by high quality visitor facilities. 
The common lands surrounding the town, and the River Hull Corridor, contribute to biodiversity and have an 
important recreational role, which will have been maintained and, where possible, enhanced. The train station will continue to be an important asset, and major transport schemes, including a park and ride scheme, improved public transport facilities and new cycling and pedestrian routes, will have been developed. This will have further improved accessibility and connectivity, particularly between the town centre and the new urban extension to the south of the town, helping to alleviate congestion.
Bridlington
By 2039 Bridlington will have been the focus of most new  development in the northern and coastal area of the East Riding.  Its role as a premier East Coast resort will have been cemented  and complemented by a stronger and more diverse economic  base and range of tourism facilities. Housing demand will have  been met through a combination of adapting the existing housing  stock, re-using previously developed sites and greenfield sites in  suitable locations. New housing will have been provided, not only  to meet the needs of an aging population, but to support families  and young people to remain in the area. The important open  spaces between Bridlington and Bessingby and Sewerby will  have been maintained, and the quality of drinking water supplied by the Mill Lane borehole protected as part of wider measures to manage potential pollutants. 
The need for new retail space in the town will have largely been met in the town centre, which will have been 
redeveloped and reinvigorated by greatly improved shopping, employment, town centre facilities, tourist accommodation and public realm improvements. New residential uses will have been developed in the town centre to add to its vitality and vibrancy and new residents and visitors alike will benefit from enhanced links and better integration with the working harbour. Other seaside attractions will have been improved and added to within the seafront area.
Those elements that contribute to the distinctive character of the outstanding ‘Old Town’ area will have been 
preserved and enhanced, and it will have strengthened its position as an important part of the town’s tourism offer. In conjunction with the Heritage Coast of Flamborough Head, Bempton Cliffs and Sewerby Hall, it will provide an attractive alternative coastal tourism experience based on nature, heritage and cultural activity.
The diversification of Bridlington’s economy will have been supported by new employment developments at 
Carnaby and Bessingby Industrial Estates. These, together with new office and business spaces in the town centre, will meet the needs of the growing economy. The re-modelled town centre and the stronger economy will have retained many more young, economically active people, while the needs of older generations will have been met through improved commercial and community facilities.
Bridlington’s public transport links, both road and rail, with larger settlements and its rural and coastal catchment, 
will have been improved, and opportunities for walking and cycling enhanced. Together with the park and ride facility, this will help manage seasonal parking pressures.
26
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateDriffield
By 2039 Driffield will have been a focus for new development in  
the northern area of the Wolds. Its role as the ‘Capital of the  Wolds’ will have been strengthened by improvements to its retail,  service and leisure facilities. The train station will continue to be  an asset for the town, giving the town sustainable links with  Bridlington, Beverley and the City of Hull.
Driffield town centre will have been revitalised by focussed retail  
development and the sensitive redevelopment of its derelict sites.  There will be a broader range of leisure and cultural facilities set within an improved public realm and the night-time economy will also have been enhanced. 
Kelleythorpe Industrial Estate will have expanded to accommodate further employment uses and benefited from 
measures to improve access between the estate, the former Alamein Barracks and the town. New employment uses will have helped to retain young people and broaden the base of the economy by attracting higher value sectors. The Driffield Navigation and the Driffield Showground, together with key natural assets such as the River Hull Headwaters, will have been enhanced to become an important part of the visitor economy. The River Hull Headwaters will be maintained as an important biodiversity asset, which will also help manage the risk of flooding.  New development will have been carefully delivered to manage the risk of potential pollutants in respect of water abstraction.
Whilst there will have been significant opportunities for using previously developed land, a number of sustainably 
located greenfield sites will also have contributed to meeting housing demand in this part of the East Riding. The re-development of Alamein Barracks outside the town will have brought a substantial brownfield site back into use and will have been accompanied by appropriate infrastructure. New development at these locations will have cycling and pedestrian connections to the centre of Driffield and will respect and enhance the landscape surrounding the town.
Goole
By 2039 Goole will have strengthened its economic role as the  Principal Town in the southwest area of the East Riding, and new  investment in and around the town will have made it a more  desirable place to live and conduct business. The challenge of  flood risk and climate change will have continued to be managed  appropriately, and most new development sited in lower risk  areas with a design and layout based on flood resistance or  resilience. Investment in infrastructure, including flood defences,  will have taken place, where required, and supported the  development of the town.
Goole’s proximity to other major urban areas, such as Doncaster, Leeds and Sheffield, and position on the 
important M62/A63 East-West Multi-Modal Transport Corridor with one of the UK’s most important inland ports, will have enabled it to develop as a major inter-modal hub for trade, logistics and manufacturing. Employment in these sectors will have seen strong growth and be complemented by a growing number of small and medium sized businesses. Strong growth in the scale and diversity of the local economy and improved education, training and skill levels will have raised employment rates and incomes, and reduced deprivation levels. The town’s multi-modal links will be complemented by improved cycling infrastructure and give residents a range of sustainable transport options, connecting them to job opportunities, services and facilities. The relationship with surrounding towns and villages, such as Howden, will have been strengthened to ensure that the needs of the sub area can be met. 
As a result of investment stimulated initially through the Goole Town Deal, the town centre will have become much
27 Vision, Place Statements, Objectives and Key Diagrammore cohesive and attractive, with an enhanced retail offer, cultural, arts and sports facilities. Oakhill Country Park, 
and other parks and green space in and around Goole, will complement the existing attractiveness of the town and its setting. Open space will have been protected to ensure the continued separation of the town from the village of Hook. Green infrastructure will have also been maintained, and enhanced where possible, around the Humber Estuary, the River Aire, River Ouse and the River Don/Dutch River, and provide a valued flood alleviation, recreational and biodiversity role. 
New development will have respected Goole’s distinctive townscape together with its port heritage.
Towns
Elloughton-cum-Brough
By 2039 Elloughton cum Brough will be a thriving settlement. An expanded range of services and facilities, including 
new retail provision, will have increased the ability of residents to meet their needs locally. This will better suit the size of the population, and complement economic development, planned housing development and small-scale infill opportunities for housing. Investment in infrastructure, including in education and health facilities, will have taken place where necessary to ensure they meet the needs of the settlement.
Employment development within Elloughton cum Brough will have established the settlement as an important part 
of the Humber Green Port Corridor and supported the growth of the renewable and low carbon energy sectors. The industrial estate at Melton will have also continued to develop as a strategically important employment site, taking advantage of its prime position along the important A63/M62 East-West Multi-Modal Transport Corridor. It will have attracted significant inward investment to the area, supporting the growth and diversification of the economy and providing significant opportunities for new and expanding businesses. Together, this will help to provide more employment opportunities for residents close to home. Any development near the banks of the Humber will have been carefully planned to ensure that the risk of flooding and effects of climate change are managed.
The tight-knit urban nature of the historic centre of Brough, and the historic core and village quality of the centre of 
Elloughton, will be protected to help maintain their distinct characters. Green infrastructure assets that are valued by the local community and have a flood alleviation, recreational and biodiversity role, such as the Brough Haven, the waterfront and the neighbouring Yorkshire Wolds Important Landscape Area, will have been protected and enhanced where possible. Development will have been managed in a manner that maintains the integrity of the Humber Estuary nature designations and the functional land around it.
The local transport infrastructure will have been improved through the provision of a link road joining Moor Road to 
Saltgrounds Road and improvements to the junction with the A63. The train station will continue to be a particular asset for the settlement and, along with enhanced pedestrian and cycle routes, will give residents a choice of sustainable transport options.
Hedon
By 2039 Hedon will continue to be a vibrant market town with a good  range of services and facilities that provide for its residents and rural  hinterland. It will have continued to have close links with Hull and to  capitalise on the opportunities the city presents, while maintaining its  own unique identity and character.
Where possible, measures will have been undertaken to help reduce
28
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Updatethe risk and impact of flooding from all sources, and new development will have been designed and located to ensure 
that it is safe and does not increase the risk of flooding elsewhere in the town. Investment in infrastructure, including surface water drainage, will have taken place where necessary to ensure that it meets the requirements of the town.
Hedon’s unique heritage assets, such as St Augustine’s Church, the seventeenth century Town Hall, its Georgian 
buildings and the remains of the medieval town, and the important open spaces within the town, will have been protected. St Augustine’s Church will continue to be an important landmark in the skyline of this part of Holderness, and the key views towards it will have been protected. New development will have been provided through the re-use of previously developed land and small-scale infill opportunities. These will have respected the town’s character and rural setting and protected the continued separation of Hedon and the surrounding villages.
Shops in the town centre will continue to flourish and the evening economy will have grown, complementing the 
town’s status as a heritage destination. Connectivity within the town, and with surrounding employment areas, will have also been improved through measures to encourage travel by more sustainable means.
Nearby Hedon Haven, which is located at the eastern end of the East-West Multi-Modal Transport Corridor, will 
have been sensitively developed to support the expansion of the Port of Hull, capitalising on the opportunities offered by the emerging renewables sector. This will take advantage of its unique location adjacent to the Humber Estuary and the existing ports estate in Hull. It will also safeguard the integrity of the Humber Estuary’s biodiversity assets and the significance of the heritage assets in its vicinity.
Hornsea
By 2039 Hornsea will be a thriving family seaside town.  The Central Promenade will continue to be the cultural hub of  Hornsea’s seaside offer, serving both residents and visitors.  Important green spaces in the town, on Hornsea seafront and the  Mere, will be maintained and enhanced, for the benefit of residents,  visitors and biodiversity. Further improvement of the promenades  will create a stylish and vibrant mix of uses. 
Tourism will continue to be an important part of the economy of the town. Employment opportunities will have 
been increased through the successful implementation of renaissance projects. These will stimulate demand for new employment land and small-scale business accommodation and encourage a variety of businesses to operate from the town. This will have been complemented by the intensification and diversification of the shops, restaurants and services on Newbegin and Market Place, and enhancement of the town’s leisure and cultural facilities. Ease of movement through the town will have improved as a result of better linkages between retail, cultural and leisure facilities, residential areas, holiday parks, and services. Together this will better meet the needs of the local community, enhance the viability and vitality of the town centre and reduce the need for residents to commute elsewhere.
Development will have complemented the unique cultural and built heritage of the town and reinforced the different 
character of the seafront, town centre and the Mere. New housing development will have provided a mix of housing, including more homes for first time buyers, which will have helped retain more young people in the town.
29 Vision, Place Statements, Objectives and Key DiagramHowden
By 2039 Howden’s role as a town will have been strengthened, with a range of  
services and facilities and a diverse retail offer, supported by high quality pedestrian  friendly public open spaces. An urban extension to the north of the town will have  been successfully integrated to provide for mixed communities and to meet the  demand for new housing in the town and the wider sub area. Comprehensive  development of this area, which will extend beyond 2039, will have included the  provision of a new relief road that re-routes traffic at the northern end of the town  and provides a better connection between the motorway and destinations to the  north of Howden. New services, facilities and infrastructure, including connections  that support sustainable transport modes, will have been provided to support the  growth in population and will complement the role of the historic town centre. 
The character of the centre overall will have been maintained and enhanced by new development that helps 
reinforce the sense of place. The Minster will continue to be an important landmark in the skyline of the town, and the key views towards the Minster will have been protected, with new views opened up as part of the urban extension. New developments will have been designed using the historic core as a source of inspiration, contributing to the high-quality urban environment in the town. Important green spaces, such as the Howden Marsh, which have an important recreational and biodiversity role will have been maintained and enhanced where possible. The challenge of flood risk and climate change will have been managed appropriately and new development focused in lower risk areas with design and layout based on flood resistance or resilience.
Howden’s strategic position on the East-West Multi-Modal Transport Corridor will have been used to secure more 
employment opportunities for the town through an expansion of the Ozone Business Park and as part of an urban extension. Sustainable transport provision and connections, including cycling and walking, between housing, retail and employment areas will have been improved. The train station will also continue to be a particular asset for the town, with opportunities taken to improve facilities to the benefit of existing and new residents.
Market Weighton
By 2039 Market Weighton will be a thriving market town and  
agricultural service centre at the heart of the East Riding. Its distinct  
cultural and built heritage, and the eclectic mix of historic buildings  
giving its town centre such character, will have been complemented  
by sensitive new development, which will contribute to the  
continued vibrancy of the town. 
Employment opportunities in the town will have increased through  
the expansion of industry and business in the Becklands Park area. New developments will have also improved and diversified the town centre to help meet the needs of the growing population. Visitor facilities, activities and accommodation will have been further developed helping to make Market Weighton a local centre for tourism, capitalising on its links to the Wolds. There will be alternatives to commuting away from the town as a result of the enhanced local employment, services and facilities.
Housing development will have occurred in a way that respects and enhances the distinctive character of the town, 
providing new properties that meet local demands. Access arrangements for cars, pedestrians and cyclists to new development sites will have been carefully considered. Investment in infrastructure, including surface water drainage, will have taken place as required to meet the needs of the growing town.
The much-valued Yorkshire Wolds Important Landscape Area that surrounds the eastern and northeastern side 
of Market Weighton will have been protected, and enhanced where possible, and the town will continue to be separate from the village of Goodmanham. Well used community green spaces will have been preserved and added to, providing recreational facilities for local people and visitors alike.
30
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdatePocklington
By 2039 Pocklington will have continued to be a thriving market  
town. New development will have respected its cultural and  built heritage and the nearby Yorkshire Wolds Important  Landscape Area. 
There will be increased employment, retail and leisure facilities  
within and around the town that will offer alternatives to  commuting away from Pocklington. Employment opportunities  will have increased through the redevelopment and expansion of the industrial estate and with the growth of small-scale start-up businesses. The town’s vibrant centre, with a range of shops and services, will continue to meet many of the needs of local residents and the surrounding rural areas. Other facilities and attractions, including the Arts Centre, Burnby Hall and the various sports and recreational facilities, will also continue to serve residents and attract visitors to the town. These will be complemented by appropriate recreational opportunities along Pocklington Canal and Canal Head, supporting Pocklington’s role as a centre for tourism and a gateway to the Wolds.
Development will have been carefully planned to promote the use of sustainable transport options and to maintain 
and enhance green and blue infrastructure. The risk of flooding from various sources, including Pocklington Beck, will have been managed. New development will have occurred in a way that respects and enhances the character of the market town, preserving important heritage assets, such as All Saints Church, and contributing to the sense of place. The town will remain separate from the village of Barmby Moor, preserving the identity of each settlement.
Withernsea
By 2039 Withernsea will have strengthened its role as a family seaside  town and visitor destination. It will be a more vibrant, bustling town  with a range of local facilities that meet the needs of residents and  visitors alike. The town will continue to be protected from coastal  erosion in order to allow it to flourish. Transport improvements will  have improved accessibility within the town, particularly for pedestrians  and cyclists.
The condition of the town’s housing stock will have been improved and the development of new housing will help 
meet a wide variety of demands. Queen Street and the town centre, together with the seafront area, will have been integrated and the quality of the public realm enhanced through targeted investment from both the public and private sector. The retail offer in the town centre will help to meet local community needs and strengthen the town’s role as a service centre to the surrounding villages. Altogether this will have increased the desirability of Withernsea as a place to live and visit.
Tourism will continue to be an important industry for the town, and the development of a more diverse range of 
accommodation and tourist facilities will have complemented the offer of the existing holiday parks. The Meridian Centre will continue to act as a focal point for both community and visitor activities. The provision of space for small businesses, and the commercial fishing compound and slipway, will have helped support the wider economy of the town. Employment opportunities will have been increased through the successful implementation of renaissance projects, which will have stimulated demand for new employment land.
31 Vision, Place Statements, Objectives and Key DiagramRural East Riding
By 2039, the Rural East Riding (Rural Service Centres, Primary Villages, Villages  
and the Countryside) will have continued development towards a strong and  diverse rural economy, taking advantage of the current and emerging  developments in agricultural and related technologies, developing renewables  and expanding into the new products and markets. Farming, food production,  land management, environmental ‘goods and services’ and rural tourism will  remain key mainstays of the rural areas of the East Riding.
Planning decisions will have sought to ensure that new development  
recognises the intrinsic beauty, character and distinctiveness of the  countryside. The natural and historic assets will support a high-quality living and working environment, contribute to the identity of the East Riding, provide an attractive recreational and tourism resource and will be a valued biodiversity resource. It’s important that appropriate development will have been delivered that supports the rural economy and sustains local communities, including connectivity to facilities, meeting local housing needs, particularly through sustainable development in rural hubs such as Rural Service Centres and Primary Villages.
Objectives for the Strategy Document Update
3.7 The 21 objectives below set out what is needed to achieve the East Riding Local Plan Update vision and the aspirations included in the individual place statements. They provide the guiding principles for managing development over the plan period, which will be realised by applying the policies of the Strategy Document Update and other development plan documents.
32
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateSpatial StrategyKey delivery 
policies
1 Contribute to reducing emissions which cause climate change and ensure that the local impact of climate change, including rising sea levels, increased rates of coastal erosion and more frequent flooding events, are minimised, managed and adapted to.S1, S2, S8, S9, EC5, ENV1, ENV5, ENV6, A1-6
2 Promote sustainable development to improve opportunities for all, with a particular focus on meeting the needs of disadvantaged communities and supporting regeneration of the East Riding and the City of HullS1, S2, S3, S4, S5, S6, H2, H3, EC1, A1-6
3 Enable residents to achieve a high quality of life, with good access to high quality jobs, homes and key services, including community and health services, affordable housing, shopping, education, recreation and cultural facilities, and protect and enhance the East Riding’s valued environmental assets.S1, S2, S3, S4, S5, S6, S7, S8, H2, EC1, EC3, EC4, A1-6
4 Maintain the character of smaller settlements and rural areas, whilst ensuring new development that supports their continued vitality, responds to local housing needs, realises opportunities for appropriate rural economic diversification and retains or enhances valued community facilities.S1, S2, S3, S4, S5, H1, H2, H4, EC1, EC3, ENV1, ENV3, C2, A1-6
5 Ensure new development is located to maximise accessibility to services and facilities, encourage the use of sustainable modes of transport, including rail and water, and facilitate opportunities for walking and cycling to support environmental and health benefits.S1, S2, S3, S4, S8, EC4, A1-6
A Healthy and Balanced Housing MarketKey delivery policies
6 Ensure a deliverable and flexible supply of housing land is available, which is managed to meet local housing requirements and overall regeneration and transformation aspirations.S1, S5, A1-6
7 Provide a mix of housing by type, size and location, taking into account housing needs including the specific needs of older people, first time buyers and the gypsy and traveller community.S1, S3, S4, S5, H1, H2, H3, A1-6
8 Significantly increase the provision of affordable housing throughout the East Riding. S1, S4, H2
9 Encourage the efficient use of land by developing at densities that reflect local circumstances, maximising the use of the East Riding’s limited supply of previously developed land and allocating sustainably located greenfield sites.S1, S2, S3, S5, H4, A1-6
10 Improve the quality of the existing housing stock to meet changing needs and reduce its environmental impact.S1, S5, ENV1
33 Vision, Place Statements, Objectives and Key DiagramA Prosperous EconomyKey delivery 
policies
11 Grow, strengthen, modernise and diversify the local economy, including the East Riding’s Town and District Centres, and support both existing and emerging economic sectors and clusters.S1, S2, S6, S7, EC1, EC2, EC3, EC5, A1-6
12 Provide employment land in locations that are accessible to the potential workforce, and where best use can be made of national and regional road, rail and port related transport and infrastructure, focusing on the East-West Multi-Modal Transport Corridor, in order to attract new inward investment and enable existing businesses to expand.S1, S2, S3, S6, S8, EC1, EC4, A1-6
13 Encourage a thriving and sustainable tourism and visitor economy, enhancing the tourism accommodation offer and making use of town centres, seaside resorts, coastal areas and the countryside, including the area’s natural features and the rich heritage of the landscape, nature conservation sites and built environment.S1, S3, S4, S7, S9, EC2, EC3, ENV1, ENV2, ENV3, ENV4, A1-6
14 Support a wide portfolio of energy infrastructure and businesses, and maximise the potential of renewable and low carbon energy generation whilst minimising adverse impacts, including any cumulative landscape and visual effects.S1, S2, S6, EC1, EC5, A1, A3
15 Protect the East Riding’s mineral resources from sterilisation, by striking a balance between the importance of mineral deposits and any non-mineral surface development.S1, EC6
A High Quality EnvironmentKey delivery policies
16 Achieve high quality design where people are, and feel safe, and deliver that minimises environmental impacts, by supporting the use of decentralised energy and energy efficiency, prioritising the re-use and adaptation of existing buildings, and incorporating measurable biodiversity enhancement.S1, S2, S4, S9, H4, EC1, EC2, ENV1, ENV4
17 Recognise, protect, conserve and enhance the international, national and local importance of the East Riding’s natural environment and biodiversity, including nature designations of all levels, Priority Habitats and Species, high quality landscapes, such as the Yorkshire Wolds, networks of blue/green infrastructure and supporting opportunities for appropriate recreation.S1, S2, S9, ENV1, ENV2, ENV4, ENV5, A1-6
18 Value the special character of the East Riding’s settlements by ensuring that development reinforces their distinct identity, avoids coalescence and protects their landscape settings and natural assets.S1, S3, S4, H4, ENV1, ENV2, ENV3, A1-6
19 Recognise, protect, conserve and enhance the East Riding’s historic environment and heritage assets, maximising their potential in contributing to the economic well-being of the area and to the quality of life of its communities.S1, ENV1, ENV2, ENV3, A1-6
34
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateA Strong and Healthy CommunityKey delivery 
policies
20 Support the vitality of settlements by seeking to protect and/or enhance community facilities and services, including education, health care, recreation, open spaces, cultural and sports facilities.S1, S3, S4, S9, ENV5, C1, C2, C3, A1-6
21 Ensure that new development is appropriately serviced by new or existing infrastructure, community services and facilities, and open space.S1, S2, S8, S9, EC4, ENV5, C1, C2, C3, A1-6
Key diagram
3.8 The Key Diagram (Figure 3 overleaf) illustrates the strategic priorities and strategy approach. It provides a broad illustration of what the Strategy Document Update is seeking to achieve and identifies key areas of housing and employment growth, as well as areas of environmental significance. 
35 Vision, Place Statements, Objectives and Key DiagramFigure 3: Key Diagram
36
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update4. Spatial Strategy
37 Spatial Strategy4  Spatial Strategy
Sustainable development
4.1 A Spatial Strategy is necessary to manage development in a way that responds to the wide ranging and complex 
needs and challenges for the area. It also provides the strategic approach to delivering the visions and objectives of the Plan set out in Chapter 3.
4.2 The Spatial Strategy draws together the need to support sustainable development, with a particular focus on how development can be managed to address the challenges presented by climate change. It also sets out the Settlement Network, which provides the overall framework for directing development in a sustainable way across the East Riding. A specific policy on development in rural areas recognises the importance of balancing development with the preservation of the character and appearance of the countryside.
4.3 The overall scale and broad distribution of development required over the plan period is also provided as part of the Spatial Strategy. This includes the provision of housing, employment land and retail floorspace that are principally distributed across the Settlement Network and a series of Key Employment Sites. Finally, the Spatial Strategy incorporates the approach to supporting the enhancement of transport and blue/green natural infrastructure networks.
Policy S1: Sustainable development
Development proposals
A. When considering development proposals the Council will take a positive approach that reflects the 
three overarching objectives of sustainable development as set out in paragraph 8 of the National Planning Policy Framework, economic, social and environmental, whilst taking in to account local circumstances. It will work proactively with applicants to find solutions that mean proposals can be approved wherever possible, and to secure development supporting the Council’s Vision and Objectives for the Local Plan and the other documents which make up the development plan.
B. The Local Plan should be read as a whole and in conjunction with the other documents which make up the development plan. Planning applications that accord with the policies in the development plan will be approved without delay, unless material considerations indicate otherwise. 
C. Proposals should ensure that, where appropriate, development will support the future sustainable growth of settlements. Future access and connectivity to neighbouring land should be taken into consideration.
Creating Neighbourhood Plans
D. The Council actively supports the development of Neighbourhood Development Plans within the East Riding.
E. Neighbourhood Development Plans proposing additional growth to that indicated in the Local Plan will be supported where infrastructure and service provision is able to accommodate the growth planned or can be delivered as part of the proposals.
4.4 Planning plays a major role in enabling sustainable development, which is central to the National Planning Policy 
Framework (NPPF). This is development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. Policy S1 outlines that the Council will take a positive approach that reflects the economic, social and environmental aspects of sustainable development, as set out in the NPPF. Proposals should look to achieve a balance between all three of these aspects and should not favour one at the expense of another.
38
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update4.5 The Council aims to work proactively with applicants to find solutions. The Council will also engage positively 
with statutory consultees and infrastructure providers to identify ways to support the delivery of sustainable development. To support this process, applications should be accompanied by appropriate supporting information to enable a positive and timely determination. This will be greatly assisted where applicants actively engage in pre-application discussions with the local community and other consultees.
4.6 The Local Plan, when read as a whole, provides an interpretation of what sustainable development means for the East Riding. This includes policies that indicate where development would be restricted, for example relating to protected sites, designated heritage assets and locations at risk of flooding or coastal erosion. The development plan, as set out in Figure 1, also includes adopted Neighbourhood Plans and the Joint Waste Plan and Joint Minerals Plan. Where relevant, the other documents within the development plan should be considered alongside the Local Plan.
4.7 The Local Plan’s policies have been designed to reflect and support the Council’s vision and objectives for development. There is an element of flexibility within the policies to allow for adaptation and change where necessary as set out in paragraph 11 of the NPPF. The vision and objectives are the guiding principles for managing development and should therefore be referred to if there is any uncertainty regarding the implementation of a policy. Table 1 shows how the Plan’s objectives work with the three pillars of sustainable development and are reflected within the Local Plan Strategy Document Update policies.
39 Spatial StrategyTable 1: East Riding Local Plan Objectives
  Local Plan Update Object ives   
Spatial Strategy  
A Healthy  and 
Balanced  
Housing Market  
A Prosperous 
Economy 
A High Quality 
Environment  
A Strong and 
Healthy 
Community  Sustainable 
Development   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 
Economic 
Sustainability                       
Social 
Sustainability                       
Environment al 
Sustainability                       
                       Strategy Document Update Policies  Policy S1                       
Policy S2                       
Policy S3                       
Policy S4                       
Policy S5                       
Policy S6                       
Policy S7                       
Policy S8                       
Policy S9                       
Policy H1                       
Policy H2                       
Policy H3                       
Policy H4                       
Policy EC1                       
Policy EC2                       
Policy EC3                       
Policy EC4                       
Policy EC5                       
Policy EC6                       
Policy ENV1                       
Policy ENV2                       
Policy ENV3                       
Policy ENV4                       
Policy ENV5                       
Policy ENV6                       
Policy C1                       
Policy C2                       
Policy C3                       
Policy A1                       
Policy A2                       
Policy A3                       
Policy A4                       
Policy A5                       
Policy A6                       
 
 4.8 It is recognised that sustainable growth and development in the East Riding will happen past the end of the current 
development plan and therefore proposals should be mindful of not restricting future opportunities. For example, retaining ransom strips that would restrict access and connectivity to neighbouring land.
4.9 The Council supports, and will continue to support, the preparation of Neighbourhood Plans by town and parish councils. These plans are useful tools in reflecting the specific needs and challenges of individual communities within the East Riding. Neighbourhood Plans must meet the ‘basic conditions’ set out in paragraph 8 of Schedule 4B to the Town and Country Planning Act 1990. This includes contributing to the achievement of sustainable development and being in general conformity with the strategic policies of the Local Plan. For clarity, the strategic policies of the Local Plan are all of the policies contained within the Strategy Document Update. Once adopted, Neighbourhood Plans form part of the statutory development plan and will be used alongside the Local Plan in decision making as shown in Figure 1.
40
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update4.10 In some instances, local communities may wish to prepare Neighbourhood Plans that support additional growth 
to that planned for in the Local Plan. For example, additional residential development may facilitate the delivery of road improvements not currently prioritised in the Local Transport Plan. The Council will support these proposals through Neighbourhood Plans where the existing or planned infrastructure is able to accommodate the level of development proposed.
4.11 Neighbourhood Plans proposing to elevate a settlement within the Settlement Network (e.g. from a Primary Village to a Rural Service Centre), which is defined in Policy S3, will generally be supported. Each Neighbourhood Plan will be treated on a case-by-case basis. The availability of services and facilities will need to be considered and, if necessary, enhanced to complement the proposed additional development. Neighbourhood Plans for Villages, as defined in Appendix B, which propose to allocate small sites for development or amend development limits to accommodate more development, will generally be supported. Those town and parish councils looking to allocate sites for development should consider the application of the Council’s Site Assessment Methodology in the first instance.
Addressing climate change
4.12 There is substantial scientific evidence that the climate is changing, and that this is being driven by increased greenhouse gas emissions through human activity. Some of the consequences of a changing climate for the East Riding include increased risk and frequency of flood events, more extreme temperatures and intense weather systems. In turn, these events will have wide ranging impacts for: 
 
 Public health;
  The viability and diversity of habitats and species; 
  Soil health, crops, livestock and commercial trees; 
  Economic growth and supply chains; and 
  The integrity of buildings and infrastructure
4.13 In the East Riding, the ‘per capita’ CO2 emissions rate recorded is one of the highest in Yorkshire and the Humber and significantly higher than the national average
4. It is notable that the reduction in CO2 emissions in the East Riding 
has been slower than that experienced at the national and regional levels over recent years.
4.14 The greatest source of total carbon emissions is from the industrial and commercial sector (1,157kt CO2 for 2019).  A number of large industrial installations are present and account for a relatively high proportion of emissions, including operations at Salt End and Junction 36 (M62) at Goole. The planning system has a limited role in being able to require reductions at existing installations.
4.15 The rural nature of the area means that a substantial contributor of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions the transport sector (approximately, 820 kt CO2 for 2019). Local plans are concerned with the spatial relationships of new development, so there are opportunities to ensure that the need to travel can be reduced or alternative means of sustainable transport are more viable (e.g. public transport, walking and cycling). This may be difficult to realise in some of the more rural and coastal parts of the East Riding. The potential impacts on the climate from development proposals should be fully considered and guided by robust policies.
4.16 The response at the national level is primarily governed by the Climate Change Act 2008 (as amended) which commits the UK Government to net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. In addition, the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 (as amended) requires local plans to incorporate policies that contribute to the mitigation of, and adaptation to, climate change, in respect of development proposals. 
4 UK Local Authority and Regional CO2 emissions national statistics, 2019.
41 Spatial Strategy4.17 The NPPF reaffirms this, stating that Plans should take a proactive approach to mitigating and adapting to climate 
change. Planning Practice Guidance provides additional guidance and highlights a number of ways in which local  plans can meet this objective. It provides examples for mitigating climate change and for adapting to climate  change, including:
Mitigation
  Reduce the need to travel and provide for sustainable transport;
  Provide opportunities for renewable and low carbon energy technologies;
  Provide opportunities for decentralised energy and heating; and
  Promote low carbon design approaches to reduce energy consumption in buildings, such as passive solar design.
Adaptation
  Consider future climate risks when allocating development sites to ensure risks are understood over the  
 development’s lifetime; 
  Consider the impact of and promoting design responses to flood risk and coastal change for the lifetime of the  
 development; 
  Consider availability of water and water infrastructure for the lifetime of the development and design responses to  
 promote water efficiency and protect water quality; and 
  Promote adaptation approaches in design policies for developments and the public realm.
4.18 At a more local level, the Council has recently declared a climate emergency and a climate change strategy is being prepared that identifies key opportunities for mitigation and adaptation for the East Riding. This is ongoing at the time of writing, though a draft for public consultation outlines a vision for the East Riding to be ‘net zero carbon’ and climate resilient by 2050, with significant progress made by 2030. Prior to this, the Humber Industrial Strategy Prospectus (2019) had already set the ambition to develop the Humber into a net-zero carbon industrial economy by 2040. The prospectus recognises that the ‘Energy Estuary’ contributes to over a quarter of the UK’s energy and is at the forefront of developing the UK’s world-leading offshore wind sector. In terms of onshore wind, the East Riding alone has a grid connected operational capacity in the order of 330MW of electricity. This is likely to be one of the highest wind energy capabilities in the country. In addition to wind energy, a number of solar, bio-renewable and other renewable energy projects are operational or permitted. Indeed, between 2005 and 2019, there was a reduction of CO2 emissions from electricity generation in the order of 60 per cent for the East Riding. As such, the East Riding is in a good position to support the shift to a low carbon economy, but a range of other interventions are required to help address climate change. 
4.19 Policy S2 provides an overall framework for ensuring that the Local Plan and individual development decisions in the East Riding consider the relationship that new development may have with the climate. It also outlines how new development will need to adapt to the impacts of climate change.
42
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdatePolicy S2: Addressing Climate Change
Development proposals will be supported where they reduce the generation of additional greenhouse gas 
emissions and incorporate adaptation to the expected impacts of climate change. This will be accomplished by: 
A. Directing most new development to areas where there are services, facilities, homes and jobs, reducing 
the need to travel and where it can be served more easily and viably by sustainable modes of transport.
B. Efficiently using land, mineral, energy and water resources.
C. The re-use of the area’s building stock and previously developed land.
D. Building at higher densities where appropriate and supporting opportunities for mixed use development.
E. Promoting sustainable modes of transport and well-connected places.
F. Promoting the creation of economic clusters for the renewable and low carbon energy sector.
G. Incorporating high standards of sustainable design and construction which involve design approaches minimising energy demands, the prudent and efficient use of natural resources, and built-in resilience to the impacts of climate change (e.g. overheating, flood risk).
H. Incorporating renewable, low carbon and decentralised energy generation and heat networks in appropriate locations and schemes where possible.
I. Supporting proposals that protect, enhance and link habitat networks to allow biodiversity to adapt to climate change.
J. Conserving, enhancing and linking green infrastructure networks to provide flood management, shading in areas of built development and natural air conditioning.
K. Steering development away from areas of high flood risk as far as possible, and ensuring development is as resilient as possible to any residual risks.
L. Supporting effective on-site water management such as Sustainable Drainage Systems and wider flood management proposals.
M. Implementing the most recent Shoreline Management Plan and Humber 2100+ strategy.
N. Managing development in coastal areas and facilitating the re-location/roll back of development from areas between Barmston and Spurn Point.
O. Exploiting carbon capture approaches through the protection and restoration of existing ‘carbon sinks’ such as peat bogs and coastal ecosystems, the creation and expansion of woodland, and the deployment of new technologies.
P. Support the development of infrastructure, such as hydrogen transportation, that facilitates decarbonisation. 
4.20 Policy S2 will be used in combination with a wide range of other Local Plan policies to support local and national 
objectives for responding to the challenge of climate change. Table 2 shows how other policies in the Local Plan will contribute to this. 
43 Spatial StrategyTable 2: How the Local Plan will address the challenges of climate change
How the Local Plan will address the challenges of climate change
A Directing most new development to areas where there are services, facilities, homes 
and jobs, reducing the need to travel and where it can more easily and viably be served by sustainable modes of transport.S3, S4, S5, S6, S7, S8 and A1-A6
B Efficiently using land, mineral, energy and water resources. S5, H4, EC1, EC5, EC6 and ENV1
C The re-use of the area’s building stock and previously developed land. S3, S4, S5, H4, EC1 and EC2
D Building at higher densities where appropriate and supporting opportunities for mixed use development.H4, ENV1 and C2
E Promoting sustainable modes of transport and well-connected places. S8, EC4 and A1-A6
F Promoting the creation of economic clusters for the renewable and low carbon energy sector.S6, EC1, EC5 and A1
G Incorporating high standards of sustainable design and construction which involve design approaches minimising energy demands, the prudent and efficient use of natural resources and built-in resilience to the impacts of climate change (e.g. overheating, flood risk).ENV1
H Incorporating renewable, low carbon and decentralised energy generation in appropriate locations and schemes where possible.ENV1 and EC5
I Supporting proposals that protect, enhance and link habitat networks to allow biodiversity to adapt to climate change.S9, ENV4 and ENV5
J Conserving, enhancing and linking green infrastructure networks to provide flood management, shading in areas of built development and natural air conditioning.S9, ENV1, ENV5, ENV6 and C3
K Steering development away from areas of high flood risk, as far as possible, and ensuring development is as resilient as possible to any residual risks.S3, S4, S5, ENV6 and A1-A6
L Supporting effective on-site water management such as Sustainable Drainage Systems and wider flood management proposals.ENV6
M Implementing the most recent Shoreline Management Plan and Humber 2100+ strategy. ENV6
44
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateHow the Local Plan will address the challenges of climate change
N Managing development in coastal areas and facilitating the re-location/roll back of 
development from areas between Barmston and Spurn Point.ENV6
O Exploiting carbon capture approaches through the protection and restoration of existing ‘carbon sinks’ such as peat bogs and coastal ecosystems, the creation and expansion of woodland, restoration of peat bogs and coastal ecosystems, and the deployment of new technologies.S9, EC5, ENV4 and ENV5
P Support the development of infrastructure, such as hydrogen transportation, that facilitates decarbonisation. EC5 and C1
Focussing development
Policy S3: Focussing Development 
A. New development will be supported where it is focused within the following locations:
1. The defined Settlement Network which consists of land within the development limits of:
i. The Major Haltemprice Settlements – those settlements in the East Riding immediately to 
the west of the City of Hull – Anlaby, Cottingham, Hessle, Kirk Ella and Willerby;
ii. Principal Towns – Beverley5, Bridlington, Driffield, and Goole6;
iii. Towns – Elloughton cum Brough7, Hedon8, Hornsea, Howden, Market Weighton, 
Pocklington and Withernsea;
iv. Rural Service Centres – Aldbrough, Beeford, Bubwith, Gilberdyke/Newport, Holme on Spalding Moor, Hutton Cranswick, Keyingham, Kilham, Leven, Middleton on the Wolds, Patrington, Snaith, Stamford Bridge and Wetwang; and
v. Primary Villages – Bilton, Brandesburton, Cherry Burton, Dunswell, Easington, Eastrington, Flamborough, Leconfield, Melbourne, Nafferton, North Cave, North Ferriby, Preston, Rawcliffe, Roos, Skirlaugh, South Cave, Swanland, Thorngumbald, Tickton, Walkington, Wawne, Wilberfoss and Woodmansey.
2. Key Employment Sites along the East-West Multi-Modal Transport Corridor – Hedon Haven, Humber Bridgehead (Hessle), Melton and Junction 36 (M62) at Goole.
B. Development will be supported where it is an appropriate scale to its location and does not detract from the character and appearance of the settlement. The Major Haltemprice Settlements, Principal Towns and Towns will be the main focus of growth in the East Riding with the Key Employment Sites providing a main focus for employment development. The Rural Service Centres and Primary Villages will provide for more limited development in rural areas complemented by existing employment sites. New development will be encouraged where it involves the re-use of suitable previously developed land. 
5 For the purposes of the Local Plan, the term ‘Beverley’ relates to those parts of Beverley, Molescroft and Woodmansey parishes within 
Beverley’s development limit.  
6 For the purposes of the Local Plan, the term ‘Goole’ relates to those parts of Goole and Airmyn parish within Goole’s development limit. 
7 For the purposes of the Local Plan, the term ‘Elloughton cum Brough’ relates to those parts of Elloughton cum Brough, Welton and 
Brantingham parishes within Elloughton cum Brough’s development limit.  
8 For the purposes of the Local Plan, the term ‘Hedon’ relates to those parts of Hedon and Preston parishes within Hedon’s development limit.
45 Spatial StrategyThe Major Haltemprice Settlements
C. The Major Haltemprice Settlements will be a focus for development, commensurate with their location 
close to the City of Hull, whilst recognising the need to support the regeneration interventions and development proposals within the city.
Principal Towns
D. Principal Towns will be centres of economic development and housing growth and cater for the service needs of significant parts of the East Riding. They will be a key focus for services and facilities, including shopping, leisure, transport, education, health, entertainment, tourism, recreation and cultural activities.
Towns
E. Towns will provide the local focus for housing, economic development, shopping, leisure, transport, education, health, entertainment, tourism, recreation and cultural activities for the town and its rural hinterland. These towns will support and complement the Principal Towns, the Major Haltemprice Settlements and the City of Hull.
Rural Service Centres and Primary Villages
F. To sustain the overall vitality of rural areas, development to meet local community needs and sustainable economic growth will be supported in Rural Service Centres and Primary Villages, complementing the roles of Towns in meeting some of the basic needs outside of the Major Haltemprice Settlements and Principal Towns.
G. To ensure the delivery of the overall spatial approach, the following forms of development will be supported in Rural Service Centres and Primary Villages:
1. Residential development, including affordable housing, commensurate with the scale, role and 
character of the village.
2. New and/or enhanced local services and facilities.
3. Economic development appropriate to the scale of the village.
Key Employment Sites
H. Key Employment Sites will act as a main focus for employment development making use of their strategic location on the East-West Multi-Modal Transport Corridor. They will support the growth of the key employment sectors and clusters by providing significant opportunities for inward investment and expanding local businesses.
Development Limits
I. Development limits for the settlements and Key Employment Sites listed above are set out on the Policies Map Update or as proposed by a Neighbourhood Plan.
4.21 To support Policies S1 and S2, most new development will be directed to areas where there are services, facilities, homes and jobs, and where it can be served by the most sustainable modes of transport. A ‘Settlement Network’ is set out in Policy S3 and provides a framework that will allow this to happen. The East Riding’s Settlement Network is shown on the map in Figure 4.
46
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateFigure 4: The East Riding Settlement Network
4.22 The purpose of identifying a Settlement Network is to ensure that development takes place in the most sustainable 
and appropriate places through a plan-led approach. In general, this means focusing most new development into the East Riding’s larger settlements, which are accessible and efficiently linked into the transport network. This includes core bus routes and strategic railway lines (as shown at Figure 5). However, the Network also responds to the rural nature of the East Riding recognising that each settlement performs a different role and function. A great deal of consideration has been given to ensuring there is a good geographic spread of service centres of varying sizes across the East Riding. This recognises the challenges of accessing and providing services in a large rural authority area. The Network provides a clear approach for communities, setting out where development will take place over the plan period. This will be used by the Council to support effective and efficient service delivery across the whole of the East Riding. It also gives a degree of certainty to other providers of services and facilities to plan more effectively, concentrating provision in areas where there is likely to be sufficient demand capable of supporting a particular service. 
4.23 Policy S3 should be considered alongside other policies in the Spatial Strategy that set out the scale and distribution of new housing (Policy S5), employment (Policy S6) and retail (Policy S7) development, as well as major transport initiatives (Policy S8). The re-use of previously developed land remains important in the East Riding, provided it is not of high environmental value and is not subject to significant risks from flooding or a previous use that cannot be remediated. However, the use of greenfield land will be necessary to accommodate the development envisaged over the plan period due to the insufficient availability of brownfield land to meet all needs.
47 Spatial StrategyThe Major Haltemprice Settlements
4.24 The Major Haltemprice Settlements comprise the villages of Anlaby9, Willerby, Kirk Ella, Cottingham and Hessle. 
Together with the City of Hull, they form a highly sustainable location for new development. They benefit from 
excellent public transport links and are close to regionally important services and facilities. Hull is also a significant business location and will continue to provide employment opportunities for residents in this part of the East Riding.  
As such, the Major Haltemprice Settlements will be a key focus for development over the plan period.
4.25 Significant investment and large-scale area renewal are underway to help revitalise the housing market within the City of Hull and complement other regeneration initiatives, including the revitalisation of the city centre. This is a long-term objective that is supported by East Riding of Yorkshire Council. The scale and type of residential development in the Major Haltemprice Settlements must consider housing market interventions within the City of Hull’s administrative boundary.
4.26 As the Major Haltemprice Settlements form only part of a wider area, the principles guiding town centre developments are important. Proposals for town centre uses in these settlements will therefore need to recognise the role of Hull City Centre as the prime location for major office, retail and leisure uses.
Principal Towns 
4.27 The Principal Towns have a wide range of services and facilities, which will be further enhanced during the plan period, and they fulfil a significant role as service, employment and transport hubs for their surrounding areas. They vary in size and function, complementing and supporting the roles of the region’s larger towns and cities.
4.28 There are also significant concentrations of businesses at Carnaby, Kelleythorpe and Tokenspire Industrial Estates which are close to Bridlington, Driffield and Beverley respectively. Whilst these industrial estates are detached from the main built-up areas, they are important for contributing to the economic role and competitiveness of these settlements.
4.29 Along with the Major Haltemprice Settlements, the four Principal Towns will be the main focus of growth in the East Riding. They offer some of the best opportunities for promoting sustainable development and meeting the everyday needs of residents in one place, thereby reducing the need to travel.
Towns
4.30 Towns provide a good range of services and facilities, although not as extensive as the Principal Towns, and provide the main focal point for development in rural areas. They comprise of a mix of coastal and market towns. With development and renaissance initiatives focused here, the vitality of rural areas will be supported, ensuring a network of centres that provides services, transport, housing and employment opportunities for a wide rural hinterland. The main industrial estates at Pocklington and Howden are outside of the main built-up area of these Towns, but they are important in contributing to the economic role and competitiveness of these settlements.
Rural Service Centres and Primary Villages
4.31 As a predominantly rural area, it is important that the Strategy Document Update identifies a well-distributed network of service centres. This will allow resources to be directed to locations that are accessible to a high proportion of people. Such an approach is paramount in an authority where fuel and service delivery costs can be high.
9 Including Anlaby Common
48
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update4.32 The Strategy Document Update identifies 14 Rural Service Centres. 
These complement the roles of the Towns by acting as small service hubs for small rural catchments. They are located to provide a relatively even geographic spread through-out the East Riding and offer the opportunity to access a larger centre by public transport. Housing will be promoted to reflect this role, help meet local needs, and support the provision of a reasonable standard of services. 
 This will also help to ensure that housing in rural areas is in villages with a reasonable level of everyday services. Such a focused approach recognises the difficulty of providing services scattered across rural areas, and is therefore an approach that provides an efficient, yet well-distributed, network.
4.33 In addition, 24 Primary Villages have been identified because they exhibit similar characteristics to the Rural Service Centres, or have close links to larger centres. These offer the opportunity to support some limited new development in locations with access to jobs, services and facilities. Whilst they have not necessarily been identified to support a wide network of service centres, further development within them will help to maintain their vitality and cater for local demand. The more rural parts of the East Riding are also characterised by several relatively large industrial estates, such as at Holme on Spalding Moor, Hutton Cranswick, Full Sutton and Catfoss. Many of these have developed on former airfields and are not within nor immediately adjacent to a settlement. Despite this, they provide significant employment opportunities for local people, and it is expected that the role of these industrial estates will continue throughout the plan period, complementing the focus of development towards the Rural Service Centres and Primary Villages.
Key Employment Sites
4.34 Hedon Haven, Humber Bridgehead (Hessle), Melton and the Junction 36 area of the M62 at Goole have been identified as Key Employment Sites due to the significant opportunity they present for employment development, and because they have sufficient undeveloped land available to meet market demand over the plan period. They are all located along the East-West Multi-Modal Transport Corridor, as shown on the Key Diagram. The East Riding’s Economic Strategy (2018-2022) identifies that this corridor has proved over the long term to be the most attractive location for inward investment and indigenous growth companies. The East-West Multi-Modal Transport Corridor links the Humber Ports of Hull and Goole, as well as the smaller wharf facilities at Howdendyke, to the rest of the country via the Estuary, inland waterways, rail and highways routes. The position of the Key Employment Sites along this corridor means that they offer significant locational advantages to business, due to the access that they provide to national and international markets, as well as potential labour.
4.35 Over the last plan period, significant investment has been made in these sites to improve their infrastructure and facilitate their development. This has included Tom Pudding Way at Goole which provides a direct link from the port to the M62, a new grade separated junction and dual carriageway at Melton and access improvements at Humber Bridgehead. In addition, 80 hectares of land at Hedon Haven has been granted Enterprise Zone status, which means that financial incentives and a simplified planning process are available to businesses.
4.36 Development and investment at the Key Employment Sites have sought to ensure their potential for significant inward investment and indigenous business growth is maximised. This has been successful in attracting significant levels of market interest and employment development. 
4.37 Taking advantage of the Humber Bridge’s special location, the Humber Bridgehead sites are being developed into a high quality business park. The development site at Melton is now under one ownership and critical upgrades to site infrastructure are under way. The site has seen significant early development despite challenging market conditions. Demand is now returning for a mix of employment premises in conjunction with a clear long-term vision for the site and Enterprise Zone status. The completion of Tom Pudding Way in late 2015 fully opened up the employment land adjacent at Junction 36 (M62). This area has experienced very strong levels of demand, with large scale developments from major multinational companies including Siemens. In addition, Hedon Haven offers substantial opportunities to support the growth of the Port of Hull, making the most of the growth that is expected to come forward in the port related, low carbon and renewable energy sectors.
49 Spatial Strategy4.38 The Key Employment Sites are considered of vital importance to achieving the economic growth aspirations of the 
East Riding. The large plot sizes, combined with their locational advantages and investment to remove constraints to their development, means that they are able play a central role in the overall economic strategy for the East Riding. They provide significant opportunities to accommodate the growth of the key employment sectors and clusters listed in Policy EC1.
Supporting development in Villages and the Countryside
Policy S4: Supporting development in Villages and the Countryside
A. Outside of the settlements listed in Policy S3, development will be supported to help maintain the vibrancy of Villages (listed in Appendix B) and the Countryside where it:
1. Is of an appropriate scale to its location taking into account the need to support sustainable 
patterns of development;
2. Encourages the re-use of previously developed land where appropriate; and
3. Does not involve a significant loss of best and most versatile agricultural land.
B. Development in Villages and the Countryside should also accord with the specific provisions of Part C or D of this policy. Proposals not listed under Part D should demonstrate why they require a rural location. 
Villages
C. Within the development limits of Villages, as set out on the Policies Map Update or as proposed by a Neighbourhood Plan, the following forms of development will be supported where it does not detract from the character and appearance of the village:
1. New housing, including affordable housing for local people;
2. New and/or enhanced local services and facilities; and
3. Economic development.
Countryside
D. Outside of a development limit, land will be regarded as the Countryside and the following forms of 
development are supported, where proposals respect the intrinsic character of their surroundings:
1. Conversion of buildings for economic development (including work-live units), tourism or 
community uses. Conversions for new housing will be supported where the preservation of the building would enhance the immediate setting and where it:
i. would represent the optimal viable use of a heritage asset or would be appropriate enabling development to secure the future of a heritage asset; or
ii. would re-use a redundant or disused building without significant alteration or significant extension.
2. Replacement dwellings;
3. New dwellings of exceptional quality or of truly outstanding innovative design;
50
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update4. Affordable housing for local people which could include community-led housing;
5. Agricultural, forestry or other rural-based occupational dwellings subject to demonstrating an 
essential need. Such dwellings will be subject to an agricultural occupancy condition; 
6. Employment uses in accordance with Policy EC1; 
7. Agricultural, horticultural and forestry uses;
8. New and enhanced infrastructure;
9. Energy development and associated infrastructure;
10. Development to support existing military defence operations; and
11. Sports, equine, recreation, community facilities and tourism development.
4.39 Much of the East Riding’s character is provided by its  
wide-open landscapes and smaller scattered settlements. This is part of what makes the East Riding an attractive place to live, work and visit. Consequently, these rural areas are often subject to significant development pressure. Whilst the scale of change in rural East Riding is unlikely to be extensive, the vibrancy of the countryside depends on getting the right balance between development and protecting the intrinsic character of the countryside.
4.40 Outside of the places identified in Policy S3, there is a wide range of smaller villages, hamlets, farmsteads and rural enterprises. These places have their own particular needs, which the Strategy Document Update seeks to respond to and ensure their continued success. In those villages with basic services, appropriate development offers opportunities for villages to grow organically. Elsewhere, the Strategy Document Update does not seek to preserve the countryside in aspic, instead it recognises that a working, living and attractive countryside means adapting to changing needs and enhancing what is already there.
4.41 Policy S4 lists those types of development that are most relevant to the East Riding. Proposals not listed in section D would have to demonstrate why they require a rural location. In all instances, proposals are expected to be of an appropriate scale for their rural location. Therefore, consideration will be given to how the proposal relates to the built and landscape character of the surrounding area and the impact that the development would have on the local road network. Proposals involving the reuse of previously developed land will also be expected to be in an appropriate location, avoiding the use of land that is of high environmental value and would not be subject to significant risks from flooding or other hazards.
Villages
4.42 Development in Villages will be supported where it will continue to support the vitality of the Village. Villages include those settlements that have one of the following services: a village hall (meeting rooms); a village shop selling everyday grocery items; a public house; or a primary school. Settlements with a good pedestrian or public transport link to another which provides one of the above services are also identified as Villages. A list of Villages is set out in Appendix B. 
4.43 New market housing will normally be in the form of infill, conversion or replacement buildings. There may be instances where infill development would provide the opportunity for more than one dwelling, however proposals should have due regard to the form and character of the Village. Proposals for affordable housing must meet an 
51 Spatial Strategyidentified need. Policy H2 sets out how proposals for affordable housing would be considered in more detail.  
In certain Villages where the risk of flooding is high, it may not be possible to support housing and other vulnerable uses, as proposals may not be able to pass the sequential test and exception test outlined in Policy ENV6. In all cases the scale of development must be appropriate to the character and appearance of the Village. 
4.44 New and enhanced local services and facilities will be supported as these can add to the vitality of the Village, offering employment opportunities and reduce the need to travel elsewhere. These should be provided for the benefit of local people and proposals that draw significant numbers of people from elsewhere will not normally be considered appropriate. Policies EC3 and C1 provide additional guidance for certain types of services and facilities.
Countryside
4.45 Elsewhere, outside of the development limits of the Settlement Network and Villages, a ‘Countryside’ approach will apply. This seeks to support a healthy, working and attractive countryside now and in the future. The conversion of buildings will be supported where they help to create more vibrant rural communities, offering employment, tourism or residential opportunities. As well as the types of uses supported through the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015, Policy S4 provides a positive framework for bringing buildings back into use. Work-live units may be appropriate, and these should constitute a high proportion of workspace (more than half of the overall floorspace) and will be conditioned to ensure that the occupancy of the living space is restricted to a person directly involved with the business being operated. 
4.46 To be considered suitable for conversion to residential use, an existing building must be structurally sound and capable of re-use without significant rebuilding, alteration or substantial extensions. Extensions should be small scale and not affect the rural character of the building or its setting. Generally, extensions that exceed what could be built under permitted development rights will be considered significant, as they are likely to be of a scale that alters the original form and design of the converted building. Permitted development rights will normally be removed when conversions are approved. Where the proposal involves the use of a heritage asset, whether designated or not, it will also need to be assessed against Policy ENV3. Extensions to buildings in the Countryside for uses other than housing and economic development will be considered under Policy ENV1. 
4.47 Replacement dwellings will be permitted in the Countryside where their design and character reflects the surrounding area and results in an increase of the usable floor area of the original building normally by no more than 50 per cent (i.e. the original dwelling as built or as at 1st July 1948, as defined in the General Permitted Development Order). In certain circumstances, a new dwelling of exceptional quality or of truly outstanding innovative design may be supported in line with national planning policy. Where traditional farm buildings are replaced, the replacement structure should respect the agricultural heritage of the original building. This might include replacing the building with a dwelling of a similar size. 
4.48 Proposals for affordable housing may take place in the Countryside and will be considered against Policy H2. This sets out that sites for affordable housing will normally be well related to development limits. 
4.49 Permanent dwellings for agricultural and forestry workers, or for other people involved in rural based enterprises, will be supported where it is justified and commensurate with the size of the holding. This will include demonstrating:
 
 A clear functional need for the dwelling, relating to a full-time worker(s) employed on the unit;
  The existing rural activity has been established for at least three years, has been profitable for at least one and is  
 currently financially sound; and
  That the need for the dwelling cannot be provided by an existing dwelling which is suitable and available for  
 occupation by the worker(s) concerned.
4.50 Properties for agricultural and forestry workers will be conditioned to ensure that the dwelling remains available in perpetuity for use by people employed full-time in agriculture/forestry, or other relevant enterprise for which 
52
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Updatea dwelling in the particular location is considered essential. Existing agricultural/forestry occupancy conditions 
will only be removed where it can be demonstrated that the property is no longer required for the purposes of accommodating an agricultural/forestry worker. To demonstrate this, applicants would be expected to market the property for at least 12 months using specialist agricultural land and property agents and media. Advertisement of the property must refer to the existence of the agricultural occupancy condition and the property priced accordingly. 
4.51 If a new dwelling is required to support a rural activity, whether on an existing unit or a newly established one,  it should normally, for the first three years, be provided by a temporary structure that can be easily dismantled.  An application should be supported where it can be demonstrated that:
 
 There is a clear intention and ability to develop the enterprise concerned;
  There will be a clear functional need for a full-time worker to be employed on the unit;
  The proposed activity has been planned on a sound financial basis; and
  The need for the dwelling cannot be met by an existing dwelling which is suitable and available for occupation by  
 the worker(s) concerned.
4.52 Applications for extensions to temporary permissions will not normally be supported, nor will applications for a temporary dwelling in a location where permission for a permanent dwelling would not be permitted.
4.53 Evidence presented for the functional need test should clearly demonstrate that having one or more workers available at most times of the day and night is essential for the proper functioning of the unit. For example, where workers are needed to meet welfare needs of vulnerable livestock or are needed to deal quickly with other emergencies, which would otherwise lead to a serious loss of crops or products. Security issues can contribute to the functional need, but this factor cannot be used to justify a dwelling on its own.
4.54 Proposals for economic development that support the rural economy will be assessed alongside Policies EC1, EC2 and EC3. Forestry related proposals will generally be supported, particularly where this helps to achieve the aims of the latest national forestry strategy.
4.55 The agricultural and horticultural sectors play a significant role in shaping the landscape and character of the East Riding, as well as underpinning a strong local food industry from manufacturing to catering. Economic development that relates to agriculture will be supported where it would enable the agricultural industry to:
 
 Become more competitive, sustainable and environmentally friendly;
  Adapt to new and changing markets;
  Comply with changing legislation and associated guidance;
  Diversify into new agricultural opportunities (e.g. renewable energy crops); or
  Broaden its operations to ‘add value’ to their primary produce.
4.56 Some types of infrastructure may be required in the Countryside to support the achievement of the Plan’s objectives. Examples include water management schemes, energy development and infrastructure (in accordance with Policy EC5), transport schemes (in accordance with Policy S8) and telecommunications infrastructure.  These will be supported where they require a Countryside location for operational reasons.
4.57 There are several important military sites in use in the East Riding which are located in the Countryside for operational reasons, for example, the Defence School of Transport at Leconfield and the Defence Training Estate land on the former RAF Driffield airfield. The Council recognises the valuable contribution that these operations make to the local economy. Proposals to modernise facilities and operations will be supported where they use existing buildings or previously developed land within the existing footprint of the site. Where this is not possible, new development should be designed to minimise the impact on the character of the Countryside. The Council 
53 Spatial Strategywould welcome the preparation of a masterplan to fully appreciate the cumulative impacts of any proposals to 
improve existing facilities.
4.58 The Countryside can often provide for certain sports, equine, recreation, community and tourism facilities. Proposals for such uses will need to support the objectives of the Plan, and in particular Policy S3, by focusing uses that would generate high movements of people into the main settlements. Where possible, community services and facilities should be well related to the village they serve and proposals will also be considered against Policy C2. Sports and recreation development in the Countryside should be of a generally open nature, with priority given to the re-use of existing buildings where buildings are required. Due regard will also be had to the impact of lighting, which can often be detrimental to the visual amenity of the Countryside and proposals will be considered against Policy ENV6. In terms of tourism developments, further guidance is provided in Policy EC2. 
4.59 For clarity, development limits are not intended to exclude the prospect of extensions to residential dwellings or other ancillary domestic development such as outbuildings and garages where these are of an appropriate size and respectful to the character of the area.
54
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateDelivering housing development
Policy S5: Managing the Scale and Distribution of New Development
A. Provision will be made for at least 20,900 (net) additional dwellings (1,100 dwellings per annum) in the East 
Riding between 2020 and 2039.
B. Through the allocation of sites in the Allocations Document Update or a Neighbourhood Plan, and the determination of planning applications in accordance with the development plan, the Council will seek to support the distribution of new homes as follows:
Distribution of dwellings (2020/21 - 2038/39)
Major Haltemprice Settlements 3,120
Principal Towns 8,965
Beverley 3,010
Bridlington 2,850
Driffield 2,250
Goole10855
Towns 5,694
Elloughton-cum-Brough 915
Hedon119
Hornsea 660
Howden 2,140
Market Weighton 850
Pocklington 770
Withernsea 350
Rural Service Centres and Primary Villages 3,085
Villages and the Countryside 1,500
10 No new allocations for residential development will be made based on current evidence regarding the level of flood risk in Goole. This figure 
represents the number of dwellings with extant planning permission at 1 April 2020. 
11 No new allocations for residential development will be made based on current evidence regarding the level of flood risk in Hedon. This figure 
represents the number of dwellings with extant planning permissions at April 2020.
55 Spatial StrategyC. In Rural Service Centres and Primary Villages, sites for housing will be allocated to support the level of 
growth set out in Table 3.
D. The Council will ensure a minimum 5-year supply (plus appropriate buffer) of deliverable sites across the  East Riding.
E. The Local Plan will seek to support the provision of an average of 200 new affordable homes per annum as part of the overall net additional homes provided each year.
F. The renewal and improvement of the existing housing stock will be supported as part of approaches aimed at improving the image and attractiveness of areas with low housing demand. Major clearance and redevelopment programmes should only be undertaken where retention is not viable or where it assists in the wider regeneration of an area.
4.60 National planning policy seeks to increase the supply of housing across the country. Planning has a major role to play in this and local planning authorities need to ensure that land is available to meet the identified housing requirement. To understand the housing requirements of the East Riding, and the ability of the area to accommodate development, a range of evidence has been collated. This has included: a Local Housing Needs Assessment (2022), housing land supply position statements (HLSPS), Infrastructure Study (2022), Level 1 and Level 2 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (2020), Census 2011 and Landscape Character Assessment Update (2018).
4.61 The evidence recognises that the East Riding is generally a high demand area with strong levels of in-migration from urban centres, particularly Hull and York. There is also a strong need and demand for housing generated from within the East Riding, as a consequence of changing household size (primarily through more single person households) and the difficulty in accessing affordable properties.
4.62 The NPPF sets out a standard methodology for determining local housing need (LHN). It no longer sets a definition of a Housing Market Area (HMA) as the starting point for calculating housing need. The standard methodology applies a formula to identify the minimum number of homes expected to be planned for based on household projections that are released by the Office for National Statistics. An uplift is then applied in those areas where average house prices are over four times the average workplace-based earnings. There is an expectation that the standard method will be used when preparing a local plan and that any other method can only be used in exceptional circumstances. For the East Riding, the LHN calculated using the standard method results in a figure of 909 dwellings per annum (at the Plan’s base date of 2020). 
4.63 The standard method identifies a minimum annual housing need figure and a starting point for determining the number of new homes needed in an area. It does not produce a housing requirement figure. Reflecting on past levels of delivery and the need to maximise the delivery of affordable housing, a requirement of 20,900 net additional dwellings over the plan period is set out in Policy S5. This translates as approximately 1,100 dwellings per annum from 2020. Setting a local plan requirement higher than the LHN will support the delivery of additional affordable housing, which comprises part of the overall housing requirement and is a key challenge for the East Riding as evidenced through the Local Housing Need Assessment (LHNA) (2022).
4.64 It also reflects the level of housebuilding the market is capable of delivering. Whilst there are benefits in boosting the supply of housing and affordable housing, there are also potential negative impacts associated with higher levels of development beyond the identified need. These include environmental consequences and the potential to support migration and commuting patterns that go against the principles of sustainable development, which also have implications for neighbouring areas. 
56
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update4.65 Factors affecting the supply of land and the ‘deliverability’ of sites have been considered in the distribution of 
development. Some areas have experienced much lower levels of development, reflecting weaker market demand. Whilst the Local Plan needs to support a spatial strategy that accounts for local need, it needs to be cognisant of the market in terms of potential homeowners and housebuilders to ensure that development can be delivered. In other areas, environmental factors such as areas of high flood risk have influenced the potential scale of housing that could be accommodated. Consideration has also been given to infrastructure capacity such as highways or school capacity, which has, in some instances, highlighted where investment is necessary and is identified in the sub area policies.
4.66 The level of development promoted across the Settlement Network reflects the individual needs and challenges of each settlement, taking a realistic view of what can be delivered in different locations. Given that the overall housing requirement is a minimum, it follows that the housing requirement identified for different tiers of the Settlement Network is also a minimum. Appropriate development in line with the overarching policies of the Plan, and where impacts can be suitably mitigated, will be supported. Most residential development will take place in the Major Haltemprice Settlements, the Principal Towns and Towns, equating to over 75 per cent of new houses. In particular, the Major Haltemprice Settlements and Principal Towns offer the best opportunities to provide new homes, alongside employment opportunities, services and facilities. The scale of development planned for the Major Haltemprice Settlements is commensurate with their size and role alongside the City of Hull, which if taken together, will significantly increase the number of new homes delivered in the main urban area of the sub-region over the plan period.
4.67 Principal Towns account for almost 40 per cent of existing housing within the East Riding. As centres for growth they will support a similar level of new housing over the plan period. Towns provide a focus to ensure housing is delivered in rural locations where there are services, facilities and jobs.
4.68 The majority of Goole is located in Flood Zone 3a. The Level 2 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) (2020) identifies that Goole is at a significantly high risk of flooding, both in terms of extent and hazard (with most of the town being classified as danger to all). The likelihood of a serious breach of flood defences in Goole is remote, as the town is defended to a good standard and investment in inspecting, maintaining and improving the defences is expected to continue into the future. However, in line with the NPPF’s sequential approach to flood risk, the approach for Goole in this Plan is based on supporting developments that already benefit from planning permission at the base date (2020). A total of 800 dwellings have outline planning permission on Land North of Rawcliffe Road. Phase 1 of this site has reserved matters approval (200 dwellings) and is under construction at the time of writing. A further 55 dwellings have been permitted on a range of other smaller sites. The Council will not rely on any further sites to come forward in the town over the plan period, though windfall residential developments may be acceptable following application of the sequential and exception tests. 
4.69 Without the risk of flooding, Goole would potentially see more residential development steered towards it, commensurate with its role as a Principal Town and the economic advantages the town offers. However, whilst the requirement set out would deliver levels of development in line with historic rates, there is a need to provide for additional housing growth elsewhere in the Goole and Humberhead Levels sub area. Following an assessment of a range of proposals in the sub area, land to the northeast of Howden is identified as a strategic area of growth to accommodate future development. As a Town, Howden is a sustainable location to accommodate further growth, complementary to economic growth and the regeneration of Goole. Around 2,140 houses are planned for Howden in total, with 1, 500 houses planned to the northeast of the Town within the plan period. 
4.70 Whilst Hedon fulfils the role of a Town, there are significant challenges associated with flood risk and managing surface water, reflected in the Level 2 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) (2020). Most of Hedon is located within Flood Zone 3a. Modelling shows that Hedon is at risk from both fluvial and tidal flooding if defences were to be breached or the Burstwick New Clough tidal gate was to fail. In addition to this, tide locking of Burstwick Drain and associated locking of sewer outfalls into the drain combined with the low and flat topography of the area, could cause significant surface water flooding issues. Given the cumulative impact of flood risk and the potential for development around Hedon to reduce the volume of existing flood plain storage, no specific allocations are proposed for the town at this time. In certain circumstances, windfall housing may be acceptable, following the application of the sequential and exception tests. Proposals should demonstrate that the development can be delivered safely in accordance with Policy ENV6, including adequately addressing drainage matters to ensure any surface water run-off resulting from a development does not introduce or exacerbate flood risk elsewhere. 
57 Spatial Strategy4.71 Although the majority of development will be directed to the Major Haltemprice Settlements, the Principal Towns and 
Towns, the Strategy Document Update takes a pragmatic approach recognising the rural nature of much of the East Riding. Around 40 per cent of the population lives outside of these settlements and development in villages can support their vitality and meet local housing aspirations.
4.72 In Rural Service Centres and Primary Villages, development will be supported to help grow these settlements, reflecting their role in the Settlement Network and, in most instances, their size. Overall, around 15 per cent of the overall housing requirement is directed to this part of the Settlement Network. For Rural Service Centres, the policy supports their role as hubs for the rural areas and plans for growth generally in the order of 15-20 per cent of the current number of dwellings. In Primary Villages, the policy recognises their basic sustainability credentials and promotes an approach that would increase the current number of dwellings generally by 5-15 per cent . The scale of development supported in the Rural Service Centres and Primary Villages will ensure that development here does not compromise the focus on the Major Haltemprice Settlements, Principal Towns and Towns as the most sustainable locations for development in the East Riding.
4.73 Gilberdyke/ Newport and Leven have been identified as Rural Service Centres, and Bilton, Dunswell, Rawcliffe, Thorngumbald and Tickton all fulfil the role of a Primary Villages. However, these settlements are either entirely within Flood Zone 3a (High Risk) or they are largely within Flood Zone 3a and land in lower risk areas is completely surrounded by high-risk areas. Therefore, due to the extent and nature of flood risk in these villages, specific housing allocations are not promoted. In exceptional circumstances housing may be appropriate where it can be delivered safely in accordance with Policy ENV6. For Easington, the scale of residential development is constrained by the presence of Health and Safety Executive (HSE) consultation zones, within which the HSE standing advice would advise against developments of more than three dwellings. The Local Plan Update Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA) also identifies a no net additional residential and tourism zone within 2.5 kilometres of habitats sites associated with Spurn and Kilnsea. The zone seeks to avoid adverse effects from recreational pressure resulting from planned growth. Therefore, no specific allocations for housing are proposed, but windfall developments in line with the HSE’s and Natural England’s standing advice would be supported in principle. 
4.74 Stamford Bridge and Woodmansey have seen high levels of development in recent years. The Plan seeks to support windfall developments and the continued development of existing allocations in these locations. High levels of housing development have taken place in a relatively short time and the Plan’s approach seeks to allow for these new developments to be absorbed into the social and physical infrastructure of the settlements. In the case of Stamford Bridge, when highway, ecology and heritage issues are also considered at a broad spatial strategy level, it is not considered appropriate to identify a higher housing requirement at this time. Similarly, for Woodmansey, the housing requirement identified also reflects existing commitments.
58
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateTable 3: Housing requirement in Rural Service Centres and Primary Villages
Distribution of dwellings (2020/21 - 2038/39)
Rural Service Centres Primary Villages
Aldbrough 90 Bilton 8*
Beeford 85 Brandesburton 55
Bubwith 50 Cherry Burton 55
Gilberdyke and Newport 56* Dunswell 5*
Holme on Spalding Moor 230 Easington 4*
Hutton Cranswick 165 Eastrington 40
Keyingham 200 Flamborough 120
Kilham 105 Leconfield 125
Leven 83* Melbourne 19
Middleton on the Wolds 65 Nafferton 100
Patrington 110 North Cave 55
Snaith 225 North Ferriby 155
Stamford Bridge 68* Preston 95
Wetwang 65 Rawcliffe 14*
*These figures represent the number of extant planning 
permissions as at April 2020. No specific allocations for residential development will be made based on current evidence regarding the level of flood /health and safety risk/sustainability in these settlements.Roos 30
Skirlaugh 65
South Cave 200
Swanland 175
Thorngumbald 0*
Tickton 2*
Walkington 60
Wawne 25
Wilberfoss 75
Woodmansey 6*
59 Spatial StrategyTable 4: Housing requirement to 2039
Housing requirement
A. Total net housing requirement 2020/21to 2038/39 20,900
Commitments
B. Dwellings with planning permission as of April 2020 11,402
Residual requirement
C. Dwellings required from other sources (A-B=C) 9,498
4.75 Table 4 shows the overall housing requirement for the Strategy Document Update, together with the number 
of houses that had permission as at 1 April 2020. The final row of the table provides the residual requirement at that point, which will need to be delivered through other sources. Sites for housing are allocated in the Settlement Network through the Allocations Document Update to meet the residual requirements in these settlements. To provide added flexibility, the Allocations Document Update identifies an additional level of supply of housing land in the Settlement Network over the residual requirement. No windfall allowance has been provided for the settlements identified in the Settlement Network. Based on previous experience, and the policies contained within this Plan, suitable windfall sites in line with the Plan will continue to come forward and be supported over the plan period. They will make an important contribution to the delivery of housing alongside sites allocated for residential development and provide additional flexibility in the supply of new housing land. The pace of delivery from allocated sites and windfall sites will be monitored and managed. Windfall opportunities in the Villages and the Countryside will deliver some housing outside of the Settlement Network and will also contribute to meeting the overall housing requirement. Policy S5 identifies an allowance of 1,500 dwellings over the plan period for the Villages and Countryside, which will be delivered through schemes in conformity with Policy S4. 
4.76 Policy S5 sets out housing requirements for several designated Neighbourhood Plan Areas (Cottingham, Howden, Market Weighton, North Cave, Pocklington, Wawne and Woodmansey). For other designated neighbourhood areas, no specific requirement is provided as these settlements are not specifically listed in Policy S3. However, they will continue to provide for small scale opportunities in line with Policy S4.
477 Policy S1 sets out the approach to considering Neighbourhood Plans. If a Neighbourhood Plan seeks to deliver a higher level of housing than is set out in Policy S5, it will be supported where the scale of residential development does not compromise the overall approach set out in the Spatial Strategy. Each approach taken in a Neighbourhood Plan will be considered on its own merits. However, it would be difficult to justify an approach that promotes a scale of development that would exceed the level of growth identified for all settlements in a higher category of the Settlement Network. Should a Neighbourhood Area without a current requirement wish to set a housing requirement figure, the Council can offer support and guidance to do so, taking into account the Spatial Strategy and the characteristics of the Neighbourhood Area, including its population and role. 
4.78 The housing supply position will be monitored annually, in order to ensure that a deliverable 5-year supply of housing sites with an additional buffer is maintained across the East Riding. An assessment of supply will be undertaken each year through a Housing Land Supply Position Statement (HLSPS) which will assess the progress and delivery of dwellings on specific sites and apply the appropriate buffer. Through the annual monitoring process any shortfalls will be identified, and a ‘residual’ approach taken, meaning that the Council will take account of previous over or under supply on an annual basis and adjust the future requirement accordingly.
4.79 A target has been set to support the delivery of an average of 200 (gross) affordable homes per year as part of the overall number of homes provided. The target represents the number of affordable homes that could be provided 
60
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Updatethrough allocated sites, existing commitments, and relevant windfall sites, and will be predominantly provided 
through developer contributions. Other sources, such as rural exception sites, First Homes exception sites and grant funding will help to bring forward additional affordable dwellings, which will also contribute towards the Council’s net affordable housing need as identified in the Local Housing Need Assessment (LHNA) (2022). Policy H2 sets out how affordable housing will be delivered on new housing sites.
Delivering employment land
Policy S6: Delivering employment land
A. The future needs of the East Riding economy will be met on a broad range of sites to provide suitable options for the market. Land to accommodate at least 208 hectares is allocated through the Allocations Document Update and will provide sufficient land for a variety of employment uses to support to the provision of E(g), B2 and B8 floorspace. 
B. The spatial approach for allocating land has taken account of the need for:
1. Business use floorspace – predominantly in the Major Haltemprice Settlements and the Principal 
Towns, recognising that, with regards to the Major Haltemprice Settlements and Beverley, such uses are complementary to developments in Hull City Centre;
2. General industrial floorspace – spread across a range of sites around the East Riding; and
3. Storage or distribution floorspace – primarily at locations along the East-West Multi-Modal Transport Corridor, as the prime location for storage and distribution uses, which generate large freight movements.
C. An additional 179 hectares of land has been allocated at Hedon Haven through the Allocations Document Update specifically to cater for the expansion of the Port of Hull. 
4.80 The Strategy Document Update aims to support jobs and businesses to ensure that the East Riding can maximise opportunities for economic development where market demand is high, as well as stimulate activity in areas in need of regeneration. Policy S6 focuses particularly on the land requirement for business, general industrial, and storage or distribution uses (also referred to as ‘employment land’). This is land that is classified in the Use Classes Order as;
 
 E: Commercial, Business and Service
  B2: General Industry
  B8: Storage and Distribution
4.81 The Employment Land Review (2020) and the subsequent Demand Update (2022) has assessed the amount of land that is required for these uses over the plan period to support the indigenous growth of the East Riding economy and provide for new inward investment. It has also taken account of the role that employment land in the East Riding has in supporting growth in the City of Hull. The approach taken in Policy S6 seeks to support a level of growth well in excess of the baseline forecast revealed in the Demand Update (2022). There is a need to plan for employment land that reflects the long term past trend of economic growth in the East Riding, whilst also recognising the anticipated future structure of the economy that may result from known projects and potential future policy interventions. The higher growth scenario calculated in the Demand Update (2022) provides an output more closely aligned to historic employment land take-up than the baseline. For this reason, and to account for known projects, over 200 hectares of employment land has been identified in the Allocations Document Update. 
61 Spatial Strategy4.82 The amount of land allocated recognises the need to plan for uncertainties, to provide competition in the market 
and allow for churn, in order to provide continued support for the East Riding economy. It is not expected that all employment land allocated will be in use by the end of the plan period and is not a target. 
4.83 The approach taken in Policy S6 provides sufficient land to attract inward investment and occupiers seeking space for large floorplates for clean energy, advanced manufacturing and port related activities in the right locations. A diverse mix of employment land is also offered that caters for the needs of the micro-economy and supports the small and medium enterprise base. 
4.84 The employment allocations include the ‘Key Employment Sites’ of Junction 36 (M62) at Goole, Melton, Humber Bridgehead (Hessle) and Hedon Haven, the first three of which are already significant employment destinations. These sites can take advantage of the excellent assets and transport links in the East-West Multi-Modal Transport Corridor. Major local roads, such as the A1079 (Hull to York), A164 (Beverley to Humber Bridge), A614 (Goole to Bridlington) and A165 (Hull to Bridlington), also have an important role in linking businesses across the area to the national road network. Smaller sites that serve a more localised need are allocated to complement the Key Employment Sites. The Employment Land Review (2020) is a key source of evidence regarding which sites will be needed to support employment growth over the plan period, and further details are set out in Policy S3, A1-A6 and in the Allocations Document Update.
4.85 The Employment Land Review (2020) highlights that Hull is the regional centre for Humber with a city centre office market focused on attracting knowledge-based sectors. It is important for Hull to retain a centralised offer to encourage clustering of Grade A space for head office uses. In contrast, East Riding provides an out of town location offering choice to business support and service sectors seeking an alternative type of premises. This position is reflected in the emerging Statement of Common Ground with Hull. Office developments in the East Riding should generally provide a different property offer to the City Centre and cater for a separate target market (for example, lower density business parks), or support the role of the District and Town Centres as outlined in Policy S7.
4.86 Due to the nature of the Hull and East Riding economies, significant investment is expected in the energy sector over the plan period. Land at Hedon Haven provides a unique opportunity to support the development of this sector and its association with the Port of Hull.  The National Policy Statement for Ports (2012) highlights the vital role that ports play in the UK economy. They provide the most effective way to move the majority of freight in and out of the UK, and the provision of sufficient port capacity will be an essential element in ensuring sustainable growth in the UK economy. The Statement identifies that manufacturing and assembly of large-scale equipment to service the offshore energy sector in the UK is set to see a significant increase in demand for port sites. An increase in port capacity may also be needed to provide installation, operation and maintenance facilities for this scale of development. Through the National Policy Statement for Ports, the Government makes it clear that judgements about when and where new port developments might be required, should be made on the basis of commercial factors identified by the port industry. The operator of the Port of Hull, Associated British Ports, has identified that the continued allocation of the 80 hectare Enterprise Zone site, together with the allocation of additional land, will be vital to service the future demand for investment and development associated with the Port of Hull. The site remains one of the largest and best-connected development opportunities of its kind in the UK. The investment in Green Port, Hull has reduced the availability of land within the main port boundary and development of the site would make a significant contribution to the sub-regional economy. 
4.87 Hedon Haven is therefore a Key Employment Site and 179 hectares of land has been allocated to cater for the expansion of the Port of Hull. This includes 80 hectares of land originally covered by a Local Development Order (LDO) adopted in June 2013. This covered that part of the site designated as an Enterprise Zone. Since then, a hybrid application for full planning permission for the construction of a new estate road, together with associated infrastructure and outline planning permission for the construction of almost 400,000sqm of employment floorspace and other ancillary sui generis uses has been approved. The Government’s designation of much of the Humber ports complex, including land at Salt End and Hedon Haven, as a Freeport now provides significant economic 
62
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Updateopportunities with 85.6 hectares of the Key Employment Site included in the Hull East Tax Site. The Allocations 
Document Update provides more details on the policy framework for developing the Hedon Haven site including the approach to ecological mitigation.
4.88 A key element of a future review of this Local Plan Update will be to monitor the progress made on bringing sites forward for development. This should include monitoring progress on the Freeport Tax Sites to the East of Hull and at Goole (see Policy EC1). 
Delivering retail development
Policy S7: Delivering Town Centre Development
A. Future needs for retail, as set out in Table 5, and other main town centre uses will be met through the 
allocation of sites in the Allocations Document Update or a Neighbourhood Plan, and the determination of planning applications, which will be based on the following network and hierarchy of centres:
1. Town Centres: Beverley, Bridlington, Driffield and Goole
2. District Centres: Elloughton cum Brough, Cottingham, Hedon, Hessle, Hornsea, Howden, Market 
Weighton, Pocklington and Withernsea
3. Local Centres: Anlaby, Bridlington Old Town, Holme on Spalding Moor, Keyingham, Patrington, Snaith, South Cave, Stamford Bridge and Willerby.
B. Outside of the East Riding, there are the city centres of Hull and York. Where proposals for main town centres uses in the East Riding are of a significant scale, due consideration should be given to the potential impact on these city centres.
4.89 Vibrant Town Centres provide significant economic benefits in terms of employment and visitor spend, and 
play a crucial role in the success of a place as a whole. Their role and function are evolving in response to new technologies, customer behaviours and leisure habits. National planning policy seeks to direct retail development, and other uses generating high number of trips, to town centres as a priority. It also requires authorities to define a town centre hierarchy and consider the future needs of each Centre, allocating a range of suitable sites to meet the scale and type of development likely to be needed. Unlike other forms of development, the NPPF recognises the inherent difficulties of planning for town centre development and requires needs to be assessed for a minimum of ten years, rather than the standard fifteen. 
4.90 The Town Centres, Retail and Leisure Study (2019) has assessed leisure and shopping patterns within the East Riding, taking into account both convenience (everyday essential items, including food, drinks, newspapers/ magazines and confectionery) and comparison (items not obtained on a frequent basis, including clothing, footwear, household and recreational goods) retailing. It has been based on a household survey that shows the catchment area from which each Centre draws its trade.
4.91 An assessment of retail provision, shopping patterns, and detailed ‘health checks’ for the East Riding’s larger towns has been set out in the Town Centres, Retail and Leisure Study (2019). In particular, it estimates the quantitative need for convenience goods and comparison goods retail floorspace in individual Centres over various timeframes. Table 5 shows quantitative need to 2033 to meet the requirements of the NPPF. This has taken into account future population growth within the catchment area of each Centre, forecasts of retail expenditure, the impact of special forms of trading (e.g. internet shopping), and the potential effect of known retail commitments at the time of the Study in determining the future need for new floorspace. For some Centres, particularly Elloughton cum Brough, there is a substantial amount of new retail floorspace that will be provided as part of proposals that have been granted planning permission. These developments will contribute towards meeting the need for new retail floorspace, and in the case of Elloughton cum Brough will meet the entire need for retail development over the period to 2033 and, potentially, beyond.
63 Spatial Strategy4.92 Whilst the figures in Table 5 are presented as a range, the capacity for each Centre will depend upon the type of 
retailers that occupy new retail floorspace.
  Comparison - the lower figures are based on needs being met by bulky goods retailers or independent retailers,  
 which both generally achieve lower sales densities. The maximum figures are based on sales densities achieved by  
 high street/multiple retailers.
  Convenience - the higher figures represent a situation in which all the capacity is taken up by smaller food stores.  
 This is unlikely with the lower end of the range potentially being more appropriate.
Table 5: Retail requirements and recommendations
Settlement CentreFloorspace Capacity to 2033 (gross sqm)
Convenience Goods Comparison Goods
Lower Upper Lower Upper
Beverley - - 2,400 4,000
Bridlington 400 500 2,100 3,400
Cottingham - - - -
Driffield 1,300 1,600 900 1,500
Elloughton-cum-Brough - - - -
Goole 600 700 1,200 1,900
Hedon - - 200 300
Hessle - - 300 600
Hornsea - - 500 800
Howden - - 100 100
Market Weighton 800 1,000 400 700
Pocklington 1,400 1,700 400 700
Withernsea 200 300 300 500
4.93 Furthermore, the figures presented above are from a quantitative perspective. The Town Centres, Retail and Leisure Centre Study (2019) also provided a qualitative analysis. It noted that the convenience goods figures for Driffield, Market Weighton and Pocklington could support the provision of a small supermarket or discount retailer. In respect of comparison goods, many of the quantitative requirements are relatively low and may be delivered through other means rather than allocating specific sites for retail uses (e.g. intensification of existing uses, bringing vacant premises back into use, etc.). For Beverley, the Town Centres, Retail and Leisure Centre (2019) did not recommend allocating sites to meet the comparison goods floorspace figure, acknowledging that the recent development of Flemingate is likely to meet needs in the short to medium term. In terms of Goole and Driffield the Town Centres, Retail and Leisure Study (2019), considers that it would be unrealistic to expect a wide range of national comparison goods operators to be attracted to locate here given the higher order role and function of nearby centres. However, additional land for comparison goods should be allocated to meet predicted needs in Bridlington, especially where this could support larger format units. 
64
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update4.94 Whilst the Town Centres, Retail and Leisure Study (2019) reflected on the changing habits of consumers and trends 
in retailing, the Council recognises that since its preparation further significant structural changes to the role and function of town centres are underway. The full extent of the impacts of the pandemic on town centres are not likely to be known for some time. For now, the figures set out in Table 5 provide a starting point for decision making, though it is likely that more detailed information will be required alongside development proposals.
4.95 The need for new retail development will be met through the identification of specific sites in the Allocations Document Update or a Neighbourhood Plan. This will follow the sequential approach set out in Policy EC3, which seeks to direct new retail development to existing centres before considering edge of centre locations. Where suitable sites are not available in these locations, out of centre sites will be considered, with preference given to accessible sites that are well connected to the Centre. The Town Centres, Retail and Leisure Study (2019) did not identify any specific need for other main town centre use development. However, it is likely that opportunities and proposals will come forward to respond to local demand and changing trends. 
4.96 The hierarchy of Centres has been informed by the Town Centres, Retail and Leisure Study (2019), which recognises the different roles and functions of the individual Centres. This is based on the size of the Centre, including the number and range of shops and services that are available, as well as the extent of the catchment area and estimated retail turnover. It provides the framework for considering the overall scale and type of town centre and retail development that is appropriate within a specific Centre. The hierarchy comprises: 
 
 Town Centres are the larger Centres in the East Riding, which have the widest range of shops and services, and  
 draw shoppers from a relatively wide catchment. This includes the four Principal Towns that are identified in  
 Policy S3.
  District Centres are smaller, but still provide a significant range of shops and services important to meet the needs  
 of the local community. These Centres include all of the Towns identified in Policy S3, as well as Cottingham  
 and Hessle.
  Local Centres are often found within larger villages and typically include a more limited range of small shops and  
 services of a local nature. These can meet the day to day needs of a small catchment.
4.97 In addition, there are regional-scale city centres in York and Hull that are located within neighbouring local authority areas. These have extensive catchment areas, which extend into significant parts of the East Riding. Depending on the scale and location of the proposals, an assessment of the impact on the city centres of Hull and York may also be required to ensure that the vitality and viability of these locations is not undermined. The relevant city council may be consulted on certain applications. 
4.98 Specific policies on managing retail development and protecting existing retail uses, both within and outside the Centres, are set out in Policies EC3 and C2. 
65 Spatial StrategyConnecting people and places
Policy S8: Connecting People and Places
A. New development should ensure that people and places are well connected.
B. The overall role and function of the Strategic Transport Network, as shown in Figure 5, will be protected 
and/or enhanced, having regard to the investment priorities, policies, and proposals of the Local Transport Plan and other related strategies.
C. Transport schemes that improve the overall capacity and coverage of the transport network will be supported. Where appropriate land will be safeguarded for these schemes in the Allocations Document Update or a Neighbourhood Plan.
D. The role and function of the East-West Multi-Modal Transport Corridor, which serves the transport needs of Key Employment Sites, will be protected and/or enhanced, where appropriate, to enable the efficient and integrated movement of freight by, and between, different transport modes, as well as for the movement of people from their homes to jobs.
E. Roadside facilities and parking essential to support the safety and welfare of motorists and lorry drivers will be supported, where they are of an appropriate scale, meet an identified need, and can be accessed safely.
F. Existing and future port operations at Goole within the Operational Port Area, as shown on the Policies Map Update, will be safeguarded from development which would conflict with this use. Where port operations could have a significant adverse effect on new development in its vicinity, applicants should be required to provide suitable mitigation before the development has been completed.
G. Existing wharf and rail facilities on the Aire and Calder Canal, River Ouse, Humber Estuary, and elsewhere will be safeguarded to maintain a choice of sustainable transport modes.
H. Provision of new walking, cycling and public transport facilities will be supported. Existing and disused public transport, cycling and footpath networks and facilities, including public rights of way, will be enhanced and/or protected, particularly within and linking to the Major Haltemprice Settlements, Principal Towns, and Towns as well as existing and proposed blue/green infrastructure corridors.
I. Proposals that facilitate integration and connection between different modes of travel, especially walking, cycling and public transport, will be encouraged.
J. Initiatives that improve accessibility in rural areas will be supported, through working with the Local Transport Plan and other strategies and programmes, including the community transport sector.
4.99 A well developed and integrated transport system can open up a wealth of opportunities for individuals and businesses, and help address issues of disadvantage, isolation and inequality. National planning policy encourages the provision of viable transport infrastructure necessary to support new development, including large scale facilities necessary to support major generators of travel demand.
4.100 New development in the East Riding will need to be accessible and efficiently linked into the area’s transport network. Full account has, therefore, been taken of the Council’s Local Transport Plan (2015-2029), which is built around six strategic objectives to:
 
 Improve the maintenance and management of the existing transport network
  Support sustainable economic growth and regeneration;
66
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update  Reduce carbon emissions;
  Improve road safety;
  Support and encourage healthy lifestyles; and
  Improve access to key services.
4.101 The spatial planning implications of these objectives 
are implemented by the Local Plan, for example, the objective of improving access to key services is integral in the approach taken in managing the location of new development. Equally, the Local Transport Plan (2015-2029) helps deliver aspects of the Local Plan, for example, through focusing investment and improvements to walking, cycling, and public transport facilities on the larger settlements. 
4.102 New development should be well connected to a range of transport options, especially where significant movements of people to/from the site are expected. However, it is recognised that in certain locations, especially rural areas, connections to the main public transport, cycling, or walking networks may not readily be available. In such circumstances, good connections to the road network will still be necessary.
4.103 Figure 5 illustrates the East Riding’s Strategic Transport Network, which consists of infrastructure that:
 
 Allows significant movements of people and goods across the East Riding and beyond;
  Connects major centres of population, facilities, and economic activity;
  Serves a wide geographical area; and
  Encourages more socially inclusive communities.
4.104 Together with its partners, the Council will work to manage the Strategic Transport Network and its integration with the non-strategic transport network effectively and efficiently, which also includes important bus interchanges away from core bus routes. New development proposals that would act to diminish the role and function of the Strategic Transport Network by, for example, creating unacceptable levels of freight or people movements, will not normally be permitted unless there are overriding public benefits (e.g. in terms of regeneration or road safety). Proposals along the network will be assessed to ensure that, where possible, future transport improvements are not compromised. Developments in the vicinity of level crossings (both vehicular and pedestrian) will be expected to assess the potential increase in risk at each crossing affected and indicate the appropriate mitigation required to reduce or remove such risks and ensure the continued safe operation of the rail network.
67 Spatial StrategyFigure 5: The Strategic Transport Network
4.105 Policy S8 supports a number of specific measures, such as improvements to the A1079 and provision South 
of Beverley of a new park and ride scheme, which are set out in sub-area Policies A1-A6 and will improve the operation and coverage of the transport network. Other schemes identified through the Local Transport Plan (2015-2029) process and other funding streams will also be supported.
4.106  The East-West rail, water, and road Multi-Modal Transport Corridor links together the Key Employment Sites at Hedon Haven, Humber Bridgehead, Melton and Goole. The function of this route for the multi-modal transfer of freight will be protected and proposals for enhancing the corridor’s function will be supported where appropriate. This is particularly important in considering proposals that may result in damage to, or removal of, facilities important to the role of the corridor, such as a rail freight siding or wharf. It is equally important to support proposals that would enhance the corridor’s role, for example, by bringing a facility, such as a rail freight siding, back into use or facilitating the transfer of materials between different modes. This will help to strengthen the corridor’s role and avoid increasing demand for road space on Highways England’s Strategic Road Network (A1033/A63/M62/M18). Alongside this, it is important to get people to the employment opportunities here and elsewhere, therefore measures aimed at improving more sustainable travel options will need to be considered as part of plans for major development.
4.107 To support the continued growth of the port, existing and potential future port operations at Goole will be safeguarded from conflicting development. Conflicting uses could include sensitive uses such as new housing, which could be significantly affected by the port’s operation. Where port operations could have a significant 
68
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Updateadverse effect on new development (or ‘agent of change’) in its vicinity, applicants will be required to provide 
suitable mitigation before the development has been completed. This could include additional sound proofing or an increased separation distance between sensitive users and the port area. The Operational Port Area is shown on the Policies Map Update.
4.108 Roadside facilities will be supported where they are necessary and provide for basic needs such as fuel, food, drink, and parking, which are essential to support the safety and welfare of motorists and lorry drivers. The scale and nature of roadside facilities would need to be appropriate to their location, safely accessible and, where possible, located within a settlement. Proposals are required to meet an identified need in a particular location, demonstrating that no suitable alternative facilities exist to meet those needs. For example, it is unlikely a mobile food outlet would be appropriate close to a village with a service station already providing for basic food needs.
4.109  There are several existing wharf facilities along the River Humber, River Ouse, and Aire and Calder Navigation that merit safeguarding from conflicting development. These can comprise substantial hard standing areas and/or landing platforms adjacent to a navigable water channel, such as at Howdendyke, which can be very difficult to reinstate once they are lost due to the costs involved. There are also rail facilities, such as Melton rail sidings, which are important to safeguard in order to maintain a choice of sustainable freight transport options. Assessments that outline the current and potential future demand for individual facilities will be an important consideration. This should recognise wharfs and rail facilities that can easily be brought back into an operational state as a greater priority for safeguarding.
4.110 A more sustainable approach to development can be promoted through schemes and initiatives, which provide alternative transport options to the car. In particular, schemes for facilitating journeys by foot, cycle, non-motorised users (NMU), public transport, and car sharing have been developed through individual settlement transport strategies in the Local Transport Plan (2015-2029). These initiatives can also enhance the transport functions of new and existing green infrastructure and provide opportunities to support health and wellbeing. New development should seek to protect, extend and support existing and disused public transport, cycling, footpath and NMU networks (including public rights of way and the National Cycle Network), as well as encouraging alternatives to the single occupancy use of the private car in line with requirements set out in Policy EC4. Existing and disused public transport, cycling, and footpath networks in the East Riding include parts of the Beverley to York rail route, the Trans Pennine Trail and the Bubwith Rail Trail. A Public Rights of Way and Planning Guidance Document has recently been prepared by the Council and should be considered alongside the Council’s Rights of Way Improvement Plan. 
4.111 Proposals, such as provision of additional car and cycle parking facilities at rail stations and coordinated rail and bus services and facilities, can facilitate better integration between different modes of travel. These will be supported where they encourage longer journeys via more sustainable modes of travel.
4.112 Local Transport Plan (2015-2029) funding currently supports three demand-responsive Community Transport groups operating in the East Riding by contributing towards the capital cost of replacing one vehicle per year. An appropriate assessment process is in place to determine which group receives this support in any given year. The running costs are recouped through a mixture of fares revenue from passengers, charitable grants, project specific funding and the delivery of local authority contracts. In some areas these services provide the only public transport option for residents. The Local Transport Plan (2015-2029) Accessibility Strategy and Local Plan will also support other transport projects which improve accessibility in rural areas.
4.113 Potential improvements to further increase the coverage and capacity of the transport network could include the longer-term aspiration to reopen the Hull/Beverley to York rail line. A feasibility study to investigate possibilities for reinstating the route was completed in 2005 and showed that this was feasible in engineering terms and that the overall benefits would exceed the overall costs over a 60-year period. At present there is little prospect of funding being available to bring forward the reinstatement of this route. However, the Council recognises the benefit that such a proposal could bring to the wider area and will work with neighbouring authorities, partners and funding bodies to explore opportunities to promote this course of action.
69 Spatial StrategyStrengthening blue/green infrastructure
Policy S9: Strengthening blue/green infrastructure 
A. Development proposals will: 
1. Incorporate a comprehensive design that is underpinned by its consideration of existing and new 
blue/green infrastructure features, including those features required by policies ENV1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and C3; and
2. Capitalise on opportunities to:
i. Maintain, enhance and where possible create links between blue/green infrastructure features such as those listed in Table 6. Links should be created both on-site and, where possible,  with nearby blue/green infrastructure features; 
ii. Utilise potential multifunctional benefits of blue/green infrastructure features; and
iii. Enhance blue/green infrastructure opportunities identified in Neighbourhood Plans.
B. Development proposals within, or in close proximity to, a blue/green infrastructure corridor should enhance the functionality and connectivity of the corridor.
C. Development proposals should seek to avoid increasing recreational pressures on designated biodiversity assets. Where a potential increase is unavoidable proposals will provide mitigation in the form of blue/green infrastructure provision.
4.114 National planning policy defines green infrastructure as, ‘A network of multi-functional green space, urban and rural, which is capable of delivering a wide range of environmental and quality of life benefits for local communities.’ Benefits can include enhanced wellbeing, outdoor recreation and access, enhanced biodiversity and landscapes, food and energy production, urban cooling, and the management of flood risk
12. The Local Plan refers to blue/green 
infrastructure, to clarify that water plays an important part in green infrastructure.
4.115 Traditionally, environmental planning has looked at the functions of blue/green infrastructure assets, such as biodiversity, landscape, flood alleviation, open space provision or public realm design in isolation. A blue/green infrastructure approach considers how together these assets form an overall ‘system’ that is greater than the sum of its parts. 
4.116 The Covid-19 pandemic highlighted the importance of access to blue/green infrastructure for physical and mental public health. The quality, quantity and connectivity of these features improves the quality of life for communities and makes spaces more attractive and safer to move through. A significant majority of people (84 per cent ) believe that being in contact with the natural elements makes them feel more relaxed. Other popular ‘stress busters’ included a walk in the park, the smell of cut grass and the sound of birds singing
13. They are all related to blue/green infrastructure.
4.117 National planning policy guidance sets out that a local plan’s strategic policies can identify the location of existing and proposed blue/green infrastructure networks and set out appropriate policies for their protection and enhancement. In 2010 work was undertaken with Natural England to map the area’s blue/green infrastructure at a strategic scale, incorporating a broad range of assets and functions
14. This resulted in an indicative map of blue/green infrastructure 
corridors (Figure 6) showing where assets/ functions correlate, and locations where opportunities to improve the functioning/ connectivity of blue/green infrastructure may be greatest. These corridors incorporate a broad range of assets/ functions e.g. biodiversity, landscape, heritage, and recreational assets. As such, the blue/green infrastructure corridors need to be viewed in conjunction with other relevant designations in this Plan (e.g. Important Landscape Areas), to ensure that the component elements of blue/green infrastructure and associated policies are appreciated.
12 Planning Practice Guidance, Paragraph: 005 Reference ID: 8-005-20190721 Revision date: 21 07 2019 
13 Poll research cited by BBC News, 19 July 2005, cited in Natural England Green Infrastructure Guidance 2009 
14 Yorkshire and Humber Green Infrastructure Mapping Project (2010)
70
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateFigure 6: Blue/green infrastructure corridors
4.118 The blue/green infrastructure corridors are categorised as regional, sub-regional, district and local, reflecting their 
geographic extent and amount of functions they provide. In the East Riding, regional corridors include the River Aire, Coast, River Derwent (which includes the Pocklington Canal), Humber and River Ouse corridors. Sub-regional corridors include the River Hull and Holderness Drain, South Holderness, and Yorkshire Wolds corridors, and district corridors include the Beverley, Driffield, Gypsey Race and Priory Fields/Walkington corridors. A number of smaller scale ‘local’ corridors have also been identified, including the River Foulness, Hornsea, Hudson Way, Haltemprice/North Ferriby, and former railway lines (e.g. Hull to Hornsea). Further local corridors may be defined through future locally-based work/strategies relating to blue/green infrastructure provision, including Local Nature Recovery Strategies and Neighbourhood Plans. 
4.119 Natural capital thinking has risen in national and local agendas in recent years, for example as a key element of the Government’s 25 Year Environment Plan. Defra summarises natural capital as follows: “At its simplest, a natural capital approach is about thinking of nature as an asset, or set of assets that benefit people. The ability of natural capital assets to provide goods and services is determined by their quality, quantity and location. These in turn can be affected by background pressures, management practices and drivers of demand
15.” 
4.120 There is a close relationship between natural capital and blue/green infrastructure. In Enabling a Natural Capital Approach
16, Defra writes “In the context of development and regeneration, natural capital forms an integral part of 
the infrastructure that underpins successful and liveable places. In this context, natural capital is known as “Green Infrastructure”. Place-making is another example of systems-based thinking that natural capital promotes.”
15 Enabling a Natural Capital Approach: Guidance (2020) Defra 
16 Enabling a Natural Capital Approach: Guidance (2020) Defra
71 Spatial Strategy4.121 The Hull and East Yorkshire Local Nature Partnership is developing with partners a York, North Yorkshire, East 
Riding and Hull natural capital investment framework. A critical part of this is a comprehensive up-to-date habitat network map, which can support better decision making across a range of sectors and work areas, including planning. This mapping is being developed currently via remote sensing technology. The final product will support  an up to date blue/green infrastructure network for the East Riding.
4.122 Planning Practice Guidance highlights the benefits blue/green infrastructure can help achieve. They include:
 
 Building a strong competitive economy;
  Achieving well designed places;
  Promoting healthy and safe communities;
  Managing climate change, flooding and coastal erosion; and
  Conserving and enhancing the natural environment17. 
4.123 The blue/green infrastructure benefits that are of particular importance to the East Riding are: climate change adaptation, flood attenuation, habitat provision, place making/urban renaissance, contribution to local character and access to nature and recreation (particularly between urban areas and the surrounding countryside). Tree planting and woodland creation can, for example, provide multiple benefits for the environment including: noise absorption, soil stabilisation, air purification and carbon storage. Further guidance on how woodland management and creation can benefit the wider environment is available from the UK Forestry Standard. The provision of blue/green infrastructure can also help achieve river basin management plan mitigation measures and the aspirations of the Water Framework Directive. These benefits, or ‘ecosystem services’, are vital to sustaining the economic, social and environmental prosperity of the area.
4.124 The provision of blue/green infrastructure has strong links to a number of other policies in the Strategy Document Update, namely ENV1, ENV2, ENV3, ENV4, ENV5, ENV6 and C3. Proposals that use these policies are also likely to consider blue/green infrastructure. This recognises the multi-functional use of blue/green infrastructure assets that will be relevant to a wide range of development proposals. Blue/green infrastructure can also provide a recreational asset allowing for sustainable transport opportunities, such as walking and cycling routes. Enhancements to blue/green infrastructure may include, but are not limited to, one or a combination of the following:
 
 Provision of open space;
  Flood attenuation;
  Consideration of landscape setting;
  Improvements to street scene and design of public spaces;
  Enhancement of biodiversity; 
  Reducing pollution;
  Carbon capture and storage/tree planting, and
  Contributing to the delivery of relevant local strategies and plans, such as Humber Forest woodland planting  
 projects and the Rights of Way Improvement Plan for the East Riding of Yorkshire 2022-2032, East Riding of  
 Yorkshire Planning Pitch Strategy (2019-2024), East Riding Health and Wellbeing Strategy (2019-2022), East Riding  
 Local Flood Risk Management Strategy (2015-2027) (including lower tier documents such as management plans,  
 catchment strategies and the Coastal Strategy), Living With Water, Neighbourhood Plans, and their successors.
 
17 Paragraph: 006 Reference ID: 8-006-20190721 Revision date: 21/07/2019
72
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update4.125 Early integration of blue/green infrastructure can ensure that it is properly planned in advance of development or 
delivered alongside development on a phased basis. Planning blue/green infrastructure from the inception or master planning stage of a proposal allows greater consideration of multifunctional blue/green infrastructure features, for example a green space could improve public realm, increase biodiversity, improve health, be used for recreation, flood alleviation, net biodiversity gain and to relieve recreational disturbance on a biodiversity designation. It can create attractive walking and cycling /green transport routes through a development and make connections to the wider blue/green infrastructure network. In this way blue/green infrastructure can be planned as an integral part of the community and recognised as a valuable community asset. Design and access statements that accompany planning applications should set out how blue/green infrastructure features have been incorporated as an integral part of a development. This should include reference to blue/green infrastructure features (Table 6) and/or corridors (Figure 6) that are on, or near the site, as well as measures that will be taken to enhance, add to, and/or link to these. Appropriate measures will vary depending on the type of blue/green infrastructure feature(s) and function(s) involved. For example, many new developments will offer the potential to improve public access and recreational opportunities to adjacent land, however, in some cases this may not be appropriate (e.g. where the nearby blue/green infrastructure feature is a nature conservation site requiring sensitive management). 
73 Spatial StrategyTable 6: Key Blue/green Infrastructure features in the East Riding
 International and nationally important sites for nature conservation (see Table 13);
 Other sites of strategic/local importance for nature conservation (see Table 13);
 Coast (between the mean high and low water marks) and Heritage Coast;
 Yorkshire Wolds (its valuable landscapes, rich biodiversity, and recreational and cultural resources);
 Rivers, especially the Humber, Hull, Derwent, Gypsey Race, and other water courses, such as the Pocklington  
 Canal, and drains, and all other water bodies, such as streams, wetlands and ponds, their riparian corridors/ 
 floodplains and areas immediately adjacent to such features;
 Individual trees, hedgerows and woodland, including areas of tree planting provided through the local Humber  
 Forest initiative;
 Green/open recreational or amenity space, including commons (e.g. Beverley Westwood), parks and gardens,  
 playing pitches, allotments, cemeteries, village greens, and any sites designated as Local Green Spaces;
 Green features within the built environment, including street trees, verges, green roofs, landscape buffers  
 and gardens;
 Rainwater harvesting (e.g. water butts);
 Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDs) (e.g. swales, balancing ponds, rainwater gardens and constructed wetlands);
 Flood alleviation schemes, including storage lagoons (e,g Cottingham and Orchard Park Flood Alleviations  
 Scheme, Willerby and Deringham Flood Alleviation Scheme, Anlaby and East Ella Flood Alleviation Scheme and  
 Pocklington Flood Alleviation Scheme);
 Tourism assets (e.g. Humber Bridge Country Park, Danes Dyke, Spurn Point, North Cave Wetlands and the  
 Heritage Coast at Spurn Point and Flamborough Head);
 Historic environment, such as registered parks and gardens and the setting of other heritage assets  
 (see Table 11);
 Wildlife corridors, including hedgerows, ditches, disused railways and verges;
 Public rights of way and cycle ways (e.g. the Yorkshire Wolds Way National Trail, Trans Pennine Trail and other  
 recreational routes of local/regional importance);
 Open access land as designated under the Countryside Rights of Way Act (2000);
 Coastal access trail as designated under the Marine and Coastal Access Act (2009); and
 Post-industrial land such as disused quarries and former landfill sites. 
4.126 The use of Building with Nature Standards18 will be supported. They provide a national framework of evidence-based, 
industry-tested standards that define high-quality green infrastructure. Developers will be encouraged to use them to 
create better places for people and wildlife and show how the proposal has met the requirements of this policy.
18 www.buildingwithnature.org.uk
74
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update4.127 Where possible multifunctional blue/green infrastructure, which provides multiple benefits/uses, will be supported. 
Examples include shrub screening along footpaths and SuDs used as recreational spaces. However, the management of such infrastructure should be considered to ensure conflicts allow benefits to be reached as fully as possible, for example screening along footpaths should consider whether people will feel safe and if it is likely that roots will make the path difficult for some users to access. The blue/green infrastructure corridors are indicative and strategic and, as such, their role is to highlight where consideration of strategic blue/green infrastructure issues should be heightened, rather than inform site-specific schemes. However, local blue/green infrastructure enhancements, such as green roofs, new tree planting, swales, parks, play areas, gardens, footpaths/cycle ways, integrated within developments are equally important in contributing to sustainable development. The Hull and East Yorkshire Local Nature Partnership is preparing natural capital mapping. Once complete this will inform the consideration of green infrastructure on site specific development schemes.
4.128 Proposals should take account of relevant plans/strategies that aim to improve blue/green infrastructure provision in the East Riding. These include the Humber Forest (Hull and East Yorkshire Woodland Initiative) Strategy (2019), which aims to significantly increase the amount of woodland cover across the area, in recognition that existing coverage is considerably below that of the national average (2.6 per cent as opposed to 8.4 per cent ). There is also a Rights of Way Improvement Plan for the East Riding of Yorkshire (a statutory document that acts as a mechanism for improving the network of public rights of way and other non-motorised routes, in line with the requirements of all types of users); Local Transport Plan (2015-2029); and Hull and East Riding Catchment Plan (2017) (which sets out the partnership approach to improving the water and wetland environment for the benefit of people and wildlife). In addition, there are regeneration strategies, market town renaissance strategies, flood risk management plans, parish plans, conservation area appraisals, and the Lower Derwent Valley Supplementary Planning Document which contain blue/green infrastructure priorities for specific locations.
4.129 Proposals that have the potential to increase recreational pressures on designated biodiversity assets should provide mitigation in the form of blue/green infrastructure provision. This could include provision of additional green spaces to provide choice and deter an increased number of visitors from using designated assets for recreational purposes. 
4.130 A number of sections within the Council (e.g. Conservation and Landscape and Sustainable Development, the Lead Local Flood Authority and Regeneration and Funding) and external organisations/ bodies (e.g. governmental and non-governmental agencies and community-related organisations, such as the Yorkshire Nature Partnership, East Riding of Yorkshire and Kingston upon Hull Joint Local Access Forum, , Humber Forest, Hull and East Yorkshire Local Nature Partnership (LNP), Internal Drainage Boards, Hull and East Riding Catchment Partnership and the East Riding of Yorkshire Rural Partnership) will be involved in the delivery of blue/green infrastructure. These teams and partnerships may be able to provide advice and guidance on appropriate blue/green infrastructure design.
75 Spatial Strategy76
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update5. A Healthy and Balanced 
Housing Market
77 A Healthy and Balanced Housing Market5.  A Healthy and Balanced Housing Market
5.1 This chapter includes a number of policies, which aim 
to ensure the East Riding has a healthy and balanced housing market. It builds upon the Spatial Strategy, which sets out the amount of housing that should be provided in particular areas, and the objectives of the Plan. 
5.2 The East Riding Community Plan (2016-21) identifies the delivery of affordable housing as a key challenge. Many people wish to stay in their local community but cannot afford to do so, this could be assisted through an increase in the range of housing suitable for an ageing population and housing for first time buyers.
5.3 There is also a need to increase housing options for a range of other vulnerable groups in the East Riding, including consideration of the provision of new and refurbished gypsy and traveller sites. These priorities are set out in the Housing Strategy (2017) , which identifies the Local Plan as an important tool in delivering four key objectives:
 
 Increasing housing supply;
  Helping people find and keep homes they can afford; 
  Ensuring safe secure good quality homes; and
 Providing housing which is appropriate for people’s needs. 
Creating a mix of housing
5.4 National planning policy expects local planning authorities to provide a wide choice of homes, widen opportunities for home ownership and create sustainable and mixed communities. This will be achieved by ensuring the delivery of housing that meets the requirements of the community both now and in the future. The creation of sustainable, mixed communities can be supported through the provision of a range and mix of housing types, sizes and tenure,  which meet the needs and demands of the community.
5.5 The need for different house sizes, types, and tenures should be reflected within local plans. The Council has produced a Local Housing Need Assessment (LHNA) (2022), which considers the characteristics of the housing markets within the East Riding, how they work now and potential changes in the future. The LHNA (2022) identifies what types of homes will be needed in the future. It has identified:
 
 A need for smaller dwellings for single people and couples without dependent children;
  A need for smaller one- and two-bedroom affordable dwellings; 
  A need to continue to support the delivery of a diverse range of affordable housing products available to local  
 residents to reflect identified need; 
  A need for a variety of dwellings to meet the needs of older people, including general market housing and  
 specialist housing; and 
  A need for dwellings built to accessible and adaptable standards. 
5.6 Taking account of future changes to population and household structure, the LHNA (2022) identifies that most dwellings needed in the future will be two- and three-bedroom properties. This remains the case for affordable housing albeit there is a higher need for one bedroom social/affordable rented properties in some locations. Various 
78
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateAnnual Monitoring Reports for the Local Plan have shown that the delivery of smaller properties has been well 
below the identified need, with significant levels of larger properties being built. 
5.7 A key demographic change is the increasing number and proportion of older people. Population projections show that those aged 55-74 represent the largest proportion of the population across the plan period. The greatest rate of population change is in the over 75 age group. Therefore, a key strategic challenge for the Council is to provide for the housing needs of an ageing population.
5.8 Vulnerable and older people have a range of individual housing needs. The Older People’s Housing Strategy (2019-2024) highlights the importance of providing housing for older people, which meets their changing needs and aspirations. Whilst care and support can be provided to people in their existing homes, in some cases it may be more appropriate for people to move to other types of housing, for example to a smaller property, bungalow or specialist accommodation where care and support is available on-site. The different types of specialist accommodation are set out in Table 7.
5.9 Although there may be an identified need for specialist accommodation, many older people will prefer to stay put or move to more suitable general market housing rather than move to age restricted specialist accommodation. This is acknowledged within national planning policy and the Older People’s Housing Strategy (2019-2024), which recognises that the needs of older people can range from a simple requirement for visiting care and support, through to accessible, adaptable general needs housing, retirement housing options and care homes for those with support or care needs. Therefore, it is necessary to provide for a range of housing for older people and other vulnerable groups, both in the general housing mix and through the provision of specialist accommodation.
79 A Healthy and Balanced Housing MarketPolicy H1: Providing a mix of housing and meeting needs
A. New residential development should contribute to the overall mix of housing in the locality by providing a 
range of house types and sizes, responding to the needs identified in the Local Housing Need Assessment. Development should, in particular, consider:
1. The needs of older people, including the provision of accessible and adaptable housing and specialist 
accommodation which may include bungalows; 
2. The needs of first time buyers;
3. Existing housing stock, as set out in the Annual Monitoring Report; and 
4. Current demand.
 It is expected that new development will improve the housing mix in settlements to better reflect the needs set out in the latest Local Housing Need Assessment unless an alternative mix can be justified.
B. A minimum of 5 per cent of new market plots on sites providing 20 or more dwellings should be made available as self or custom build plots, where appropriate, unless this requirement would have an unacceptable impact on the economic viability of the proposed scheme. 
C. All new build dwellings should be built to the nationally described space standards. New dwellings created through a change of use or conversion should meet the nationally described space standards where possible. 
D. A minimum of 30 per cent of new market dwellings and all affordable dwellings should be built to building regulation M4 (2) – ‘Category 2 – accessible and adaptable dwellings’ (and any subsequent updates), unless it can be demonstrated that this would have an unacceptable impact on the economic viability of the proposed scheme or this not practical due to site specific circumstances. 
E. The Allocations Document Update makes specific provision for specialist housing. Additional proposals for specialist housing, as set out in Table 7, will be supported where they: 
1. Are within or well related to the development limits of a Major Haltemprice Settlement, Principal 
Town, Town, Rural Service Centre, or Primary Village; and
2. Meet an identified local need for the type and scale of development proposed, including a level of care proposed, reflecting the latest Local Housing Need Assessment.
3. Are of a scale and design that is appropriate to the role, character and appearance of the settlement.
Housing mix
5.10 In establishing an appropriate housing mix, it will be necessary to consider the housing needs in the locality. It is expected that new development will improve the housing mix in settlements to better reflect the needs set out in the latest Local Housing Need Assessment unless an alternative mix can be justified. Information contained in the Council’s Annual Monitoring Report and Planning Guidance Note on Housing Mix should be used to ensure the mix addresses local over and under provision of different sizes of dwelling. For larger sites the existing housing stock within the housing market sub area should be considered. For smaller sites existing stock should be considered at a parish level. 
5.11 Where applicants propose a mix of housing that does not respond to identified needs, they will be expected to 
80
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Updateprovide robust evidence relating to the identified level of housing need, current demand, and existing housing stock. 
In some cases there may be site specific considerations that could affect housing mix and justify a deviation from the LHNA. Relevant considerations affecting housing mix could include design considerations (e.g. character and density) and site specific constraints (e.g. trees, ground levels and gradients). 
5.12 Where a mix of different house sizes and types is provided on site, the development should be designed to avoid excessive concentrations of the same size or type of house within any part of the site.
5.13 To enable opportunities for home ownership, the needs of first time buyers should be considered when determining the mix of housing. Housing that is more affordable, including low cost home ownership products, can help to meet such needs. The use of products/ initiatives to make housing more affordable, particularly for first time buyers, will be supported. Housing must meet the definition of affordable housing in the National Planning Policy Framework in order to contribute towards the affordable housing requirement set out in Policy S5. 
5.14 The need for affordable homes of different sizes will vary by local area. In considering the mix of affordable homes the LHNA should form a starting point, together with the latest information on the housing register and housing need and demand information at a parish level. On larger development schemes, a wider range of affordable house types will be needed, including one and four bed properties. Affordable housing mix should be discussed with the Housing Strategy and Development Team as part of pre-application discussions prior to the submission of a  planning application. 
5.15 Where housing for older people is provided as part of the housing mix, the type, amount, and tenure of accommodation should take into account the latest Older People’s Housing Strategy and LHNA. Proposals that include housing suitable for older people should consider including smaller, more suitable and adaptable housing to encourage those who are under occupying larger family housing to move before they need care or support. The provision of accessible and adaptable homes as part of the overall mix of houses on a development site will help meet the needs of older people, particularly where these are provided as one- or two-bedroom houses or bungalows, aimed to attract ‘early retired’ or older people. 
5.16 Policy ENV1 supports development where it achieves a high quality of place, including design that meets the needs of potential users. Inclusive design can help older and disabled people live more independently and reduce health and social care costs. Bungalows can be designed so that they provide an efficient footprint, for example ‘courtyard’ bungalows, planned back-to-back and side-to-side, creating sheltered and social spaces between each property. 
Self-build and Custom Housing
5.17 Self-build and custom housing is where an individual, an association of individuals or persons working with them, build homes to be occupied by those individuals. The initial owners of the home will have the primary input into the design and layout of their house.
5.18 Self and custom build housing will be supported as part of a wider development site and will contribute to the overall mix of housing provided under Policy H1. Five percent of the plots on sites of 20 or more homes will be expected to be made available for self or custom build, to meet local needs and provide choice in the market.  These plots form part of the market dwellings available on site, and the 5 per cent should be calculated on the number of market plots available. This provision would not be required for schemes wholly comprising flats/apartments or specialist accommodation. These plots should be marketed for a minimum of 12 months as self or custom build plots, after which, and in agreement with the Council, they can be built out by the developer if not sold. It will be expected that a planning permission sets design parameters for self and custom build plots in order to achieve a cohesive development, and that a condition is imposed to ensure self and custom build plots are completed within three years of purchase to ensure developments are completed comprehensively. Smaller individual plots for self-build within development limits will be supported where the proposal does not conflict with other policies. Self-build and custom housing can also be delivered through exception sites under Policy H2. 
5.19 The Housing Strategy and Development Team should be consulted on developments that involve self-build and  custom housebuilding. They can provide the latest data in relation to the number of people on the register and  guidance on such matters. Further guidance can also be found in the Planning Guidance Note on Self-build and  Custom Housebuilding. 
81 A Healthy and Balanced Housing MarketNationally Described Space Standards
5.20 National planning policy allows for nationally described space standards (NDSS) to be used in policy where the need 
for an internal space standard can be justified. 
5.21 The NDSS deals with the internal space within new dwellings and seeks to ensure that they provide a reasonable level of internal space to undertake typical day-to-day activities at a given level of occupancy. The standard reflects what the Government considers to be the minimum space required to allow for modern living and, as such, represent a clear and consistent benchmark for developers. 
5.22 The standards may not be practical for some conversions or changes of use where space is restricted by the existing structure. In this instance applicants should demonstrate that they have tried to achieve the standards where possible and provide a good level of amenity for occupiers. 
5.23 These standards can be applied in the East Riding as evidence demonstrates they would address an identified need.  The impact of setting these standards has been considered as part of the Local Plan Viability Study (2022).
Accessible and adaptable housing 
5.24 The National Design Guide (2019) promotes well-designed homes, which provide internal environments and associated external spaces supporting the health and well-being of their users. Houses should be adequate in size, fit for purpose and adaptable to the changing needs of their occupants over time. Accessible and adaptable housing can be made available to people of any age but may be especially suitable for older people or those with a disability, and plays an important role in helping to meet the needs of older people. Providing housing for an increasingly ageing population is likely to involve the provision of accessible and adaptable housing enabling older people to live in their homes for longer, despite changing health needs. 
5.5 National planning policy introduces optional technical standards for accessible and adaptable housing in the form of building regulation M4(2) – ‘Category 2 – accessible and adaptable dwellings’ and M4(3) – ‘wheelchair user dwellings’. These standards can be applied in the East Riding as evidence demonstrates they would address an identified need.  The impact of setting these standards has been considered as part of the Local Plan Viability Study (2022).
5.26 It is acknowledged that it might not be viable for all housing across the East Riding to meet the higher M4(3) accessibility standard. The LHNA (2022) recommends 0.6 per cent of new dwellings are wheelchair accessible (7 houses a year). National Planning Practice Guidance directs local authorities to apply policies for wheelchair accessible homes only to those dwellings where they are responsible for allocating or nominating a person to live in that dwelling. The identified need for M4(3) will therefore be dealt with on a case-by-case basis where a specific need is identified. 
5.27 Developments should aim to have at least 30 per cent of market dwellings meeting the M4(2) requirements and all affordable housing unless it can be demonstrated that this would not be viable. The LHNA supports these requirements, noting that older and disabled people are more likely to be housed in affordable housing. Challenges to the delivery of this requirement on viability grounds will require an assessment to be submitted with the planning application which should make reference to the Council’s Local Plan Viability Study (2022). The Council will consider particular site-specific circumstances that make M4(2) unachievable on a case-by-case basis, such as with steeply  sloping ground. 
5.28 The design of house types that are suitable for older people or those with a disability should also consider whether wheelchair access and level access housing would be appropriate. The NDSS and accessible and adaptable standards will not be given weight in decision making before the revised Local Plan is fully adopted to allow time for the higher standards to be reflected in local land values.
82
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateSpecialist accommodation
5.29 Whilst many older people may prefer to stay in their own homes or move to suitable adaptable and accessible 
market housing in some cases specialist accommodation will be more appropriate. Most of the specialist accommodation need in the East Riding is for older people. Table 7 describes the types of specialist accommodation that would be suitable for older people. However, proposals may also come forward for specialist accommodation for other vulnerable people in the community where there is an identified need, such as supported housing for vulnerable young people or people with learning disabilities. 
5.30 The policy supports the delivery of specialist accommodation and residential care for people aged 75 or over. ‘Specialist accommodation’ includes sheltered housing and extra care housing defined at Table 7. The LHNA (2022) identifies a significant need for 122 units per annum of specialist accommodation for older people and 113 registered care-bed spaces per annum. 
5.31 The Allocations Document Update makes provision for specialist housing and residential care as part of the mix on larger sites. However, it is not possible for these needs to be met through the allocation of sites alone. Proposals for specialist and residential care accommodation will therefore be supported where the development is well related to the development limits of a settlement and of a scale and design that is appropriate to the role, character and appearance of the settlement. The need for access to public transport and local services should be considered.  The type and scale of development proposed, including the level of care, should also meet an identified local need. The Council’s Housing Strategy and Development Team will be able to advise applicants on the type and tenure of new specialist accommodation that should be considered. 
5.32 Specialist housing can fall under use class C2 (residential institutions) or use class C3 (dwelling houses). National Planning Practice Guidance states that it is for the Council to consider which use class a particular specialist housing development may fall within. The nature and type of service and accommodation in a scheme will determine the use class and also whether or not the development needs to provide affordable housing in line with Policy H2. Where a specialist housing proposal is classed as C3 it will be required to provide affordable housing in line with Policy H2, unless it can be demonstrated that this would impact the viability of the development. 
5.33 The Council will determine use class on a case-by-case basis, depending on the individual circumstances of each application. The level of care and support services proposed together with consideration of whether the units are self-contained accommodation and the level of communal provision within a development are key factors in determining whether a development falls within class C3 (dwellings) or C2 (residential institutions). Extra care housing in particular can take a variety of forms, which can influence whether it is classified as C2 or C3. The following factors will be considered by the Council when differentiating between class C2 and C3: 
 
 Whether the occupant lives in a self-contained unit (C3) provided through a legal agreement to occupy, or in an  
 en-suite room (C2) provided through a licence or other type of agreement; 
  Whether care is provided as a condition of residency, and the level of care (lower-level care and support,  
 residential care or nursing care); and 
  What level of care is provided across the development as a whole. 
83 A Healthy and Balanced Housing MarketTable 7: Description of types of specialist accommodation suitable for older people
Older People’s 
Specialist AccommodationDescription
Retirement living / sheltered housingThis usually consists of purpose-built flats or bungalows with limited communal facilities such as a lounge, laundry and guest room. It does not provide care services based on-site but provides some support to enable residents to live independently. This can include 24-hour on-site assistance (alarm) and a resident or visiting warden or house manager.
Extra care housing or housing-with-careThis usually consists of purpose-built or adapted flats or bungalows which aim to meet a wide range of care needs including a medium to high level of care available if required, through an on-site care agency registered through the Care Quality Commission (CQC). It is not a residential care home provision and occupants must be able to live independently with 24-hour access to support services and staff. Meals are also provided within a shared dining area or café. There are often extensive communal areas, which may include spaces to socialise or a wellbeing centre. In some cases, these developments are known as retirement communities/ villages or community wellbeing schemes – the intention is for residents to live independently with the benefit of access to varying levels of care over time.
Residential care homes and nursing homesThis type of accommodation is classed as a residential institution under the Use  Classes Order. It includes both residential care and nursing homes and specialist/ dementia facilities.
5.34 There is a significant amount of variability in the types of specialist housing for older people. The list above provides 
an indication of the different types of housing available but is not definitive. Any single development may contain a range of different types of specialist housing. 
5.35 The Council is also supportive of the provision of age restricted general market housing as part of housing mix on allocated sites or sites within development limits. This type of housing is generally for people aged 55 and over and the active elderly. It may include some shared amenities such as communal gardens but does not include support  or care services provided by the operator of the accommodation or a third party on the operator’s behalf.  Age-restricted general market housing is not considered a specialist type of accommodation that would meet the requirements set out in part E of this policy or allocation policies, as these have been designed to meet specific care requirements set out in the LHNA (2022). The Council considers the need for age-restricted general market housing can be met through the existing market.
5.36 In line with the national Planning Practice Guidance housing for older people will contribute towards the provision of dwellings identified in Policy S5. For residential institutions, national planning policy guidance directs local authorities to calculate the amount of accommodation released in the house market, using the average number of adults living in households set out in census data. Using this information it can be established that 140 bed units, as identified in the LHNA, equates to 78 dwelling equivalents, applying a ratio of 1:1.8.
Providing Affordable Housing
5.37 The National Planning Policy Framework defines affordable housing as ‘housing for sale or rent, for those whose needs are not met by the market (including housing that provides a subsidised route to home ownership and/or is for essential local workers)’. This includes provision for the home to remain at an affordable price for future eligible households or for any subsidy to be recycled to alternative affordable housing provision. 
84
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update5.38 As affordable housing is let or sold at less than market prices, a 
subsidy, which can either be from a public or private source, is needed to ensure that it is affordable. In the East Riding, public subsidy may be provided through local authority borrowing, capital funds and grant provided by Homes England. Private subsidy is provided by private developers through the delivery of affordable housing on sites that are granted planning permission for market housing. These properties will generally be sold on to a ‘registered provider’, for example, a housing association, at a discounted price. 
5.39 Affordable housing can also be provided as part of community-led housing projects, which seek to provide affordable homes specifically for local people who wish to remain living in the area. Community-led housing will be supported in line with the exception sites’ policies and would include a condition to ensure that the dwellings remain for local people in perpetuity.
5.40 The Local Housing Need Assessment (LHNA) (2022) considers what is genuinely affordable housing in an East Riding context and identifies a significant need to provide additional affordable units over the plan period. Need refers to households who lack their own housing or live in unsuitable housing and cannot afford to meet their needs in the market. It is not possible for the affordable housing need in the East Riding to be met by the planning system alone. However, the significant level of affordable housing need demonstrates that it is essential to achieve, by working and negotiating with house builders, the maximum number of affordable dwellings reasonably practicable from each development site.
Policy H2: Providing Affordable Housing
A. Affordable housing will be required as part of housing developments, including where it would form part of a wider site or allocation in line with national thresholds.
B. Development that the thresholds in Part A should:
1. Achieve the level of affordable housing provision (Table 8) for the appropriate affordable housing 
area (Figure 7), unless it can be demonstrated that this would have an unacceptable impact on the economic viability of the proposed scheme; 
2. Provide 25 per cent of the affordable housing units as First Homes with the remainder meeting identified needs recommended in the latest Housing Needs Assessment; and
3. Provide affordable housing on-site unless it can be robustly demonstrated that an off-site contribution would be more appropriate. 
 Where affordable housing is accepted below the requirements of Policy H2, the Council will consider using review mechanisms to reassess viability over the lifetime of a development project.
C. Rural exception sites for affordable housing will be supported where they:
1. Are well related to the development limits of a Major Haltemprice Settlement, Principal Town, 
Town, Rural Service Centre or Primary Village; or
2. Are within or well related to the development limits of a Village; and
3. Are of a scale and design that is appropriate to the role, character and appearance of the settlement; and
85 A Healthy and Balanced Housing Market4. Provide for 100 per cent affordable housing. If it is demonstrated that this is not achievable, market 
housing units will be allowed if they support the delivery of at least 80 per cent of the units as affordable housing; and 
5. Meet an identified need for the type and scale of development proposed. 
D. First Homes exception sites for affordable housing will be supported where they satisfy criteria 1-4 set out in part C of Policy H2. Where other affordable tenures are proposed on a First Homes exception site applicants are expected to provide evidence of an identified need for the mix proposed. 
E. The tenure split, size and type of affordable housing will be informed by the latest Local Housing Need Assessment, Local Plan Viability Study, the housing register, housing surveys and the level and type of existing affordable housing in the locality.
F. Where affordable housing is provided as part of a mixed tenure site it should be integrated into the development in terms of its design and layout.
5.41 The proportion of affordable housing to be provided on housing sites is shown in Figure 7 and Table 8. This recognises that need and market conditions vary in different areas, and that the percentage of affordable housing likewise will vary based on evidence set out in the Local Plan Viability Study (2022). Developers may also choose to offer more affordable housing than is required by the policy. 
5.42 Twenty-five percent of all affordable housing units secured through developer contributions should be provided as First Homes with 75per cent remaining for other tenures. This split has been tested through the Local Plan Viability Study Update (2022). First Homes are a new and specific kind of discounted market sale product which meet the definition of affordable housing for planning purposes. First Homes are designed to allow people to get on the housing ladder in their local area and must be discounted by 30per cent against market value. National eligibility criteria, setting out who can purchase a first home is set out in national Planning Practice Guidance. 
5.43 The remaining 75per cent will be determined using the tenure split set out in the Local Housing Need Assessment (2022). Most of the need across the East Riding is for social/affordable rented housing. The Council’s Housing Strategy and Development Team can advise on the tenure split, size and type of affordable housing required on a site-by-site basis, based on the available evidence. Applicants should continue to seek early advice on the affordable housing requirements from the Housing Strategy and Development Team, prior to submission of a planning application. Further guidance is provided in the Affordable Housing Supplementary Planning Document. 
86
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateFigure 7: Affordable Housing Areas
Table 8: Affordable housing provision
Affordable housing area Greenfield Sites Brownfield Sites
North West and Wolds 20 per cent 15 per cent 
Wider Driffield 10 per cent 10 per cent 
M62/A63 Corridor 15 per cent 10 per cent 
South West 10 per cent 10 per cent 
North East 10 per cent 10 per cent 
East 10 per cent 10 per cent 
87 A Healthy and Balanced Housing Market5.44 The proportion of affordable housing to be provided in each area is split between greenfield and brownfield sites. 
Brownfield sites are those where the land has been previously developed. Where a site contains greenfield and brownfield land the affordable housing provision should be applied proportionally.
5.45 Affordable housing should be provided where a proposal results in a net increase of dwellings in line with national policy, currently 10 housing units or more, or the site area is 0.5 hectares (ha) or more. These thresholds should be applied to all housing developments, including conversions, change of use, and new build.
5.456 Planning applications for sites that fall under the threshold, but form part of a wider allocation or site that would be above the threshold, will also be required to provide affordable housing. For example, where the site is the first phase of the development, a proportionate provision of affordable housing will be sought. 
5.47 In the event that providing the required proportion of affordable housing would make a development unviable (i.e. the cost of bringing forward the development is more than the value generated by the development) the developer should enter into negotiations with the Council to agree what percentage of affordable housing can be provided and if a change to the proposed tenure of the affordable housing provision would make the scheme more viable. will vary based on evidence set out in the Local Plan Viability Study (2022). Challenges to the affordable housing requirement will require a viability assessment to be submitted with the planning application, which should make reference to the Council’s Local Plan Viability Study (2022). Viability assessments should be carried out in accordance with the Financial viability in planning: conduct and reporting RICS professional statement, England (1st Edition, May 2019). National planning policy and guidance confirms all viability assessments should be made publicly available other than in exceptional circumstances and should be prepared on this basis. The Affordable Housing Supplementary Planning Document provides further guidance on the information the Council expects developers to submit in support of any claim for a reduction in the affordable housing requirement. 
5.48 Where it is robustly justified, an off-site affordable housing contribution, which allows the applicant to develop or purchase appropriate market housing for use as affordable housing, or a financial contribution towards affordable housing, will be acceptable. 
5.49 Where affordable housing is accepted below the requirements of Policy H2, the Council will consider using review mechanisms to reassess viability over the lifetime of a development project. This will allow affordable housing contributions to be increased in the future should higher levels become achievable. This could also include reappraising viability on subsequent phases of large schemes. 
5.50 The delivery of this policy will be monitored annually. If updated evidence suggests that the level of affordable housing is not going to be achieved, or it becomes apparent that the provision of affordable housing could be increased, the percentage requirements may be amended through a future review of the Plan.
5.51 It is expected that affordable housing will be provided on-site, to create mixed and balanced communities, which should be distributed as individual houses or in small clusters throughout the development, typically four to eight units. In larger schemes, where more than one hundred dwellings are proposed, slightly larger clusters of up to twelve units may be appropriate, dependent on their design and location within the wider development site. Larger clusters must still provide an appropriate housing mix within the cluster in line with Policy H1. The Council will not support the principle of grouping affordable units together in larger numbers, as this can reinforce feelings of social exclusion and have a negative impact on the establishment of sustainable communities.
5.52 Affordable housing should be of high-quality design in line with Policy ENV1, be in keeping with housing on the rest of the site and be fully integrated into the wider development site. The National Design Guide (2019) promotes well-integrated ‘tenure neutral’ developments where no group of residents is disadvantaged as a result of the tenure of their homes. There should be no segregation or difference in quality between tenures. Affordable housing should not, for example, be located at the end of a cul-de-sac. 
5.53 Proposals should, through the layout and design of new development, consider the needs of users and how these needs would change for individuals and families through the different stages of their life. This includes building affordable housing to the nationally described space standard and 30 per cent of dwellings meeting building regulation M4 (2) – ‘Category 2 – accessible and adaptable dwellings’, as required by Policy H1. The Council expects, where achievable, a one-bedroom property to provide two bedspaces, a two-bedroom property to provide four bedspaces (unless this is a bungalow, where three bedspaces is acceptable), a three-bedroom property to provide 
88
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Updatefive bedspaces and a four-bedroom property to provide a minimum of six bedspaces in line with sizes set out in the 
nationally described space standards. 
5.54 Developers are encouraged to involve the Council’s Housing Strategy Team and a registered provider at an early stage in the design and layout of any scheme involving affordable housing, to ensure that their requirements can be met. It is important to involve the Housing Strategy Team from an early stage to ensure that the right type and size of properties are provided in the right locations and that the proposals would be appropriate for transfer. For example, a registered provider may not be able to take on a property situated in part of a site that would incur a service charge. Developers should refer to any Neighbourhood Plan that may have been prepared for the area. For further information please refer to the Affordable Housing Supplementary Planning Document .
5.55 Special consideration will be given to supporting proposals that provide affordable homes for local people. Exceptions sites are small sites brought forward outside the Local Plan to deliver affordable housing. National planning policy currently defines these as rural exception sites and entry-level exceptions sites. 
5.56 Exception sites for affordable housing will be supported in the countryside where they are well related to the development limits of a Major Haltemprice Settlement, Principal Town, Town, Rural Service Centre, Primary Village, or within or well related to the development limits of a Village. Development in such places can provide future occupants with opportunities to access transport, employment opportunities and other services and facilities. In the more rural parts of the East Riding (for example, Rural Service Centres, Primary Villages and Villages) sites for affordable housing may be larger than would normally be considered appropriate. In these instances the scale and design of development should consider the role and character of the settlement and ensure development does not undermine the Spatial Strategy.
5.57 Affordable housing on rural exception sites should be available for local residents or those who have local family or employment connections and located where there is an identified need for affordable housing within the parish or adjacent parishes. Appropriate evidence of local need can be demonstrated through a local housing needs survey. The Council takes a proactive approach to identifying suitable locations for exceptions sites. This includes working in collaboration with local communities, parish councils and other relevant groups. 
5.58 First Homes are a new and specific kind of discounted market sale product, which meet the definition of affordable housing for planning purposes. First Homes are designed to allow people to get on the housing ladder in their local area and must be discounted by 30 per cent against market value. National eligibility criteria, setting out who can purchase a First Home is set out in national Planning Practice Guidance. 
5.59 First Home exception sites must be proportionate in size to existing settlements. This means sites should be no larger than one hectare or exceed 5 per cent of the size of the existing settlement. The Council’s Annual Monitoring Report provides the most recent data on the size of existing settlements. First Home exception sites must also have regard to the character of the area. 
5.60 All exception sites should provide 100 per cent affordable housing. Where this is not possible applicants should obtain advice from the Housing Strategy and Development Team to discuss whether alternative approaches to securing site viability could be pursued. Market housing units will be allowed if they facilitate the provision of affordable housing. In these instances, a high proportion of affordable housing (at least 80 per cent) will be required. 
5.61 Applications for exception sites that include an element of market housing, will be expected to provide evidence of how the site is unviable without such housing being included. For example, in situations where the development faces significant and unexpected delivery costs. A robust, independently prepared, and audited viability assessment of the proposed development should be prepared on an open book basis. This is needed for the Council to assess whether the market element of the proposal is justified. The extent of the funding gap to be bridged, in order for the proposal to be viable, must be clearly set out. This must include the income from cross-subsidy generated through open market sales, which will assist in creating the additional scheme revenue and can fund the affordable housing on the site without requiring additional public subsidy.
5.62 Where local evidence suggests that a significant local need exists for one or more other forms of affordable housing on a proposed First Homes exception site, applicants may alter the proportions of affordable housing to include small quantities of other affordable housing products. Applicants will be expected to provide evidence of this need in the form of a housing needs assessment, local authority Housing Register, or other sufficiently rigorous local evidence.
89 A Healthy and Balanced Housing Market5.63 When considering the tenure, size and type of affordable housing, applicants should consider the need in the sub 
area and settlement. National planning policy considers that 10 per cent of homes on major developments should be made available for affordable home ownership unless this would significantly prejudice the ability to meet the identified affordable housing of specific groups. This level of low cost home ownership exceeds the requirement for intermediate housing identified through the Council’s LHNA (2022). Whilst affordable home ownership is supported by the Council, providing such a high level would restrict the delivery of other tenures and fail to meet locally identified needs. It is therefore considered that the application of national planning policy would significantly prejudice the Council’s ability to meet the needs of specific groups, and in particular those requiring affordable rented accommodation.
5.64 Additional information on the mix of affordable housing can be found in the LHNA (2022) and the Planning Guidance Note on Housing Mix. Prior to submitting a planning application advice should be obtained from the Housing Strategy and Development Team. This could include evidence of need identified through the housing register, and confirmation of current levels of affordable housing provision.
Providing for the needs of gypsies and travellers
5.65 The National Planning Policy for Traveller Sites requires local planning authorities to set pitch targets for gypsies and travellers and plot targets for travelling showpeople, which address the likely permanent and transit accommodation needs of travellers. It requires authorities to identify and update annually a supply of specific deliverable sites sufficient to provide five years’ worth of sites against the target, as well as identify a supply of specific, developable sites or broad locations for growth for years six to ten and, where possible, years 11-15.
5.66 The assessment of need in the East Riding has been undertaken through the preparation of the East Riding Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment (2018) (GTAA). The GTAA covers the period 2018 to 2032 and takes into account the 2015 revised national planning definition of ‘gypsies and travellers’ and ‘travelling showpeople’. The revised definition does not include those who have ceased to travel permanently. The needs of settled households who do not meet the revised definition are assessed through the Local Housing Need Assessment. The GTAA was prepared in consultation with households living on pitches to provide updated information on occupancy and needs. 
5.67 The GTAA identifies the need for one pitch up to 2022 and an additional pitch for the period 2023 to 2032.  No additional plots for travelling showpeople are identified. The assessment indicates that need arising for traveller accommodation will be met through current and projected vacant pitches and there is no longer a need to allocate specific sites for new gypsy and traveller pitch provision. There are currently three authorised traveller sites in the area, with a total of 66 pitches available on them. The supply position will be reviewed and updated annually in the Annual Monitoring Report.
90
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdatePolicy H3: Providing for the needs of gypsies and travellers
A. Proposals for new gypsy and traveller sites or extensions to existing sites will be considered against the 
most up-to-date needs assessment and should be:
1. Of an appropriate scale to the location; 
2. Of a high quality layout and design incorporating appropriate landscaping and boundary treatments;
3. Located where there is access to shops, schools, health and other community facilities by public 
transport, walking or cycling;
4. Of an adequate size to be able to provide for the number of pitches proposed with acceptable living conditions, access roads, amenity blocks, children’s play areas, and space for commercial vehicles;
5. Capable of being provided with adequate on-site services and facilities including water supply, drainage, power, sewerage (preferably mains) and waste disposal, appropriate vehicular access, and parking; and
6. Located in Flood Zone 1 wherever possible, before considering sites in Flood Zone 2. 
B. Proposals for new facilities on existing gypsy and traveller sites will be supported where they enable the continued provision of suitable accommodation from which travellers can access education, health, welfare, and employment infrastructure.
5.68 Proposals for new sites, including those identified in Neighbourhood Plans, and extensions to existing sites, will 
be considered against the findings of the latest GTAA, or evidence of need, which can be demonstrated through additional needs analysis. Anyone coming forward with a planning application for a new/ extended pitch or a site would need to demonstrate that the intended occupants meet the revised planning definition. Permissions for gypsy and traveller sites will be subject to conditions limiting their occupation to those who met the revised definition. 
5.69 In developing new sites, or expanding existing sites, consideration should be given to:
 
 Achieving a high quality design: any proposal should have regard to retaining the character of the site and wider  
 area and the amenity of existing and future residents in line with Policy ENV1. This includes incorporating  
 appropriate landscaping and boundary treatments; 
  Providing the correct size and layout: site size should take into account the number of pitches and needs of  
 resident families. The boundaries of the site, individual pitches and communal areas must be clearly defined  
 and in keeping with the surrounding area. In rural areas, the site boundary will require adequate soft landscaping  
 and screening. The site should also be laid out to provide adequate movement of caravans, access for emergency  
 vehicles and other service vehicles, such as waste lorries;
  Meeting health and safety requirements: sites must have appropriate drainage facilities and should not be located  
 on contaminated land, or near to inappropriate uses; and
  Convenience of residents: pitches should be orientated to provide privacy for residents, as well as provide a sense  
 of community and security. This will include the provision of adequate car parking per pitch and communal spaces  
 within the site. Each pitch should be adequately serviced by water and electricity, alongside lighting within the site.  
 If the site is remote from local facilities, a children’s play area and a communal building should be provided.
5.70 With regards to flood risk, it will also be necessary for proposals to consider the sequential test set out in Policy ENV6, which seeks to ensure development is directed to areas of lowest risk. This recognises that caravans and mobile homes are considered to be a highly vulnerable use and should not be permitted in Flood Zone. Proposals 
91 A Healthy and Balanced Housing Marketwithin a Source Protection Zone (shown at Figure 14) should manage the risk of groundwater pollution in 
accordance with Policy ENV6. 
5.71 An update of the East Riding Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment (2018) is underway. This will include a review of land for transiting travellers. Should the process of preparing the updated GTAA suggest a need to allocate specific sites for new gypsy and traveller pitch provision then an immediate review of the East Riding Local Plan would be taken to address this need. 
Making the most efficient use of land
5.72 National planning policy states that local planning authorities should encourage the effective use of land by reusing land that has been previously developed. Building on previously developed land (PDL) can help to revitalise urban areas by bringing derelict land at the heart of communities back into use. In the rural parts of the East Riding, it can also help to improve the character and appearance of villages. The Housing Land Supply Position Statement (HLSPS) (2022)  shows that there is a relatively 
limited supply of PDL in the East Riding, which is largely due to the rural nature of the authority. Despite this, monitoring has identified that a significant proportion of new housing development in the East Riding has been successfully provided on PDL. The Council maintains a schedule of PDL sites that are suitable for housing known as a Brownfield Register . This includes sites where 
the Council has granted ‘permission in principle’ for housing development. This is a new form of planning permission that seeks to agree the use and scale of housing proposed. Sites on the Brownfield Register will be reviewed through the preparation of the HLSPS. 
5.73 An approach that allows the housing density on new sites to be varied can also help to support the efficient use of land. Higher densities can be achieved in many instances, particularly on sites that are close to services and infrastructure, which enables a higher number of people to live near services and reduces the need to travel by private car. Equally, lower density housing developments in certain areas may also be appropriate, as this can help to maintain the built character of the area and support the provision of certain house types in locations where they are needed.
Policy H4: Making the most efficient use of land
A. Proposals for new residential development will be supported where they make the most effective use of land or buildings. This will be achieved through encouraging the re-use of suitable previously developed land and supporting proposals that provide the optimum housing density.
B. Proposals should seek to provide a density appropriate for the local area taking into consideration: 
1. Proximity to a Town or District Centre; 
2. Proximity to a railway station or core bus route within the Major Haltemprice Settlements, 
Principal Towns or Towns;
3. The character of the surrounding area; and 
4. The identified need for different types of housing.
92
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateC. Development proposals that relate to only part of a larger allocated site will need to demonstrate how 
the development would form part of a comprehensive scheme for the whole site and that this will not prejudice the development of the whole site. Appropriate conditions and legal agreements will be used where it is necessary to ensure that the full range of infrastructure is provided for. 
D. Where a site shares a boundary with an undeveloped site, access roads and utilities must be provided up to the boundary edge of sites where there is the potential for future development.
5.74 Proposals will be expected to be designed to make the most effective use of land or buildings. This will be achieved 
through the re-use of vacant sites and the conversion of buildings where it does not compromise other policies within the Local Plan. For example, development on PDL may not be supported if the site is shown to have a high biodiversity value, or it is not consistent with the strategy for locating development set out in policies S3 and S4.
5.75 Housing density will be calculated on the net developable area of the site recognising that, in certain instances, not all the site area will be developed solely for housing. This approach is set out in the HLSPS and the net developable area excludes a number of land uses, such as: 
 
 Major distributor roads, significant landscape buffer strips, open space serving the wider surrounding area, or an  
 area necessary to make space for significant water storage;
  An existing on-site feature or wider constraint that limits the area that can be developed, such as the need to  
 maintain an important landscape or wildlife site; and
  Areas comprising non housing development, such as employment, commercial uses or community facilities (such as  
 a new school or health centre).
5.76 As a guide new housing development should seek to achieve a net density of at least 30 dwellings per hectare (dph). When determining the density of housing developments, proposals will be considered on a case-by-case basis, taking into account individual site constraints and opportunities. This could include the size of the site, existing landscape features, the identified need for different types of housing, the character of the surrounding area, settlement, or adjacent buildings. The need to achieve a high quality design, which optimises the potential of the site and contributes to a sense of place, is also an important consideration. The density of new housing development proposed within residential gardens should ensure that there is no adverse impact on the character and appearance of the area, or to the amenity of existing residents. This means that, in general, infill development may be limited to frontage development only, as backland development could have greater potential to adversely affect the character of the area and amenity of existing residents.
5.77 Sites are likely to be considered appropriate for higher density development where they are within close proximity of a Town or District Centre (identified in Policy S7) or a railway station, or bus stop along the core bus routes in the Haltemprice Settlements, Principal Towns or Towns (as identified in Figure 5). In applying this policy, close proximity is generally considered to be within 800m, which is considered to be an easy walking distance (being approximately 10 minutes walking time). There will also be other instances where higher density schemes will be appropriate, for example, as part of the redevelopment of a brownfield site, re-use of an existing building, or where it would reflect the nature / character of surrounding buildings. 
5.78 The East Riding is predominately rural in nature and there are likely to be occasions where a density below 30 dph would be appropriate. Lower density schemes might be acceptable where it is desirable to reflect the character of the surrounding area, particularly in an area that is characterised by predominantly low density development. This could be defined by loose knit development (in whole or in part) where the space between buildings is an important feature for the character of the area. Lower densities may also protect or enhance an entrance to a settlement, where this would help to create a transition from the rural character of the open countryside to a more urban environment.
5.79 The density of development may also vary where larger or smaller house types are required to meet the needs of the settlement. Policy H1 sets out that the mix of housing will be informed by the most up to date Local Housing Need Assessment . The design and access statement accompanying a planning application should set out the supporting evidence 
93 A Healthy and Balanced Housing Marketused to justify a density below 30 dph.  
The current demand for the house type(s) proposed 
and the existing housing stock may also be relevant considerations informing density, in line with Policy H2.
5.80 To ensure delivery and the most efficient use is made of an allocated site, it is important that where proposals come forward on part of a larger allocated site they do not compromise or prevent the development of the remainder of the site. The layout must be designed to allow for connections to the adjacent allocated land to meet the requirements set out in the Allocations Document Update. It is, therefore, necessary to require detailed development proposals to demonstrate that they will not prejudice the full and proper development of the allocation, including the provision of the necessary infrastructure to serve the whole site. This could involve the use of appropriate conditions and legal agreements, for example where it would be necessary to ensure that the full range of infrastructure is provided, that access roads are built and adopted to the boundary edge and utilities are provided to the boundary edge. This will ensure that the developer would not prejudice the remainder of a development site from coming forward.
5.81 Where a site shares a boundary with undeveloped or brownfield land, which may have the potential for future development, access roads and utilities must be provided to adoptable standards up to the boundary edge of site, so as not to limit or restrict future development options. This does not mean that such adjoining land will automatically be considered suitable for future development. However, if sites are to be considered suitable for development in the future, they must not be rendered inaccessible by the current development. This could also assist in ensuring permeability between developments and help to provide alternative access arrangements.
94
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update6. A Prosperous Economy
95 A Prosperous Economy6  A Prosperous Economy
6.1 This chapter proposes a number of policies aimed at ensuring a prosperous economy for the East Riding. It builds on 
the approach taken in the Spatial Strategy, which seeks to manage economic growth, ensuring that the Local Plan identifies sufficient land in the right locations to accommodate future investment.
6.2 The Community Plan and the Strategy Document Update vision and objectives, seek to create a strong and diverse economy in the East Riding. This is supported through Local Plan policies covering a range of economic issues including: the growth of key employment sectors; safeguarding Key Employment Sites; supporting rural diversification; tourism and the visitor economy; retail and town centre uses; accessibility and parking standards; growth of the energy sector; and protecting mineral resources.
Supporting the growth and diversification of the East Riding economy
6.3 The business base of the East Riding is diverse, with a wide range of economic activities taking place across the local authority area. The East Riding Economic Strategy (2018-22), Hull and East Yorkshire Local Enterprise Partnership, and national planning policy all recognise the benefits of certain types of businesses locating within proximity to each other, to support economic competitiveness (clusters). Such groups of businesses link together because they buy and sell from each other, or they use the same infrastructure, customers or skills base. The East Riding Economic Strategy (2018-22) highlights that the East Riding has specialisms in several sectors with the potential to grow, as well as opportunities to develop new specialisms. 
6.4 Government has published the Industrial Strategy: building a Britain fit for the future, a long-term plan that seeks to create an economy that boosts the productivity and earning power of people in the UK. The vision of the Industrial Strategy is based upon five foundations of productivity; ideas, people, infrastructure, business environment and places. A number of key aims and policies to help achieve the strategy vision include major investment in: research and development, maths, digital and technical education to improve the shortage of skills, vehicle charging infrastructure to support sustainable travel, ‘Sector Deals’ (Government and industry partnerships) to increase sector productivity and local industrial strategies to deliver economic opportunities.
6.5 The Humber Local Enterprise Partnership, now replaced by the Hull and East Yorkshire LEP on the north bank, had prepared a draft Humber Industrial Strategy to build upon the region’s industrial success and look at the new opportunities available across the area’s specialist sectors. It set out a number of key aims which continue to be priorities for the areas. These include: decarbonising the Humber by 2040; becoming a global leader in clean energy generation; investing in the Humber ports; and growing and improving engineering and manufacturing sectors. Supporting the growth and resilience of the sectors as set out in the East Riding Economic Strategy, UK Industrial Strategy and emerging Humber Industrial Strategy will be important in strengthening the area’s economic identity. 
6.6 A Humber Freeport has been identified, which covers the ports of Hull, Goole, Immingham and Grimsby. Freeports benefit from varies tax and customs rules. At a freeport, imports can enter with simplified customs documentation and without paying tariffs. Businesses operating inside designated areas in and around the port can manufacture goods using the imports and add value, before exporting again without ever facing the full tariffs or procedures. Within the freeport area, specific tax zones can be identified. At the time of writing, the tax zones for the Humber Freeport at Goole and Hull (including parts of East Riding) have not been confirmed in law. The potential Hull East Tax Zone incorporates parts of King George Dock (within Hull) and areas within the East Riding including parts of Salt End, Hedon Haven and the Yorkshire Energy Park. Hedon Haven and the Yorkshire Energy Park are identified as allocations in this Local Plan Update (HAV-A and HED-A respectively) and both sites benefit from planning permission supported by a range of evidence and studies to consider the impact of development.
6.7 The East Riding Rural Strategy (2016-20) highlights the significance of the rural economy to the East Riding, and its role in supporting the vitality of the area’s towns and villages. Its key priorities for the rural economy include 
96
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Updatesupporting the growth of rural businesses, and the Local Plan will be important in helping to achieve this. The 
agricultural sector is still relatively strong in the East Riding and farming is an important part of the rural economy. Farming enterprises are evolving in response to changing markets and regulatory requirements, and many are diversifying to supplement their income. A flexible approach to farm diversification is important to help support the sector, as well as mitigate the uncertainty of agricultural policy changes following the UK’s departure from the European Union.
6.8 In many parts of the East Riding, land used for commercial or industrial use, or undeveloped land allocated for employment uses, is subject to competition from higher-value development, most notably housing. Therefore, it is essential to set out a positive approach towards proposals for employment development and a presumption in favour of retaining sites that are most appropriate for employment uses, which will help to support the long-term growth of the East Riding economy. This also enables employment and housing to be provided close together, which will support vibrant and sustainable communities.
Policy EC1: Supporting the growth and diversification of the East Riding economy
A. To strengthen and encourage growth of the East Riding economy, employment development will be supported where the proposal is of a scale suitable to the location. Proposals will be encouraged where they:
1. Contribute to the modernisation, decarbonisation, development and diversification of the local 
economy, including remote working and co-working;
2. Develop and strengthen the East Riding’s key employment sectors and clusters including: renewable and low carbon energy; manufacturing and engineering (including chemicals); agriculture/food and drink; biorenewables; tourism; ports and logistics; transport equipment; digital and creative industries; finance and business services; construction; public administration, defence, health and education; and retail;
3. Contribute towards reducing social exclusion and provide employment opportunities in deprived areas;
4. Contribute to the improvement in the physical appearance of an existing or vacant employment site or premises; or
5. Support the vitality and viability of a Town or District Centre.
B. Key Employment Sites will be safeguarded from alternative uses.
C. There will be a presumption in favour of retaining all other employment land and premises. Proposals involving the loss of land or premises from employment use will be supported where:
1. There is no longer a need, or it is not viable, for that or any other employment use on the 
site, which has been demonstrated by an up-to-date employment land review or through a comprehensive marketing exercise;
2. The use of the site for employment purposes is not in conformity with adjoining land uses and could give rise to complaint; or
3. The development would make a significant contribution towards the wider regeneration of the locality and would support other planning priorities set out in the Plan.
D. Outside of development limits employment development will be supported where it is of an appropriate scale to its location, is accessible and respects the character of the surrounding landscape. Proposals should:
1. Be within or adjacent to an existing industrial estate or business park;
2. Involve the expansion of an existing business;
97 A Prosperous Economy3. Involve the conversion of an existing building; 
4. Involve the redevelopment of redundant agricultural buildings that are no longer viable for 
agricultural uses, where conversion is not practicable; or 
5. Have a functional need to be in the particular location which cannot be met on either a nearby allocation, or on a site which satisfies any of the above criteria.
E. Substantial proposals for employment development that cannot be accommodated on allocated sites will be supported where:
1. The site is identified as part of the Freeport tax zone and a comprehensive plan for its development is in place; or 
2. The development is for a specified end user where proven substantial employment benefits would 
arise and the identified site provides the most appropriate location for the proposal, with priority given to locations that are adjacent to existing employment sites and in locations well-related to the Major Haltemprice Settlements, Principal Towns or the East-West Multi-Modal Transport Corridor.
F. Farm diversification schemes will be encouraged providing they are of an appropriate scale to their location, respect the character of the surrounding landscape, re-use existing buildings where possible and any new buildings are well related to the built form and scale of the farm.
G. Employment allocations are set out in the Allocations Document Update or a Neighbourhood Plan.
6.9 This policy is primarily focused on employment development, which is defined as being for use classes: E(g) – offices, research and development and light industrial; B2 – general industrial; and B8 – storage or distribution. However, the policy should also be considered for other uses that may generate employment opportunities or support them through the provision of related infrastructure. Proposals will be supported where they help to strengthen the East Riding’s key employment growth sectors and clusters. These have been identified in the Economic Strategy, UK Industrial Strategy and through the area’s Local Enterprise Partnership. Proposals that provide, or improve, accommodation and facilities for businesses in these sectors will be supported in order to promote the growth and resilience of important business clusters in the East Riding.
6.10 The shape of modern work has evolved over recent years. Whilst some form of property remains necessary, the way workplaces look and behave has been undergoing substantial change. A range of factors has driven this trend. From the perspective of businesses, there has been a need to improve the cost effectiveness of their property portfolio, whilst also providing an environment that enables them to attract staff, collaborate and innovate. From the perspective of individuals, there has been a desire to work more flexibly and avoid the stresses of the daily commute. A significant part of this is the move towards increased remote working and co-working, however this will be dependent on sufficiently robust infrastructure being in place. Communications infrastructure (including fast broadband and reliable mobile connectivity), transport connections and the availability of co-working spaces are key.
6.11 The English Indices of Deprivation
19, which are compiled nationally, identify some parts of the East Riding as being 
amongst the most deprived areas in the country. Proposals will be supported where they would particularly benefit areas identified as being among the 20 per cent most deprived areas in the country, for example, by providing training or employment opportunities for local people. Applicants are encouraged to submit information alongside their application to explain how it would be ensured that the benefits of the proposal are felt by those experiencing social exclusion or deprivation. Specific local partnership strategies or plans have been prepared for specific towns or areas in the East Riding, and the extent to which the proposal contributes to the delivery of these could also be relevant.
6.12 Hedon Haven, Humber Bridgehead (Hessle), Melton and Junction 36 (M62) at Goole are of particular importance to the East Riding economy. These sites are identified as Key Employment Sites in Policy S3 and will be safeguarded from alternative forms of development. They are located along the East-West Multi-Modal Transport Corridor and have the potential to cater for significant inward investment and indigenous business growth. This makes them critically important to the competitive-ness and economic growth of the East Riding. 
19 www.gov.uk/government/statistics/english-indices-of-deprivation-2019 
98
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update6.13 The Employment Land Review (2020) recommends achieving a 
balance between sustaining growth of market towns, supporting localised regeneration of coastal communities, and directing investment to strategic locations along the Humber. It advises maintaining the Key Employment Sites, building on market demand to plan more employment land compared to forecast need in the functional economic areas surrounding Hull and at Goole.
6.14 In other locations, the general presumption will be for employment development to take place on land or premises already allocated for, or already in, employment use. A number of employment sites that contribute towards the East Riding economy, but which do not form part of a Key Employment Site, have been identified in Policies A1-6. Where proposals would result in the loss of employment land or premises (i.e. land that is allocated or already being used for employment purposes, but is not part of a Key Employment Site), the Council’s Economic Development Team will be consulted where appropriate to help assess the impact of the proposal. In some instances, an existing employment site may no longer be suitable to meet market demand now and in the future, or the use of the site for employment uses may not be viable. This could be identified through an up-to-date employment land review or the marketing of the site for its current use.
6.15 The use of a site for employment purposes may give rise to justifiable complaint from neighbouring uses. This could relate to complaints about excessive noise or odour levels, or high levels of HGV movements in predominantly residential areas. Where an applicant can demonstrate that measures could not reasonably be taken to mitigate the complaint or nuisance, and alternative less pervasive forms of employment uses are not possible, then alternative uses will be supported provided all other relevant policies in the Local Plan are satisfied.
6.16 In other instances, the contribution that a development would make to the regeneration of the local area could be significant enough to outweigh concerns about losing a site from employment use. In assessing whether the regeneration benefits associated with the proposal are sufficient to justify the loss of the site from an employment use, consideration will be given to the aims and actions set out in the Economic Strategy (2018-22) and other relevant regeneration strategies. Consideration will also be given to the wider vision and objectives of the Local Plan, and the importance of maintaining a flexible supply of employment land and premises in order to grow, strengthen, diversify and modernise the local economy. It is recognised that there are a range of sui generis and other economic development uses that may sometimes be suitable on employment sites as ancillary development. For example, vehicle and caravan sales businesses often combine their sales and repair/maintenance operations. They may be appropriately located on an employment site, provided that this does not undermine the site’s role as a location for employment development or the supply of land available for employment uses.
6.17 The development and diversification of the rural economy can be supported through the conversion of existing buildings, or well-designed new buildings, for employment uses outside of development limits (Policy S4). To minimise the impact of development and maintain the character and appearance of rural areas, proposals should be of an appropriate scale for their location and respect the character of the surrounding landscape. It will also be important to consider the accessibility of the proposed workplace by sustainable modes of transport (refer to Policy EC4). Wherever possible, new employment development will be focused on existing industrial estates and business parks or involve the re-use of existing buildings. Proposals will also be supported where they are adjacent to an existing industrial estate or business park, or where it would allow for the expansion of an existing business site or premises. However, it would be expected that opportunities for the proposed development to take place within the existing boundaries of an industrial estate or business park, or on nearby sites allocated for employment use, will be taken wherever possible.
6.18 Due to changes in the economic climate or other factors, agricultural uses can sometimes become unviable and as business ceases sites can become redundant. In these instances, schemes to redevelop redundant agricultural buildings for a change of use may be supported, particularly those that are in a state of disrepair and could be visually improved. Evidence that agricultural uses are no longer viable should be provided to support the proposal. Sites that are accessible and involve the redevelopment of redundant buildings that are well related to existing settlements will be supported. In rural areas, adequate access may not be possible by sustainable modes of transport. Proposals will therefore need to be adequately accessed via road both in terms of journey time to get there from the Strategic Highway Network, and by the standard of road access proposed.
6.19 In some instances, the specific location of the proposal will be crucial to the nature of the operations proposed, which means that it would not be possible for the development to be accommodated on a site within development 
99 A Prosperous Economylimits. For example, a new building may be required in a particular location in order to support a farming or 
forestry enterprise. Proposals thatdemonstrate a functional need to be in the specific location proposed, will be supported where they contribute to the growth and diversification of the rural economy and are of an appropriate scale. To demonstrate a functional need, applicants will be expected to submit information that sets out why the development could not reasonably be expected to take place on a site that is supported by parts D1-D3 of Policy EC1. Details of the activities that would take place on the site, and an explanation of why the nature of these operations means that the proposal must be located on the particular site in question, should be provided. The fact that an applicant does not have any alternative site in their ownership will not, in isolation, be sufficient to demonstrate that there is a functional requirement for the operation to take place on the proposed site.
6.20 Occasionally, demand may unexpectedly arise for a large-scale employment development, including those requiring direct access to rail and/or water transport infrastructure. Special consideration is often sought because of the development’s scale and employment potential. In the interests of the Plan’s objectives, such development will be directed first to allocated sites. However, where it can be demonstrated that allocated sites are not suitable or available, proposals will be supported where they satisfy the criteria set out in part D of Policy EC1. 
6.21 Part D also recognises the potential of Freeport tax zones, where not allocated, to accommodate further development that supports the East Riding economy. It has not been possible to assess the entirety of the Goole Freeport tax zone as part of the Local Plan Update process so further assessments are required. This may be through a comprehensive planning application or through a Local Development Order (LDO). Piecemeal development should be avoided so that the full requirements and impact to the site can be considered. Work has commenced on preparing a Local Development Order (LDO) to provide a planning framework for the development of the site that can complement the Local Plan Update. This will include a wide range of evidence and studies to support the development of the site and to identify the necessary mitigation.
6.22 Policy S1 confirms that the Plan should be read as a whole. Therefore, it will be necessary that all other relevant policies are satisfied for substantial proposals and those identified for Freeport tax zones. Of particular note, is the fact that such developments may be located close to international (habitat) sites such as the Humber Estuary. The impact of development on the integrity of these features will need to be considered through a project-level Habitats Regulation Assessment. Policy ENV4 provides a framework for considering this further, where matters such as air quality and functionally linked land are likely to be of relevance. Evidence needs to be provided to allow the Council (as the competent authority) to ascertain there will be no adverse effect on the integrity of an international site. In addition, due to the scale and nature of likely schemes, it is critical that the developments’ potential impacts on the transport network are fully considered in line with Policy S8. Contributions from developers may be required to fund improvements to the transport network and these will be secured through legal mechanisms. When developing any such proposal, early engagement with the local planning authority and statutory planning consultees will be important to ensure that the potential implications of the proposal are considered.
6.23 Agriculture/ food and drink is identified as one of the key economic sectors in the East Riding, and proposals for agricultural development will be supported in accordance with Policy S4. It is also recognised that for many years, farmers have been developing new enterprises on their holdings, including farm shops, cafes, visitor attractions and tourism accommodation. In many instances these have helped to support and diversify the agricultural business. Proposals involving the diversification of a farming enterprise should prioritise the re-use of existing buildings over the development of new structures. Any new buildings or structures that are required should be well related to the existing buildings on the farm, and designed, laid out and of a scale that respects the character of the farm and the surrounding landscape. Diversification proposals should also ensure that they would not undermine the primary agricultural enterprise, for example, by introducing new uses on to the farm that may not be compatible with the existing agricultural operations. 
6.24 The Employment Land Review (2020) has been a key source of evidence for identifying employment land allocations.
100
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateDeveloping and diversifying the visitor economy
6.25 Tourism is an important part of the East 
Riding’s economy. The term ‘tourism development’ describes the development of tourism attractions and facilities, and the provision of accommodation (self-catering and serviced) for both leisure and business visits. A Tourism Accommodation Study was undertaken in 2009 and updated in 2016, which explored the existing provision for tourists in the East Riding and the future aspirations of the sector. It highlights that tourism accommodation in the East Riding has traditionally been associated with the coastal strip, particularly sites accommodating touring and static caravans. The nature of tourism, however, has changed significantly over the past 20-30 years. While the value of domestic tourism in the UK is increasing, UK residents now often tend to take long holidays abroad, with holidays in the UK commonly being second holidays or short break trips. This change has had a profound impact on recognised coastal resorts like Bridlington, Hornsea and Withernsea.
6.26 The Tourism Accommodation Study (2016) highlights that traditional coastal resorts are still an important part of the tourism offer in the East Riding. They continue to form part of a wider choice of different types of destinations and experiences that people look towards to satisfy their interests. However, it found that the overall offer in the East Riding is not sufficiently diversified to attract new types of visitors and the potential benefits of the sector to the economy and community are not being maximised.
6.27 A range of different types of accommodation are used for tourism purposes, including serviced, self-catering, camping and caravan provision. The previous Tourism Accommodation Study (2009) found that accommodation used by ‘tourists’ (defined as visitors staying in a property that has a cost/ rate associated with its use, or in a property that does not legally belong to them) has a stronger impact on the visitor economy than that owned by repeat visitors. Tourists are more likely to visit attractions and places of interest, to spend money in shops and on entertainment. 
6.28 A priority of the Economic Development Strategy (2018-22) is to support growth in the tourism sector. The challenge for the East Riding will be to develop and diversify the tourism offer by capitalising on the potential of the area’s Market Towns, diverse coastline, wildlife, rural landscapes (including a potential Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) designation for part of the Yorkshire Wolds), and waterways. This will include working with the City of Hull and Visit Hull and East Yorkshire (VHEY), to promote the area as a visitor destination. A more diverse mix of tourism accommodation will also need to be provided. Together, this will ensure that the East Riding has a broad appeal that attracts different types of visitors, for different reasons, all year round. As a result, there is a continuing requirement for tourism development and especially for tourism accommodation.
Policy EC2: Developing and diversifying the visitor economy
A. Tourism developments including attractions, facilities and accommodation, particularly those helping to 
meet existing deficiencies or to provide a year-round and all-weather offer will be encouraged to help strengthen and broaden the tourism offer across the East Riding.
B. In the Countryside, proposals for tourism development will be supported where their scale, design and cumulative impact is appropriate for the location having particular regard for, but not limited to, landscape character, biodiversity, existing infrastructure and the built environment, and where they:
1. Utilise existing buildings;
101 A Prosperous Economy2. Involve new, expanded, upgraded or rolled back/re-located sites for camping and caravans;
3. Are part of a farm diversification scheme, providing existing buildings are re-used where possible;
4. Support an existing countryside attraction, providing existing buildings are re-used where possible; or
5. Have a functional need to be located in the Countryside, providing existing buildings are re-used  
where possible.
C. Within a Seafront Area, tourism and recreation proposals that take advantage of the seafront location will be supported, particularly those that will remain open all year round. The boundaries for Seafront Areas are set out on the Policies Map Update.
6.29 The policy seeks to support proposals for tourism development, particularly those that will improve the tourism offer, provide a year-round and all-weather offer, and encourage the growth of the visitor economy. In accordance with Policy S3, tourism proposals are likely to be considered appropriate within the development limits of Principal Towns and Towns in particular. Some types of tourism facilities, such as hotels, shops and leisure facilities, are classified in national planning policy as ‘town centre uses’ and will also need to consider the requirements of Policy EC3. While the rural nature of the East Riding means that access to tourism facilities will often be by car, it will be important that consideration is given to Policy EC4 so that visitor destinations are accessible by sustainable modes of transport wherever this is possible.
6.30 Proposals that help address the existing deficiencies in the types of commercial accommodation available will be particularly encouraged. The Tourism Accommodation Study (2009) and Update (2016) identifies where there is an over or under-provision of specific types of tourism accommodation in specific areas (Figure 8), and the key findings are highlighted in Table 9. The findings of the Tourism Accommodation Study will be an important consideration in determining whether a proposal would be likely to help address deficiencies in meeting market demand and/or developing new markets, though it does not provide an exclusive list of those types of proposals that may be supported.
6.31 The Plan should be read as a whole and policies such as S4, ENV2, ENV4 and EC4 are likely to be of relevance for many tourism development proposals in the Countryside. A proposal’s impact on the landscape character of the area will need to be fully understood and great care should be taken in preparing proposals in Important Landscape Areas such as the Heritage Coast, and potentially in the future, an AONB. In addition, the potential impact of tourism development on biodiversity and the integrity of international (habitat) sites needs to be fully considered when preparing and determining a planning proposal. Policy ENV4 identifies a number of issues that require consideration in respect of designated sites. Of particular note is the potential of tourism developments to lead to recreational pressure. 
6.32 Consideration should also be given to the level of existing infrastructure within the area and in nearby settlements. The potential impact on the local highway network will be of particular importance for major developments, and improvements may be required to adequately accommodate the proposed development. Significant numbers of visitors may also create additional pressure on existing drainage and water resources as well as other items of physical infrastructure. Working with infrastructure providers at the design stage will be crucial in preparing proposals that can be supported. 
6.33 It is acknowledged that some tourism developments, including static and touring caravans and holiday lodges (which are defined as accommodation that falls into the size and transportability definitions of a caravan, and are normally a 
102
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Updatetwin or single static caravan clad in timber or timber effect), may be appropriate in a Countryside location. However, 
in all instances, it will be important that the character of the Countryside is protected, and the relationship with nearby settlements is fully considered. The scale of a tourism development proposal, and the cumulative impact of other development proposals in proximity, will be important considerations. Consideration will be given to developments that have already taken place, as well as developments that have planning consent and have not yet been built. To ensure that proposals for tourism accommodation in the Countryside are used for this purpose, rather than as permanent residential accommodation, they will be subject to holiday occupancy conditions. Proposals for tourism developments that support an existing countryside attraction, such as an important heritage asset, wildlife reserve or a country park, or have a functional need to be located in the Countryside, will need to submit information. This should demonstrate how the proposal would benefit the attraction in question, or why it has a functional requirement to be situated in the location proposed. In addition, it should include information about the uses or activities that would take place within the new development and explain how these relate to and support the existing function of the attraction, or why they necessitate a Countryside location. A demonstrable benefit for the tourism sector must be established to justify the development of new buildings in the Countryside.
6.34 To minimise the impact of tourism development on the Countryside, it is expected that existing buildings will be re-used wherever possible. Where a new building is proposed, applicants will need to submit information that identifies why the building is required, and why the re-use of an existing building is not possible. For many proposals, Policy ENV2 is likely to be a key issue in decision making to ensure that developments sensitively integrate into the existing landscape. 
6.35 The boundaries of Seafront Areas of Bridlington, Hornsea and Withernsea are set out on the Policies Map Update. In these areas, tourism and recreation developments that require a seafront location to take advantage of their location and setting, will be encouraged, to support the visitor economy. It is expected that any new buildings proposed would be located to minimise the impact on the character of the area, for example, by positioning them next to existing buildings. Proposals that contribute to the delivery of an adopted renaissance strategy will also be supported where they conform to policies within this Plan. 
6.36 Proposals for tourism accommodation will need to have regard to the provisions of Policy ENV6, particularly in  respect of flood risk, groundwater protection (source protection zones) and coastal change management. Sites used  
for holiday or short-let caravans and camping are classed as ‘more vulnerable’ uses in flood risk terms, so application of the ‘sequential test’ and, potentially, the ‘exception test’ will be required to support proposals. The approach to the Coastal Change Management Area (CCMA) is set out in policy ENV6 and provides guidance on the types of uses that will be appropriate within this area, along with the policy framework for managing the ‘roll back’ of tourism accommodation sites. 
103 A Prosperous EconomyTable 9: Key tourism accommodation requirements
Tourism 
Character AreaOverall development principle needed to develop and diversify the sectorKey tourism accommodation requirements
The East CoastStrengthen the tourism sector throughout the East Coast area (Bridlington Bay, North and South Holderness) to ensure that the benefits of tourism to the economy, environment and community are maximised and can be revitalised year-on-year.Encourage the development of new commercial accommodation to support leisure and business visitors.1a) Bridlington - large scale serviced (hotel) accommodation and high quality B andB/ guest houses. Encourage high quality “Restaurants-with-Rooms” and boutique-style B andBs and Guest Houses. Continue to work with potential key operators to deliver an additional new large-scale (60+rooms), quality/branded hotel, potentially associated with the planned Bridlington Marina.1b) North and South Holderness - new small-scale accommodation enterprises focused on serviced (B andB, Farm and Inns) and self-catering units in the form of farm building conversions, additional camping and touring caravan pitch provision. There may be scope for budget accommodation to serve the business sector, given the large-scale investments in energy and renewable energy technologies.North and South Holderness – Encourage the development of new commercial accommodation, particularly smaller-scale serviced, self-catering and hostel provision. Any new developments should be part of, or linked to development in attractions, activities and experiences. Themes to consider include wildlife, arts and crafts, watersport activities, equestrian tourism, and outdoor education.
The Yorkshire WoldsDevelop the Yorkshire Wolds into a recognisable and coherent short-break visitor destination that blends the pleasant countryside character, quaint rural villages, and the historic character of its market towns through increased provision in leisure, recreation and appropriate accommodation.Small-scale accommodation, focused on B andB, inns and self-catering units, in market towns and through farm diversification schemes.Camping and touring caravan parks.Boutique hotels and specialist inn accommodation, for example spas and high quality eateries.Encourage more camping and caravan touring parks, glamping, and self-catering units across the Wolds. This could be achieved through farm diversification schemes.
Beverley and its HinterlandsSupport continuing efforts to convert Beverley from a largely day visitor destination into a recognisable and coherent short-break visitor destination based upon a combination of heritage, retail, and special events.High quality serviced accommodation, particularly within Beverley.Encouraging high quality “Restaurants-with-Rooms” and/or a high-end boutique hotel.Explore the potential of additional camping and caravan touring parks in outlying areas, particularly where it is possible to create linkages between Beverley and the Wolds.
104
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateTourism 
Character AreaOverall development principle needed to develop and diversify the sectorKey tourism accommodation requirements
North West (The Vale of York)Support further development of the tourism sector in York and the Yorkshire Wolds, and strengthen the linkages between them.Self-catering accommodation, which draws visitors to the Yorkshire Wolds.Explore the potential for a range of accommodation options to support York, The Wolds and potential Howardian Hills AONB.
M62/A63 CorridorEncourage tourism development to maximise the locational potential for wildlife tourism and heritage tourism, and to support further the development of the business tourism sector.Budget based hotel and hotels primarily for business use. Continue to explore opportunities to develop hotels – and other serviced accommodation – along the M62/A63 corridor as a means of supporting Hull as a city destination for business and leisure purposes. This should take into account the town-centre first approach to such uses.
Figure 8: Tourism Character Areas
105 A Prosperous EconomySupporting the vitality and viability of centres
6.37 To promote the vitality and viability of defined Centres, national planning policy sets out a strong ‘centres first’ 
policy, through a sequential approach that directs main town centre uses to existing Centres. This is supported by an impact test. An impact test requires any development that might harm a Centre to be assessed against a range of factors. The main town centre uses cover retail development (including warehouse clubs and factory outlet centres); leisure, entertainment facilities the more intensive sport and recreation uses (including cinemas, restaurants, drive-through restaurants, bars and pubs, night-clubs, casinos, health and fitness centres, indoor bowling centres and bingo halls); offices; and arts, cultural and tourism development (including theatres, museums, galleries and concert halls, hotels, and conference facilities). 
6.38 National planning policy requires the boundary of each Centre and the Primary Shopping Area, which is the main retail area of a Centre, to be defined. The East Riding Town Centre, Retail and Leisure Study (2019) has provided the evidence base to help define the:
 
 Extent of the Town, District and Local Centre boundaries;
  Extent of the Primary Shopping Area; and
  Proposed thresholds and distances for when retail and leisure development outside the defined Centres would  
 need to be subject to an impact test.
Policy EC3: Supporting the vitality and viability of centres
A. Town, District and Local Centres will function as the prime location for retail and other main town centre 
uses. These uses will be supported within each Town, District and Local Centre where the scale and type of development reflects that Centre’s size, role and function and its capacity for new development.
B. Proposals for main town centre uses should demonstrate compliance with the sequential approach, with the exception of small-scale rural offices, other small scale rural developments or developments that serve a purely localised need. Within Town and District Centres, proposals for retail development will be encouraged within Primary Shopping Areas in the first instance. A more specific sequential approach for proposals in and around Bridlington is set out in Policy A2A: Bridlington. Proposals that fail to satisfy the sequential approach are likely to be refused.
C. Proposals for retail and leisure uses that are outside of the defined Centres and not allocated for a main town centre use, will be required to assess the impact of the development on the most relevant Centre (or Centres) where they comprise more than:
1. 500 sq m (gross) floorspace; 
2. 250 sq m (gross) floorspace within 800 metres of a District Centre boundary; or 
3. 200 sq m (gross) floorspace within 800m of a Local Centre boundary. 
Proposals that are deemed to result in a significant adverse impact are likely to be refused. 
D. Proposals for non-retail main town centre uses within Primary Shopping Areas will be supported where 
they will enhance the vitality and vibrancy of the Centre as a whole, having regard to any locally-derived town centre strategy and the current presence and concentration of retail uses.
E. Proposals that help develop the evening and night-time economy will be supported as valuable additions to the vitality and viability of Town and District Centres, where the operation of such activities can be controlled to address amenity implications.
106
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateF. Residential development, including suitable accommodation above shops or other uses, will be supported 
subject to consideration of the amenity of future residents and where the introduction of residential development will not place undue restrictions on the operation of existing town centre businesses or facilities. 
G. The boundaries for Town, District and Local Centres and Primary Shopping Areas are set out on the Policies Map Update.
H. Outside the Town, District and Local Centres, small parades or groupings of shops will be protected from alternative uses where they are important to the day-to-day needs of local communities.
I. Farm shops and farm cafes will be supported in the Countryside where the development is ancillary to the main farm operation and could not reasonably be expected to locate within an existing Centre.
6.39 The policy aims to strike a balance between 
promoting economic growth and the need to protect and promote the roles of the East Riding’s Town, District and Local Centres. This is particularly important in the East Riding where a Centre can serve a large rural catchment.
6.40 In line with national planning policy, proposals for main town centre uses development should be directed, in the first instance, to within existing Town, District or Local Centres as defined in Policy S7, then in ‘edge of centre’ locations. in Town and District Centres, new and expanded retail developments should be located, where possible, within the defined Primary Shopping Area as this area currently represents the greatest concentration of retail provision and is usually regarded as the ‘high street’. Where there are no suitable sites available within or on the edge of the defined centres, out of centre locations can be considered. Preference should be given to sites well served by a choice of means of transport including walking and cycling. To support the regeneration strategy for Bridlington, a more bespoke sequential approach is required for proposals in and around the town. Policy A2A: Bridlington seeks to direct different main town centre uses to specific parts of the town centre to achieve maximum benefit. 
6.41 The sequential approach may not necessarily be required for small-scale office development, other small-scale development or where the proposal serves a purely localised need. For example, a proposal for a small shop in a village or neighbourhood area may only seek to serve a small catchment and could help to reduce the number of car trips for day-to-day activities. It may not be appropriate for that proposal to consider locations in defined Centres in other settlements.
6.42 Following the application of the sequential approach, an assessment of a proposal’s impact may be required depending on its specific location and size where it involves retail or leisure development. The thresholds identified in the policy reflect the different roles and functions of the Town, District and Local Centres and the likelihood of there being an impact as a result of new development. An impact assessment would not be required for an allocation where the proposed development delivers the type specified by the relevant policy in the Allocations Document Update and the scale is consistent with the floorspace requirements set out in Table 5, taking account of other developments that may have been recently completed or consented. 
6.43 In line with the NPPF, the impact assessment should consider the impact of the proposal on: 
 
 existing, committed and planned public and private investment in a Centre or Centres in the catchment area of  
 the proposal; and 
  the town centre vitality and viability, including local consumer choice and trade in the town centre and the wider  
 catchment (as applicable to the scale and nature of the scheme). 
107 A Prosperous Economy6.44 The NPPF states that where the impact assessment identifies a significant adverse impact on one or more or the 
above considerations, or where it fails to satisfy the sequential approach, it should be refused. 
6.45 In addition, some parts of the East Riding are also located within the catchment of a Centre that is within a neighbouring local authority area, principally Hull and York City Centres. Therefore, relevant proposals on unallocated sites within the catchment area of Hull or York may also need to consider the impact on centres within these cities.
6.46 The right mix of uses will be different in different Centres but the role of a Primary Shopping Area should be to provide for a critical mass for retailing and to meet the needs of the settlement and the catchment area, consistent with the role of the Centre. As such, the Council would expect the makeup of the Primary Shopping Areas to have a significant retail presence in terms of floorspace and frontage. Proposals for non-retail main town centre uses, which will enhance the vitality and viability of the Centre (for example, by promoting an increase in ‘dwell time’), will be supported where the function of the Primary Shopping Area is not undermined. Such uses should be designed with active ground floor frontages and demonstrate that their presence will be beneficial to the function of the Primary Shopping Area (for example, by attracting healthy numbers of footfall). Proposals will also be supported where a locally-derived town centre strategy identifies the need for such a use in that particular part of the Primary Shopping Area. 
6.47 Development that improves the type and range of leisure and entertainment attractions, including those that would attract more families or help develop the evening economy, will be encouraged in Centres provided that their cumulative impact would not affect the character and function of the Centre, or lead to an unacceptable impact on the amenity of nearby residents. 
6.48 The vibrancy and vitality of Centres can be aided by the presence of housing. Therefore, proposals for new housing on appropriate sites within Centres will be supported where the amenity of new, and existing, residents can be achieved. Careful consideration must be given to the potential relationship between new housing and existing businesses and facilities. In line with the approach taken in the NPPF, existing operations should not have unreasonable restrictions placed on them, so proposals for new residential development should not be approved if the proposal cannot be satisfactorily mitigated.
6.49 In addition to the Town, District and Local Centres, there are small parades of shops of neighbourhood significance in the Major Haltemprice Settlements, Principal Towns and Towns. In addition, a number of villages in the East Riding contain a smaller range of shops and services. It is important to retain this range of facilities, where possible, so proposals involving the loss of use class E(a) retail uses which provide for the day to day needs of the local community will be resisted unless fully justified, notwithstanding permitted changes of use. For proposals in Rural Service Centres, Primary Villages and Villages the loss of an E(a) retail use, such as a village shop or Post Office, will also be assessed against Policy C2. This seeks to manage the loss of retail uses where they provide an important community service or facility that helps to meet the needs of local residents. Some individual shops, particularly in rural areas, may fall into use class F2(a) where they are under 280sqm in size and are there is no such facility within 1000m. 
6.50 On the Strategic Highway Network and industrial estates, a local need for catering facilities is often met by mobile catering vans. New proposals for catering vans will only be acceptable where there is an unmet need, and the visual, traffic and amenity impact of the proposal is acceptable.
6.51 In the Countryside, proposals for new or expanded farm shops and/or cafes will be restricted to those developments that are tied to an existing agricultural operation. Such proposals will be exempt from the sequential approach where it is demonstrated that they are a true farm diversification scheme. However, depending on the size of the proposal, the potential impact on defined Centres may need to be considered in accordance with part C of the policy. 
Enhancing sustainable transport
6.52 National planning policy identifies that transport issues should be considered at the earliest stages of plan-making and development proposals. This is so potential transport impacts can be addressed, opportunities from existing transport infrastructure and changing technologies can be realised and to promote walking, cycling and public transport. There is a need for transport systems to be balanced in favour of sustainable transport modes, which give people a real choice about how they travel and thereby help reduce greenhouse gas emissions, reduce congestion, and improve air quality 
108
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Updateand public health. There is, therefore, a need to pro-actively encourage sustainable modes of transport, alongside 
appropriate measures that seek to manage the use of the private car. This will be supported through travel planning as well as the allocation of sites for development in a way which supports a reduction in the need to travel and promotes greater use of sustainable transport modes, such as public transport, walking and cycling.
6.53 The Local Transport Plan (2015-2029) provides a long term 14-year strategy for delivering and improving transport services across the East Riding. This will be supported by the Local Plan to help deliver schemes and work towards the Local Transport Plan’s six overarching objectives. In particular, congestion is an issue in specific areas within the East Riding, such as the A164 and A1079 corridors. Whilst planned major transport schemes have been set out in Policies A1-6, the road network cannot be expected to accommodate unconstrained traffic growth. Therefore, there is a need for robust sustainable travel planning alongside new development, which will help protect the role of the Strategic Highway Network.
Policy EC4: Enhancing sustainable transport
A. To increase overall accessibility, minimise congestion, improve safety, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, encourage healthy lifestyles and reduce social exclusion, new development will be supported where it is accessible, or can be made accessible, by sustainable modes of transport and addresses its likely transport impact. Development proposals should:
1. Produce and agree a transport assessment and travel plan, where a significant transport impact is 
likely;
2. Encourage the use of sustainable travel options which may include public transport, electric and ultra-low emission vehicles, car sharing, cycling and walking; particularly in the Major Haltemprice Settlements, Principal Towns, and Towns; and
3. Bring forward other necessary transport infrastructure to accommodate expected movement to and from the development.
B. Developments generating significant freight movement located along the East-West Multi-Modal Transport Corridor should capitalise on the opportunities for transferring and transporting freight by means other than road.
C. The number of parking spaces for all new development should reflect:
1. Accessibility of development, particularly by public transport;
2. The expected car usage on the site, including an adequate provision of spaces for the charging of 
plug-in electric and other ultra-low emission vehicles; and
3. The most efficient use of space available and promotion of good design.
6.54 The Local Plan has a key role to play in supporting the Local Transport Plan (2015-2029) in improving accessibility and safety, and reducing congestion. Policy EC4 sets out how new development should facilitate the use of non-car modes of transport. It includes a requirement for travel planning to support new developments that are likely to have a significant transport impact, for example, where the development would generate significant amounts of movement. Location specific factors such as the availability of public transport, scale of the development, and available road capacity may also affect whether a transport assessment and travel plan are required. The Local Transport Plan (2015-2029) has identified Bridlington, Goole, the A164 and A1079 corridors as areas experiencing significant levels of congestion, particularly during peak hours. In addition, the East Riding Infrastructure Study (2022) highlights the A63 and A1033 dual carriageways, A64 Grimston Bar interchange, A1035 and A1174 as areas where road capacity may be limited in the future.
6.55 Travel Plans should demonstrate a firm commitment to reducing the number of single occupancy car trips generated 
109 A Prosperous Economyby, or attracted to, the site and have regard to proposals set out in the Local Transport Plan (2015-2029) and 
accompanying Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plans. In those instances where a transport assessment or travel plan is not needed, a transport statement, which sets out an overview of how the likely transport impact would be addressed, may still be required. Developers are encouraged to engage with the Council’s Highway Development Management section at an early stage to establish whether a travel plan, transport assessment or transport statement is required. National Highways will advise on requirements for developments that impact on the Strategic Road Network, which includes the A63, A64 and A1033 trunk roads, M18 and M62.
6.56 Where possible, new developments should be designed to support and encourage sustainable alternatives to single occupancy use of the private car. This can be undertaken in line with the individual Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plans developed for the Major Haltemprice Settlements, Principal Towns and Towns to accompany the Local Transport Plan (2015-2029), and by developing, protecting and connecting to safe and attractive public transport, cycling, footpath and non-motorised user networks and facilities (in accordance with Policy S8). Development should bring forward other necessary transport infrastructure to facilitate expected movements to and from the site, for example, new road junctions or access roads may be required, which take into account the needs of disabled people. Any new infrastructure should not create an unacceptable impact on businesses and the local community. In most cases transport improvements will need to be completed prior to the occupation of the development.
6.57 Developments generating significant freight, such as commodity cargo that is transported and unpackaged in large quantities, along the East-West Multi-Modal Transport Corridor should capitalise on the opportunities for transferring and transporting freight by means other than road.
6.58 New developments will be expected to provide an appropriate amount of car parking, considering:
 
 Accessibility of development, particularly by public transport;
  Existing publicly available parking provision nearby (for example, on-street parking) and usage in the vicinity of the site;
  Need for facilities for charging electric plug-in and other ultra-low emission vehicles; and
  The need to deter unnecessary car use while avoiding overspill parking problems.
6.59 This recognises that the level of parking provision could vary depending upon the location of the proposed development. For example, a development in a Town Centre may provide a reduced provision, in comparison to a similar development in a rural settlement, where it can be proven that it would make use of existing high frequency public transport or public parking facilities.
6.60 In considering the appropriate number of parking spaces within residential developments, proposals should also assess the expected car usage based on the number and size of dwelling units. Guidance contained within ‘Car Parking - What Works Where’ (2006), ‘Manual for Streets’ (2007), and ‘Manual for Streets 2, wider application of the principles’ (2010) should be used to establish appropriate layouts, design, and balance between on-street and off-street parking within new development.
6.61 All types of development proposals, including residential and commercial, should reflect the parking guidance standards that are set out in the Sustainable Transport Supplementary Planning Document. This guidance will be taken as the starting point for determining the number of parking spaces required within all new developments and will be considered against the anticipated impact of a travel plan. Measures, such as the provision of secure cycle 
110
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Updateparking, improved bus services, and car share schemes, can all act to reduce the amount of car parking required 
within a proposed development by encouraging a shift to more sustainable modes of transport. 
Supporting the renewable and low carbon energy sector
6.62 Increasing the amount of energy from renewable and low carbon technologies will help to ensure the UK has a secure energy supply as well as reduce greenhouse gas emissions to slow down climate change. Planning has an important role in the delivery of new renewable and low carbon energy infrastructure in locations where the local environmental impact is acceptable.
6.63 The Climate Change Act 2008 set in legislation the UK’s approach to tackling and responding to climate change. It introduced the UK’s long-term legally binding 2050 target to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at least 80 per cent relative to 1990 levels. April 2022 to March 2039 is a critical period in the transition to a low carbon economy and progress to UK Net Zero by 2050, stretching up to and beyond the Sixth Carbon Budgets (2033 – 2037) under the Climate Change Act 2008 and Carbon Budget Order 2021. The Government has published a British Energy Security Strategy (2022), which aims to generate 95 per cent of the UK’s energy from low carbon sources by 2030 and decarbonise 95 per cent of British electricity production by 2035 to meet the Sixth Carbon Budget. In the transport sector, the Government is planning to ban the sale of new conventional petrol and diesel cars by 2030.The Government has set out that one of the main ways to ensure UK energy security is by promoting a wide range of technologies and supply routes, which will help to support a transition to a low carbon economy. An important component of this includes carbon capture, use and storage, which has significant potential to reduce carbon dioxide emissions from existing fossil fuels (coal and gas) in the UK’s electricity supply and industrial manufacturing mix.
6.64 The energy sector in the East Riding is important to both the UK and East Riding economy and plays a significant role in ensuring the UK’s fuel security. The East Riding is home to major installations for international companies including BP, Scottish and Southern Energy, Centrica Storage, and Gassco. In total these installations currently store approximately 70 per cent of the UK’s gas reserves, either within or offshore of the East Riding, and have capacity to bring approximately 30 per cent of the UK’s peak gas capacity onshore at the Easington Gas Terminal Complex. The role that each type of energy development currently plays in the East Riding is set out in Table 10. 
6.65  A shift towards low carbon and renewable energy generation over the plan period will help reduce emissions that cause climate change. This will contribute to fuel security and create opportunities for economic growth, particularly in relation to the Humber Renewable Energy Super Cluster Enterprise Zone and the Humber Green Port Corridor Enterprise Zone. The East Riding also contains one of the country’s largest inland ports at Goole, which has a significant role for importing biomass to Drax power station and will support the growth of the renewable energy sector. 
6.66 The Yorkshire and Humber is currently one of the most carbon intensive regions in the UK and represents the greatest opportunity for decarbonisation. The Humber Local Energy Strategy (2020) recognises this and identifies three objectives to ensure the Humber region supports the UK’s commitment to reduce emissions by 80 per cent by 2050. These include: 
 
 Securing the energy value through efficiency improvements, new technologies and shift to low carbon and  
 renewable sources;
  Developing the hydrogen economy; and 
  Moving to a net-zero emissions with the application of Carbon Capture, Use and Storage. 
6.67 Therefore, a range of technologies will contribute, including small scale and community led schemes, which will likely play an increasing role in delivering decarbonisation and renewable energy. Significant demand for renewable 
111 A Prosperous Economyenergy development within the East Riding has been experienced over recent years. This includes both large scale 
windfarms and single wind turbines to serve industrial units and farms. There is also increasing interest in biomass and combined heat and power (CHP) development. Other renewable energy technologies, such as photovoltaics and heat pumps, are expected to become more affordable and popular over the plan period.
Table 10: Examples of Energy Types
Energy Type Definition and discussion
Renewable Energy
Biomass The biodegradable fraction of products, waste and residues from agriculture (including plant and animal substances), forestry and related industries, as well as the biodegradable fraction of industrial and municipal waste. Biomass can result in fuel that is in a solid, liquid, or gas form, which can create energy by burning, anaerobic digestion or use in biofuels.
Geothermal heatingGeothermal energy is derived from the energy stored in the earth’s crust and can be used for heating purposes, via geothermal heat pumps. A conventional scheme uses the energy of deep underground sources of hot water by pumping the hot water out of a borehole. The used water can be discharged back to the ground or to surface water. To operate a conventional scheme requires environmental permissions from the Environment Agency
20.
Ground source heatingA ground source heat pump can be used to extract heat energy from the ground in winter and to transfer the heat into buildings. Equally it can be used to provide a very efficient mechanism for heat to escape from buildings down into the ground in summer. These comprise a system of pipes buried in shallow ground near the building they intend to heat, and a heat pump that operates an air delivery system inside the building.
Tidal Power The potential energy stored in water is converted into power through the movement of water, which is caused by tidal currents and the rise and fall of sea levels.
Photovoltaics (PV)PV systems convert sunlight into electricity in a semi-conductive device and many, which are located on existing buildings (commercial, residential and public), do not require planning permission. However, some will require permission, for example, where they are erected on a building in a conservation area. Solar farms/ parks, which usually cover large areas of land and connect to the national grid will also require permission. 
Wind Wind turbines convert the kinetic energy in the wind to electricity and are usually tall towers with two or three propeller-like blades, called the rotor, on the top. The wind spins the rotor and the energy created by this movement is converted by a generator into electricity. There are a large number of operational and planned commercial scale wind turbines, as well as smaller turbines that usually power farms or individual buildings, within the East Riding. The Dogger Bank offshore wind farm is proposed to come onshore north of Ulrome.
20 www.gov.uk/guidance/deep-geothermal-energy-regulation
112
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateEnergy Type Definition and discussion
Low Carbon Energy Development
Combined 
Heat and Power (CHP)CHP is a highly efficient process that captures and utilises the heat generated as a by-product of the electricity generation process. By generating heat and power simultaneously, CHP can reduce carbon emissions by up to 30 per cent compared to the separate means of conventional generation via a boiler and power station. Whilst energy created from biomass CHP is considered to be renewable, the energy created through the use of other fuels is considered to be low carbon. Low carbon CHP can use a range of different fuels, which sometimes includes fossil fuels or municipal waste. The excess heat can be used as part of district heating networks, to heat specific buildings or facilities such as swimming pools.
Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS)Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) is a way of reducing carbon emissions, which could be key to helping to tackle global warming and ocean acidification. It’s a three-step process, involving: capturing the carbon dioxide produced by power generation or industrial activity, such as steel or cement making; transporting it; and then storing it deep underground so that it will not enter the atmosphere. Possible storage sites for carbon emissions include saline aquifers or depleted oil and gas reservoirs. These typically need to be 1km or more under the ground.Storage facilities exist offshore in the North Sea in depleted oil fields and empty aquifers, however, they require infrastructure, such as pipelines, onshore.
Fossil Fuel Energy Development
Oil and Gas Exploration, Appraisal and ExtractionOil and gas developments essentially follow the same process. Conventional oil and gas are found in underground reservoirs. Unconventional gas and oil are usually found in shale rock. In most cases an appraisal is undertaken using a seismic survey to detect the presence of geological structures with conventional or unconventional hydro-carbon potential. Exploration may be followed by a test borehole to identify if further appraisal is appropriate, and additional boreholes may be needed depending on the extent of the geological structure involved. Oil and gas production wells and associated infrastructure may include upgrading of an earlier borehole site, or development of a new site. Where resources are found in shale rock, a high-pressure mixture of water and sand is pumped into the rock to create cracks which enable the resource to be extracted. This type of extraction is becoming increasingly more viable and is also subject to licencing, health and safety and environmental regulations. Proposals for this type of development are considered against policies within the East Riding and Hull Joint Minerals Local Plan.
Gas Supply InfrastructureEasington and Dimlington Gas Terminals Complex is one of three main gas terminals in the UK, where gas is imported into the country. At Easington, gas is received from a number of offshore gas fields (where it is extracted and/or stored), processed, compressed, transferred to offshore storage and exported to the national transition system or grid. The Langeled gas pipeline, which transfers gas from Norway and has the capacity to provide 20 per cent of the UK peak gas supply, comes onshore at Easington. In addition, there are other nationally significant pipelines, including the Teesside to Salt End Ethylene Pipeline, that cross the East Riding.
Gas Storage Natural gas can be stored for an indefinite period of time in natural gas storage facilities for later consumption. Significant salt cavern gas storage facilities are based in the East Riding, in particular, at Aldbrough, which stores enough gas to supply Britain for a day. Gas storage caverns can only be created in suitably thick homogeneous salt strata, whichare free of major faulting systems. The deep salt deposits under the East Riding are one of only a few locations in the UK where these salt deposits occur. The caverns themselves are very deep underground, typically some 1.5 to 2km below the surface, and only require a small area to be developed above ground, such as a well pad.
113 A Prosperous Economy6.68 Planning applications for some of the forms of development in Table 10 will be determined by the Secretary of State, 
however, in those decisions the East Riding Local Plan will be a material consideration. The local planning policy framework for considering energy mineral developments for exploration, appraisal, and extraction of oil, gas, and coal is contained within the Joint Minerals Local Plan (2019). Policy EC5 considers proposals for all other energy developments.
Policy EC5: Supporting the renewable and low carbon energy sector
A. Proposals for the development of the energy sector, excluding mineral extraction, but including all 
other types of development listed in Table 10, will be supported where any significant adverse impacts are addressed satisfactorily, and the residual harm is outweighed by the wider benefits of the proposal. Developments and their associated infrastructure should be acceptable in terms of:
1. The cumulative impact of the proposal with other existing and proposed energy sector 
developments;
2. The character and sensitivity of landscapes to accommodate energy development, with particular consideration to the identified Important Landscape Areas, as shown on Figure 12. 
3. The effects of development on:
i. local amenity, including noise, air and water quality, traffic, vibration, dust, light (including reflection, glint, glare and shadow flicker), and visual impact;
ii. biodiversity, geodiversity and nature, particularly in relation to designations, displacement, disturbance and collision and the impact of emissions/contamination;
iii. the historic environment, including individual and groups of heritage assets above and below ground;
iv. telecommunications and other networks; including the need for additional cabling to connect to the National Grid, electromagnetic production and interference, and aeronautical impacts such as on radar systems;
v. transport, including the opportunity to use waterways and rail for transportation of materials and fuel, and the capacity of the road network to accommodate development;
vi. increasing the risk of flooding; and
vii. the land, including land stability, contamination and soil resources.
B. Proposals for onshore wind development will be supported where they repower existing wind turbines or are in an area identified as suitable for wind energy development by a Neighbourhood Plan. Neighbourhood Plans should consider Part A of this policy and Figure 9 and Figure 10 when considering what areas are suitable for onshore wind development. Projects will only be consented where it can be proven that adverse effects on the integrity of Habitats sites can meet the requirements of policy ENV4. 
C. Where appropriate, proposals should include provision for decommissioning at the end of their operational life. Where decommissioning is necessary, the site should be restored, with minimal adverse impact on amenity, landscape and biodiversity, and opportunities taken for enhancement of these features.
6.69 Energy sector development to be considered using this policy could include a wide range of schemes, such as 
renewable and low carbon developments, and grid connected and decentralised developments. Developments involving extraction of energy minerals, such as oil and gas, will be determined using relevant policies in the East 
114
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateRiding and Hull Joint Minerals Plan (2019). National policy statements may also be a material consideration for 
decisions relating to new energy development.
6.70 Applications for nationally significant infrastructure, including energy developments over 50MW and offshore developments, and their associated onshore infrastructure, are not determined by the Council and will be considered by the Secretary of State. Policy EC5 should be considered in preparing a Local Impact Report, which would be submitted to the Secretary of State, so that local impacts can be considered in the determination of an application for a nationally significant energy development.
6.71 Development will be supported providing adverse environmental, social or economic impacts are satisfactorily addressed. Adverse impacts must be minimised, and any residual impact must outweigh the wider benefits of the development. These benefits could include, supporting the growth of the low carbon and renewable energy sector of the economy and reductions in emissions that cause climate change. The type and location of the development, as well as the height and number of structures, such as flumes, chimneys, well pads or turbines, will be key factors in determining applications.  
This will include consideration of the landscape characteristics, sensitivity of viewpoints and visual receptors in the area, which will be important in assessing the significance of any amenity, landscape and visual impacts of the development.  
The severity of any adverse impacts can often be avoided or reduced through mitigation. 
6.72 Cumulative impacts that would result from new proposals, could start to constrain development in some locations, which would otherwise be suitable for development. Cumulative impact assessments should consider existing developments and those with an extant planning permission, including developments within neighbouring local authority areas. Information should be provided with the application to address the:
 
 Degree or magnitude of change; and
  Nature of the potential change reflecting the inherent sensitivity of the affected area, feature or species.
6.73 In determining the character and sensitivity of the landscape to accommodate development, the impact of the development on the historic character, sense of place, tranquillity and remoteness of the landscape should be considered. Some energy developments appear industrial in nature, and where there are proposals in rural areas it will be important to ensure that any cumulative effects do not lead to a perception of industrialisation, either within a particular landscape or wider area. In assessing the capacity of the landscape to accept energy development, it will be important to consider Policy ENV2 and the latest East Riding landscape character assessment.
6.74 Proposals should also ensure they are located at an appropriate distance from noise sensitive uses, such as housing and quiet leisure-based uses, to ensure that increases in ambient noise levels are acceptable. The prevailing noise standards (e.g. BS4142 or ETSU-R-97), and any current best practice/ guidance (e.g. from the Institute of Acoustics), should be used, giving consideration to the level of existing background noise in the area. Light impacts can be a particular consideration with wind energy developments, including reflection and shadow flicker. Where impacts cannot be mitigated, on-site proposals should consider design alterations and soundproofing of the affected properties.
6.75 Energy developments and associated infrastructure should not be sited where they will detrimentally impact on the significance of a historic asset, including views, vistas and setting of individual assets and landscapes. Where relevant, proposals will also be considered against Policy ENV3. 
6.76 Access to a site is a particularly important consideration for energy developments, as the local road network will often need to accommodate the large vehicles needed to transport the wind turbine/ solar panel components or fuel to the site. Road access to a site usually needs to be able to accommodate trailers carrying long and wide loads and/or heavy loads. In some rural locations these access requirements can lead to significant ‘indirect’ impacts on the local road network. For example, the widening of lanes or easing of bends can require the removal of boundary features such as stone walls or hedges or loss of roadside verges. Traffic can be an issue for some types 
115 A Prosperous Economyof energy development, such as biomass, and construction activities can also have an impact on the road network 
for other types of development. The Council may require access and traffic assessments and, using planning conditions, control the number of vehicle movements to and from the site during the construction, operation, and decommissioning of a site.
6.77 Some energy developments, particularly those involving significant underground works, have the potential to increase the risk of flooding on the site or elsewhere. They could also impact on geology and ground water sources, leading to water pollution and/or ground subsidence. These impacts will need to be satisfactorily addressed.
6.78 Routing and design of the electrical connection from the site sub-station to the local electricity distribution network is the responsibility of the electricity distribution network operator and does not require planning permission from the Council. The effects of the connections should be regarded as material to the overall scheme design.
6.79 Proposals involving the development of wind energy will be determined in accordance with national planning policy and practice guidance. This is set out in a Written Statement made by the Secretary of State on 18 June 2015 and through revisions to the national Planning Practice Guidance. These outline that planning permission for wind energy development should only be granted if:
 
 The development site is in an area identified as suitable for wind energy development in a Local Plan or  
 Neighbourhood Plan; and
  Following consultation, it can be demonstrated that the planning impacts identified by affected local communities  
 have been fully addressed and therefore the proposal has their backing.
6.80 Proposals for repowering existing onshore wind turbines will generally be supported. A full repowering involves the dismantling and replacement of existing turbines with new ones. Alternatively, some of the components of an existing turbine can be upgraded (e.g. generator) without changing the hub height, siting or size of the development. Both methods aim to improve the efficiency of generating energy from ‘existing’ facilities. 
6.81 The Local Plan encourages local communities to consider identifying suitable areas for specific types of renewable and low carbon energy sources, and supporting infrastructure through their neighbourhood plan. In doing so, a successful neighbourhood plan referendum that adopts a suitable area for onshore wind will demonstrate the planning impacts identified by affected local communities have been fully addressed and therefore the proposal has the community’s backing.
6.82 When identifying suitable areas for onshore wind developments, local communities will have to ensure their onshore wind designations are compatible with Policy ENV4 and the designated sites set out in Table 13. Figure 9 below identifies where onshore wind developments may result in a likely significant effect on an international habitats site.
116
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateFigure 9: Wind Turbine Impact Risk Zones
6.83 A revised Landscape Character Assessment Update (2018) has been prepared, which includes a specific Wind 
Energy Development Sensitivity Study. This identifies the relative sensitivity of the different landscape areas identified in the East Riding, dependent on the size of turbine being considered, which is based on different sensitivity grades ranging from ‘Low’ to ‘High’. In considering the different sensitivities, the study sets out an overall “Wind Energy Strategy” for each landscape area. This classifies each area as shown in Figure 10.
6.84 Alongside any impacts identified above, wind turbines have the potential to cause electromagnetic interference with radio signals, local TV reception and telecommunication systems, including those used by the police and emergency services. Applicants should contact The Office of Communications (Ofcom) to establish which systems may be affected by their proposal.
117 A Prosperous EconomyFigure 10: Wind energy Landscape sensitivity strategy
6.85 Turbines can also interfere with navigation and radar, as movement of the blades can be mistaken for aircraft or 
reduce the ability to track aircraft. There are a considerable number of aerodromes within, and close to, the East Riding. Some civil airports are important to the national air transport system and are, alongside military and other technical sites, officially safeguarded to ensure that their operation is not inhibited by new development. The officially safeguarded areas, around Humberside Airport and Robin Hood Doncaster Sheffield Airport (including Hibaldstow Radar Station) are determined by the airport operator. The consultation zones for all officially safeguarded areas in the East Riding are shown on the Policies Map Update. Applicants should liaise with airfield management at civilian airfields, where appropriate, and should also consult with NATS En Route (an organisation that provides air traffic control), the Civil Aviation Authority, Associated British Ports (ABP) (which operates the shipping radar in the Humber) and Defence Estates, in line with their requirements for consultation. The careful siting of turbines may mitigate any interference, otherwise planning conditions will be used where possible.
118
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update6.86 In relation to suitable areas for non-wind energy forms of renewable and low carbon energy sources and supporting 
infrastructure. The whole of the East Riding is considered to be potentially suitable, subject to impacts being deemed to be satisfactory against national planning policy, Policy EC5 and the development plan as a whole.
6.87 There has been a high number of approved planning applications for wind energy development in parts of the East Riding. Therefore, the cumulative impacts, which would result from new proposals, could start to constrain development in some locations, which would otherwise be suitable for development. The cumulative impact of the following issues will need to be considered by a local community and applicant:
 
 The degree of acceptable landscape change;
  The effects on international, national, regional and local designations and their setting, including landscape, nature  
 and the historic environment;
  The need to maintain the integrity and quality of a landscape;
  Whether developments could be considered as being overbearing or dominant;
  The effects on local communities;
  Compatibility between existing and proposed developments in terms of scale and potential for skyline clutter; and
  Technical standards, such as noise and aviation.
6.88 In decommissioning energy developments, it may not be possible to remove below ground infrastructure due to the effect this may have on biodiversity and the landscape. There may also be impacts on amenity, for example, through increased traffic movements, noise and dust. The development should be removed as fully as possible, whilst having regard to the effects, including the cumulative impact, of retaining the development in the ground. Where appropriate, enhancements should be made to landscape and biodiversity in accordance with Policies ENV2 and ENV4 respectively. Proposals in the Coastal Change Management Area (CCMA) should be considered against Policy ENV6, which would require the development to be temporary and all associated structures to be removed upon expiry of the planning permission. The decommissioning of development will be controlled through planning conditions.
6.89 It is the responsibility of the applicant to ensure that the impacts of development are minimised and to mitigate any potential impacts, which would be deemed unacceptable. Where any risk is identified, the applicant should submit a statement of mitigation setting out how the impacts will be mitigated and provide details of any residual impact. In many cases, impacts can be mitigated through the design of the development and Policy ENV1 will need to be considered.
Protecting mineral resources
6.90 The East Riding contains important mineral resources, such as sand and gravel, limestone, and clay, which are important for the construction industry and the delivery of the Local Plan. National planning policy highlights it is essential that there is a sufficient supply of minerals to provide the infrastructure, buildings, energy, and goods that the country needs.
6.91 Minerals can only be worked where they are naturally found. Consequently, Mineral Safeguarding Areas are required to ensure that minerals of local and national importance are not needlessly sterilised by non-mineral development.  The detailed minerals planning framework is set out in the Joint Minerals Local Plan (2019), with Hull City Council.
119 A Prosperous EconomyPolicy EC6: Protecting Mineral resources
A. Mineral Safeguarding Areas for sand and gravel, crushed rock, limestone, industrial chalk, clay, and silica 
sand are identified on the Policies Map Update.
B. Within or adjacent to Mineral Safeguarding Areas, non-mineral development, which would adversely affect the viability of exploiting the underlying or adjacent deposit in the future, will only be supported where it can be demonstrated that the:
1. Underlying or adjacent mineral is of limited economic value;
2. Need for the development outweighs the need to safeguard the mineral deposit;
3. Non-mineral development can take place without preventing the mineral resource from being 
extracted in the future;
4. Non-mineral development is temporary in nature; or
5. Underlying or adjacent mineral deposit can be extracted prior to the non-mineral development proceeding, or prior extraction of the deposit is not possible.
6.92 Mineral Safeguarding Areas are identified on the Policies Map Update. In defining these, the extent of the different mineral resources and the likely development pressures within and adjacent to the resources was considered, as well as the location of significant existing mineral operations in the area. In the case of sand and gravel, limestone, and silica sand this is in line with the general extent of the resource, as shown on the British Geological Survey Map and in Figure 11. In the case of brick clay, crushed rock (chalk), and industrial chalk resources, the safeguarding areas are located at significant existing operations. Urban areas are excluded from the Mineral Safeguarding Areas, but environmental designations, such as SSSIs, are included.
120
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateFigure 11: Simplified minerals resources map of East Riding
6.93 The safeguarding of mineral resources will ensure that the importance of the mineral can be balanced against the 
importance of the proposed non-mineral development. It does not provide a presumption in favour of minerals development. Therefore, non-mineral development, which would adversely affect the viability of exploiting an underlying or adjacent deposit in the future, will be supported within and adjacent to a Mineral Safeguarding Area where:
 
 Test drilling, test pits or other evidence, including the quantity of mineral, overburden, mineral depth, mineral  
 thickness, and how fine the deposits are, suggest the underlying or adjacent mineral is of limited economic value,  
 and its value is unlikely to become significantly greater in future, for example, by being of insufficient amount or  
 quality. Documented attempts to market the mineral may be required to demonstrate that the mineral resource is  
 not viable;
  The need for the development outweighs the need to safeguard the minerals for the future, for example,  
 the surface development is an essential piece of infrastructure and alternative sites are not available without a  
 disproportionate cost;
  It can take place without preventing the mineral resource from being extracted in future. This could include  
 development covering a smaller area, such as householder development. Some larger proposals containing only  
 limited built development could also take place without sterilising the resource, for example, golf courses or some  
 types of agricultural development. This will depend on the nature of the proposal and the extent, nature and  
 economic value of the mineral concerned. Other types of development which could take place without sterilising  
 the mineral resource include, applications for alterations and extensions to existing buildings, change of use of  
 existing development, advertisement consents, and applications for reserved matters following an outline consent;
  It is temporary in nature; or
121 A Prosperous Economy  There is evidence that prior extraction of the mineral deposit is not possible, or that the deposit will be extracted  
 in an environmentally acceptable manner prior to the non-mineral development proceeding.
6.94 In all instances it will also be necessary to consider the balance between how the quality, depth and thickness of 
the mineral deposit affects its viability, as well as the extent to which the non-mineral surface development would sterilise this resource. An assessment of the effect of the proposed development on the mineral resource beneath or adjacent to the site of the development (termed a Mineral Assessment) will normally be required. A proposal for a single dwelling, for example, could still sterilise a large area of resource if built in a certain location. In other cases, applications will be screened out of having to satisfy the policy’s requirements by meeting one of a number of exemption criteria which include:
 
 Applications for householder development;
  Applications for alterations and extensions to existing buildings and for change of use of existing development,  
 unless intensifying activity on site;
  Applications for advertisement consent;
  Applications for reserved matters including subsequent applications after outline consent has been granted;
  Prior notifications (telecoms, forestry, agriculture, demolition);
  Certificates of Lawfulness of Existing Use or Development (CLEUD) and Certificates of Lawfulness of Proposed  
 Use or Development (CLOPUD);
  Applications for works to trees;
  Applications for temporary planning permission.
6.95 Where non-mineral development is considered acceptable within or adjacent to a Mineral Safeguarding Area it will be necessary to ensure that the proposal minimises the impact on the minerals deposit, for example, through the siting and layout of any buildings. In assessing whether a proposed non-minerals development is adjacent to a Safeguarding Area, it will be necessary to consider the nature of the resource being safeguarded. For example, chalk and limestone deposits may require the use of explosives for extraction and the close proximity of non-mineral development may limit the ability to extract this resource. However, sand and gravel, which can be dug from open workings, has a much lower potential impact. Guidance previously published by the Government and British Geological Survey provides examples of typical distances from Mineral Safeguarding Areas for different mineral resources within which non-mineral development is likely to be considered to be ‘adjacent’.
 
 Small heritage stone quarries (where currently disused) – 150m;
  Sand and gravel – 250m;
  Clay – 250m; 
  Silica sand – 250m; 
  Chalk (where blasting is likely) – 500m; and 
  Limestone (where blasting is likely) – 500m.
6.96 Within these distances, proposals will need to consider part B of the policy. In addition, any greenfield non-mineral allocation adjacent to a development limit where it abuts a Mineral Safeguarding Area will be required to address the provisions of the policy.
122
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update7. A High Quality Environment
123 A High Quality Environment7  A High Quality Environment
7.1 The policies in this chapter seek to retain and enhance the East Riding’s high quality built and natural environment. 
They aim to promote high quality design and development, that not only considers beauty but recognises the potential impact that schemes may have on the wider landscape, the historic environment, biodiversity, the amenity of existing residents, and natural processes. There are features of international, national and local importance throughout the East Riding and these need to be fully recognised when preparing proposals for new development. In addition, the risks to new development posed by environmental hazards, such as from flooding or coastal erosion, are also fundamental issues that need to be addressed. 
Integrating high quality design
7.2 National planning policy emphasises the need for high quality design as fundamental to the planning and development process. It highlights that good design is a key aspect of sustainable development and helps make development acceptable to communities. Well-designed places influence the quality of our experiences, as we spend time in and around them. Places can affect our health and wellbeing, our feelings of safety, security, inclusion and belonging, and our sense of community cohesion . Planning policies and decisions should address the connections between people and places, helping to integrate new development into the natural, built and historic environment.
7.3 Whilst good design is often associated with the physical appearance or functionality of buildings, it is increasingly concerned with achieving more sustainable and energy efficient buildings. When considering design, every development makes a difference, and many small developments can cumulatively change a place dramatically.  Every development is an opportunity for good design that can help to:
 
 Ensure climate change resilience, including  
 Sustainable Drainage Systems and other flood  
 protection measures, natural cooling, and  
 green roofs;
  Encourage healthy and active lifestyles and travel  
 patterns, including open, play and green space, 
provision for walking and cycling;
  Create a sense of safety, including natural surveillance by overlooking public spaces, mixed uses to encourage l 
 longer legitimate use of space and secured by design principles;
  Encourage green infrastructure, including features listed in Table 6;
  Contribute to safeguarding and enhancing biodiversity and geodiversity, including responding to habitat and species need;
  Manage waste materials and refuse in a more sustainable manner;
  Maximise the use of resources and reduce water waste, during construction and for lifelong use;
  Reduce energy consumption and increase the use of renewables;
  Provide homes that are adaptable; and
  Ensure local distinctiveness through development that considers the use of local materials, local vernacular and  
 local context.
124
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update7.4 There is a range of guidance that can aid understanding of integrated high quality design, including Planning Practice 
Guidance, The National Design Guide (2019), Secured by design22, Planning for a Healthy Environment - Good 
Practice Guidance for Green Infrastructure and Biodiversity (2012), Manual for streets (2007)/Manual for streets 2 (2010), and Design for Play: A Guide to Creating Successful Play Spaces (2009). In addition, there are a number of other national policies and strategies, which promote the importance of sustainable design and construction, such as the Environment Agency’s Meeting our Future Water Needs: a National Framework for Water Resources (2020)). The Council is currently preparing a design guide, which will set out the Council’s expectations in terms of design. 
7.5 This promotes the use of sustainable drainage systems and water efficiency measures in new developments, particularly in areas where water resources are under pressure. In the East Riding, some areas are subject to water abstraction restrictions (e.g. the Sherwood Sandstone aquifer), therefore water resources are an important design consideration, particularly for any water-dependent or industrial developments.
Policy ENV1: Integrating high quality design
A. All development proposals will:
1. Contribute to safeguarding and respecting the diverse character and appearance of the area 
through their design, layout, construction and use;
2. Seek to minimise the demand for energy and make prudent and efficient use of natural resources, particularly land, energy and water; and
3. Seek to maximise the use of decentralised and renewable or low carbon technologies. 
B. Development will be supported where it achieves a high quality of design, which optimises the potential of the site and contributes to a sense of place and beauty. This will be accomplished by:
1. Having regard to the specific characteristics of the site’s wider context and the character of the 
surrounding area;
2. Incorporating an appropriate mix of uses on the site;
3. Having an appropriate scale, density, massing, height and material;
4. Having regard to the amenity of existing or proposed properties;
5. Ensuring the proposal does not have an unacceptable impact on existing uses in the surrounding area;
6. Ensuring the proposal does not result in unreasonable restrictions being placed on existing uses;
7. Having an adaptable layout for sites and/or buildings, whichtakes into account the needs of future users;
8. Having regard to healthy lifestyles;
9. Incorporating energy efficient design and arrangements to manage waste;
10. Incorporating hard and/or soft landscaping, alongside boundary treatment of an appropriate scale and size, to enhance the setting of buildings, public space and views;
11. Promoting equality of safe movement for all within the site, including access, egress and minimising highway safety risks;
22 www.securedbydesign.com
125 A High Quality Environment12. Having regard to features that minimise crime and the perception of crime;
13. Considering the use of public art, where the sense of place and public access or view would justify it; 
14. Ensuring infrastructure, including green infrastructure, drainage, SuDS and flood mitigation, are well 
integrated into the development; 
15. Ensuring that new streets are tree-lined, unless this would be inappropriate, and that opportunities are taken to incorporate trees elsewhere in developments. Proposals should ensure appropriate measures are in place to secure the long-term maintenance of newly-planted trees, and that existing trees are retained wherever possible;
16. Incorporating, nature conservation and biodiversity net gain into the proposal;
17. Incorporating, where appropriate, a reduction in the vulnerability and increase in resilience to  climate change;
18. Considering the use of the latest technologies and materials to improve building quality;
19. Considering the appropriate use of local materials, architectural styles and features that have a strong association with the area’s landscape, geology and built form, with particular attention to heritage assets; and
20. Safeguarding the views and setting of outstanding built and natural features and skylines within and adjoining the East Riding, including those features identified in Policies A1-A6.
C. Innovative design incorporating new materials and technologies will be supported where the local context and sub areas, with their diverse landscapes, geologies, historical background and built form, have been fully considered as part of the design process.
7.6 Policy ENV1 seeks to foster good design that creates a strong ‘sense of place’ and a high quality environment, 
including creating attractive and distinctive places. The design of a site should consider the surrounding area, including the character, type, size and use of buildings and spaces. 
7.7 National planning policy recognises the role that high quality design plays in creating sustainable places that make a positive difference to people’s lives. It advises that local authorities should have access to design review to ensure high standards of design are achieved through the planning system. Early engagement in the consideration of design is encouraged and are a way to positively respond to site challenges. In general, this recognises that the more issues that can be resolved at pre-application stage, the greater the benefits. Design review could be supported through ‘Integreat Plus’ who provide local design review assessment and support for the Council on minor and major projects within the East Riding.
7.8 The Government has produced a National Design Guide, which should be considered by proposals. The Council is also producing an East Riding Design guide, which once complete, will be a material consideration. 
7.9 Proposals are expected to seek to make prudent and efficient use of natural resources, particularly land, energy and water. Considering natural resources and design collectively at the outset of a project and through the evolution of a proposal can lead to more significant environmental benefits and financially preferable outcomes for the applicant. This, environment first, approach to design will be encouraged. 
7.10 All proposals, including extensions to existing developments, should aim to comply with the relevant rating for sustainable construction prescribed by the Government at the time a planning application is validated. In addition, applicants should assess the potential to reduce energy demand, for example by considering layout, using thermally efficient materials, orienting developments to maximise solar gain, etc. They should also assess the potential to maximise the use of decentralised renewable and low carbon energy technologies. These include, but are not limited to:
126
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update  Solar panels;
  Biomass heating systems (sometimes shared); and
  Developing community scale heat opportunities.
7.11 The chosen technology(ies) should be operationally suitable for the development, visually acceptable and not 
unduly harm amenity. Larger developments should consider how to contribute/share technologies to meet part of their energy needs, and/or increase the sustainability of existing or new development nearby, and be capable of adaptation over time.
7.12 Where appropriate, the potential of district heating networks should be explored, in particular, the Major Haltemprice Settlements, Bridlington and Goole have been identified in the Regional Renewable and Low Carbon Study as areas with potential to connect nearby combined heat and power plants to the urban areas. In other areas, the possibility should be considered if it is known that a significant heat load, such as a large industrial site or hospital, is available in the area. Information on localised heat demand is available from the UK CHP Development Map
23. 
7.13 Adapting the East Riding’s stock of existing buildings will be particularly challenging. Where possible, opportunities to share the benefits of locally produced renewable or low carbon energy with adjoining existing development should be realised.
7.14 Development should be designed considering the use, including possible future uses, to ensure that buildings can be easily adapted. It should integrate new landscaping and public realm that meets the needs of its potential users, such as the provision of high quality safe access for all movement to, from and around the development. This should also include appropriate provision for public transport, cycling, pedestrians, disabled people and, where necessary, car parking. 
7.15 When assessing the impact of a proposal on the amenity of an existing or proposed property, the amenity of future occupants and existing uses adjacent to the site will be considered. Particular attention should be given to the potential for noise pollution, overshadowing, loss of daylight and sunlight, overlooking and a sense of enclosure. In residential development, proposals should also provide adequate private amenity space for future occupants. 
7.16 It is also important to consider whether a proposal would have an adverse impact on existing uses. The introduction of new residential properties could, for example, lead to complaints about noise, light or smells from existing businesses or community facilities, such as playing fields, and result in restrictions being placed on these uses. The Government’s planning guidance makes it clear that in such cases the agent of change should be responsible for providing suitable mitigation as part of their application, so developers will need to consider whether mitigation measures should be included within their proposal, for example increased noise insulation and mechanical ventilation may be required in town centre locations near existing entertainment venues. In some cases it may not be possible to mitigate potential impacts of existing uses, and in these cases an application may have to be refused.
23 www.chptools.decc.gov.uk/developmentmap 
127 A High Quality Environment7.17 Proposals should, through the layout and design of new development, consider the needs of users, including equality 
of access (see standards set in Policy H1), and how these needs would change for individuals and families through the different stages of their life. Proposals should be built to accessible and adaptable standards, as set out in Policy H1. It will also be important to consider whether the proposal would contribute to improving healthy lifestyles and help to reduce health inequalities. Where adverse impacts are identified, for example, the implications of fast-food take-away outlets, particularly in deprived areas and areas of poor health, the development will be expected to demonstrate how it will address or mitigate against health inequalities:
 
 Reducing the proliferation of any land use which reduces people’s ability to be healthy;
  Creating convenient and desirable active travel links;
  Promoting higher levels of regular exercise by increasing awareness of local sports and recreational facilities; and
  Supporting opportunities to widen the East Riding’s cultural, sport, recreation and leisure offer.
7.18 The provision of trees can make a significant contribution towards character and the quality of the environment. Trees can help mitigate climate change, contribute to improved mental health and contribute towards green infrastructure provision. They should be provided on all new streets unless there are justifiable reasons why they would not be appropriate. Opportunities should also be taken to incorporate trees elsewhere such as in parks and community orchards.
7.19 Arrangements should be in place to manage construction waste, and waste generated from the use of the development, as far up the waste management hierarchy as possible. This means preventing waste from occurring wherever possible (e.g. by reusing materials or equipment) or, if this is not possible, prepare items for reuse (e.g. by repairing damaged items). If this is not possible, recycling is the next best option and can be facilitated by the storage of refuse on-site allowing for the segregation of reusable or recyclable materials. This is followed by recovering value from waste by other means before disposal as the last resort. This approach can be achieved through the production and implementation of a site waste management plan which details how waste arising from new development is to be managed and making the best use of resources.
7.20 Construction methods are being continually developed, adapted, and improved to reduce construction time, increase build quality, reduce the impacts of construction, and make buildings more energy efficient. The use of modern methods of construction, including modular buildings, should be considered and is supported where other design considerations are met.
7.21 There are areas within the East Riding that have their own special character, which should be safeguarded. These areas include large, well-spaced houses in substantial, landscaped grounds (e.g. at Kemp Road in Swanland) and areas of settlements where the arrangement of buildings is loose, giving that part of the settlement an open, or even semi-rural appearance. Areas that have their own special or common character should be conserved. Proposals to subdivide large gardens to form new building plots, or to carry out development not in keeping with the common character, will be resisted where they would have an adverse impact on that character. Where development is proposed within a conservation area it will also be necessary to take account of any published character appraisal.
7.22 There are several landmarks in the East Riding that make an important contribution to the sense of place and examples are identified in Policies A1-A6. New development will need to safeguard, including any views of, the East Riding’s outstanding built and natural features. These include; 
 
 Important religious buildings;
  Important civic buildings, country houses and industrial heritage;
  Historic cores of the East Riding’s settlements and their settings; and
  Views of outstanding natural features.
7.23 All new development should consider using local materials and architectural styles or features that have strong local 
128
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Updateassociations with the East Riding’s main landscape, geology and built form types. These include: 
  Holderness Plain – Brick clay, tiles
  Humberhead Levels - Dutch influences;
  Wolds/ Derwent Valley - Brick, clay pantiles, chalk; and
  Coastal (especially coastal towns and seafront settings) – various seaside styles, including modern movement,  
 Victorian/Edwardian, Queen Anne/Georgian.
7.24 This should include consideration of relevant information on local styles and materials, as set out in the East Riding 
Landscape Character Assessment Update (2018), conservation area appraisals and town and village plans/strategies/design statements. Additional areas of special character, outstanding built and natural features and architectural styles are identified in Policies A1-A6.
7.25 The Council supports the use of Neighbourhood Plans to provide more localised design policies. Neighbourhood Plans may include the use of design guides or codes for a local area. New development proposals will need to take into account any codes or guides that exist.
7.26 Notwithstanding the need to address local design factors, innovative designs incorporating new materials and technologies will be supported in appropriate locations, for example, where they can be shown to add value to their settings. Applications should be accompanied by a design statement, which demonstrates how the design of the proposed development has evolved and responded to its context.
7.27 The design of development should incorporate nature conservation and biodiversity enhancements. The Town and Country Planning Association and The Wildlife Trust’s Planning for a Healthy Environment - Good Practice Guidance for Green Infrastructure and Biodiversity (2012) has a wide range of best practice design options for biodiversity. Proposals will also deliver a biodiversity net gain as set out in Policy ENV5.
7.28 Developments should aim to provide a reduction in the vulnerability and increase in resilience to climate change, in terms of thermal comfort and flooding. This could be through site lay out and/or property resistance/resilience measures. Further detail is provided in Policy ENV6.
Promoting a high quality landscape
7.29 Landscape character is what makes an area unique. It is defined by Natural England as “a distinct, recognisable and consistent pattern of elements in the landscape that makes one landscape different from another, rather than better  
or worse.”
7.30 The East Riding contains a diverse range of land forms, which gives particular areas a distinctive character. These are described through the National Countryside Character Areas (NCCAs) and include: the chalk uplands of the Yorkshire Wolds; meandering rivers and streams of the Vale of York; watery raised mires of the Humberhead Levels; coastal plain of Holderness; and broad expanse of the Humber Estuary and its surroundings. Along the East Riding’s coast, the landscape changes from the dramatic chalk cliffs of Flamborough Head in the north, through the crumbling clay cliffs of Holderness, to the nationally unique Spurn Head at the southern tip of the coast. Two sections of the coast, at Flamborough and Spurn Head, are designated as Heritage Coast and are protected for their special scenic and environmental value.
7.31 The NCCAs provide a context and framework for managing development, safeguarding and, where possible, enhancing the natural environment and landscape values. The East Riding Landscape Character Assessment Update (2018) splits the East Riding into a further 23 Character Types and assesses their value.
129 A High Quality EnvironmentPolicy ENV2: Promoting a high quality landscape
A. Development proposals should be sensitively integrated into the existing landscape, demonstrate an 
understanding of the intrinsic qualities of the landscape setting and, where possible, seek to make the most of the opportunities to protect and enhance landscape characteristics and features. To achieve this, development should:
1. Protect the character and individual identity of settlements by maintaining their physical separation, 
including through the maintenance of the Key Open Areas identified in Policies A1-A6, where there is a risk of settlement coalescence.
2. Protect and enhance important open spaces within settlements, which contribute to their character.
3. Ensure all important hedgerows and trees are retained unless their removal can be justified in the wider public interest. Where important hedgerows and any trees are lost replacements will usually be required on-site.
4. Maintain or enhance the character and management of woodland where appropriate.
5. Retain, not detract from, and enhance wetland and water feature characteristics.
6. Protect and enhance views across valued landscape features, including flood meadows, chalk grassland, lowland heath, mudflats and salt marsh, sand dunes and chalk cliffs.
7. Protect and enhance the undeveloped coast.
B. Proposals should protect, enhance and be compatible with the existing landscape character as described in the East Riding Landscape Character Assessment, in particular within the following Important Landscape Areas as shown on the Policies Map Update:
1. The Yorkshire Wolds, with special attention to ensuring developments are of an appropriately high 
quality and will not adversely affect the historic and special character, appearance or conservation value.
2. The Heritage Coast designations at Flamborough and Spurn Head.
3. The River Derwent Corridor and Lower Derwent Valley, which includes the Pocklington Canal.
4. The Thorne, Crowle and Goole Moors.
C. Proposals should have regard to the existing historic character as described in the Historic Landscape Characterisation of the East Riding of Yorkshire and Kingston Upon Hull.
7.32 The landscape is constantly changing because of the natural environment and human activity, including the impact of 
new development. There are key features and characteristics that have been identified in the Landscape Character Assessment Update (2018) and contribute to character and sense of place. These include natural features (e.g. hills, rivers and floodplain), as well as the cultural and historic features past and present (e.g. woodland, shelter belts, field boundaries, pre-historic land divisions and evidence of human landscape change from the Neolithic to the present day). New development should be managed so that it is sensitively integrated into the landscape and, where possible, enhances the character of the landscape and its features. Opportunities to restore lost features and characteristics, perhaps as part of development proposals, will be supported. Proposals are also expected to consider and take forward the conclusions of the Landscape Character Assessment Update (2018) and Important Landscape Areas Boundary Refinement (2014) which identified several important landscapes in the East Riding (Figure 12). These Important Landscape Areas include landscape areas that are valued locally. 
130
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update7.33 Where a proposal has potential impacts on the landscape outside of the East Riding the impact on that landscape or 
seascape should be considered.
Figure 12: Important Landscape Areas
7.34 Many of the settlements in the East Riding are characterised by their rural setting, which allows residents and visitors to distinguish one settlement from another. The coalescence of settlements would result in adverse change to the countryside setting of these settlements, resulting in the loss of their distinctiveness and be detrimental to their character. Whilst Policies A1-A6 identify a number of settlements where it is particularly important to maintain their physical separation, other areas may also perform a similar, albeit more localised role. A number of sub area policies identify a number of Key Open Areas that need to be protected between settlements and have been shown on the Policies Map Update. The areas of countryside separating the individual Major Haltemprice Settlements from each other, and with Hull, are of particular importance to preventing coalescence.
7.35 Proposals should avoid any detrimental impact on the physical separation of settlements, which could include uses requiring new buildings, structures, car parking, lighting, and hard surfacing, or detract from the open nature of the area. There may however, be opportunities for certain forms of development, such as informal recreation (e.g. walking, cycling, nature conservation) and formal recreation, where the openness of the countryside is retained. Any proposals should consider whether there are opportunities to improve the quality of the open areas, recognising their landscape value, alongside the potential for managing flood risk, biodiversity, public access, and meeting changing recreational, health and lifestyle needs. Such initiatives should retain and enhance a sense of openness and the existing landscape character.
7.36 In addition, open areas within settlements may often form an essential part of their character and act as a visual amenity for residents and visitors. They may also have a valuable role to play in providing a break in an otherwise built-up environment. Proposals within open areas considered to be important to the character of the settlement 
131 A High Quality Environmentshould ensure that the essentially open character of the site is maintained. This may be achieved by ensuring that any 
buildings are sited to relate to existing adjoining development.
7.37 The East Riding has one of the lowest percentages of woodland cover in England and, in particular, has very little ancient, or semi-natural woodland. Therefore, where woodland is present it often makes an important contribution to the amenity of the landscape and landscape character. Equally, despite their past loss due to intensive land management for agricultural production, hedgerows are the dominant field boundary feature in the East Riding and make an important contribution to landscape character by contributing to the strengthening of landscape pattern. Proposals should ensure that trees and important hedgerows are retained unless their removal can be justified in the wider public interest. Where trees and important hedgerows are lost, replacements, which may be provided off-site in some instances, will be required. New tree planting, particularly in association with development proposals, may also have the advantage of helping to integrate new development within the wider landscape character. It is expected new streets will be tree-lined in accordance with policy ENV1 and the NPPF.
7.38 There is a varied drainage pattern in the East Riding, which is the result of both natural and man-made watercourses. Rivers, streams, ditches, dikes and other water bodies are characteristic of the low-lying areas of the East Riding, where, in many instances, artificial drainage systems have been developed over centuries to take water away from the land. By contrast the Yorkshire Wolds is almost devoid of watercourses, the main exception being the Great Wolds Valley which carries the stream of the Gypsey Race to Bridlington. It is important that development proposals respect, and do not adversely affect, the contribution that water bodies and features make to landscape character.
7.39 Development proposals should also consider the proximity, or views of valued landscape features, within and surrounding the East Riding. Those features that have been identified as being of particular importance are set out in Policies A1-A6, and other features are set out in the Landscape Character Assessment Update (2018).
7.40 Along the coast it will be important that development protects the character of the undeveloped coastline, particularly in the two national Heritage Coast designations, Flamborough Headland northeast of Bridlington and Spurn Head to the southeast of the East Riding on the Humber Estuary. These are recognised as being among the most beautiful undeveloped coastlines in England, and are managed to conserve, protect, and enhance their natural beauty, marine flora and fauna, and heritage assets. This character must be maintained, although adequate provision is made for limited development in Flamborough (which is identified by Policy S3 of this Plan as a Primary Village) and Bempton (which is identified by Policy S4 as a Village), both of which fall within the Heritage Coast designation. The NPPF states that major development within a Heritage Coast is unlikely to be appropriate unless it is compatible with its special character. 
7.41 There are currently no statutory landscape designations in the East Riding, although there are the two areas identified as Heritage Coast, which are recognised as being of particular importance. In addition, there are a number of distinctive landscapes that are valued locally and are recognised as being of a high quality within the context of the East Riding. These are the Yorkshire Wolds, the River Derwent Corridor and Lower Derwent Valley, which includes the Pocklington Canal, and the Thorne, Crowle and Goole Moors. The boundaries of these Important Landscape Areas are shown on the Policies Map Update. 
7.42 The Yorkshire Wolds are currently being considered for Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) status. If the area is designated during the lifetime of the plan, this policy and NPPF paragraphs 176/7 should be used together to ensure that new development does not undermine the special qualities of the Yorkshire Wolds and its setting. If designated, it may be necessary to prepare a supplementary planning document relating to the AONB.
7.43 The Yorkshire Wolds form an arc of high, gently rolling ground extending from the Humber Estuary west of Hull, to the North Sea coast at Flamborough Head. They comprise a prominent chalk escarpment and foothills rising from the Vale of York to the west, the Vale of Pickering to the north (outside of the East Riding in Ryedale and 
132
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateScarborough Districts), and falling to the plain of Holderness to the east. Most of the Wolds is agricultural with 
woodland planting restricted to small, scattered woodland comprising shelterbelts around farmsteads with larger woodland and plantation areas located on the sides of the valleys. The gently, rolling landscape instils a sense of openness and tranquillity provided by expansive views, sparse populations and agriculture.
7.44 Much of the East Riding’s boundary with Ryedale District falls within the Yorkshire Wolds, and the landscape quality of this area is also recognised in the Ryedale Plan as an Area of High Landscape Value. It is however, recognised that not all the Yorkshire Wolds is of the same quality and the Landscape Character Assessment Update (2018) identifies 5 different landscape character types and 23 landscape areas. Those parts of the Yorkshire Wolds that are considered to be of highest quality tend to be concentrated on the western scarp slope and around Sledmere. On the western scarp slope the landscape is particularly diverse, characterised by a series of dry valleys resulting in a complex landscape made of contrasting characteristics (such as enclosed valleys and open hill tops). The varied landform also results in a sense of enclosure and isolation in the valleys where fields tend to follow contours with hedges marking the upper extent of the steepest area. The areas of lesser quality tend to be less diverse in their characteristics, have fewer features and may have some detractors, such as an urban edge around a larger settlement, which also serves to reduce tranquillity.
7.45 Despite the varying degrees of quality, the entire area of the Yorkshire Wolds is shown on the Policies Map Update as it is the interactions between the different character types and areas that contribute to character and make the Yorkshire Wolds distinctive. Within the Yorkshire Wolds it is important that development is of an appropriate scale and design that conserves landscape value, and protects and enhances those features which contribute to the character of the area. Development should seek to retain the varied landform including but not limited to:
 
 The contrasting and varying levels of enclosure and exposure, isolation, and tranquillity;
  Diversity of the landscape;
  Distinctive features and views;
  Field patterns;
  Villages and their distinctive character and setting;
  The historic importance of the Great Wolds Valley; and
  Signs of past human activity.
7.46 The River Derwent Corridor, which includes the Lower Derwent Valley and Pocklington Canal, lies to the west of the East Riding forming the boundary with York and Selby. The Lower Derwent Valley area incorporates the section of the River Derwent Corridor between Kexby to the north and Barmby on the Marsh to the south, as well as the area eastwards on the Pocklington Canal and Beck corridor towards Pocklington. This area is important for the traditionally farmed flood plain meadow landscape of the river and canal corridors, which support the internationally and nationally important habitat and species of the designated Habitats sites. To the south, the Lower Derwent Valley extends to join the Humber Estuary. This area has a traditional riverine landscape with pasture, species rich meadows and well vegetated field drains, framed by occasional small woodlands and waterside willows with a strong sense of tranquillity and serenity from the traditionally farmed areas. Both Selby District and York City’s emerging local plans propose to safeguard the area’s special landscape which is of great agricultural, historic, cultural, environmental and landscape value. In this area it is important that development and management activity has particular consideration of the character and setting of the low-lying flat floodplain, and the villages, hamlets and farmsteads that line the corridor just above the floodplain. The Lower Derwent Valley Supplementary Planning Document has been prepared to support the application of this policy.
7.47 The Thorne, Crowle and Goole Moors are located in the most southwestern corner of the East Riding forming the boundary with Doncaster. The rarity of the landscape character, where peat extraction has taken place, is recognised as being important in the context of the East Riding and forms part of the largest expanse of lowland raised mire in England. There are extensive views across the flat open landscape that are intermittently interrupted by scrub and birch regeneration on the moors. Development should consider the surrounding extensive views across the flat open landscape. 
133 A High Quality Environment7.48 To make positive planning decisions regarding the historic environment and the management of historic elements 
present within the current landscape, proposals should have regard to the existing historic character as described in the Historic Landscape Characterisation of the East Riding of Yorkshire and Kingston Upon Hull (HLC). The HLC can be used alongside the Landscape Character Assessment to aid environmentally beneficial land management, the conservation of historic parkland, and flood management schemes.
Valuing our heritage
7.49 National planning policy recognises that the historic environment is an irreplaceable resource and should be conserved, in a manner appropriate to its significance, so that it can be enjoyed by future generations. It defines conservation of heritage assets as “the process of maintaining and managing change to a heritage asset in a way that sustains and, where appropriate, enhances its significance.”
7.50 Significance is defined as having aesthetic, historic, archaeological, or communal values attached to a place . A single place or asset can have one, more or all of the significances attributed to it, and it is particularly important to safeguard these elements. The environment in which a heritage asset is experienced (including its setting), is also key to the character of a heritage asset and should be considered within the planning process. 
7.51 The East Riding has a rich and diverse historic environment, containing outstanding buildings of national importance, such as Beverley Minster and Burton Constable Hall, alongside more local landmarks that act as place makers. There is a variety of architectural styles, which are the result of adapting to locally available building materials, such as chalk and clay for bricks. Brick is the predominant building material in the area with both the use of pantile roofs as a vernacular feature and slate used on higher status buildings. Vernacular buildings feature throughout the area including those constructed in limestone, cobbles and chalk, with “tumbled” gables being a particular feature of the area.
7.52 The wealth and variety of built heritage and archaeology in the East Riding add to a sense of place, creating a feeling of identity in the area. Many assets are recognised as being of particular significance and are protected by their designated status, such as scheduled monuments, listed buildings, registered parks and gardens, a registered battlefield and conservation areas. However, only a proportion of the elements that give the East Riding its sense of place are protected by these national designations. There are also many other heritage assets of local significance, these are often classed as non-designated heritage assets but can fall into similar categories, buildings or structures, archaeology, parks and gardens or battlefields. 
7.53 The historic environment includes the wider landscape and various individual features in the landscape that give areas and settlements their special character. They include nationally significant, yet largely undesignated archaeological landscapes, such as the Yorkshire Wolds, with archaeological deposits spanning back to pre-historic eras. Landscapes are also significant to registered parks and gardens, listed buildings and conservation areas, influencing the character, and setting in which the asset is experienced. 
134
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateTable 11: Designated heritage assets within the East Riding
Types of Designated Heritage Asset
Scheduled 
monumentsThe East Riding has around 350 such sites, including numerous Neolithic and Bronze Age funerary sites, Iron Age remains, a number of deserted medieval villages, and crop-mark sites. Scheduled Monument Consent (SMC) is required though Historic England for works affecting these heritage assets.
Listed buildings The East Riding has over 200 Grade I and Grade II* listed buildings (of ‘outstanding’ architectural or historic interest). These include several notable churches (such as Beverley and Howden Minsters) and significant country houses (including Sledmere House, Burton Constable Hall and Burton Agnes Hall). There are over 2,500 Grade II listed buildings, with significant concentrations in Beverley, Bridlington and Hedon.
Conservation areas106 conservation areas have been designated throughout the East Riding, which seek to preserve the special character or appearance of an area and are set out on the Draft Policies Map Update. Conservation Areas can include buildings, designed features, spaces between buildings, views, trees and boundary treatments.
Registered BattlefieldsWithin the East Riding, Stamford Bridge (1066) (Historic England National Register) is the only Registered Battlefield. It is a nationally important example, which is set out on the Draft Policies Map Update. Other military sites within the East Riding are often covered by other national designations such as scheduled monument or listed buildings. For example, the complex of military structures at Paull, dating from the mid nineteenth century fort to Tudor and Napoleonic gun batteries.
Registered parks and gardensA number of parks and gardens of historic interest are included on Historic England’s Register of Historic Parks and Gardens of special interest in England, including Sledmere House, Burton Constable, Dalton Hall, Houghton Hall, Londesborough Park, Thwaite Hall and Risby Hall Manor House. Registered parks and gardens are identified on the Draft Policies Map Update.
135 A High Quality EnvironmentTable 12: Non-designated heritage assets within the East Riding
Types of Non - Designated Heritage Asset
Buildings/
StructuresThere are many buildings, bridges or other structures that have historic and architectural value and are locally significant to East Riding’s character. The local significance can derive from aesthetic, historic, communal, and/or evidential value. This could be the whole asset, including the setting, a particular architectural feature within the building or linked to a historical event/person. The National Planning Policy Framework states it is the Local Planning Authority who identifies a Non-Designated Heritage Asset. This can include assets included within the Historic Environment Record (HER), Conservation Area Appraisals, or where identified by officers during the determination of an application. 
Archaeology The East Riding has a number of archaeological landscapes that are considered significant but are undesignated. These include areas in the Y orkshire Wolds (an extensive prehistoric landscape), wetlands in the Humberhead Levels (which contain significant palaeoenvironmental remains), Holderness, the Hull Valley and Vale of Y ork.Information about archaeological remains, or the potential for archaeology within the East Riding can be found at the Humber Historic Environment Record (HER).
Battlefields/MilitaryNon-designated military sites can be both archaeological or above ground built heritage assets.
 One of the candidates for the site of the tenth century battlefield of Brunanburh in Rowley 
Parish, is undesignated.
 A number of undesignated battlefield and skirmish sites from the English Civil War.
 The undesignated Napoleonic era signal station, gun batteries and barracks built at Spurn 
between 1796 and 1804.
 A significant number of undesignated sites associated with the two World Wars, inter-war 
period and Cold War.
Parks and GardensNon-designated parks, historic estates and parkland landscapes make an important contribution to the rural character and cultural heritage within the East Riding, for example:
 Larger designed landscapes such as Rise Park, Grimston Garth, Warter Priory and Wassand Park.
 Over 50 non-designated medieval and Tudor deer parks, some containing significant 
archaeological remains.
 A number of smaller public parks and gardens such as West Park in Goole. 
Cemeteries of historic or local significance, including Bridlington Cemetery and Goole Cemetery.
7.54 A number of these assets have been identified as being at risk, including the nationally significant prehistoric ritual and settlement landscapes of the Yorkshire Wolds and the Humber Wetlands. There are also a number that have been included on the Historic England At Risk Register (2021)
25, which identifies the following entries:
  89 archaeological entries26, though this is largely due to ploughing which cannot be restricted under the planning system;
  buildings or structures27;
  7 places of worship28;
  registered parks and gardens; and
  conservation areas.
25 Historic England’s At Risk Register is updated annually 
26 Scheduled monuments that are earthworks or buried archaeology 
27 The Historic England At Risk Register considers buildings and structures to comprise listed buildings of Grade I or Grade II* and above ground 
scheduled monuments  
28 Which are also Grade I, II* or II listed buildings.
136
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdatePolicy ENV3: Valuing our Heritage 
A. Proposals that positively and proactively conserve and enhance the East Riding’s Historic Environment and 
heritage assets will be supported. This Historic Environment reinforces local distinctiveness, helps create a sense of place and can assist in the delivery of the economic wellbeing of the area. Key features that contribute to the East Riding’s distinctive historic character, include, but are not limited to:
1. Those elements that contribute to the special interest of Conservation Areas, including the landscape 
setting, open spaces, key views and vistas, and important unlisted buildings identified as contributing to the significance of each Conservation Area in its appraisal;
2. Listed Buildings and their settings;
3. Scheduled Monuments;
4. Historic Parks and Gardens and key views in and out of these landscapes;
5. The dominance of the church towers and spires as one of the defining features of the landscape, such as those of Holderness and the Wolds; 
6. Heritage assets associated with the historic development and defence of the East Yorkshire Coast and the foreshore of the Humber Estuary; 
7. The historic, archaeological and landscape interest of the Registered Battlefield at Stamford Bridge; 
8. The historic cores of medieval settlements, and, surviving former medieval open field systems with ridge and furrow cultivation patterns or garth plots;
9. The nationally significant archaeology of the Yorkshire Wolds; and
10. Those parts of the nationally important wetlands where waterlogged archaeological deposits survive.
B. In determining applications, proposals that sustain or enhance the significance of a heritage asset and its setting should be supported. Development that will cause harm to the significance of a heritage asset will only be granted where clear and convincing justification for the proposed harm can be demonstrated in line with national planning policy requirements. Where harm cannot be avoided the applicant will need to prepare a scheme that mitigates the introduction of harm. 
C. Proposals that would retain, and enhance the significance of a built non-designated heritage asset, or its contribution to the character of a place will be supported where it is in accordance with national planning policy.
D. Proposals which seek to safeguard the future of designated heritage assets at risk, including putting them to an appropriate, viable and sustainable use and conserve their significance will be supported where it is in accordance with national planning policy. 
E. Proposals that impact on a heritage asset (including its setting) should be accompanied by a heritage statement; proportionate to the asset’s significance and in line with national planning policy. 
F. Considerable weight will be given to the preservation and protection of non-designated archaeological remains. Development proposals on sites that have archaeological potential must include a desk-based assessment and, where necessary, a field evaluation report with their planning application. To minimise conflict and ensure mitigation of damage, preservation of the remains in situ is the preferred solution. However, where the significance of archaeological remains is such that their preservation in situ is not essential and is not feasible, a written scheme of investigation and programme of archaeological works aimed at achieving preservation by record will be required to be submitted to and agreed with the local planning authority. 
137 A High Quality Environment7.55 Policy ENV3 considers how best to manage the 
conflict between the pressure for development and the need to preserve our heritage assets, alongside supporting opportunities to better reveal the significance of assets. Heritage assets are defined in national planning policy and those of relevance to the East Riding are shown in Table 11. Designated and non-designated assets, as set out in Table 11 and Table 12, make a significant contribution to the historic character of the East Riding. This character varies from area to area and is influenced by a range of features, such as historic street patterns, coastal character, architectural styles, design features and the materials used in a particular location. These special features should be conserved and, where possible, form an important factor in the design of new development. By requiring conservation, the policy encourages developments to take opportunities to enhance the significance, views, setting, character, appearance, and context of heritage assets. Heritage assets and historic character are also key considerations in the design of new development as part of Policy ENV1. 
7.56 Many heritage assets have been identified in Table 12, Policies A1-A6 and other documents, such as the HER and East Riding Landscape Character Assessment Update (2018), conservation area appraisals and town/parish plans provide useful information. This does not represent a definitive list and other non-designated assets are likely to be identified through the planning application process. Therefore, it is necessary to determine the significance of an asset on a case-by-case basis. Where proposals are likely to affect a heritage asset, proposals should include a heritage statement so that the full impact of the development can be understood.
7.57 If a development would harm the significance of a heritage asset, applicants will be expected to justify how other factors outweigh the harm, such as the benefits of the proposal to the local community. The greater the significance of the asset (as shown through the level at which it is designated), the greater the weight given to conserving it and the greater the weight given to preventing harm or loss of the significance. In assessing the potential for harm to a heritage asset it may also be appropriate to consider if the design and siting of the development could be adapted, as well as identify whether there are any other suitable and viable uses, which would enable the building’s conservation. Development that results in substantial harm to, or total loss of, the significance of a designated heritage asset will only be supported in exceptional circumstances.
7.58 However, the absence of a designation does not necessarily indicate lower significance for nationally significant archaeological sites, which cannot be designated as a scheduled monument due to the very specific selection criteria. 
7.59 Where it is likely that an undiscovered heritage asset exists, for example, through consideration of the location of known assets, steps should be taken to ensure that its potential significance is understood and considered in any development proposal. 
7.60 If development proposals result in harm or total loss of a non-designated built heritage asset, then justification is required to make a balanced judgement. Evidence can show the lack of economic viability for preservation/conversion or structural complications rendering the building unsound.
7.61 Proposals affecting a designated heritage asset, including development within the setting of a heritage asset, will require the submission of a heritage statement with their planning application. The level of information provided should be proportionate to the asset’s significance and scale of the proposal. This is to provide a consideration within the planning process for any possible impact a proposal may have on a heritage asset, and to avoid or minimise any conflict that may arise. 
7.62 The local planning authority will seek to protect, enhance, and promote archaeological heritage. Proposals that affect archaeological assets, or sites that may have the potential to further enhance our archaeological understanding, will require the submission of an archaeological desk-based assessment and an evaluation report with their planning 
138
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Updateapplication. The level of information required should be proportionate to the asset’s significance, or potential 
thereof, and to the scale of impact of the proposal. 
7.63 Wherever possible, developments affecting archaeological assets or their setting should be located or designed to avoid archaeological remains and ensure that these remains are preserved in situ. Considerable weight will be given to the preservation, protection, and enhancement of the asset. The more significant the remains, the greater the presumption will be in favour of this.
7.64 Where the significance of archaeological remains is such that their preservation in situ is not essential and not feasible, the developer will need to set out those measures required to provide for the appropriate and satisfactory excavation and recording of the remains before planning permission is granted. A programme of archaeological investigation aimed at achieving preservation by record will be required to be submitted to and agreed with the local planning authority. The findings should be published within an agreed timescale and submitted to the Humber Historic Environment Record.
Conserving and enhancing biodiversity and geodiversity
7.65 National planning policy underlines the importance of conserving and enhancing biological and geological diversity and integrating this with new development. National policy on this issue is currently evolving, with the introduction of the Environment Act and the UK leaving the European Union.
7.66 Development proposals have potential to effect biodiversity in a number of ways. These include but are not exclusive to:
 
 Direct habitat loss;
  Disturbance and displacement of wildlife;
  Impact on breeding/migrating birds;
  Damage to habitats due to pollution and  
 nutrient deposition; and
  Impact on hydrology and water.
7.67 The East Riding is home to a wide variety of wildlife species and habitats, owing to its varied landscapes and geology. Significant biodiversity assets in the East Riding include the ancient flood meadows of the Lower Derwent Valley, chalk grasslands of the Yorkshire Wolds, wetlands of the River Hull Valley, mudflats and salt marshes of the Humber Estuary, globally rare chalk stream habitats and towering chalk cliffs of Bempton and Flamborough Headland. There are also pockets of ancient woodland, such as at Millington. Important species supported by these habitats include water voles, otters, over-wintering bird populations, nesting seabirds, farmland birds, migratory fish, amphibians, and reptiles such as the sea lamprey, great crested newt and grass snake, and a variety of plants and insects. However, the overall extent and variety of biodiversity has, for a long period of time, been declining. Future development and projected climate change present further challenges to protecting and enhancing this resource. The following policies aim to reverse that trend of decline and ensure development proposals contribute to conserving and enhancing biodiversity.
139 A High Quality Environment7.68 Biodiversity provides numerous benefits, or ecosystem services, for people, such as; 
  Providing services such as food, fuel and water,
  Regulating services, such as soil formation, climate change, flood regulation, pollination and waste purification, 
  Supporting ecosystem services, such as nutrient cycles, food and oxygen production, and
  Cultural services, such as recreation spaces, education, intrinsic and aesthetic value.
7.69 Natural capital thinking has risen in national and local agendas in recent years, for example as a key element of the 
Government’s 25 Year Environment Plan. Defra summarises natural capital as follows: 
 “At its simplest, a natural capital approach is about thinking of nature as an asset, or set of assets that benefit people.  
The ability of natural capital assets to provide goods and services is determined by their quality, quantity and location. These in turn can be affected by background pressures, management practices and drivers of demand.”
7.70 In Enabling a Natural Capital Approach
29, Defra writes 
 “Biodiversity can be thought of as a core component of natural capital with multiple effects on social and economic welfare. Biodiversity:
 
 is core to the ecological condition and quality of  
 ecosystems that support the services provided  
 to people,
  directly benefits people through species existence,  
 through nature-based solutions, and by enriching  
 other benefits (like nature-based recreation),
  underpins the resilience of ecosystems to shocks and can provide insurance value.”
7.71 The Hull and East Yorkshire Local Nature Partnership is developing with partners a York, North Yorkshire, East Riding and Hull natural capital investment framework. A critical part of this is a comprehensive up-to-date habitat network map, which can support better decision making across a range of sectors and work areas, including planning. This mapping is being developed currently via remote sensing technology. The final product will support better decision making and monitoring with regard to biodiversity and support the development of a Local Nature Recovery Strategy in this area.
7.72 Following the enactment of the Environment Act, a Local Nature Recovery Strategy and a Nature Recovery Network will be required, to enable the Government to achieve commitments made in its 25 year Environment Plan
30 (2018). The Strategy will set local priorities for restoring and linking up habitats so species can thrive, and 
agree the best places to help nature recover, plant trees, restore peatland, mitigate flood and fire risk, and create green spaces for local people to enjoy. It is expected that Local Nature Recovery Strategies will underpin a national Nature Recovery Network
31, which will be a network of wildlife-rich places. The Network’s aim is to expand, 
improve and connect these places across our towns, cities and countryside. Establishing the network will:
29 Enabling a Natural Capital Approach: Guidance (2020) Defra 
30 A Green Future: Our 25 year Plan to Improve the Environment (2018) DEFRA  
31 Policy Paper: Nature Recovery Network (Updated Nov 2020) DEFRA
140
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update  Enhance sites designated for nature conservation and other wildlife-rich places - newly created and restored  
 wildlife-rich habitats, corridors and stepping stones will help wildlife populations to grow and move;
  Improve the landscape’s resilience to climate change, providing natural solutions to reduce carbon and manage  
 flood risk, and sustaining vital ecosystems by improving soil, water and air quality;
  Reinforce the natural and cultural diversity of our landscapes, and protect our historic natural environment; and
  Enable us to enjoy and connect with nature where we live, work and play - benefiting our health and wellbeing.
7.73 A significant policy area concerning biodiversity is the Water Framework Directive (WFD) (2000) which was 
transposed into UK law through The Water Environment (Water Framework Directive) (England and Wales) Regulations 2017. The WFD is implemented through River Basin Management Plans (RBMPs), which set targets for waterbodies’ ecological status or ecological potential. The condition of a watercourse is measured as being either good, moderate, or less. Local planning authorities must have regard to the impact of any development proposal on the improvement targets set out in RBMPs. Development must not cause deterioration of the WFD status of any water body, or prevent any water body from reaching ‘good’ ecological status, except where it can be shown that there is an overriding public interest that outweighs WFD requirements. This is only likely to occur in exceptional circumstances. The Humber River Basin Management Plan (2009, updated 2015) identifies that, for the Hull and East Riding catchment, improvements to water bodies are dependent upon actions including, reducing diffuse pollution from agriculture and discharges from sewage works and storm drains, as well as ‘re-naturalising’ the ‘heavily modified’ nature of the area’s watercourses. In addition, the River Hull Headwaters Restoration Project (commenced 2008) aims to restore the headwaters, which is a northerly chalk stream system and designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), to a more favourable condition. 
7.74 There are a number of other local partnerships and initiatives aimed at protecting and enhancing the area’s biological and geological diversity. The Hull and East Yorkshire Local Nature Partnership (LNP) consists of stakeholders from commercial and social sectors, as well as environmental organisations. Their objective is to ensure that the natural environment is better taken account of in local decision making. 
7.75 Table 13 sets out the hierarchy of designated sites protected for their ecological importance from the international, national, and local levels, which are all represented in the East Riding. The international sites are made up of Special Area of Conservation (SAC), Special Protection Area (SPA) and Ramsar sites, which are part of the network of ‘European sites
32’ also referred to as 
habitats sites. This also applies to Potential SPAs (pSPA), possible SACs (pSAC), proposed Ramsar Sites and land identified as mitigation land or compensatory land.
7.76 National Sites cover Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) and National Nature Reserves (NNR). All the above form the cornerstone of UK nature conservation policy and are afforded the highest degree of protection.
7.77 Local Sites, including Candidate and Designated Local Wildlife Sites (LWS) are identified in the Local Sites in the East Riding of Yorkshire. 
141 A High Quality Environment 
32 This term is long established in government policy e.g. ODPM Circular 06/2005: Biodiversity and Geological Conservation – Statutory Obligations 
and their Impact within the Planning System (16 August 2005), to be read in conjunction with the current NPPF, other Government guidance and the 
current version of the Habitats Regulations. 
Table 13: Biodiversity and geological designated Sites
International Sites (Habitats Sites)
Ramsar Sites Listed under the Convention on Wetlands of International Importance under the criteria of rarity and diversity of both habitat and species, and fragility of ecosystems. East Riding designations are: Humber Estuary and Lower Derwent Valley. Shown on the Policies Map Update.
Special Protection Areas (SPA)Classified under the EC Directive on the Conservation of Wild Birds to ensure the survival and reproduction of migratory and other species. East Riding designations are: Flamborough and Filey Coast, Greater Wash, Hornsea Mere, Humber Estuary, Lower Derwent Valley and Thorne and Hatfield Moors. Shown on the Policies Map Update. Post Brexit these sites have been transposed into UK law.
Special Areas of Conservation (SAC)Designated under the EC Directive on the Conservation of Natural Habitats and of Wild Fauna and Flora to maintain or restore natural habitats and wild species. East Riding designations are: Flamborough Head, Humber Estuary, Lower Derwent Valley, River Derwent, and Thorne Moors. Shown on the Policies Map Update. Post Brexit these sites have been transposed into UK law.
European Marine Site (EMS)SPAs and/or SACs below mean high water. EMSs are the EU’s best examples of marine habitats or species populations. There are two in the East Riding: Flamborough Head and Humber Estuary. Post Brexit these sites have been transposed into UK law.
Potential, Possible and Proposed International SitesPotential SPAs (pSPA), possible SACs (pSAC) and proposed Ramsar Sites are afforded the same protection designated International sites. 
National Sites 
Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)Identified under the Wildlife and Countryside Act (1981) for habitat and natural features, including flora and fauna, geology, and geomorphology. There are 50+ sites in the East Riding. Examples include the Derwent Ings, Hornsea Mere, Leven Canal, Melbourne and Thornton Ings, Melton Bottom Chalk Pit, Newton Mask, River Derwent, River Hull Headwaters, and Thorne, Crowle and Goole Moors. Shown on the Policies Map Update.
National Nature Reserves (NNR)Identified to protect habitats and communities of plants and animals and geological or physical geographical features of special interest. There are three NNRs within the East Riding: Humberhead Peatlands, Lower Derwent Valley and Spurn. Shown on the Policies Map Update.
Marine Conservation Zones (MCZ)Marine Conservation Zones are areas that protect a range of nationally important, rare, or threatened habitats and species. There is one MCZ within the East Riding. Shown on the Policies Map Update.
142
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateLocal Sites 
Local Wildlife 
Sites (LWS)Locally important sites for habitats and species. The original local sites are being reviewed against site selection guidelines set out in the latest Local Sites in the East Riding of Yorkshire. As well as sites that have been designated, there are candidate sites which have evidence to suggest they would qualify but have not yet been surveyed and assessed against the guidelines. There are also historic sites, which are former candidate LWS that lacked sufficient evidence to either confirm their status as candidate LWS or to delete them. It is a holding category until the status of the site can be determined through appropriate evidence. Currently evidence does not exist for the Council to inform an assessment of the impact upon a historic LWS. Designated and Candidate Local Wildlife Sites are shown on the Policies Map Update.
Local Geological Sites (LGS)Locally important Geological Sites (previously referred to as Regionally Important Geological Sites) are valued for the educational value they hold, the role they play in the development of geological science or for the rocks, fossils, or features they hold. There are 50+ sites in the East Riding. LGS underpin and complement the SSSI coverage and are shown on the Policies Map Update.
Local Nature Reserves (LNR)Local Nature Reserves (LNRs) are sites for both people and wildlife. They are of special interest for their flora, fauna, geological or physical geographical features, and are managed for the purpose of their preservation, or for providing opportunities for study and research. They are also recognised as providing the public with opportunities for informal enjoyment of nature. There are 13 LNRs in the East Riding and these are shown on the Policies Map Update.
143 A High Quality EnvironmentPolicy ENV4: International, National and Local Sites of Importance for 
Biodiversity
A. Proposals that are likely to have a significant adverse effect on statutory designated sites listed in Table 
13 (alone or in combination) will be considered in the context of the statutory protection afforded to the site.
B. Development should follow the mitigation hierarchy to first avoid, then mitigate, and where necessary compensate for loss or harm to biodiversity. Where loss or harm to a national or local designated site, as set out in Table 13, cannot be avoided, or adequately mitigated, as a last resort compensation for the loss/harm must be agreed. Development will be refused if loss or significant harm cannot be avoided, adequately mitigated or compensated for.
International (Habitats) sites
C. Applicants will be required to submit appropriate levels of evidence to enable the Council to undertake a Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA) of the proposal. Evidence will be required to assess the proposal’s potential impact (alone or in combination) in view of the international (habitats) site’s conservation objectives. This evidence should include the following potential impacts that proposals need to consider:
Recreational Pressure
1. The potential impact of recreational pressure on international (habitats) sites should be considered in proximity to sensitive sites. Proposals for residential and/or tourism accommodation in the following key sensitive locations should; 
i. in the Humber recreational pressure zone of influence, consider contributing towards strategic programmes aimed at managing the impact of residents and tourists on international (habitats) sites (see Figure 13);
ii. avoid development within the Spurn recreational pressure zone of influence shown on the policies map. Proposals for ‘roll back’ in this zone will have to provide appropriate mitigation to rule out adverse effects on the integrity of international (habitats) sites;
iii. consider the impact of recreational pressure when located within 5km of the Lower Derwent Valley international (habitats) sites; and
iv. consider the impact of recreational pressure on Flamborough Head international (habitats) sites.
Functionally Linked Land
2. Development proposals located within 10km of the Humber Estuary or Lower Derwent Valley international (habitats) sites will have to consider whether development results in the loss of ‘functionally linked land’ for mobile species associated with the international (habitats) site where the application site;
i. is greater than 5 hectares; or
144
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Updateii. forms part of a wider plot, field or open area that is greater than 5 hectares. 
3. Development proposals located within 3km of Thorne and Hatfield Moors international (habitats) 
sites, which impact habitats nightjars may use for feeding, will only be supported where they deliver a net gain in nightjar foraging habitat.
4. Where land is identified as functionally linked land, mitigation land that can perform the same function in a suitable location may be required to mitigate adverse effects.
Air Quality
5. Proposals emitting air pollutants must rule out adverse effects on the integrity of international (habitats) sites. 
Water Quality
6. Proposals discharging water pollutants, such as Nitrates and Phosphates, must rule out adverse effects on the integrity of international (habitats) sites.
7. Proposals that discharge foul or surface water into Hornsea Mere’s international (habitats) site hydrological catchment will have to demonstrate that foul and surface water can be appropriately addressed so that developments are nutrient neutral. Contaminants should be restricted from entering the Mere’s hydrological system. 
D. Mitigation will be required for a development site where adverse effects cannot be ruled out. Where mitigation is not possible to rule out adverse effects on the integrity of an international (habitats) site, the development will not be permitted unless it can be conclusively demonstrated that: 
1. There are no feasible alternative solutions that would be less damaging or avoid damage to the site;
2. There are imperative reasons of overriding public interest for the development; and
3. The necessary compensatory measures can be secured.
E. Sites that have been identified for mitigation or compensatory land are shown on the Policies Map and will 
be protected for the purposes for which they have been identified.
National 
F. Proposals that are likely to have an adverse effect on a national site (alone or in combination) will not normally be permitted, except where the benefits of development in that location clearly outweigh both the impact on the site and any broader impacts on the wider network of national sites. This should consider adverse impacts such as recreational pressure, functionally linked land, air quality, and water quality.
Local
G. Development resulting in loss or significant harm to a local site, or habitats or species supported by local sites, whether directly or indirectly, will only be supported if it can be demonstrated that there is a need for the development in that location and the benefit of the development outweighs the loss or harm.
145 A High Quality Environment7.78 Development proposals will be considered under the statutory context afforded to them. An Important Biodiversity 
Sites Supplementary Planning Document (Biodiversity Sites SPD) has been prepared to provide guidance on the implementation of Policy ENV4. The Biodiversity Sites SPD covers the HRA process and provides advice on considering ecological impacts on designated sites such as recreational pressure, functionally linked land, air quality and water quality. 
7.79 The NPPF emphasises that if harm resulting from development cannot be avoided, (through locating development on an alternative site with less harmful impacts), adequately mitigated or, as a last resort, compensated for, then planning permission should be refused.
International (habitats) sites
7.80 A Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA) has been completed to test whether developments in this Local Plan would adversely affect the integrity of the international (habitats) sites. It assessed a range of potential impacts on the designated sites including recreational impacts from new households and visitor accommodation, the loss of functional land for mobile species, and the impact of air and water pollution from planned growth. Policy ENV4 reflects the conclusions of this HRA and ensures that development complies with the Habitats Regulations. The main conclusions and resulting key requirements of the HRA are set out below, this also includes some issues that are relevant to national and local sites.
Recreational Pressure
7.81 The Humber Estuary, particularly its mudflats, shingle, saltmarshes and surrounding functional agricultural land provide essential winter feeding and roosting grounds for birds that spend the winter here. The wide range of recreational activities that take place on the Estuary’s shoreline can result in disturbance to the birds, albeit often unintentional. Human disturbance of the birds can have several impacts on their populations and habitats.
7.82 Prior to mitigation, the HRA cannot rule out the recreational impacts of new residential and visitor accommodation along the Humber Estuary, having a likely significant ‘in combination’ effect on the Humber Estuary SPA and Ramsar sites. Visitor surveys undertaken on the Humber Estuary identified residential and tourism accommodation development within 11.5 kilometres of the Humber Estuary SPA and Ramsar sites, which could contribute to further recreational impact. Consequently, avoidance and mitigation measures are required for all proposals of these types of development to rule out adverse recreational impacts on the Humber Estuary international (habitats) sites.
146
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateFigure 13: Recreational Pressure Mitigation Zones
7.83 The Strategic Access Management and Mitigation Strategy (SAMM) contained within the Biodiversity Sites SPD 
provides a mechanism to avoid and mitigate the lifetime recreational impacts of certain development on the Humber Estuary international (habitats) sites. Therefore, to ensure proposals comply with the Habitats Regulations, developers within 11.5km of the Humber Estuary can make a financial contribution, to the SAMM. These contributions will be used to implement a range of measures which will mitigate the recreational impacts of new development on the designated sites and help protect and maintain their integrity. Contribution to the SAMM will enable applicants to secure the appropriate avoidance or mitigation measures and enable the Council to conclude, through appropriate assessment, that development results in no adverse effect on the integrity of the Humber Estuary SPA from recreational pressure.
7.84 Applicants are not precluded from assessing the potential impact of their proposals on the designated sites and devising their own appropriate mitigation measures. When considering these measures, the evidence presented will need to allow the Authority to rule out adverse effects from the proposed development throughout its lifetime on the designated sites. Applicants will need to provide sufficiently detailed information about the potential impacts of their proposed development on the designated features, species, and habitats of all the internationally protected sites and the effect of their proposed mitigation measures to demonstrate conclusively to the Authority that it will comply with the Habitat Regulations. This will need to take into consideration the conclusions of the HRA for the Local Plan and the proposal’s potential impacts in combination with all other planned development within the East Riding and its surrounding areas. Under a precautionary principle, if the applicant does not demonstrate with certainty that the development, including any proposed mitigation, will not impact the integrity of the site, permission will be refused.
147 A High Quality Environment7.85 Visitor survey evidence at Beacon Ponds, within the Humber Estuary Special Protection Area (SPA) and Ramsar site 
and The Lagoons Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), highlighted a direct link between local tourist infrastructure (i.e. nearby caravan parks) and frequent access to the potentially vulnerable international (habitats) site. Sites where there is direct foot access from the potential development site to the international (habitats) site are of particular concern. Therefore, it would not be appropriate to increase accommodation near the sensitive Beacon Ponds Little Tern colony. The extent of the Beacon Ponds zone of influence is shown on the policies map. Development for ‘roll-back’ schemes within the Spurn zone of influence, as set out in policy ENV6, will have to rule out adverse effects on the international (habitats) sites. 
7.86 The Lower Derwent Valley is one of the largest and most important examples of traditionally managed species-rich floodplain remaining in the United Kingdom. A five-kilometre zone of influence, measured from the Lower Derwent Valley international (habitats) sites, is identified as the core area within which development proposals could impact on the Lower Derwent Valley. In this area, the guidance in the Lower Derwent Valley Supplementary Planning Document is particularly important. The document lists the type of development proposals likely to have a significant impact on biodiversity and/or landscape features within this area. Of particular concern are proposals resulting in increased direct or indirect disturbance e.g. through lighting, noise or increased recreational activity.
7.87 Flamborough Head European Marine site represents the most northerly outcrop of coastal chalk in the UK and the most southerly area of bedrock on the North Sea. It is also an attractive and popular tourist destination. Proposals for tourism development should consider the need for additional measures to minimise disturbance to breeding seabirds, and any associated erosion from high visitor numbers. There is also potential for damaging impacts to offshore reefs arising from increased recreational watercraft activity associated with tourism developments.
Functionally Linked Land
7.88 The term ‘functionally linked land’ refers to terrestrial land that is not designated as part of the Special Protection Area (SPA)/ Ramsar site, but used by significant numbers of featured species (mostly birds) for feeding and resting. Therefore, any potential impacts on this land needs to be considered under the Habitats Regulations. 
7.89 The Biodiversity Sites SPD provides a screening tool, which can be used to assess the ecological attributes of a site to identify its potential for being functionally linked land. Where a likely significant effect from development on potential functionally linked land cannot be ruled out, an appropriate assessment of the ecological value of the site should be undertaken. This should be based on at least one year’s survey data to identify the species (if any) present in significant numbers, the numbers of birds involved and the type of use the birds make of the site. The use of functionally linked land by birds from the international (habitats) site may vary and include high tide roosting, loafing or feeding. The significance of any loss of functionally linked land must be considered as an impact in a HRA. Any mitigation land that is required to be created must provide the same functions as the land predicted to be lost e.g. provision of roosting and/or feeding habitat for the relevant species and suitable for the same numbers. 
Air Quality 
7.90 In the East Riding, agricultural related emissions are the largest source of air pollution, which can damage vegetation and affect the diversity of ecosystems. Air quality impacts the natural environment and wildlife, and is particularly important in relation to some features within international and national designated sites, such as special areas of conservation (SACs) and sites of special scientific interest (SSSIs) but may also impact on non-designated sites where the specific ecological features are sensitive to air pollution. 
7.91 The Council will seek to ensure habitats are protected from impacts of air pollution. Potential air pollution risks will need to be considered (alone and in combination) and adequate mitigation included in the design of new development or if necessary, development should be avoided around sensitive environmental receptors. Proposals 
148
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Updatewith the potential to produce air pollution as shown by Natural England’s Impact Risk Zones, will be required to 
undertake an air quality assessment, which identifies the potential impact of the development in combination with other planned developments. Proposals involving an increase in emissions from livestock installations and associated storage and spreading should be accompanied by a SCAIL agricultural assessment or similar. Assessments should identify mitigation addressing any deterioration in air quality because of the development, having taken into account other permitted developments.
Water Quality 
7.92 Nutrient pollution is a big environmental issue for many of our most important places for nature in the East Riding. In freshwater habitats and estuaries, increased levels of nutrients in the water (especially nitrogen and phosphorus) can speed up the growth of certain plants, disrupting natural processes and impacting wildlife. This process (called ‘eutrophication’) damages these water dependent sites and harms the plants and wildlife that are there. In technical terms it can put sites in an ‘unfavourable condition’. The sources of excess nutrients are very site specific but include sewage treatment works, septic tanks, livestock, arable farming, and industrial processes. The Council will seek to ensure habitats are protected from impacts of water pollution. Guidance on how developments should consider their impact on water quality is provided in the Biodiversity Sites SPD.
7.93 Hornsea Mere Special Protection Area (SPA) site is already in unfavourable condition. Foul and surface water from new developments within Hornsea Mere’s catchment can make matters worse and undermine ongoing efforts to recover. Natural England has issued ‘nutrient neutrality’ advice highlighting the need to carefully consider the nutrients impacts of any new plans and projects that discharge into Hornsea Mere SPA, and whether mitigation is needed to protect the site from additional nutrient pollution. 
7.94 The Biodiversity Sites SPD provides a catchment calculator to assess a site’s current nutrient status and the likely impact of any new development. This allows competent authorities and developers to identify the level of mitigation required to cancel out the additional nutrient pollution expected from a particular project.
National sites
7.95 National Sites cover Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), National Nature Reserves (NNR) and Marine Conservation Zones (MCZ) are covered by the relevant legislation
33. Similar to International sites, National sites 
may require consideration of potential impacts from developments some distance away, based on the nature of the development and potential pathways for impact. Natural England has produced an Impact Risk Zone (IRZ) tool for assessing impacts of different types of development on different features of SSSIs. Planning applications within an IRZ, may require the submission of separate documentation, including: 
 
 Air quality assessment
  Water quality impact assessment
  Ecological appraisal; 
  Protected Species Survey; and 
  Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment.
33 The1981 Wildlife and Countryside Act and the Countryside and Rights of Way (CRoW) Act, 2000
149 A High Quality EnvironmentLocal Sites
7.96 Proposals that would have an adverse impact upon a Candidate, or Historic LWS should treat the site as a 
designated LWS or provide sufficient relevant and credible ecological data to enable the site to be assessed against the objective guidelines detailed in the Local Sites in the East Riding of Yorkshire.
7.97 LPAs have a duty to consult Natural England before granting planning permission for any development that is in, or likely to affect, a SSSI, SAC, SPA or Ramsar site. Ecological information may be required to determine a planning application. Data from bespoke ecological surveys may be required for sites likely to contain statutory protected habitats and species, or Habitats and Species of Principal Importance for the conservation of biodiversity
34. These 
include trees/woodland (e.g. badgers, bats), old buildings (e.g. bats, barn owl), ponds (e.g. great crested newts and other amphibians), and ditches, rivers and canals (e.g. otters, water voles, migratory fish).
7.98 Any ecological appraisal should be proportionate to the nature and scale of the development proposal and presented in a thorough and clear manner. Appraisals should be undertaken early in the design process to enable them to influence the desgin of the proposal. The methodology should be consistent with best practice guidance, such as Chartered Institute of Ecology and Environmental Management’s Guidelines for Preliminary Ecological Appraisal
35. This sets out the minimum standards required and the British Standard - BS 42020: 2013 Biodiversity 
Code of practice for planning and development. 
7.99 If there is evidence of protected species being present or affected by the development, a protected species survey will be requested. The MAGIC interactive mapping system and information from the NEYED Centre should be used by applicants to check the protected species present on, or near to, a development site. This includes any records of species protected by the Habitats Regulations, including otter, great crested newt and bats (known as European Protected Species). Development could have an impact if it involves the: 
 
 Loss of, or alteration to, trees, woodland, hedgerows, scrub, grassland, watercourses or water bodies; or 
  Demolition, conversion or alteration of older buildings or roof spaces.
Mitigation
7.100 Development should avoid adverse impacts on designated sites, important habitats or species, and/or habitat networks. If this cannot be achieved, the adverse impacts must be adequately mitigated or, as a last resort, compensated for. It will not be possible to compensate for any proposals that would result in the loss of an irreplaceable habitat, including ancient woodland. Ancient woodland is of great importance for its wildlife, history, and the contribution it makes to the landscape. Development resulting in the loss or deterioration of irreplaceable habitats, including ancient woodland, will only be supported if it can be demonstrated that the need for, and benefits of, the development in that location would clearly outweigh the loss of habitat.
7.101 Mitigation measures should avoid harmful impacts of development or reduce them to an acceptable level, which does not cause significant ecological harm. This can involve a range of measures, including changes to site layout, the timing of construction and the provision of wildlife protection or buffer zones. The type of mitigation measures used on a scheme will be dependent on the species and habitat present, therefore, a standard approach cannot be used. The design and landscaping of new development should aim to retain existing natural and biodiversity features where possible, as well as provide opportunities for additional or enhanced biodiversity. For example, a means of enhancing biodiversity could be where a development proposal helps to bring a local site into active nature conservation management. In other cases, action may be more localised, for example, through the creation of new habitats such as green walls/roofs, street trees, sustainable drainage systems, hedgerows and ponds, or the provision of nest boxes and hibernation sites.
7.102 If it is necessary to mitigate or, as a last resort, compensate for loss or damage, a mitigation/compensation plan should be prepared. The plan should set out the mitigation/compensation objectives and monitoring and maintenance procedures, including the period for which monitoring and management should be undertaken, which 
34 As listed in Section 41, National Environment and Rural Communities Act (NERC) 2006 
35 www.cieem.net/guidance-on-preliminary-ecological-appraisal-gpea-28
150
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Updateshould be built into the planning application and delivered through planning conditions. This may be in the form of 
a construction environment management plan (CEMP), which may include specified best practice working methods and also address issues such as the management of invasive non-native species. It should be agreed by all parties and where required, it must be delivered prior to the commencement of the development. 
7.103 Compensation can be provided in a number of ways, including on-site habitat creation, off-site provision and resources for on and off-site management. The nature and scale of compensation should be established at the planning application stage and should also aim to provide a net gain in biodiversity. Compensation measures must deliver a sufficient area of habitat to ensure that the ecological function of the site lost can be recreated on the new site. 
Policy ENV5: Enhancing biodiversity and geodiversity 
A. Proposals will be supported where they:
1. Conserve, restore, enhance or recreate biodiversity and geological interests including the Priority 
Habitats and Species, Irreplicable Habitats and Local Sites (identified in Table 13); and
2. Safeguard, enhance, create and connect habitat networks in order to:
i. protect, strengthen and reduce fragmentation of habitats;
ii. create a coherent ecological network that is resilient to current and future pressures;
iii. conserve and increase populations of species; and 
iv. promote and enhance green infrastructure. 
Local Nature Recovery
B. Proposals should further the aims of the Local Nature Recovery Strategy and national Nature Recovery Network and other relevant strategic landscape-scale biodiversity initiatives. 
Biodiversity Net Gain
C. Proposals must achieve a measurable biodiversity net gain at least in line with the most up to date national requirements, in addition to the measures required in ENV4.
Water Framework Directive
D. Proposals that include altering river channels, lakes, estuaries, coastal waters, or their banks, propose structures that break continuity or alter flow, or EIA developments that are determined to have a likely significant effect on the water environment, must undertake a Water Framework Directive Assessment to show that the proposal will:
1. Not cause deterioration of the Water Framework Directive status of any water body; and 
2. Will not prevent any water body from reaching targets set in the River Basin Management Plan.
7.104 New developments are expected to optimise opportunities to safeguard biodiversity and geodiversity and deliver 
enhancements that result in a biodiversity net gain, contribute to the aims of biodiversity strategies and initiatives,  
151 A High Quality Environmentand support the achievement of Water Framework Directive targets.
7.105 Biodiversity conservation, restoration, enhancement and recreation can involve a range of measures, including 
changes to site layout, the timing of construction and the provision of wildlife protection or buffer zones. The type of measures used on a scheme will be dependent on the species and habitat present, therefore, a standard approach cannot be used. The design and landscaping of new development should aim to retain existing natural and biodiversity features where possible, as well as provide opportunities for additional or enhanced biodiversity. For example, a means of enhancing biodiversity could be where a development proposal helps to bring a Local Site into active nature conservation management. In other cases, action may be more localised, for example, through the creation of new habitats such as hedgerows and ponds, or the provision of nest boxes and hibernation sites. 
7.106 Proposals which require habitat enhancement, restoration and creation measures should consider information from the Local Sites in the East Riding of Yorkshire, and relevant partnerships and landscape-scale initiatives including the Local Nature Recovery Strategy and Nature Recovery Network (once adopted). Prior to adoption of the strategy/network, proposals should consider the national aims for the Nature Recovery Network. Proposals should also include species enhancement measures such as bird and bat nesting and roosting boxes, green walls/roofs, street trees, and sustainable drainage systems where appropriate. There are also specific action/management plans for some designated sites, including for Flamborough Head, the Humber Estuary, Spurn Point, and the River Hull Headwaters, and for some locally designated sites. A Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) for the Lower Derwent Valley Plan has been adopted by East Riding of Yorkshire Council.
7.107 Biodiversity net gain is an approach that delivers measurable improvements for biodiversity by creating or enhancing habitats in association with developments
36. Biodiversity net gain will be a statutory requirement for most planning 
applications from 2023. It will require development to deliver at least 10 per cent net gain in biodiversity (habitat) units, as determined by the most up to date Defra metric. Net Gain will be expected to be secured for a minimum of 30 years. Proposals providing above the mandatory net gain requirement will be supported. The net gain can be delivered on- or off-site, or via statutory biodiversity credits, advice should be sort from the Council on their preference. If off site provision is acceptable, there may be a preference for it to be located within a local habitat restoration / creation scheme such as a Nature Recovery Network. The provision of biodiversity net gain should be considered early in the design process to enable it to influence the design of the proposal. Net gain does not apply to irreplaceable habitats and any requirement for a development, which may impact on a protected site, is additional to any existing legal or policy requirements for statutory protected areas. Net gain is additional provision over and above the requirements of avoidance, mitigation and compensation measures required to make the development acceptable. It should be provided following the relevant regulations and national guidance. Guidance is currently set out in “Biodiversity net gain good practice principles for Development” (CIRIA/CIEEM/IEMA, 2016)
37, though this is 
likely to be superseded during the plan period. Subject to the detail included in regulations and national guidance, a Supplementary Planning Document providing further detail on how to apply biodiversity net gain may be prepared. 
7.108 A Water Framework Assessment must be submitted to the body that grants permission for an activity that may impact on the ability of a water body to reach targets set in the River Basin Management Plan. In the case of planning permission, this is the Council. 
7.109 A WFD assessment explains:
 
 The impact the activity may have on the immediate water body and any linked water bodies, and
  Whether the activity complies with the river basin management plan (RBMP).
7.110 Water bodies can include lakes, reservoirs, streams, rivers, canals, groundwater, estuaries, and coastal waters. Every water body has a status. The current status is set out in the 2015 RBMP. It is based on the condition of different quality elements in the water body, for example biology. The RBMP describes how the WFD will be achieved in this region.
7.111 A WFD assessment can have up to 3 stages. Progression to the next stage is dependent on what is found at each stage. The stages are:
36 Planning Practice Guidance (Para: 022 Reference ID: 8-022-20190721, Updated 21/07/2019) 
37 www.cieem.net/resource/biodiversity-net-gain-good-practice-principles-for-development/?msclkid=6f89029cd10311ec9d7
2a2af7dbcf09a
152
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update  Screening; 
  Scoping; and
  Impact assessment. 
7.112 Where it is likely that a proposal would have a significant adverse impact on water quality, a more detailed 
assessment will be required. The assessment should form part of the environmental statement if one is required because of a likely significant effect on water.
7.113 A WFD assessment should consider:
 
 All activities that will be carried out;
  Construction, operation and decommissioning; and
  The water body the activity is in and all water bodies you could affect.
7.114 Further details on WFD Assessment are available online38 and in Planning Practice Guidance39.
7.115 Biodiversity and geodiversity assets form an important component of the wider network of ‘green infrastructure’. Therefore, relevant proposals are also likely to be considered against Policy S9.
Managing environmental hazards
7.116 Environmental hazards are generally managed through existing statutory controls and procedures. The hazards associated with flood risk, coastal change, and groundwater pollution are particularly prevalent in the East Riding, given its proximity to the east coast and Humber Estuary, low-lying topography, and underlying geology. The areas affected by these hazards are identified on Figure 14.
7.117 The risk of flooding and coastal erosion is expected to increase with climate change, as sea levels are predicted to rise by up to 1m by 2100. This presents a challenge for property/business owners and service providers in susceptible areas and will also place some important biodiversity and heritage assets at risk. The Flood Risk Regulations (2009) and the Flood and Water Management Act (2010) establish how flood and coastal erosion risks will be managed in England and Wales. The Environment Agency (EA) takes a strategic overview of the management of all sources of flooding and coastal change. This includes, setting the direction for managing the risks through the national flood and coastal erosion risk management strategy for England and through regional plans and strategies. The EA also has an operational role and is the lead authority for managing the risk of flooding from main rivers, reservoirs, estuaries, and the sea. 
7.118 As the lead local flood authority, the Council is responsible for managing ‘local’ sources of flooding, namely surface water, ground water and ‘ordinary watercourses’ (smaller streams not classified as main rivers, which drain large parts of the East Riding). Internal drainage boards (IDB) are also responsible for managing risk associated with some ordinary watercourses. The legislation requires lead local flood authorities to produce Flood Risk Management Plans for designated Flood Risk Areas to establish priorities and measures for managing these risks.
7.119 A Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA), comprising an East Riding-wide Level 1 SFRA (2019) and separate Level 2 SFRAs for Goole and Hedon (both 2020), has mapped the potential extents of tidal, river, surface water and 
38 www.gov.uk/guidance/water-framework-directive-assessment-estuarine-and-coastal-waters#carry-out-your-wfd-assessment-in-stages  
39 Paragraph: 016 Reference ID: 34-016-20140306
153 A High Quality Environmentgroundwater flooding. It shows that the low-lying areas, namely South Holderness, the River Hull corridor and 
Humberhead Levels around Goole, would be susceptible to tidal inundation, if no flood defences were present.  Hence, approximately a third of the East Riding is classified as being within a high flood risk area. The East Riding is also susceptible to surface water and groundwater flooding, as was particularly seen during June 2007 when large areas experienced severe flooding following prolonged heavy rainfall.
7.120 National planning policy sets out a precautionary approach to flood risk, the principle being to avoid development in high flood risk areas as far as possible, even if there are defences in place. This is because it cannot always be guaranteed that defences will prevent flooding or be in place for the lifetime of a development. However, where this cannot be achieved, for example, due to the large extent of a flood risk area, the policy requires that care is taken to ensure that risks can be managed through suitable adaptation measures, taking into account the impacts of climate change.
7.121 The East Riding has one of the fastest eroding coasts in northwest Europe (average cliff losses of 1-1.5m per year between Barmston and Atwick and 2-4m per year between Hornsea and Kilnsea), and individual cliff losses can exceed 20m per year. The adopted Flamborough Head to Gibraltar Point Shoreline Management Plan (SMP) (2010) provides a large-scale assessment of the risks associated with coastal change and a framework for managing these up to 2105. For the East Riding it sets out an approach to continue to defend the main settlements of Bridlington, Hornsea and Withernsea, as well as the village of Mappleton and the gas terminals at Easington, subject to the availability of funding. Natural coastal processes are allowed to continue in other areas, which are predominantly rural and agricultural.  This recognises that it is not environmentally sustainable nor economically viable to protect the entire coastline.
7.122 The Council takes an integrated approach to coastal management focusing on the social, environmental and economic issues associated with coastal change. It promotes the concept of ‘roll back’, which allows properties at risk from coastal erosion to be relocated further inland. The Government is also focused on promoting measures to assist communities in adapting to coastal change in a sustainable manner. The Council promotes adaptation within communities at risk from coastal erosion, including through the delivery of the East Riding Coastal Change Fund (ERCCF), which provides advice and limited financial support to help vulnerable residents to adapt to, or relocate away from, coastal erosion risk. Throughout the lifetime of the Local Plan, the Council will continue to explore opportunities to secure longer term funding for adaptation, building on the existing, locally-developed approach to managing coastal erosion risk.
7.123 National planning policy also promotes coastal change adaptation measures, and recommends identifying any area likely to be affected by physical changes to the coast as a Coastal Change Management Area (CCMA). It recommends allowing temporary uses in CCMAs to help sustain the local economy and allow time for longer-term planning solutions, for example, through re-location or ‘roll back’, to be implemented.
7.124 Effective management of groundwater is crucial as a significant proportion of the East Riding is, due to its chalk geology, located on principal aquifers and springs which supply almost all of the district’s public drinking water. Hence there are several groundwater source protection zones (SPZ) in the area, indicating where development could pose a risk to this resource. 
7.125 Groundwater is also important for flood management in the Haltemprice area. Large scale groundwater abstraction in the Haltemprice area started during Victorian times. This facilitated the development of the as clean water became available in large quantities and marsh areas dried out as groundwater levels were drawn down. Most of Haltemprice is now constructed on these former marsh areas. Pollutants have been shown to be able to migrate from the ground surface to some of these adits in a matter of hours or days. Given these risks, and the seriousness of pollution, the Council will be cautious about allowing potentially polluting activity. Further north, there are fewer pollution sources, but drinking water is treated less, so the impacts of pollution would be greater. 
7.126 The Environment Agency’s Groundwater Protection Guide
40 outlines what types of development should be 
prevented or carefully controlled within each SPZ.
Figure 14: Environmental hazard 
40 www.gov.uk/government/collections/groundwater-protection
154
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update155 A High Quality EnvironmentPolicy ENV6: Managing environmental hazards
A. Environmental hazards, such as flood risk, coastal change, nutrient deposition, aerial pollution, 
groundwater pollution and other forms of pollution, will be managed to ensure that development does not result in unacceptable consequences to its users, the wider community, and the environment.
Flood risk
B. The risk of flooding to development, from all sources both now and in the future, will be managed by applying a sequential test to ensure that development is steered towards areas of lowest risk, as far as possible. The sequential test will, in the first instance, be undertaken on the basis of the East Riding Strategic Flood Risk Assessments (SFRA) and the Environment Agency’s Flood Maps, within appropriate search areas. The order of preference for the sequential test is set out in the relevant SFRA, with preference given to reasonably available sites that are in the lower risk/hazard zones. Where necessary, development must also satisfy the exception test.
C. If, following application of the sequential test, it has not been possible to successfully steer development to a site at low risk of flooding from all sources now and in the future, a sequential approach will be taken to site layout and design, aiming to steer the most vulnerable uses towards the lowest risk parts of the site and upper floors.
D. Flood risk from all sources will be proactively managed by:
1. Ensuring that new developments:
i. limit surface water run-off to existing run-off rates on greenfield sites, on previously 
developed land reduce existing run-off rates by a minimum of 30 per cent , or to greenfield run-off rate, and in the Living With Water Area (see Figure 14), support proposals that make a reduction in runoff beyond greenfield rates; 
ii. do not increase flood risk within or beyond the site;
iii. incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) into major development proposals and proposals at risk of flooding, unless demonstrated to be inappropriate;
iv. ensuring SuDS provide multi-functional benefits, where appropriate;
v. do not culvert or otherwise build over watercourses, unless supported by the Risk Management Authority and an appropriate the Water Framework Directive Assessment,  as required by Policy ENV5. Where practical existing culverts should be removed;
vi. have a safe access/egress route from/to areas at low risk of flooding now and in the future or establish that it will be safe to seek refuge at a place of safety within a development;
vii. incorporate flood resistant and resilient mitigation that meets the design risk and residual risk now and in the future;
viii. are adequately set-back from all watercourses, including culverted stretches, in line with the advice of the relevant Risk Management Authority; and
ix. adhere to other relevant SFRA recommendations.
156
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update2. Supporting proposals for sustainable flood risk management, including the creation of new and/or 
improved flood defences, water storage areas and other schemes, provided they would not cause unacceptable adverse environmental, social, or economic impacts. 
3. Supporting the removal of existing culverting and returning these sections to open watercourse.
4. Designating areas of Flood Zone 3b (Functional Floodplain) and safeguarding land for current and future flood risk management, on the Policies Map Update.
Coastal change
E. Development likely to be affected by coastal change will be proactively managed by designating a Coastal Change Management Area (CCMA) on the Policies Map Update.
F. Within the CCMA proposals will be supported where it:
1. Can be demonstrated that an appropriate temporary development, such as those included in Table 
14, will contribute to the local economy and/or help to improve the East Riding’s tourism offer; or
2. Would involve re-location or roll back of existing development to an alternative location, provided the existing development is in permanent use and is a permanent structure, or is an existing caravan or holiday home park. The alternative location should be a suitable coastal location, including meeting the requirements of Policy ENV4; and
3. Is ensured that:
i. the development is safe from the risks associated with coastal change for its intended lifespan;
ii. the development does not have an unacceptable impact on nature conservation, heritage and/or landscape designations;
iii. sites to be vacated as a result of relocation/roll back or expiry of a temporary permission, will be cleared and restored to a natural state, with net sustainability benefits and, where appropriate, public access to the coast; and
iv. the development has an acceptable relationship with coastal settlements in relation to character, setting, residential amenity and local services.
G. Development proposals for sustainable coastal change management, such as improvements to coastal defences or managed realignment, will be supported where: 
1. They would not have any unacceptable adverse environmental, social or economic impacts; 
2. Are in line with the most up to date Shoreline Management Plan; and 
3. In line with the latest coastal monitoring information. 
157 A High Quality EnvironmentGroundwater pollution
H. The risk of groundwater pollution will be managed by: 
1. Avoiding development that has potential to increase the risk of groundwater pollution in source 
protection zones and where an alternative site outside an SPZ is not available, ensuring that appropriate mitigation measures are employed;
2. Preventing inappropriate uses/activities in SPZ1 and SPZ2, unless adequate safeguards against possible contamination can be agreed;
3. Supporting developments which will decrease the risk of pollution in SPZs by cleaning up contaminated land and incorporating pollution-prevention measures;
4. Preventing non-mains drainage that would involve sewage, trade effluent or other contaminated discharges, as far as possible; and
5. Ensuring re-development of previously developed sites does not contaminate under-lying aquifers.
7.127 Policy ENV6 applies to all types of environmental hazard, which incorporates both existing hazards and/or any hazard that may be caused or exacerbated as a result of new development. This includes flood risk, coastal change, contaminated land, unstable land, hazardous installations, nutrient deposition, aerial pollution, water pollution, and pollution generated by light, noise, dust, smell, vibration, fumes, smoke, soot, ash or grit. Many hazards are controlled through relevant statutory controls and procedures, and consultation with relevant bodies, such as the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) or the Environment Agency. Where a proposal is likely to generate or be affected by an environmental hazard, for example it is located close to a waste water treatment works where odour could occur, early discussions should take place with the relevant bodies/departments as early as possible in the development process, preferably at pre-application stage. It is recommend that early consultation on environmental permitting is conducted in parallel with pre-planning applications.
Pollution
7.128 Some forms of pollution are controlled through licencing or permitting which is a separate process to the planning application. The NPPF states that planning should focus on whether a proposal is an acceptable use of land, rather than the control of processes or emissions, where these are subject to separate pollution control regimes. Planning decisions should assume that these regimes will operate effectively. 
7.129 Where a proposal is likely to give rise to any form of pollution, information will need to be submitted with a planning application to demonstrate that the sources of pollution can be adequately addressed. For example, applications for noise generating development will need to provide a noise assessment of the proposal. Proposals for agricultural development to house livestock should provide a farm waste management plan, as well as being sited to minimise the impact on any occupied dwellings.
7.130 In some instances a development may require external lighting that could cause significant light pollution or nuisance from light spillage, for example floodlighting of all weather play pitches or outdoor storage and distribution areas. It will be necessary to ensure that lighting levels are appropriate to the need, lights are aimed where required, and do not result in unacceptable light pollution or nuisance through light spillage. Developers will be expected to ensure that lighting installations are fully shrouded. In order to consider potential light pollution, it will be necessary to submit an assessment of light spillage if floodlighting is proposed. Guidance on what information is required with an application is given in the Council’s Validation Checklist.
7.131 In certain circumstances Hazardous Substance Consent may be required for industrial operations, including the storage of particular materials. Where proposals within an HSE consultation area would be appropriate, it should ensure that they do not unacceptably add to the current risk.
158
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update7.132 If a proposal is on, or in close proximity to, land potentially affected by contamination the Council’s Environmental 
Health section and the Environment Agency should be consulted. The Council holds records of current and previous land uses which may cause contamination. Contamination assessments should also take account of the following documents and any future updates:
 
 Land contamination risk management (LCRM) guidance41,
  Managing and Reducing Land Contamination: Guiding Principles (GPLC)42,
  The Environment Agency’s approach to groundwater protection February 2018 Version 1.243, and
  Yorkshire and Lincolnshire Pollution Advisory Group’s Development on Land Affected by Contamination Technical  
 Guidance for Developers, Landowners and Consultants (June 2020)44.
7.133 Wherever possible the National Quality Mark Scheme for Land Contamination Management should be used. This involves the use of competent persons to ensure that land contamination risks are appropriately managed. 
7.134 Some pollution such as nutrient deposition and aerial pollution may have implications for habitats caused by pollutants being carried either in watercourses or by air. In such instances policy ENV4 will need to be considered and impacts may require further consideration through the habitats regulations assessment process. This type of pollution can be caused by, among other uses, intensive livestock units which produce ammonia. Managing the wider farmed landscape can help to reduce rates of diffuse pollution and improve water quality. Where appropriate, SuDS could be incorporated to absorb at source the run-off from development and enable it to be released more slowly. This will help reduce the impact of diffuse pollution from run-off. 
7.135 The design of any sustainable drainage system should be appropriate for the sensitivity of the location. In sensitive areas, such as Source Protection Zones, SuDS are likely to require an Environmental Permit. Developers should consider surface water drainage at the earliest stages of design and refer to Environment Agency guidance to ensure that surface water drainage options are appropriate. In Hornsea the use of SuDS will require careful consideration due to the potential impact on nutrient neutrality. 
Flood risk
7.136 The sequential test, which seeks to direct development away from areas at risk of flooding now and in the future, as far as possible, will require development proposals to be assessed against the Council’s SFRA and the Environment Agency’s Flood Map. For tidal/fluvial flood risk, the aim is to direct development to Flood Zone 1 (low probability) in the first instance, Flood Zone 2 (medium probability) in the second, then Future Flood Zone 3 and then, least preferably, Flood Zone 3 (high probability). The area over which to apply the sequential test will vary depending on the type of development proposed. For example, schools have their own catchment areas, as do retail and leisure facilities. Some proposals, such as householder extensions and changes of use, are exempt from the sequential test. Applicants should contact the Council for pre-application advice on the application of the sequential test. An SPD is being prepared to set out further guidance on the potential area of search for the Test. If development cannot be directed to Flood Zone 1, the vulnerability of the proposed use(s) needs to be taken into account. For example, highly vulnerable uses, such as caravans intended for permanent residential use, are not normally considered acceptable in Flood Zone 3. Where it is necessary for development to be located in Flood Zone 2 or 3 a sequential approach should be taken to site layout. Sites should be designed so that vulnerable uses are located on the areas of lowest risk or upper floors, which is in accordance with the recommendations of the SFRA.
7.137 If the sequential test is passed, the ‘exception test’ may also need to be applied. This assesses whether the proposal would provide wider sustainability benefits to the community, which outweigh the flood risk. It will also be necessary 
41 www.gov.uk/government/publications/land-contamination-risk-management-lcrm  
42 www.gov.uk/government/publications/managing-and-reducing-land-contamination  
43 www.gov.uk/government/publications/groundwater-protection-position-statements  
44 www./khub.net/documents/6039378/17952859/YALPAG+Planning+Guidance+ per cent 28Version+11.2 per cent 
29.pdf/32a86523-9040-57c9-2efb-4b01d2e5ea7d?t=1593446758630
159 A High Quality Environmentto consider whether the development can be made safe without increasing flood risk elsewhere, and, where 
possible, reduce flood risk overall. Applicants must demonstrate through a site-specific flood risk assessment that any flood risk can be adequately mitigated.
7.138 Flood resistant and resilient design should account for all sources of flood risk, including future flood risk as a result  of climate change. The Level 1 and Level 2 SFRAs provide development control guidance on the standards that must  
be met. 
7.139 Potential flooding from other sources needs to be assessed. All developments should be free from the risk of surface water flooding in a 1 in 100 year flood event, plus an allowance for climate change. Additionally, surface water runoff from greenfield sites should be restricted to the existing rate checked against agricultural runoff rate. The surface runoff rate from previously developed land, or land occupied by buildings or hard standing (such as farm buildings and access roads) should be established prior to redevelopment and runoff from the site restricted to 70 per cent of this rate or to greenfield rates. Within the Living With Water Area (Figure 14), a reduction in runoff beyond greenfield rates will be supported. Living With Water is a partnership of water management authorities working together to build flood resilience, develop innovative water management systems, and highlight the region as a great place to live, work and visit. Within this area there may be a high integrated risk of flooding.
7.140 Restricted runoff should be applied using flow control devices coupled with on site attenuation and other sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) measures. For smaller sites, for example less than 0.25ha, there may be limited opportunities for attenuation apparatus and source control measures alone may need to be considered to manage runoff. In accordance with current Building Regulations, in the first instance consideration should be given to infiltrate surface water into the ground wherever possible, followed by discharge into an open watercourse, discharge into a culverted watercourse and finally discharge into a combined public sewer system.
7.141 Where appropriate, SuDS should provide multifunctional benefits. They should work with natural processes, to provide green infrastructure, see Policy S9, which stores flood water and incorporates green space, carbon sequestration and provides biodiversity. The Environment Agency has produced guidance
45 that can be used to 
support this approach.
7.142 Major development proposals and proposals at risk of flooding should incorporate SuDS unless it can be demonstrated they would be inappropriate. In Hornsea the use of SuDS will require careful consideration due to the potential impact on nutrient neutrality. SuDS must be designed in accordance with national and local guidance
46 
and be approved by the Council as part of the planning application process. Pre-application discussion with the local planning authority, lead local flood authority and other interested parties, such as sewerage undertakers, Environment Agency, highway authority and internal drainage boards, is advised to enable the best flood alleviation and drainage plans for the area and for the proposed development itself to be prepared. The lead local flood authority will be consulted at the planning application stage on all major development proposals.
7.143 On larger sites or a combination of sites, a comprehensive SuDS scheme will be essential. Comprehensive SuDS schemes are designed to accommodate surface water from a wider area and will often drain water to one central storage area where it can then be discharged at a controlled rate back into the environment. These schemes are often more practical to maintain and present opportunities for green space and environmental enhancement.
7.144 Culverting will not generally be permitted as part of new development, because of the adverse ecological, landscape, flood risk, safety and aesthetic impacts. It will only be permitted where there is no reasonably practicable alternative, or if the detrimental effects would be so minor that a more costly alternative is not justified. In all cases, where it is appropriate to do so, applicants must provide adequate mitigation measures for loss of capacity, accept sole ownership and take responsibility for future maintenance. This includes any weed or safety screens installed on the culvert. Management of the culvert must be agreed with the relevant Risk Management Authority, which will either be the Council as the lead local flood authority, internal drainage board, or Environment Agency depending on the water course effected.
7.145 If a site contains an existing culverted watercourse, applicants will be required to investigate whether it is feasible or 
45 Working With Natural Processes to Reduce Flood Risk (February 2021) available at: www.gov.uk/flood-and-coastal-
erosion-risk-management-research-reports/working-with-natural-processes-to-reduce-flood-risk  
46 Further details on national guidance and the Council’s Surface Water Drainage Systems Design – Standing Advice 
available at www.eastriding.gov.uk/planning-permission-and-building-control/applications-for-planning-and-building-control/
non-householder-and-commercial-planning-advice
160
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Updatepracticable to open up the culvert and restore the watercourse to a more natural state. Where this is not possible, 
it will be necessary to incorporate mitigation measures that compensate for any loss of capacity, and ensure that access is maintained to any watercourse or culvert to enable maintenance works to be carried out. Building over existing culverts will not normally be permitted, due to health and safety considerations and increased maintenance costs. It would also preclude future options to restore the watercourse.
7.146 In areas at risk of flooding, mitigation will be required to protect from residual risk as well as design risk. This means that occupants should be safe if flood defences fail.
7.147 Where access and egress, evacuation, and/or the need to provide safe refuge is an important issue, the Council’s Emergency Planning Team and the emergency services may need to be consulted. Planning conditions will be used to ensure the SFRA’s recommendations regarding land use and design, and mitigation measures are adhered to.
7.148 Where development is proposed on a site that contains, or is adjacent to, an existing watercourse, buildings and other structures must be set-back from it in order to make space for water. This should allow access for watercourse maintenance and improvement, promote river-based biodiversity and recreation, and encourage the use of river banks as sustainable transport corridors. Development should normally be set-back as minimum in line with the relevant bylaws, set by either the Environment Agency, East Riding of Yorkshire Council or the internal drainage board, as set out in the SFRA. Space can also be made for water by utilising existing features, such as village ponds, that have potential to store flood water, as well as increase amenity and improve biodiversity.
7.149 Proposals for sustainable flood risk management measures may include new defences or improvements to existing defences, managed realignment, or water storage areas. Consideration should be given to any potential adverse environmental, social and/or economic impacts, and relevant Flood Risk Management Plans. Relevant plans/strategies include the most recent Catchment Flood Management Plans (for the Rivers Aire, Derwent, Don (Dutch River), Hull, Ouse and Trent), Humber Estuary Flood Risk Management Strategy (likely to be replaced by the Humber 2100+ Strategy during the plan period) and any flood risk management strategies produced by the Environment Agency and/or the Council. A number of existing and proposed flood alleviation schemes are identified on the Policies Map Update. It is likely that over the plan period additional schemes will be proposed.
7.150 Further guidance on the application of the flood risk elements of this policy will be provided in a Supplementary Planning Document (SPD), particularly in relation to the NPPF sequential test, appropriate search areas, the exception test, and site mitigation and design/safety requirements.
Coastal change
7.151 The Shoreline Management Plan (SMP) (2010) has assessed the long-term risks associated with coastal erosion and flooding in the East Riding. This assessment, together with the most recent data collected through the Council’s comprehensive coastal monitoring programme, has been used to define the extent of the Coastal Change Management Area (CCMA). The CCMA is shown on the Policies Map Update.
7.152 The types of temporary development that may be acceptable in the CCMA will mainly be those that support commercial activities associated with tourism, recreation, fisheries and agriculture. The use, scale and design life of proposals will differ dependent on their position within the CCMA, with reference to the distance from the eroding cliff edge. Table 14 provides examples of proposals that could be supported within the CCMA. The epochs in the table reflect the coastal erosion risk levels defined by the Council through the delivery of the East Riding Coastal Change Fund. The most recent coastal monitoring prepared by the Council’s Flood and Coastal Risk Team, will be used when determining which of these epochs is relevant to each particular planning application. 
161 A High Quality EnvironmentTable 14: Guide to appropriate development within the CCMA
Projected 
lifespan of application siteExamples of Appropriate Temporary Development
0 to 25 years Development within this zone will be strictly limited to temporary uses.Examples of potential uses include the following:
 Areas assigned for touring pitches to avoid/remove hard development needed to support 
static caravans;
 Temporary car parking;
 Temporary tourism concessions (ice cream/pop-up cafes), supporting the local tourism offer 
and economy;
 Temporary modifications to other existing commercial facilities, including fishing compounds 
may also be considered where a clear positive link can be made with the local economy; and
 Nationally Significant Infrastructure, such as pipelines, that are related to offshore energy 
development and constructed to a standard that will not be impacted by coastal erosion.All proposed development within this zone should be linked to an agreed planned approach for adapting to coastal change in the future.The most seaward, clifftop portion of this zone would exclude all development and temporary uses to provide a safe buffer from the impacts of coastal erosion. The extent of the exclusion buffer would be based on the coastal monitoring data, and advice on proposals should be sought from the Council’s Flood and Coastal Erosion Risk Management Team.
25 to 50 years In addition to the development allowed in the 0 to 25 years zone, parts of this zone may be considered suitable for new and existing caravan parks, however, proposals should be linked to an agreed planned approach for adapting to coastal change in the future. New developments should seek to limit the amount of permanent infrastructure associated with the site to reflect their position within the CCMA.Development to replace, relocate and adapt facilities and infrastructure deemed to be essential to support the continued operation of existing commercial/ business uses may also be allowed within this zone. Examples of this include: 
 Adaptation of electricity, gas or sewerage infrastructure for existing sites;
 Adaptation of access routes including roads and footpaths; and
 Changes of use from permanent residential to other strictly limited temporary uses, including 
change of use to agricultural or tourism uses.
50 to 100 yearsLimited development may be considered within this zone. In addition to development allowed within the 0 to 25 years and 25 to 50 years zones, temporary development to replace existing permanent developments/properties may be considered within the 50 to 100 years zone. This would be conditional on the development being proposed to replace an existing permanent property/structure at risk from coastal erosion. The proposal would have to recognise that it was within the CCMA and its ability to be relocated in the future. The relocation of residential properties would not be excluded from this limited development. Extensions to existing properties and householder applications are likely to be acceptable in this zone.
7.153 The risk of coastal change must be adequately mitigated throughout the intended lifetime of any development located within the CCMA. This should include consultation with the Council’s Flood and Coastal Erosion Risk Management Team to establish an appropriate distance from the shoreline, and the Environment Agency if there is a risk of flooding/inundation. Where proposals are in close proximity to a designated area, such as Flamborough Head and the Humber European Marine Sites
47 and Flamborough Head Spurn Point Heritage Coasts, Policy ENV4 
should be considered and Natural England will also be consulted. In all instances, temporary or re-location/roll back permissions must secure arrangements for structures to be completely removed from the original/temporary site 
47 The term ‘European Marine Sites’ (EMS) collectively describes Special Areas of Conservation (SACs) and Special 
Protection Areas (SPAs) that are covered by tidal waters and protect some of our most important marine and coastal habitats and species of European importance.
162
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Updatewhich would be restored to a natural state upon vacation/
expiry. Proposals should not hinder the creation and maintenance of a continuous managed English Coastal Path.
7.154 Proposals for replacement caravan and holiday home parks could be either an inland extension to a site at risk (roll back), an extension to another existing site, siting of units on an alternative area within the site, or the creation of an entirely new site to replace the whole of the site at risk. Where necessary to secure relocation or replacement of the site at risk, an increase in site area of a caravan/holiday home park may be acceptable. Net sustainability benefits, which should be secured as a result of re-location/roll back, may include; maintaining or adding to local jobs, improvements in site quality and appearance, nature conservation gains, access and open space improvements, and provision of tourist and community facilities. In the case of residential re-location, a sustainability benefit would be to remove isolated properties from the open countryside to a nearby coastal settlement.
7.155 It is important to assess the relationship that a proposal to re-locate or roll back a caravan/holiday home park would have with an existing settlement(s). This should consider the potential adverse impacts of the proposed development on residential amenity and local character. An appropriate separation distance between the development and an existing settlement may need to be established in some cases, such as for large sites.
7.156 In special circumstances alternative sustainable locations may be considered appropriate for roll back if a significant link to the new site can be demonstrated. The location should be sustainable, in that it meets the other relevant policies in this Plan for the particular use. This will allow any relevant funding and assistance to be administered for roll back whilst ensuring a sustainable pattern of development is maintained.
7.157 Proposals for sustainable coastal change management measures may include new, and/or improvements to existing, sea defences or managed realignment. Consideration should be given to any potential adverse environmental, social, and/or economic impacts that a proposal may have, having regard to coastal management plans/strategies, for example Humber Flood Risk Management Strategy (2008), the East Inshore and East Offshore Marine Plans (2014), and the North East Inshore and North East Offshore Marine Plan (2021). Projects will only be consented where it can be proven that adverse effects on the integrity of Habitats sites can meet the requirements of Policy ENV4. Decisions will be made in line with the most up to date Shoreline Management Plan, as well as monitoring of coastal erosion produced by the Council’s Flood and Coastal Erosion Risk Management Team. Existing and committed managed realignment sites are shown on the Policies Map Update. There is potential for others to come forward throughout the plan period.
Groundwater pollution
7.158 Groundwater source protection zones (SPZs) quantify the risk of contamination from activities that might cause pollution to the aquifer. SPZ1 (the ‘inner zone’) identifies where pollution would reach the aquifer within a 50-day period, SPZ2 (the ‘outer zone’) represents a 400-day travel period, and SPZ3 is the total catchment. The Environment Agency’s Approach to Ground Water Protection
48 outlines what types of development should be 
prevented or carefully controlled within each SPZ.
7.159 There are numerous SPZs in the East Riding and advice from the Environment Agency and Yorkshire Water suggests a precautionary approach should be taken to development in an SPZ, development should first be avoided in this area, and if it is necessary, appropriate mitigation should be employed. Development proposed within a SPZ should justify why it cannot be located outside the SPZ and consider whether there are any suitable alternative sites. The Environment Agency’s Approach to Ground Water Protection lists those activities which could be considered inappropriate in SPZ1 and would require screening under the guidance. These include, but are not limited to, the following activities:
48 The Environment Agency’s Approach to Groundwater Protection (February 2018 V1.2), https://assets.publishing.service.
gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/692989/Envirnment-Agency-approach-to-groundwater-protection.pdf
163 A High Quality Environment  Waste management activities;
  Some forms of general industry (use class B2);
  Oil/gas pipelines;
  Cemeteries;
  Mineral exploration and quarrying;
  Major infrastructure development;
  Substantial livestock housing;
  Storage tanks containing hydrocarbons or any chemicals;
  Sub-watertable and/or underground attenuation tanks;
  Septic tanks/ cesspools / cesstanks;
  Discharge of surface water, trade effluent and sewage effluent to ground;
  Development that may result in physical disturbance of the aquifer; and
  Sustainable Drainage Systems that drain areas where pollution may be present such as roads and parking areas.
7.160 Where the above types of development cannot be avoided or other forms of development are proposed in a SPZ, 
it will be necessary to consider whether mitigation measures, such as highest specification pipework, are required, and/or appropriate, to prevent potential risk of groundwater pollution. This should include any impact during the construction phase of developments within SPZ1. A risk assessment will be required, which should appropriately adopt the precautionary principle. Additional guidance can be found in documentation produced by the Environment Agency, including the Ground Water Protection Guides
49. Where mitigation measures are proposed, 
the Environment Agency and Yorkshire Water must be consulted.
7.161 Support will be given to proposals that decrease the risk of pollution in SPZs, such as by decontaminating and appropriately redeveloping a site or incorporating pollution-prevention measures, such as appropriate green infrastructure.
7.162 Non-mains drainage is unlikely to be acceptable for developments located anywhere involving sewage, trade effluent or other contaminated discharge, unless it can be demonstrated that it is not reasonable to connect to a public foul sewer. In these instances, proposals must be supported by a robust non-mains drainage assessment.
7.163 Development of previously developed land, and/or land affected by contamination, can pose a risk to both groundwater and surface water. Where relevant, it will be necessary to identify and ensure that these risks are addressed as part of the proposed development. In some cases, remediation of land may be required to prevent future contamination of groundwater and surface water.
49 www.gov.uk/government/collections/groundwater-protection
164
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update8. A Strong and  
Healthy Community
165 A Strong and Healthy Community 8  A Strong and Healthy Community 
8.1 Ensuring good access to a range of infrastructure, services and facilities is an important factor in creating sustainable 
communities. In particular, the provision of open space, health, education, leisure, and local convenience shopping can help to address problems of social exclusion in deprived or remote areas. It is also necessary to ensure that new development is adequately serviced by infrastructure where this is needed to deliver the future planned levels of development. 
Providing infrastructure and facilities
8.2 National planning policy requires the local plans to make sufficient provision for infrastructure, including transport, security, water supply, flood risk and energy, which is needed to enable the amount of development proposed for the area to be delivered. Infrastructure can be funded in a variety of ways, although the most common approach is for it to be provided through developer contributions. This is where a developer provides, or makes a financial contribution, towards the infrastructure that is necessary to support the development. Developer contributions are currently secured through the use of planning obligations (often secured through ‘section 106 agreements’) although a standard charge on new development called a Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) can also be set.
8.3 In the past, developer contributions have only routinely been used in the East Riding to provide for recreational open space, such as children’s play areas and sports pitches, affordable housing and more occasionally for education infrastructure. The wider range of infrastructure required to support development, as identified in the updated East Riding Infrastructure Study (2022) means a much broader range of infrastructure will need to be funded by developer contributions in the future. Infrastructure will also continue to be provided by statutory undertakers such as Yorkshire Water, and via other plans such as the Local Transport Plan (2015-2029). In addition, the Council will continue to seek opportunities for funding through other mechanisms such as major funding bids to Government, often via the Humber Local Enterprise Partnership, for transport and flood alleviation schemes.
8.4 For new development to take place, it is essential that arrangements are in place for it to be supported by adequate infrastructure and community facilities. Depending on the location and type of development, the infrastructure required may include road improvements, enhancing the public transport system, health provision, additional schools or classrooms, public open space, flood defences and drainage improvements. 
Policy C1: Providing infrastructure and facilities
A. Proposals for new and/or improved infrastructure and facilities will be supported where they enhance the 
quality and range of services and facilities or facilitate delivery of new development needs.
B. New development will be supported where it is adequately serviced by infrastructure and facilities. Where necessary, the phasing of new development will be linked to the delivery of new or improved infrastructure and facilities.
C. Subject to economic viability, developer contributions will be sought from new development to:
1. Meet the need for new and/or improved infrastructure and facilities; and
2. Mitigate its impact on the wider environment and the community.
166
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update8.5 The Local Plan has an important role to play in supporting 
the provision of new and/or improved infrastructure and facilities, which can include the maintenance of infrastructure that serves new development. This includes proposals for improving communication networks (such as broadband and telecommunications), road improvements and sports facilities. Maximising the use of existing infrastructure and facilities should be prioritised, especially where new provision may result in adverse impacts. For example, it may not be necessary to construct new telecommunications masts where existing masts are available. 
8.6 An Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) for the East Riding will form the starting point for assessing infrastructure needs in each area of the East Riding as well as for individual development proposals. The sub area policies of the next chapter also highlight some of the key projects and programmes required to support development over the plan period. The IDP and the sub area policies use information from the Infrastructure Study (2022) to set out: the infrastructure which may be needed to support development over the plan period; infrastructure delivery organisations; funding sources; and delivery timescales. More detailed information on infrastructure requirements and mitigation needed to address potential impacts on the wider environment and community (such as vegetation screening) will be established through consultation with utility companies, the statutory organisations, town and parish councils, and other consultees through the planning application process.
8.7 Developers are encouraged to work with infrastructure providers and consider opportunities to address infrastructure requirements as part of their proposal. On larger sites, infrastructure may need to be phased as different parts of the site are developed. This will enable the infrastructure needed for the site as a whole to be provided in a coherent and comprehensive manner. The Allocations Document Update provides information on some of the specific requirements, such as a link road or screening, to allow development of individual allocations. Where arrangements are not already in place to provide the required infrastructure and mitigation measures, via a statutory undertaker, the Council or another body, , a developer may be required to make arrangements by way of a planning obligation or other legal agreement.
8.8 There are limits to the level of developer contribution that can be imposed on individual schemes without adversely affecting viability. Therefore, the economic viability of development is important in considering the level of contribution expected, such as for public open space, affordable housing education. This ensures that the size of any expected contribution does not put at serious risk the development of the area. 
8.9 As part of the Planning for the Future White Paper the Government have indicated that changes to the CIL process may take place over the next few years. The Council will continue to monitor changes to national policy to ensure the approach taken in the East Riding is appropriate for providing the infrastructure needed to facilitate development.
8.10 Planning obligations for infrastructure directly related to specific development sites vary and will, therefore, be negotiated on a site-by-site basis. Where it is demonstrated that a planning obligation would make a specific development unviable, ‘open book’ negotiations will be conducted to establish a revised contribution. This will have regard to evidence submitted by the developer and the Council’s development viability assessments where relevant.
Supporting community services and facilities
8.11 National planning policy seeks to support delivery of social, recreational and cultural services and facilities that the local community needs. It also supports the retention and development of local community facilities, such as village shops, Post Offices, rural petrol stations, village halls, places of worship and rural public houses.
167 A Strong and Healthy Community 8.12 The Infrastructure Study (2022) has assessed the existing 
provision of, and strategic need for, a range of different types of infrastructure to meet the future planned levels of development. It assessed a number of community services and facilities, including health, education, leisure and amenity (sports and leisure, public open space, libraries, and community recycling), and emergency services. It found that there is a need for the provision of additional school capacity, GPs and dentists over the plan period. The future provision of services and facilities may be reliant upon the investment strategies of both public and private agencies. Where appropriate, these strategies set out how services and facilities will be provided in the future and will be increasingly focused on those settlements identified in the Local Plan Settlement Network. 
8.13 The rural nature of the East Riding with its dispersed settlement pattern presents a significant challenge in achieving good accessibility to local services and facilities. The health and vitality of some rural and coastal settlements has declined in recent years, and many more are vulnerable to changing lifestyles and economic patterns. It is, therefore, important to consider the extent to which the rural population can support existing services and facilities, and how realistic it is to seek to retain them in every settlement. This is a key reason behind the identification of Rural Service Centres as part of the Local Plan Settlement Network. 
8.14 The Community Right to Bid is one of a raft of initiatives introduced in the Localism Act. It allows communities and town and parish councils to nominate buildings or land for listing by the Council as an ‘Asset of Community Value’. An asset can be listed if its principal use furthers (or has recently furthered) the community’s social well-being or social interests (which include cultural, sporting or recreational interests) and is likely to do so in the future. When a listed asset comes to be sold, a moratorium on the sale (of up to six months) may be invoked, providing local community groups or the town or parish council with a chance to raise finance, develop a business case and make a bid to buy the asset on the open market. Further information about how local assets in the East Riding can be nominated is available from the Council’s Asset Strategy service and my community.org.uk
50.
Policy C2: Supporting community services and facilities 
A. To maintain and improve access to a range of services and facilities in the East Riding, which meet the needs of residents and in appropriate circumstances visitors, proposals will be supported that: 
1. Retain or enhance existing services and facilities; and/or 
2. Provide for new services and facilities, including, where appropriate, new mixed use and multi-
purpose facilities. 
B. Where services and facilities are provided as part of new development they should be well integrated within that development. 
C. The loss of health, education, and other services and facilities will only be permitted if: 
1. It is proved the existing use and proposals for alternative community uses on the site are not 
economically viable, and there is insufficient demand to support them; 
2. The loss is part of a wider proposal to improve service provision in the locality; or 
3. Existing facilities can adequately serve identified needs, in an equally accessible manner. 
D. The views of the local community, and relevant town or parish council(s), will be important in order to establish the significance of, and demand for, individual facilities and develop solutions to enable their retention.
50 www.mycommunity.org.uk/understanding-the-community-right-to-bid
168
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update8.15 New and enhanced community services and facilities will be supported where they are well related to the 
communities they serve and address their particular needs. This should ensure that a facility is readily accessible by foot, cycle, and public transport. 
8.16 Service delivery in the East Riding is increasingly being focused upon the use of mixed and multi-purpose facilities. Following the success of multi-purpose facilities at Elloughton cum Brough, Pocklington and Market Weighton, the Council is extending this model of service delivery to other settlements in the Local Plan Settlement Network. These centres can provide public access to a number of services, including libraries, customer service centres, leisure and social care provision, and may also help meet the requirements of other service providers such as the NHS and the emergency services. They are a key means of ensuring that services are both accessible and convenient, whilst optimising the efficiency of service delivery. The provision of a mixed or multi-purpose facility will continue to be supported where it facilitates multi-purpose trips and enhances accessibility. 
8.17 On a smaller scale, and in rural areas, shared services may also be provided through schemes such as ‘Pub is the Hub’. This encourages rural public house owners, licensees and their local communities to work together with the aim of supporting and retaining local services and improving the viability of businesses which, wherever possible, will be located within the public house itself. Examples of services provided within a public house may include small shops, Post Offices, IT facilities or community centres. Proposals for sharing services through mechanisms such as ‘Pub is the Hub’ will be supported.
8.18 The Council will seek to minimise the loss of land and buildings that are being used for health, education, and other community facilities, such as a Post Office, public houses, village shops, schools, children’s nurseries, rural petrol stations, GP surgeries and other health facilities, places of worship and village halls. A loss of a facility will only be supported where it meets one of the three criteria set out in part C of Policy C2.
8.19 Assessing a facility’s economic viability should involve consideration of the financial records of the business, the ability of the facility to serve the surrounding catchment, and whether the facility has been appropriately marketed (at a competitive market value for the community use) as a going concern and, if so, for how long (one year is usually expected). This would need to demonstrate that the existing use, and alternative proposals for community use on the site, are not economically viable. An independent professional valuation will be required where it is considered that the facility has been marketed at an unsuitable price. The marketing of public houses should be for non-tied operations and free of restrictive covenants. 
8.20 Some public service providers are carrying out ongoing reviews of service provision, often in response to Government targets and performance requirements. This may involve relocating facilities to more suitable locations to meet modern standards of service provision. Where necessary, proposals will be supported if the disposal of existing land is critical to fund a new or enhanced facility elsewhere in the local area. Where the loss is not part of a wider proposal to improve service provision, developers should undertake an assessment of existing service and facility provision in the locality. Land and buildings used for community services and facilities will be protected where there is no alternative provision. Consultation with the relevant town or parish council(s) and the response of local residents to the proposal should also help to establish whether or not there is sufficient demand from the local community to support the facility.
Providing public open space for leisure and recreation
8.21 Planning for open space, sport, and recreation, is a key part of the wider approach to green infrastructure planning set out in Policy S9 and Policy ENV5. ‘Open space’ refers to accessible spaces that provide amenity and/or recreation value to the public, such as parks and gardens, picnic areas, woodland, playgrounds, playing pitches, allotments, and amenity green spaces within residential developments. It also includes buildings associated to these uses (e.g. pavilions).
8.22 National planning policy emphasises the importance of providing access to good quality open spaces, including opportunities for sport and recreation and protecting public rights of way, in order to promote the health and well-being of communities and facilitate social interaction and inclusion. It also allows for local communities to identify Local Green Space for protection where it is of particular importance. This designation would not be appropriate for most green areas or open spaces and sites must satisfy certain criteria. For example, proposed Local Green Spaces should be in reasonable proximity to the community, hold particular local significance, and are not an extensive tract of land. Where Local Green Spaces are designated, they would be given the same status as Green Belt.
169 A Strong and Healthy Community 8.23 An assessment of open space, through the Open Space Review (2012) and Playing Pitch Strategy (2019), has been 
undertaken to ascertain the amount, quality and accessibility of different categories of open space in the East Riding. This sets out where new open space is needed and where existing open space needs to be protected. Local standards of provision have been set (Table 15).
Policy C3: Providing public open space for leisure and recreation
A. Proposals should maintain and/or enhance the quantity, quality and accessibility of open space and address any shortfalls in provision, when measured against the standards set out in Table 15. 
B. Residential development of 10 or more dwellings or of a combined gross floor space of1000m2 or more that increases demand for open space will be required to provide for an amount of open space per dwelling in line with the following:
1. 13.5m
2 per 1 Bedroom Dwelling
2. 32.8m2 per 2 Bedroom Dwelling
3. 52.1m2 per 3 Bedroom Dwelling
4. 77.2m2 per 4 or more Bedroom Dwelling
Where practicable, open space should be provided on-site and link in well with other green infrastructure 
features as described in Policy S9.
C. Proposed open space, including open space required to make up existing shortfalls in provision, will be 
identified in the Allocations Document Update or a Neighbourhood Plan.
D. Existing and proposed open spaces are shown on the Policies Map Update. Proposals resulting in the loss of an existing open space, sports and recreational buildings and land, will only be supported where:
1. Assessments of existing provision against local standards demonstrate the land is surplus to 
requirements for all of the functions that open space can perform; or
2. Replacement open space to an equivalent standard or better, in terms of quantity, quality and accessibility, is provided; or
3. The development is for alternative sports and recreation provision, for which there is a deficit; and
4. The loss of open space would not have an unacceptable detrimental impact on the amenity or character of the area.
170
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateTable 15: Open space standards of provision 
Type of Open 
SpaceQuantity Standard Quality StandardAccessibility Standard
Parks and ornamental gardens0.18 hectares per 1,000 peopleUpper Quartile Within 10 kilometres
Natural and semi-natural green space2 hectares of natural green space per 1,000 people and 1 hectare of local nature reserve per 1,000 peopleUpper Quartile Within 4 kilometres
Green corridors - Upper Quartile -
Outdoor sports facilities / Playing Pitches1.35 hectares per 1000 people‘Good’ (80 per cent - 100 per cent ) grading as assessed within the updated Playing Pitch Strategy, and local intelligence from the Commuted Sums Team20 minutes travel time by car in conjunction with evidence of clear links between where a team is based and where they regularly train and play matches
Amenity green space 0.6 hectares per 1,000 peopleUpper Quartile Within 2 kilometres
Provision for children and young peopleProvision of 11.6m
2 (split 
2.6m2 equipped and 9m2 
recreation space) per child in urban areasProvision of 9.3m
2 (split 
2.3m2 equipped and 7m2 
recreation space) per child in rural locationsUpper Quartile No child should be living further than 100 metres from a small play area and all children should have access to three different types of recreation space no further than 1,000 metres from home
Allotments 0.3 hectares per 1,000 peopleUpper Quartile -
Cemeteries and church yards- Upper Quartile -
Civic spaces - Upper Quartile -
8.24 Policy C3 seeks to ensure that open space provision within the East Riding accords with the local standards set 
out in Table 15 or any revised local standards that result following future reviews of open space and/or playing pitch provision. The Open Space Review (2012) and Playing Pitch Strategy (2019) indicate that, at present, in some locations, there are deficiencies in natural and semi-natural green space, amenity green space, allotments, provision for children and young people, and outdoor sports facilities. These documents will be updated periodically during the lifetime of the Local Plan to re-assess the level of provision across all open space typologies and to provide an up to date audit of existing open space in the East Riding. The Council’s Asset Strategy section undertake this exercise and can provide further information on open space provision on request.
8.25 Part B of the Policy requires a certain amount of open space per dwelling on proposals of 10 or more dwellings or over a combined gross floor space of 1000m2. This is based on providing for outdoor sports facilities / playing 
171 A Strong and Healthy Community pitches and provision for children and young people as these 
are the most commonly required types of open space from new housing developments. The Council operates an Open Space Group containing representatives from a range of relevant disciplines including Commuted Sums, Asset Strategy, Legal, and Grounds and Forestry. Each relevant application will be discussed and the group will use the standards along with local intelligence to make recommendations as to what type of open space is needed, and whether it should be provided for on or off-site. Where provision off-site is recommended, a financial contribution in lieu of on-site provision will be usually be required. Where it is provided on-site the group will make recommendations as to the layout and siting of the open space.
8.26 The types of open space that may be applicable depend upon the intended occupants of a development, for example specialist housing for older people will not create additional demand for children and young people’s open space. The standards, shown in Table 15, relate to the quantity, quality and accessibility of each type of open space. More specifically:
 
 Quantity standards refer to the area of open space in hectares required for every 1,000 people, or per child for  
 children and young people’s provision, within a set area.
  Quality standards refer to a subjective rating of the quality of existing open space expressed as a percentage based  
 on physical characteristics, value of the space, and benefits to the wider environment. Standards are expressed in  
 percentages: the higher the percentage, the better the quality. The Council’s aim is to achieve quality scores of 71  
 per cent or more (or the ‘Upper Quartile’). All open space quality assessments, except for Outdoor Sports  
 Facilities/Playing Pitches, use data from the Open Space Review (2012). The quality of Sports Facilities/ Playing  
 Pitches is assessed using data from the Playing Pitch Strategy (2019).
  Accessibility standards refer to set distances away from people’s homes/ communities. All open space of a  
 particular category that is within the set distance is determined as serving that particular house/ community.  
 For Outdoor Sports Facilities/Playing Pitches, evidence of clear links between where a team is based and where  
 they regularly train and play matches is also considered.
8.27 In some cases, quantity and/or accessibility standards have not been defined, for example where it is not possible to sensibly quantify a type of open space (e.g. green corridors, civic spaces). The geographical variances across the East Riding mean that clubs and, therefore, individuals travel significant distances to access outdoor sports facilities/ playing pitches on which to play and train. On this basis, the Playing Pitch Strategy (2019) considers an access standard of 20 minutes travel time to be more appropriate than a distance standard. This access standard represents the Council’s intention to maintain, and, where possible, enhance, accessibility to outdoor sports facilities. A full explanation of how the standards have been defined is provided in the Open Space Review (2012) and Open Space Background Paper (2021).
8.28 For those open space categories that do not have an accessibility standard, the Open Space Review’s relevant parish supply report will be used to determine whether there is a surplus/ deficit. The parish supply reports indicate the level of provision within a parish boundary and can be used to determine the main shortfalls. In terms of playing pitches, the Playing Pitch Strategy (2019) can be used to determine whether, at a sub-area level, there is a surplus/ deficit.
8.29 The Council will require open space to be provided on-site wherever possible. Where it is not practicable to provide open space on-site, it may be delivered through planning obligations. For example, if there is a shortfall in a type of open space that cannot practically be delivered on-site, such as woodland (a semi natural and natural green space). Further guidance on the circumstances where open space should be provided on or off-site and what form this should take, including off-site contributions, is set out in the Open Space Supplementary Planning Document.
172
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update8.30 Open space should be designed and located so that it performs multiple functions. It should be considered as part 
of the wider green infrastructure approach to planning, as set out in Policy S9. Where open space is to be provided on the same site as the development, this should be identified as part of the development’s green infrastructure within the design and access statement that accompanies the planning application. Reference should be made to those green infrastructure assets (- Green Infrastructure features in the East Riding) and/or corridors that apply to, or exist near, a site and what measures will be taken to enhance, add to, and/or link to these. The incorporation of open space into new developments should also take into account Policy ENV1, the principles set out in Secured by Design and other guidance such as Play England’s Design for Play: A Guide to Creating Successful Play Spaces (2009). The inclusion of open space through new development is, for example, an opportunity to have regard to features that minimise crime and perception of crime such as natural surveillance by overlooking public spaces. 
8.31 The boundaries of existing open space are set out on the Policies Map Update and includes existing open spaces that have been identified through the Open Space Review (2012) and Playing Pitch Strategy (2019). Ongoing updates of these documents will ensure an up to date audit of existing open space in the East Riding is maintained by the Council or a third party. This may result in the identification of other existing open spaces over the plan period. Where practicable, the Council has allocated land as open space in the Allocations Document Update, primarily as playing pitches. This is to address current shortfalls and provide much needed community facilities. 
8.32 If it is considered acceptable that an existing open space can be replaced through development, this must be to an equivalent standard or better. Proposals will be assessed in accordance with the standards set out in Table 15. Where non open space development is justified on an existing open space, consideration will be given to whether its loss would have a detrimental impact on the character and appearance of the area. Wildlife/ nature conservation value is also an important factor, and will be considered through Policy ENV4.
8.33 In addition to the types of open space set out in Table 15, local communities can designate Local Green Spaces through a Neighbourhood Plan. This enables green areas of particular importance for communities to be identified and protected. These should only be designated when a plan is being prepared or updated, and be capable of enduring beyond the end of the plan period. The designation should not be used in a way that undermines the aim of plan making to identify sufficient land in suitable locations to meet identified development needs. Policies for managing development within local green spaces should be consistent with those for green belts.
8.34 Local Green Spaces should be reasonably close to the community they serve, demonstrably special to the local community and hold a particular local significance, local in character and not an extensive tract of land. Examples of what can constitute a site’s ‘particular local significance’, as specified in the National Planning Policy Framework, are its beauty, historic significance, recreational value (including as a playing field), tranquillity, or richness of its wildlife. 
8.35 Local Green Spaces should not be used to undermine the requirement to identify sufficient land in suitable locations to meet identified development needs. The designation will rarely be appropriate where the land has planning permission for development. If land is already protected by an international, national, or local designation, as set out in Policy ENV4, consideration should be given to whether any additional local benefit would be gained through the Local Green Space designation. Designation does not in itself confer any rights of public access over what exists at present. Local Green Spaces should be protected from inappropriate development other than when very special circumstances can be demonstrated.
173 A Strong and Healthy Community 174
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update9. Delivering Growth through 
a Sub Area Approach
175 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area Approach9  Delivering Growth through a Sub Area Approach
9.1 The East Riding is a large and diverse area with wide-ranging challenges and opportunities. To ensure that this 
local distinctiveness is reflected in the Local Plan, six sub areas have been defined. These each possess a number of common characteristics, or significant assets, that are important for the area.
9.2 The policy for each sub area looks to address the most important spatial planning objectives and provides a more local interpretation of other policies in the Plan. As part of the overall strategy, this will help ensure that the Local Plan reflects the diversity of the area and supports the delivery of the place statements for the larger settlements,  as well as the overall vision for the East Riding.
9.3 Neighbourhood Plans produced by local communities will complement the sub area policies and provide additional details which will be of relevance to those preparing proposals across the East Riding.
9.4 The six sub areas are (see Figure 15): Beverley and Central; Bridlington Coastal; Driffield and Wolds; Goole and Humberhead Levels; Holderness and Southern Coastal; and Vale of York.
Figure 15: Local Plan sub areas
176
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateBeverley and Central sub area
9.5 The Beverley and Central sub area has a population of around 160,000 which is almost half of the East Riding’s total.  
Of this, around 32,000 people live within Beverley, and around 56,000 people live in the Major Haltemprice 
Settlements of Anlaby, Cottingham, Hessle, Kirk Ella and Willerby. The sub area benefits from a significant concentration of the East Riding’s employment opportunities and is also subject to high demand for housing.
9.6 There is a strong relationship between the sub area and the City of Hull. This has been reflected in the past by high levels of people moving out of the City into the East Riding, alongside significant flows of people who travel into the City for employment. Within the City a number of priority areas have been identified, including the City Centre, the Port of Hull, Newington and St Andrews, Kingswood, Holderness Road Corridor, Orchard Park and North Bransholme. In these areas, significant investment is taking place to stimulate demand and create sustainable communities. These initiatives are supported through the current local plans of both authorities, and growth in the sub area needs to be managed to benefit the sub-region as a whole. 
Figure 16: Beverley and Central Sub Area
0 5 10kmN
City
of York
Selby
Bridlington
Withernsea
HornseaDriffield
Pocklington
Market
WeightonBeverley
Howden
HedonElloughton/
BroughGoole
Snaith
Market
Weighton
Goole &
Humberhead Levels
Sub Area
Barton upon
HumberHornsea
Vale of
York
Sub Area
CottinghamLeven
HedonBeverleyHolderness & Southern
Coastal Sub Area
Anlaby/
Willerby/
Kirk Ella
HessleElloughton/Brough
North Lincolnshire DCBridlington Coastal
Sub Area
Brandesburton
Skirlaugh
South CaveNorth Cave
KeyinghamBilton
Preston
ThorngumbaldNorth
Ferriby
Swanland
Wawne
DunswellWoodmanseyTickton
Walkington
Key area of growth for Housing New Development Key: Strategy and Places
Principal TownThe Major Haltemprice Settlements
Town
Primary V illageRural Service Centre
Sub Area BoundaryEnvironment
Key Open AreaYorkshire W olds 
Flood Zone 3
Strategic W aterwaysInternational nature conservation
site
Yorkshire W olds -
Areas of highest quality
EZ
EZ
Hull Regeneration / Renewal Areas
EZ
EZ
Ferriby
EZ Enterprise ZoneEZRES
Economic Focus
Rural Employment Site
Transport
Rail Route and StationCore Bus Routes
Important Road Links
Port
East-W est Multi-modal
transport corridorTransport ProposalRES
Leconfield
Cherry
Burton
EZEZ
EZ
Main Focus for Housing 
177 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area ApproachHousing
9.7 As the sub area surrounds the City of Hull, there is a need to carefully manage the scale and distribution of housing 
development to support the ongoing development, regeneration and housing market interventions within the City.
9.8 As identified in Policy S5, most new housing development in the sub area will occur in the Major Haltemprice Settlements and Beverley, and to a lesser extent Elloughton cum Brough, in recognition of the high level of demand in these settlements and their good transport connections with employment areas and the City of Hull. The amount of residential development that can take place in Hedon is constrained by the high flood risk and drainage issues, which mean that no further allocations are proposed in the town other than that already benefiting from planning consent. Similarly, no residential allocations are proposed in the settlements of Leven, Bilton, Dunswell. Thorngumbald and Tickton due to flood risk considerations. 
9.9 Various flood alleviation schemes have and are being undertaken in the areas around the Major Haltemprice Settlements. These large scale infrastructure projects are set to reduce the risk of flooding to thousands of properties in the East Riding and Hull. 
9.10 A lower level of housing development, which reflects the role and function of the settlement, will also take place in the sub area’s Rural Service Centres and Primary Villages as defined in Policy S3: Brandesburton, Cherry Burton, Keyingham, Leconfield, North Cave, North Ferriby, Preston, Skirlaugh, South Cave, Swanland, Walkington and Wawne. This will help to support the services and facilities in these settlements and help to meet local housing need. Woodmansey has seen high levels of development in recent years, double the amount originally planned for across the previous plan period in less than half the time. No further allocations are planned at this time though this will be reviewed as part of the Woodmansey Neighbourhood Plan process and in future Local Plan reviews. 
9.11 New housing development in the above settlements will be promoted on previously developed land and other suitable land within development limits, including on sites identified in the Allocations Document Update. Additional land could be identified in a range of settlements through a Neighbourhood Plan. In Beverley, the southern end of the town will be a key area of growth as it offers the greatest opportunities to integrate new housing with the rest of the town and create strong connections with the town centre. Development proposals in this location will be informed by the published masterplans for the area, which seek to protect and enhance the landscape setting of the town and key views towards the Minster. In Elloughton cum Brough planning permission has been granted for a mixed use development to the south of the town, which will accommodate the vast majority of the housing development proposed for the town.
9.12 Policy H1 should be used to determine the appropriate housing mix for proposals in this sub area having regard to the latest Local Housing Need Assessment.
Economy
9.13 The sub area has an important role in the overall economy of the East Riding and is centred mainly on sites in and around the Major Haltemprice Settlements and Beverley and along the East-West Multi-Modal Transport Corridor at Elloughton cum Brough, Melton and Salt End. A diverse range of businesses operate within the sub area, including several growth sectors as identified in the East Riding Economic Strategy 2018-2022: manufacturing and engineering; creative and digital, energy and ports and logistics. There are a broad range of industries providing employment across the sub area, the top employers being health, manufacturing and public administration and defence. The sub area forms part of the Hull Functional Economic Area (FEA) and, as highlighted in Policy S6, it is important to the overall competitiveness of both Hull and the East Riding that it provides a complementary offer to the city. 
9.14 Sites at Melton, Elloughton cum Brough, Salt End and Hedon Haven have been designated as part of the ‘Humber Green Port Corridor Enterprise Zone’. The Enterprise Zone, and the sites within it, will have a particularly important 
178
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Updaterole in supporting the growth of the renewable and low carbon energy sectors in the Humber sub-region. Due to 
the scale of growth that is anticipated in these sectors, further development land at Hedon Haven has been identified as being required to cater for an expansion of the Port of Hull in Policy S6 and the site has been identified as an employment site in the Allocations Document Update. More recently, the Government has announced that much of the Humber ports complex will be designated as a Freeport and this incorporates significant areas of land at Salt End, Hedon Haven and land to the east of Staithes Road outside of Hedon. As a Freeport, businesses may benefit from different business and tax arrangements that could support economic growth. 
9.15 The Employment Land Review (2020) and the subsequent Demand Update (2022) set out the gross land requirements for each of the Functional Economic Areas (FEA) of the East Riding. This sub areas falls into the Hull FEA though the FEA’s do not align with the Local Plan sub area and there is some overlap. The specific sites required to help address the conclusions of the Demand Update are set out in the Allocations Document Update. 
9.16 The Employment Land Review (2020) highlighted that Beverley is an important employment centre for the East Riding and its popularity as an office destination has improved in the last 15 years. As such, land for employment uses has been identified in the Allocations Document Update on land north of Annie Reed Road (BEV-M) and land south of Grovehill Road (BEV-P) as well on a mixed use site for housing, employment and open space on the allocation BEV-K, land south of Beverley (east of railway).
9.17 In the Major Haltemprice Settlements there is a high level of demand for employment premises which the Employment Land Review (2020) identifies is likely to be met largely by a number of committed sites. This includes Key Employment Sites at Bridgehead, Hessle, where the high quality business park is now half occupied, and Melton, which is continuing to develop as a key business park due to its strategic location with good access to the Humber Bridge, A63 and the national motorway network. Whilst there continues to be a strong supply of land available on permitted sites at Melton, Bridgehead may require additional land to sustain growth. Therefore allocation HES-K has been made to cater for this. Elsewhere a large number of existing undeveloped allocations have been carried forward to service ongoing demand for employment land. Priory Park and Willerby Hill also provide additional employment premises, and together with the larger strategic sites, will provide a major growth pole for inward investment and employment growth in the East Riding which complements the City of Hull’s offer.
9.18 Over a number of years Elloughton cum Brough has seen significant housing development, which will continue as existing sites are built out. It will be important that the resulting population growth is supported by an appropriate range of services, facilities and employment opportunities, in addition to recently developed retail space, to ensure the overall vitality of the settlement. While activity in the aerospace industry is set to decline, the retention of employment land and the Enterprise Zone designation will assist in maintaining employment opportunities in the town.
9.19 Smaller industrial estates, such as that at Catfoss, are also noted to have an important role in contributing towards the rural economy of the sub area, and proposals in these locations will be considered in accordance with Policy EC1.
9.20 The Town Centres, Retail and Leisure Study (2019) identifies Beverley as a major shopping destination that serves a wide catchment area. This study highlights that much of the town centre performs well according to the town centre ‘health check’, though there is limited need for future retail floorspace in the town following the significant development of Flemingate. 
9.21 The town, with its historic assets such as the Minster, racecourse, and a busy festival and events programme, acts as a tourism hub for the sub area and a base to explore the area’s rural attractions. The Tourism Accommodation Study (2016), notes that the limited hotel offer is a weakness for the town’s visitor economy and identifies that opportunities should be taken to support high quality ‘restaurants-with-rooms’ accommodation, as well as ‘high-end’ boutique style hotels. The policies within this Local Plan will help to ensure that Beverley continues its role as an important retail and leisure destination. 
9.22 The Humber Bridge Country Park and the Humber Foreshore are also valued visitor destinations for the sub area, with the Bridge offering a unique and scenic route for walkers and cyclists alike. In addition, the Wolds Way and Transpennine Trail transect the sub area, and there is an opportunity to maximise the potential for nature tourism through the use of assets, such as the Beverley Parks, Tophill Low and the North Cave Wetlands. The Tourism Accommodation Study (2016) also recognises the potential of additional camping and caravan touring parks in outlying areas, particularly where it is possible to create linkages between Beverley and the Wolds. Policy EC2 will be used to determine whether tourism developments are appropriate, while Policy EC3 provides further detail on the approach that will be applied to tourism proposals that include main town centre uses.
179 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area ApproachEnvironment
9.23 There are a number of significant heritage assets across the sub 
area that contribute to its character, including Beverley Minster and the buildings and parklands of Burton Constable Hall. In addition, there are a diverse range of other historic buildings and structures, including the remains of the artificial havens, canals and associated settlement of the planned medieval town of Hedon, a Napoleonic battery at Paull, and a series of World War II decoys for the Hull Docks. Planning policies and restoration projects such as the ‘Two Churches One Town’ project in Beverley are important in conserving and enhancing the built environment of the sub area and beyond. In some instances, the conservation and enhancement of important buildings may best achieved by bringing them forward for alternative viable uses, which may be the case for some surplus student accommodation facilities in Cottingham such as The Lawns. The Yorkshire Wolds have also been identified as an area of national archaeological importance. Elements that contribute to the character and setting of heritage assets will be protected in accordance with Policy ENV3. In particular, Beverley, which has medieval roots and fine architectural examples from Georgian, Victorian and earlier periods, and Hedon, with its unique assembly of eighteenth and nineteenth century town centre properties, are important historic towns. The historic character of these settlements is a major element of their attraction for residents and visitors. 
9.24 The sub area is the meeting point for a number of National Landscape Character Areas, principally the Humberhead Levels, Yorkshire Wolds, Holderness and Humber Estuary areas. As a consequence, the landform ranges from the steep-sided wooded dales at Brantingham Thorpe in the west to the open and flat landscape of Holderness in the east. In particular, the Yorkshire Wolds has been identified in Policy ENV2 as an Important Landscape Area. The Landscape Character Assessment (2005) notes that within these landscapes there are a number of landmarks that contribute to the character and distinctiveness of the sub area. This includes a number of important historic churches, Black Mill in Beverley and Paull Holme Tower. There are also four ancient common lands (Westwood, Hurn, Figham and Swinemoor), which contribute to the setting of Beverley. These are an important historic characteristic that are unique to the town and are identified as important district-level green corridors in Policy S9.
9.25 Furthermore, gaps between settlements have been identified where they perform a valued role in preventing coalescence of settlements and maintain their individual characters. As highlighted in Policy ENV2, ‘Key Open Areas’ between Hull and the Major Haltemprice Settlements have been shown on the Policies Map Update. Previous assessments have also highlighted that the gap between Beverley and Hull has an important role in preventing coalescence, and despite the distances involved development between these settlements is gradually eroding their separation. Because of the current extent of the land in between, it is not considered appropriate to define all of this area as a ‘Key Open Area’, but proposals in this area will need to take account of the issues related to coalescence and demonstrate that the development is appropriate to its landscape setting, in accordance with Policy ENV2.
9.26 The Landscape Character Assessment Update (2018) highlighted changes to the landscape since the previous assessment in 2005. Across the East Riding, land management practices have had an influence on the rural landscape, including in the Beverley and Central sub area. While on a relatively small scale, expanding settlements in the sub area, in particular Beverley, Brough and the Major Haltemprice settlements can change the landscape character at the margins. While on a smaller scale compared with other areas of the East Riding, wind turbine development has also had an impact on the landscape character within the sub area. Proposals for additional turbines will need to consider the cumulative impact in accordance with Policy EC5.
9.27 There are parts of the Major Haltemprice Settlements, Beverley and Elloughton cum Brough that are in high flood risk areas, as well as the vast majority of Hedon with major campaigns such as ‘Living with Water’ looking to raise awareness of the threats and opportunities that water brings. The risk to these settlements, which is predominantly tidal arising from the Humber Estuary, is expected to increase with climate change. There are also risks from the inland rivers and water courses, such as the River Hull, Beverley and Barmston Drain, Holderness Drain, Beverley Beck and Burstwick Drain. In addition, over 5,000 properties flooded in the sub area in June 2007, mainly as a result of pluvial (rainfall) flooding. Other more localised events have also occurred in the sub area since then. The Council continues to work in partnership with Hull City Council and the Environment Agency on flood alleviation schemes 
180
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Updatethat manage the risk of flooding in the Major Haltemprice Settlements, the City of Hull and areas to the east of 
the City. This includes recently completed schemes in Cottingham and Orchard Park (COPFAS), Willerby and Derringham (WADFAS), and Anlaby and East Ella (AEEFAS). A continued programme of works is in place and will include the delivery of the Hessle Foreshore Tidal Defence and Phase 2 of the Hull and Holderness Flood Alleviation Scheme (HHFAS). A scheme for the Holderness Drain area has also been planned and includes the provision of an aquagreen that extends out of the City and into the East Riding.
9.28 The Level 1 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) (2019) provides detail on the risk and impact of flooding. It will be used, alongside Policy ENV6, to inform the sequential approach to the location of development. There are a number of strategies and management plans in place for the sub area including: the Humber Flood Risk Management Strategy (2008) (currently under review as part of the Humber 2100+ programme); the Flood Risk Management Plan – Kingston upon Hull and Haltemprice Catchment (2015); Humber River Basin Management Plan (2009, updated December 2015); as well as two catchment management plans - the River Hull and Coastal Streams Catchment Summary Report (2010) and the River Hull Integrated Catchment Strategy (July 2015). The priorities set out in these documents should be considered when considering proposals for flood management schemes. 
9.29 A Level 2 SFRA for Hedon has also been prepared to help identify the specific risks of flooding in the town and should be used to inform the consideration of development proposals. On the basis of the evidence contained in the Level 2 SFRA, no allocations for residential development are set out in the Allocations Document Update.
9.30 There are areas to the north and northeast of Cottingham, and within Anlaby, Willerby and Kirk Ella that are located in an inner Groundwater Source Protection Zone. Within these locations new development will need to be carefully managed, in accordance with Policy ENV6, to avoid contamination of the public drinking water supply. 
9.31 The Humber Estuary is a significant environmental asset and the inter-tidal areas are afforded SSSI status, with parts designated as a Special Protection Area (SPA), Special Area of Conservation (SAC) and Ramsar site. Development on or near the Estuary will be managed to continue the protection of this designated area in accordance with Policy ENV4. The Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA) for the Local Plan Update and HRAs for individual planning applications have identified that some fields in proximity to the Humber Estuary provide important refuge and roosting points for protected species. These are functionally linked to the habitat designation. An SPD provides a screening tool that can be used to assess the ecological attributes of a site to identify its potential of being functional land. 
9.32 The River Hull and Holderness Drain, South Holderness and Wolds are identified in Policy S9 as sub regional green infrastructure corridors, whilst the Humber Estuary is identified as a regional green infrastructure corridor. Other sub-regional, district and local green infrastructure corridors in this sub area include the River Hull and Holderness Drain, Beverley, Hudson Way, Hull-Hornsea, Priory Fields Walkington (extending to Cottingham) and Hessle corridors.
Community and Infrastructure
9.33 The Infrastructure Study (2022) identifies where there is a need for new infrastructure provision in the sub area, the findings from this are reflected in Policy A1. In particular, the key area of growth to the south of Beverley will require a highway connection from Woodmansey Mile to Minster Way, a new primary school and a footbridge to link the two large development sites together.
9.34 A number of transport schemes, which enhance accessibility, widen transport choices and reduce congestion, have been identified through a number of sources including the Council’s Local Transport Plan (2021-2039), Infrastructure Study (2022), and dialogue and assessment with Highways England as part of the Local Plan Update preparation process. The Infrastructure Study (2022) highlights a number of junctions where capacity issues may arise in the future, and where improvements are required. Within the sub area, these include the A164 Jock’s Lodge Interchange south of Beverley, A164 Swanland roundabout and A1079 Dunswell Roundabout. Development of the employment sites at Hedon Haven and land east of Staithes Road (Hedon/Preston) will require provision of transport 
181 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area Approachinfrastructure improvements within the East Riding and the City of Hull, including upgrades to junctions on the 
A1033 and A63 and a direct road (and potential rail) link from Hedon Haven to the Port of Hull. At the signalised crossroads between Staithes Road, School Road, Main Street and Station Road in Preston, and the Baxtergate / Fletchergate and St Augustines’s Gate/Fletchergate junctions in Hedon, traffic management measures will also be required to help address the limited highway capacity.
9.35 The regional East-West Multi-Modal Transport Corridor to the south of the sub area contains a number of large employment sites. Improvements to this corridor will support the development of the area’s important economic clusters, help enhance the available transport options and reduce the impact on the Strategic Road Network.
9.36 The Major Haltemprice Settlements are well connected to the City of Hull with frequent public transport services, particularly in Cottingham and Hessle. Measures will be required to integrate new development with existing public transport, cycling and walking facilities which will help to reduce the number of single occupancy car journeys on the highway network. In addition, Hull City Council, through its Local Transport Plan Strategic Refresh and Delivery Plan, has identified the need for two new park and ride schemes to the north and east of the City and appropriate sites will be needed within the East Riding.
9.37 The requirements for additional school capacity, in the form of extensions or new schools, has been informed by the Infrastructure Study (2022) and reflects the anticipated demand for school places at a particular moment in time. Adjustments in number of pupils on roll for a wide variety of reasons will influence the assessment of demand on a school by school basis. As such, the Council’s education department will be consulted on schemes that either individually, or in combination with other known and future developments, are likely to increase demand for school places. The locations listed in Policy A1 for additional school place capacity should not therefore be regarded as exhaustive. 
9.38 Large-scale, strategic solutions to addressing issues such as managing flood risk and connectivity may not be deliverable at the current time but may be progressed during the plan period (for example, The Hull Lagoon). Further reviews of the Local Plan will allow for the full consideration of such proposals which aim to help support the Plan’s objectives.
182
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdatePolicy A1: Beverley and Central sub area
Plans, strategies and development decisions in the Beverley and Central sub area should:
A. Housing
1. Manage the location, type and amount of new housing to support housing market interventions 
within the City of Hull.
2. Support the role of the Major Haltemprice Settlements, Beverley and Elloughton cum Brough as the main focus for residential development in the sub area through the development of sites within the settlements.
3. Support the delivery of housing, at a level commensurate with the scale and function of the settlement, in Brandesburton, Cherry Burton, Keyingham, Leconfield, North Cave, North Ferriby, Preston, Skirlaugh, South Cave, Swanland, Walkington and Wawne through the development of sites within the settlements . 
4. Support the south of Beverley as a key area of growth for the town.
5. Contribute to the overall mix of housing in the sub area, in line with the latest Local Housing Need Assessment.
B. Economy
1. Support appropriate expansion and diversification of the sub area’s key economic sectors including ports and logistics; tourism; energy; manufacturing and engineering (including chemicals); creative and digital.
2. Support the role and development of the Key Employment Sites at:
i. Hedon Haven; for the expansion of the Port of Hull;
ii. Humber Bridgehead; for high quality office and research, making use of the site’s location assets; and
iii. Melton; predominantly for manufacturing, storage, and distribution activities which make use of the site’s high quality multi-modal transport links.
3. Make maximum use of the sub area’s infrastructure assets and existing employment sites, and support the completion of the Willerby Hill Business Park, the role of Salt End, particularly for the chemicals industry and related sectors, the potential of land east of Staithes Road (Hedon) for energy related development, and the role of Priory Park for a variety of economic development uses.
4. Support the role that Catfoss Industrial Estate has in contributing to the rural economy;
5. Support the growth of Beverley’s economy through:
i. the growth and diversification of the leisure and visitor sector, including high quality serviced accommodation; 
ii. physical improvements of the industrial estates to the east of Swinemoor Lane as a location for business; and
iii. supporting the development of the Tokenspire Business Park.
183 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area Approach6. Strengthen Elloughton cum Brough’s role as a Town by encouraging employment opportunities 
and promoting new and enhanced services and facilities commensurate with the town’s role and function.
7. Support the sub area’s urban and rural tourism assets, such as the Humber Bridge Country Park, and the provision of high quality serviced tourist accommodation, and opportunities to create linkages between Beverley and the Wolds.
8. Support the decarbonisation of the economy through appropriate energy infrastructure (e.g. grid connection points, pipelines) that integrates with renewable and low energy generating uses.
C. Environment
1. Support integrated approaches to habitat and species management, safeguarding and enhancing designated sites and associated functionally linked land, including the internationally important Humber Estuary, green infrastructure corridors and avoid development that would have a detrimental impact, working in conjunction with neighbouring authorities where appropriate.
2. Prevent coalescence by protecting the character and individual identity of settlements by maintaining Key Open Areas between:
i. Hull and the Major Haltemprice Settlements;
ii. Cottingham and Anlaby/Willerby/Kirk Ella;
iii. Anlaby/Willerby/Kirk Ella and Hessle;
iv. Hedon and Preston; and
v. Hull/Salt End and Hedon.
3. Maintain the physical separation of;
i. West Ella and Kirk Ella;
ii. Hull/Salt End and Paull;
iii. Hull and Bilton;
iv. Hedon and Paull;
v. Hedon and Thorngumbald; and
vi. Elloughton cum Brough, Welton, Melton, North Ferriby and Swanland.
4. Protect those elements which contribute to the character and setting of the heritage assets of the sub area and improve the public realm, particularly in Beverley and Hedon to retain and enhance their attractiveness and facilitate their tourism role.
5. Have regard to the character and quality of landmarks, such as Beverley Minster, St. Mary’s Church (Beverley), the Blackmill (Beverley), Burton Constable Hall, St. Augustine’s Church (Hedon), the Humber Bridge, All Saints Church (Preston), St. Mary’s Church (South Dalton), Skidby Mill, Paull Holme Tower and St. Andrew’s Church (Paull), and respect, and, where possible, enhance views of these features.
184
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update6. Proactively manage the risk of flooding posed from the Humber Estuary and the River Hull and 
Burstwick Drain catchments, including the risk of surface water flooding, having regard, where appropriate, to the relevant Strategic Flood Risk Assessment and flood risk management plans and strategies.
7. Support proposals that make a reduction in run-off rates beyond greenfield rates within the Living with Water area. 
8. Ensure that the integrity of the Cottingham, Dunswell, Etton, Keldgate, North Newbald and Springhead Groundwater Source Protection Zones are protected.
9. Retain the distinctive character and landscape setting of the Wolds villages.
10. Protect the diverse character, skyline and views across the rolling tops of the Yorkshire Wolds.
11. Manage improvements to the River Hull, Leven Canal, Hedon Haven and Beverley Beck where it would create economic, environmental and recreational opportunities, and does not adversely affect conservation initiatives or the quality of the natural environment.
D. Community and Infrastructure
1. Enhance connectivity within the sub area and with the rest of the East Riding and the City of Hull 
by supporting transport infrastructure improvements, particularly:
i. south of Beverley park and ride;
ii. A1079/A164 Jock’s Lodge interchange improvements and A164 dualling to the south of Beverley;
iii. A164 Willerby roundabout;
iv. A164 Swanland roundabout
v. A63/A15 Humber Bridgehead Interchange, including Humber Bridge roundabout;
vi. A1079 Dunswell roundabout;
vii. Melton inter-modal freight links, including the existing rail sidings and jetty;
viii. direct road link from Hedon Haven to the Port of Hull, Hull Docks Freight line extension and improvements to junctions on the A1033 Strategic Road Network;
ix. north of Hull park and ride;
x. east of Hull park and ride;
xi. improvements to walking, cycling and public transport facilities, including those set out within the Local Transport Plan Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plans, and major cross country routes such as Wolds Way, the Minster Way, and Transpennine Trail, the public rights of way network, and the National Cycle Network;
xii. A1033 Salt End Roundabout Improvements;
xiii. A1033/B1362 Hedon By-pass Roundabout Improvements;
185 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area Approachxiv. B1362 Red House Farm Mini Roundabout Improvements; 
xv. Traffic Management Measures to address issues with 3 junctions within Hedon and Preston; and 
xvi. A highway connection from Minster Way to Woodmansey Mile and a footbridge across the 
railway line to link sites BEV-J and BEV-K. 
2. Support development within the Major Haltemprice Settlements that is well integrated with the public transport corridors serving Hull.
3. Support the provision of additional infrastructure, including:
i. primary health care capacity, including GPs and dentists across the sub area;
ii. drainage and flood alleviation schemes, particularly for the Major Haltemprice Settlements, Beverley, Hedon, Leven and South Cave;
iii. additional primary school pupil capacity for existing schools in the Beverley, Cottingham, Hessle and Wolfreton school areas, alongside the provision of a new primary school in Beverley;
iv. additional secondary school pupil capacity within the South Hunsley school areas;
v. additional post-16 education capacity within the Hessle, South Hunsley and Wolfreton school areas; and
vi. additional capacity for special educational needs (SEN) and early years education.
186
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateBridlington and the Bridlington Coastal sub area
9.39 The Bridlington Coastal sub area covers the northern part of the East Riding’s coastal area. It has a population of 
around 43,000, of which approximately 35,000 live in Bridlington. Bridlington is the largest town in the East Riding and has been subject to a number of economic and social changes which present challenges to its role as a service, employment and visitor centre.
9.40 Bridlington is an attractive coastal town and whilst tourism is an important part of the economy, there has been a sustained focus for the last 20 years on coordinated regeneration initiatives that will help to diversify and strengthen the town’s economic base. 
9.41 To achieve the regeneration of Bridlington, and support its role as a Principal Town, the Council previously had an Area Action Plan (AAP) in place to support regeneration in the town centre and to facilitate the delivery of a new Marina. Many of the specific town centre priorities have now been achieved or are already committed and the prospects for a new Marina are no longer considered to be achievable in the short to medium term. The AAP covered the period 2012 to 2021 and the relevant policy requirements have been subsumed within this document through, in particular, a policy specifically for the town that sits alongside the broader sub area policy. The continued policy framework for Bridlington recognises the town’s role as the most populous settlement in the East Riding and seeks to respond to the challenges and opportunities that the town faces in respect of economic regeneration investment, seasonality, and pockets of deprivation.
187 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area ApproachFigure 17: Bridlington Coastal sub area
0 5 10kmN
Economic FocusKey area of housing growthNew Development Key: Strategy and Places
Primary V illageRural Service Centre
Transport
Core Bus Routes
Important Road LinksEnvironment
Heritage Coast
Flood Zone 3Yorkshire W olds - 
Area of highest qualityPrincipal Town
Sub Area Boundary
International nature conservation
siteRail Route and StationYorkshire W olds
Key Open AreaMain Focus for Housing 
City
of York
Selby
Bridlington
Withernsea
HornseaDriffield
Pocklington
Market
WeightonBeverley
Howden
HedonElloughton/
BroughGooleFlamborough
BeefordKilhamScarborough DC
Driffield
& Wolds
Sub AreaBridlington
DriffieldRyedale
DC
Holderness & Southern 
Coastal sub area
Nafferton
Housing
9.42 The amount of development directed to Bridlington recognises that the town is the East Riding’s largest settlement, 
and whilst the housing market is not the strongest in East Riding terms, there is a need for new housing and investment to meet the area’s needs and support the town’s regeneration. In Beeford and Flamborough a lower level of residential development will occur to support their roles and help meet local housing need.
188
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update9.43 The regeneration of Bridlington’s town centre is crucial to the success of the town as a whole and new dwellings, 
particularly apartments and town houses, will add vitality to the centre. Changes of use from Band Bs and guest houses back into residential accommodation provides a useful source for additional family accommodation and such proposals will be supported. In addition, it is important to support stable and socially mixed neighbourhoods and this will be aided by seeking to reduce the proportion of houses in and around the Town Centre that are in multiple occupation. 
9.44 Generally, housing will be promoted on previously developed land and other suitable land within development limits, as well as on specific sites identified through the Allocations Document Update such as land to the north of Bridlington.
9.45 Policy H1 should be used to determine the appropriate housing mix for proposals in this sub area having regard to the latest Local Housing Need Assessment.
Economy
9.46 The AAP, which built on the Strategy for Regenerating Bridlington (updated 2007), aimed to deliver major developments as part of the town’s regeneration strategy and address shortcomings in the performance of the town centre. A great deal has already been achieved but the key strategic objectives set out in the original AAP remain appropriate for shaping the long term direction of the town, namely to:
 
 Regenerate the town centre to meet the year round needs of  
 Bridlington and its catchment for retail, leisure and other town  
 centre uses, including office space to support the growth of its  
 small business community.
  Create a good quality, well designed and varied Town Centre  
 residential offer.
  Make the Town Centre easily accessible and comfortably usable all year round.
  Create a strategic framework of new and enhanced public spaces and pedestrian environments in the Town Centre.
  Raise design standards in the built environment and conserve, recover and enhance the Town Centre’s  
 historic character.
9.47 Although the development of a marina is no longer being pursued within the plan period, the local strategy for Bridlington recognises the importance of the current working harbour. Proposals to improve harbour infrastructure and facilities, as well as the creation of additional berths for leisure craft, will be supported. Enhancements to the environment around the harbour will also be encouraged.
9.48 Key economic sectors for this sub area include tourism; manufacturing and engineering; ports and logistics; creative and digital; and agriculture/food and drink. The East Riding Economic Strategy 2018-2022 identifies that the growth sectors of manufacturing, ports and logistics and creative and digital have the greatest potential to contribute to economic competitiveness, promote innovation and generate higher skilled employment in Bridlington. The retail sector is also important. Previous plans have sought to tackle the key causes of the under- performance of Bridlington Town Centre but shifts in economic prospects for retailers has meant a move away from comprehensive redevelopment plans to more targeted interventions in and around the Primary Shopping Area. The provision of a diverse range of culture, entertainment and other evening leisure uses across the town centre and seafront will also complement the Spa and help to develop and diversify the evening economy. 
9.49 The Employment Land Review (2020) and the subsequent Demand Update (2022) set out the gross land requirements for each of the Functional Economic Areas (FEA) of the East Riding. This sub area falls within the Bridlington and Wolds FEA though the FEAs do not align with the Local Plan sub areas and there is some overlap (this FEA also covers Driffield). The specific sites required to help address the conclusions of the Demand Update are set out in the Allocations Document Update. 
189 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area Approach9.50 Out-of-centre sites will have an important role in providing employment premises for manufacturing, storage and 
distribution, and supporting the growth and development of the local economy. These uses have traditionally been based on industrial estates, for example at Carnaby, Bessingby Way and Pinfold Lane. Carnaby and Bessingby Way continue to provide a key role in meeting the needs of the area’s existing and future businesses. Pinfold Lane, however, is accessed by heavy goods vehicles past a residential area and school, which presents a range of amenity and safety concerns. A number of existing businesses have expressed a strong interest in relocating their premises to somewhere more suitable in the local area, and proposals to comprehensively redevelop the Pinfold Lane area for residential purposes, and the relocation of the existing larger non-conforming employment uses, will be encouraged. No additional employment allocations in the sub-area are needed to achieve this.
9.51 The Town Centres, Retail and Leisure Study (2019) identified a modest requirement for additional retail floorspace in Bridlington. Ideally, additional floorspace would be best provided through stores with larger floorplates, after having regard to the current nature of existing retail outlets in the town. This additional floorspace is likely to be largely met through the delivery of a scheme on the former coach park, previously identified as an opportunity site for a supermarket relocation in the AAP. Any further retail proposals in and around Bridlington would need to be in accordance with the sequential approach outlined in Policy A2A: Bridlington to help protect the vibrancy and vitality of Bridlington Town Centre as well as the Old Town.
9.52 One of the key local objectives for Bridlington is to reduce the seasonality of the Town Centre and seafront area, and to support all-year-round activities that would attract more visitors and spending beyond the high season. Cultural, entertainment and leisure proposals that fulfil this objective will therefore be supported subject their impact on local amenity and other normal planning considerations. The Town Centres, Retail and Leisure Study (2019) highlighted that Bridlington is a good location to take advantage of the changing trends of leisure users. For example, trampolining centres, ‘boutique’ bowling alleys or miniature golf experiences could diversify Bridlington’s leisure offer further and improve the provision of all-weather facilities. A sequential approach for considering leisure development is set out in Table 16, reflecting on the fact that Bridlington is a coastal town. As such, the town centre seafront area is the preferred location of choice for such proposals. 
9.53 Tourism has a particularly important role in providing for a stronger and more diverse local economy, evidenced by the accommodation and food services, retail and arts, entertainment and recreation industries providing just over 40 per cent of employment in the sub area. One strategy that is being pursued is to increase Bridlington’s share of out-of-season short breaks and business tourism by improving its services and facilities, the public realm, quality of the built environment and a diversified accommodation offer (including through the provision of a good quality hotel (3 star plus) and high quality bed and breakfasts or guesthouses). The East Riding Tourism Accommodation Study (2016) reiterates the need to encourage the provision of good quality large scale serviced hotel accommodation in Bridlington, which is targeted at leisure and business visitors. As such, locations close to the Spa would be suitable to help support the business and conference visitor market (see Table 16for the sequential approach). The Studyalso notes that the potential for ‘restaurants-with-rooms’ and boutique-style Band Bs and guest houses, which would help to cater for a wider market. Policy EC2 will be used to determine whether tourism developments are appropriate, while Policy EC3 provides further detail on the approach that will be applied to tourism proposals which include main town centre uses. 
9.54 The area’s valuable natural assets, which include Bempton Cliffs and the Flamborough Heritage Coast more generally, and parts of the Yorkshire Wolds, provide an alternative outdoor leisure, recreation and tourism offer. Flamborough Head and Bempton also provide a key element of the ‘Yorkshire Nature Triangle’. This creates opportunities to capitalise on activities associated with the area’s high biodiversity and landscape value, such as walking, golf and bird watching.
9.55 The sub area has an important role in the UK’s energy industry, with energy from the Dogger Bank offshore wind farm expected to come onshore just north of Ulrome. When complete, the Dogger Bank project will collectively be the largest offshore windfarm in the world. Bridlington may also offer opportunities to support the offshore wind industry as a servicing location for certain types of vessels. 
190
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateEnvironment
9.56 The Landscape Character Assessment (2005) assessed the sub area’s landscape character areas, which includes 
Open High Rolling Farmland, Wolds Valley Farmland, Holderness Open Farmland and Holderness Coastal Farmland as generally being of high quality. The Yorkshire Wolds and the Flamborough Heritage Coast, which are located to the north of the sub area, are identified in Policy ENV2 as Important Landscape Areas.
9.57 Within the open high rolling farmland character area, Flamborough Headland is a significant physical feature protruding out into the North Sea. Its spectacular chalk cliffs topped with boulder clay, and the unique flora, particularly at Bempton Cliffs, provide an excellent range of habitats for a variety of birds. The waters around the Headland also support a wide diversity of marine life. As a consequence of the reefs, sea caves and seabirds, it is protected through a number of nature conservation designations, as defined in Policy ENV4, including Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), Special Protection Area (SPA) and Special Area of Conservation (SAC). Policy ENV4 highlights the needs to consider the impact of recreational pressure on Flamborough Head that may arise from proposed new developments in the area. The area has also been designated as a Heritage Coast in recognition of the high quality landscape, rich biodiversity and the heritage features of archaeological, historical and architectural interest. As such, it is very important that proposals in this area respect its distinctive character. The Flamborough Head EMS Management Plan (2016) has been prepared to ensure integrated management of wildlife, landscape and access in the area, and looks to ensure that human activities are managed in a way that is compatible with the area’s natural assets. 
9.58 There are a number of important green infrastructure assets within the sub area, which are identified in Policy S9. This includes the River Hull and Holderness Drain green infrastructure corridor and the entire East Riding coast, which forms part of a regional green infrastructure corridor. In addition, the area around Gypsey Race has been identified as a district green infrastructure corridor, and the local strategy looks to realise the potential it holds to provide new public space and green infrastructure for the Town Centre with cycle ways, walks and a park. Some improvements to reveal the Gypsey Race have already taken place as part of early phases of the AAP.
9.59 Very few parts of the sub area lie within areas of high fluvial flood risk, with most risk being confined to the narrow strips flanking Gypsey Race and along the coast. However, the predicted rise in sea levels resulting from climate change could increase the risk of tidal flooding in some locations. Policy ENV6 and the Council’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) (2019) will be used to manage the potential risk and impact of flooding with respect to new development. The flood risk management policies for this sub area, as set out in the River Hull and Coastal Streams Catchment Flood Management Plan (CFMP), are to:
 
 Reduce existing maintenance activities in the Gypsey Race catchment to allow the watercourse to develop more  
 naturally and enhance biodiversity, whilst ensuring this does not increase flood risk in Bridlington (e.g. ensuring that  
 blockages do not develop in downstream culverts);
  Improve understanding of groundwater flood risk in order to determine how best to manage this risk; and
  Manage flood risk at the current level in Bridlington, pursuing opportunities to remove or open up culverts as part  
 of the town centre’s regeneration.
9.60 The coast to the south of Bridlington is subject to erosion at a rate of about 1-1.5m per year, and this is expected to increase as the sea level rises due to climate change. Consequently, the Local Plan will encourage sustainable coastal management where it is linked to the Shoreline Management Plan (2010) or any subsequent updates. A Coastal Change Management Area is identified on the Policies Map Update, and Policy ENV6 sets out how this will be used to manage the risk posed by coastal change.
191 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area Approach9.61 The Landscape Character Assessment Update (2018) highlighted changes to the landscape since the previous 
assessment in 2005. Coastal erosion has resulted in loss of land and property along the East Riding’s coastline, impacting the landscape character. The development of caravan parks are also increasing their influence on the landscape character of the coastal sub areas. While on a smaller scale compared with other areas of the East Riding, wind turbine development and the expansion of settlements in the sub area have also had an impact on the landscape character.
9.62 The 2005 Landscape Character Assessment identified that Bridlington Priory and Christ Church, Flamborough Lighthouse and, more generally, the sea are landmark features in the sub area. Other heritage assets include Danes’ Dyke (a Bronze Age earthwork that runs for 2.5 miles across Flamborough Head), Burton Agnes Hall and Sewerby Hall (both popular tourist attractions), and the eleventh century motte and bailey castle at Skipsea. These features contribute to the character of the sub area and elements which contribute to an asset’s character and setting will be protected in accordance with Policy ENV3. Open areas between Bridlington and the nearby villages of Sewerby and Bessingby have an important role in maintaining landscape and settlement character and preventing coalescence. Maintaining clean beaches is also very important in retaining the attractiveness of the area.
9.63 To support the regeneration of Bridlington some public realm improvements have already taken place, for example the Spa environs scheme, a seafront improvement scheme and parts of the Gypsey Race. However, other improvements are required to improve the attractiveness of the town centre as part of the continued implementation of the AAP’s objectives. 
9.64 There are several Groundwater Source Protection Zones that extend northwest from north of Carnaby Industrial Estate, northeast of Burton Agnes and northwest of Bridlington. In these locations new development will need to be carefully managed in accordance with Policy ENV6 to avoid contamination of the public water supply.
Community and Infrastructure
9.65 The Infrastructure Study (2022) identifies where there is a need for new infrastructure provision in the sub area, and the findings from this are reflected in Policy A2 and A2A: Bridlington. In particular, the key area of growth to the north of Bridlington will require a link road connecting the A165 Scarborough Road with Bempton Lane and the first phases of this are under development.
9.66 Previous transport studies for Bridlington have examined transport problems and issues, future traffic forecasts, and the impact of the town’s regeneration strategy. A centre local access and movement strategy was developed as part of the AAP, which promoted a range of measures including the recently completed widening of Hilderthorpe Road, realignment of Beck Hill, the creation of a new pedestrian space the Station Plaza and improvements to Station Approach linking through to Hilderthorpe Road. Other elements, including the provision of a park and ride and road improvements, have already been implemented to address some of the access issues. The measures have helped improve the environment for pedestrians and thus further facilitate the town’s regeneration.
9.67 The requirements for additional school capacity, in the form of extensions or new schools, has been informed by the Infrastructure Study (2022) and reflects the anticipated demand for school places at a particular moment in time. Adjustments in the number of pupils on roll for a wide variety of reasons will influence the assessment of demand on a school by school basis. As such, the Council’s education department will be consulted on schemes that either individually, or in combination with other known and future developments, are likely to increase demand for school places. The locations listed in Policy A2 and A2A: Bridlington for additional school place capacity should not therefore be regarded as exhaustive. 
9.68 In addition, Yorkshire Water has identified that the existing allocation to expand the waste water treatment works in Bridlington is still required.
192
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdatePolicy A2: Bridlington Coastal sub area
Plans, strategies and development decisions in the Bridlington Coastal sub area, and outside of the town of 
Bridlington, should:
A. Housing
1. Support the role of Bridlington as the main focus for residential development in the sub area.
2. Support the delivery of housing, at a level commensurate with the scale and function of the 
settlement, in Beeford and Flamborough through the development of sites within the settlements.
3. Contribute to the overall mix of housing in the sub area, in line with the latest Local Housing Need Assessment.
B. Economy
1. Support appropriate expansion and diversification of the sub area’s key economic sectors, particularly tourism; manufacturing and engineering; agriculture/food and drink (including fisheries); and retail.
2. Support the growth of new and existing businesses at Carnaby Industrial Estate, predominantly for manufacturing, storage and distribution uses.
3. Encourage improvements to existing tourism accommodation and additional appropriately located small-scale serviced and self catering tourist accommodation.
4. Support necessary infrastructure and ancillary developments associated with the offshore renewable energy sector.
5. Sensitively make the best use of the sub area’s natural assets, such as the coast and the Wolds, to develop more outdoor sport, tourism and leisure opportunities, whilst improving its high landscape value and biodiversity.
C. Environment
1. Protect those elements which contribute to the character and setting of the heritage assets in the sub area to improve their attractiveness and encourage tourism.
2. Have regard to the character and quality of landmarks, such as Bridlington Priory and Christ Church, Flamborough Lighthouse and the sea, and respect, and, where possible, enhance views of these features.
3. Retain the distinctive character and landscape setting of the Wolds villages.
4. Facilitate the relocation or roll back of existing development threatened by coastal erosion between Wilsthorpe and Skirlington, maintain coastal defences at Bridlington, and allow appropriate temporary developments to take place in Coastal Change Management Areas where they would contribute to the local economy.
5. Support integrated approaches to habitat and species management, safeguarding and enhancing designated sites, including Flamborough Head and Bempton Cliffs, green infrastructure corridors and the beaches of Bridlington Bay, and avoid development that would have a detrimental impact, working in conjunction with neighbouring authorities where appropriate.
193 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area Approach6. Sensitively maintain the character of the undeveloped coast, particularly the Flamborough Heritage 
Coast, and improve public access to, and enjoyment of, the coast, ensuring that development proposals protect and enhance its distinctive landscape, conservation initiatives and the quality of the natural environment.
7. Protect the character and quality of the Yorkshire Wolds, in particular the unique broad valley landform of the Gypsey Race Corridor and the large scale open nature of the landscape of Bempton, Grindale and Flamborough.
8. Proactively manage the risk of flooding posed from the North Sea and the Gypsey Race catchment, including the risk of surface water and groundwater flooding, having regard to the relevant Strategic Flood Risk Assessment and flood risk management plans and strategies.
9. Ensure the integrity of the Burton Agnes, Haisthorpe and Mill Lane Ground Water Source Protection Zones.
D. Community and Infrastructure
1. Enhance connectivity within the sub area and with the rest of the East Riding and Scarborough by 
supporting transport infrastructure improvements.
2. Improve walking, cycling and public transport facilities, including those set out within the Local Transport Plan Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plans and major cross country routes, such as the Way of the Roses, the Public Right of Way network, and the National Cycle Network.
3. Support the provision of additional infrastructure, including:
i. primary health care capacity, including GPs and dentists across the sub area;
ii. additional primary school pupil capacity for existing schools in the Bridlington area; and 
iii. additional capacity for special educational needs (SEN) and early years education.
194
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdatePolicy A2A: Bridlington 
Plans, strategies and development decisions in and on the edge of Bridlington should:
A. Strategy
1. Support the regeneration of the Town Centre, harbour and seafront areas to meet the year round 
needs of the town and the wider sub area. 
2. Diversify the Town Centre tourism offer to create a higher value, year round market for Bridlington.
3. Create a good quality, well designed and varied Town Centre residential offer.
4. Improve the highways, parking, public transport, cycling and pedestrian infrastructure required to make the Town Centre easily accessible and comfortably usable all year round, with appealing, safe and traffic-free environments for pedestrians 
5. Create new and enhanced public spaces and pedestrian environments in the Town centre to support the Town’s vitality and vibrancy.
6. Raise the design standards in the built environment and conserve, enhance and restore the historic character of the Old Town and parts of the Town Centre. 
B. Housing
1. Support the role of Bridlington as the main focus for residential development in the sub area through opportunities within the Town Centre and on the allocated sites identified in the town.
2. Improve the choice of good quality and well-designed housing, including by supporting purpose built flats and townhouses within the Town Centre and seafront area, and by ensuring a complementary housing mix across the town, including bungalows, larger properties and affordable housing for older people.
3. Manage the concentration of houses in multiple occupation (HMO) and support the change of use of existing Band Bs and guest houses back into residential use, particularly for family accommodation. 
C. Economy
1. Regenerate the Town Centre as the place of choice for retail, leisure, business, financial and professional services in the sub area through:
i. improvements to the harbour and its environs that support its continued economic operation and its attractiveness as a place to visit; 
ii. targeted interventions in the Primary Shopping Area to create a coherent retail circuit;
iii. supporting the development of good quality hotels, particularly where these are well related to the Spa, as well as good quality guest house accommodation and restaurants-with-rooms; 
iv. supporting the development of cultural, entertainment and other leisure uses including all-weather attractions and uses that support the evening economy where the amenity of adjoining and nearby users can be addressed satisfactorily;
195 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area Approachv. improving services and facilities in Bridlington to reduce seasonality and increase its 
attractiveness to the higher value short-break tourist market; 
vi. the adoption of a sequential approach, as set out in Table 16, for major development proposals for main town centre uses; 
vii. ensuring that outside of the town centre, uses are complementary to the town centre offer.
2. Deliver a high quality mix of year round uses in the seafront area that: 
i. take advantage of the exceptional position within the Town Centre near to or overlooking the sea, beach and northern perimeter of the Harbour;
ii. site active uses with year round markets at ground floor level along Prince Street, Cliff Street, Garrison Street and the Esplanade and Harbour, helping to animate these areas all year round; and
iii. contribute to preserving, restoring and recovering the area’s distinctive character and townscape.
3. Support the vitality and vibrancy of the Old Town through positive economic development that preserves and enhances the character of this part of the town. 
4. Support Bessingby Industrial Estate as a location for predominantly manufacturing, storage and distribution uses.
5. Support the relocation of businesses from the Pinfold Lane Industrial Area to Carnaby Industrial Estate, or elsewhere locally, and the comprehensive redevelopment of the Pinfold Lane Industrial Area for residential development.
6. Support necessary infrastructure and ancillary developments associated with the offshore renewable energy sector.
D.  Environment
1. Protect those elements which contribute to the character and setting of the heritage assets in the 
town, particularly in the Town Centre, Old Town, Harbour and on the seafront, to improve their attractiveness and encourage tourism.
2. Support improvements to the strategic public realm to provide quality public spaces and enhance visual appeal. Development adjoining the strategic public realm should:
i. be orientated so as to provide for natural surveillance of the public space; and
ii. contain ground floor uses which help to animate or otherwise attract footfall to public spaces
3. Have regard to the character and quality of landmarks, such as Bridlington Priory and Christ Church, the harbour and the sea, and respect, and, where possible, enhance views of these features.
4. Prevent coalescence by protecting the character and individual identity of settlements by maintaining Key Open Areas between Bridlington and Sewerby, and Bridlington and Bessingby.
5. Continue to manage improvements to the Gypsey Race where it would create economic, environmental and recreational opportunities, and does not adversely affect conservation initiatives or the quality of the natural environment.
196
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateE. Community and Infrastructure
1. Enhance access and movement to and within Bridlington through:
i. development that reduces traffic congestion in the town centre by encouraging alternatives 
to private car use; 
ii. enhancing the pedestrian environment and facilities; 
iii. the delivery of the Gypsey Race Park from Station Road towards the harbour; 
iv. the provision of a multi-storey car park within the Town Centre;
v. the provision of a link road from the A165 Scarborough Road to Bempton Lane; 
vi. improvements to walking, cycling and public transport facilities, including those set out within the Local Transport Plan Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan for Bridlington.
2. Support the provision of additional infrastructure necessary to deliver the objectives of this policy as set out in part A above and in part D of Policy A2.
197 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area ApproachTable 16: Sequential approach for major town centre use development
The sequential approach for major town centre use proposals within Bridlington is as follows:
1. For offices or office-type workspace, the sequential preference is, in the order listed:a) Town Centre; 
b) Old Town
2. For retail development, the sequential preference is, in the order listed:a) Primary Shopping Area;
b) Elsewhere in the Town Centre;
c) Old Town
d) Elsewhere in the Town Centre.
3. For leisure development (other than hotels) with a year round market, the sequential preference is,  
in the order listed:
a) The Town Centre Seafront;
b) Elsewhere in the Town Centre
c) Old Town 
4. For hotel development, the sequential preference is:a) Well related to the Spa; 
b) The Town Centre Seafront;
c) Elsewhere in the Town Centre.
198
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateDriffield and Wolds sub area
9.69 The Driffield and Wolds sub area includes some of the most remote, rural and sparsely populated parts of the East 
Riding. It has a population of just under 28,000, of which about 13,000 live in Driffield, which is the smallest of the East Riding’s four Principal Towns. The rural character of the sub area has much in common with the neighbouring authority of Ryedale and the very high quality Yorkshire Wolds landscape spans the local authority boundary. 
9.70 One of the key issues for this sub area relates to its relative peripherality, as it is located on the fringes of both the Hull and York catchments. This presents a number of challenges in respect of accessibility, both in terms of distance and the availability of public transport. As a result, Driffield has a crucial role in meeting most of the everyday needs of those residents in the more rural parts of the sub area. The town provides a wide range of commercial and community services and is, therefore, the sub area’s main focus for housing, employment, leisure, community and transport development. 
199 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area ApproachFigure 18: Driffield and Wolds sub area
Vale of York 
Sub AreaBridlington & Coastal 
Sub Area
Beverley and Central 
Sub Area
Kilham
   Hutton
 Crans wickWetwang
Middleton-on-
the-W oldsNafferton
Driffield
0 5 10kmN
Sub Area BoundaryCore Bus Routes
Important Road Links
Rail Route and StationPrimary V illage
Rural Service CentrePrincipal Town Key area of housing growthTransport Strategy and Places New Development Key:
Economic Focus
Flood Zone 3
Yorkshire W olds Environment
Yorkshire W olds - Area of highest qualityRESRural Employment SiteMain focus for housingCity
of York
Selby
City
of York
Selby
Bridlington
Withernsea
Hornsea
Pocklington
Market
WeightonBeverley
Howden
HedonElloughton/
BroughGooleDriffield
RES
200
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateHousing
9.71 Most new housing in the sub area will be provided in Driffield, as set out in Policy S5, to support the role of the 
town. However, it is the smallest of the Principal Towns, with a lower number of jobs, and the total amount of housing directed to the town is less than in Beverley or Bridlington. Residential development will be supported in Hutton Cranswick, Kilham, Middleton on the Wolds, Nafferton and Wetwang to meet more localised needs.
9.72 The key focus for growth will be on the vacant Alamein Barracks and on land to the northeast of Driffield. Alamein Barracks forms part of a former military airfield and presents a significant development opportunity. The site comprises former barrack blocks, military housing, an officers’ mess and a technical unit, though these buildings are now vacant and are in a poor state of repair having been disposed of by the Ministry of Defence. While it is not directly adjacent to Driffield, redevelopment would allow productive use to be made of this large previously developed site. It will be important that future housing development creates good quality walking, cycling and public transport links with Driffield town centre and the Kelleythorpe Industrial Estate. To support the development of the site in a comprehensive manner, a development brief has been prepared. Elsewhere, housing development will be promoted on previously developed land, other suitable sites within development limits including on land identified through the Allocations Document Update or a Neighbourhood Plan where appropriate. In particular, the northeastern part of the town offers the best opportunities for accommodating development away from areas of high flood risk and the ecologically important River Hull Headwaters. Development here would form a logical rounding off to the town without extending the built form much further eastwards.
9.73 Policy H1 should be used to determine the appropriate housing mix for proposals in this sub area having regard to the latest Local Housing Need Assessment. 
Economy
9.74 A number of economic sectors, including logistics; tourism; manufacturing and engineering; and agriculture/food and drink are well represented in this sub area and key employment industries include manufacturing, health and retail. These will continue to be supported alongside the diversification and development of the area’s economic base. The East Riding Economic Strategy 2018-2022 identifies logistics, agri-food and biorenewables, manufacturing and engineering as the sub area’s growth sectors. 
9.75 The Employment Land Review (2020) and the subsequent Demand Update (2022) set out the gross land requirements for each of the Functional Economic Areas (FEA) of the East Riding. This sub area falls within the Bridlington and Wolds FEA though the FEAs do not align with the Local Plan sub areas so there is some overlap (this FEA also covers Bridlington). The specific sites required to help address the conclusions of the Demand Update are set out in the Allocations Document Update. 
9.76 The Employment Land Review (2020) notes that the Bridlington and Wolds FEA is driven by local need from small and medium sized enterprises. Within Driffield this comes from smaller manufacturing and distribution businesses together with agriculture. The existing Kelleythorpe and Skerne Road employment areas in Driffield are recognised as playing an important role in providing employment opportunities in the sub area and demand for space has continued. The Industrial Estate at Hutton Cranswick also contributes towards the rural economy in this sub area, and proposals in this location will be considered in accordance with Policy EC1.
9.77 The North-South Transport Corridor from Hull, through to Beverley, Driffield, Bridlington and beyond, is an important link for the East Riding. It connects three of the four Principal Towns to larger centres outside of the East Riding by both road and rail, and, to a certain extent, by water. These connections provide opportunities for existing and new businesses in the sub area to link into the wider East Riding and sub-regional economy.
9.78 Previously developed sites within and adjacent to the town centre, such as the former Cattle Market site, present opportunities for investment and to improve the vitality of the Town Centre area. The former Cattle Market will also cater for future retail needs as evidenced through the Town Centres, Retail and Leisure Study (2019). In addition, the Riverhead area provides an opportunity to cater for small-scale office, leisure and tourism based employment opportunities, which are well linked with the town centre and capitalise on increased leisure use on the Driffield Navigation Waterway. Development of the night-time economy, through additional leisure and entertainment attractions, also represents an opportunity to improve the overall vitality of the town. 
201 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area Approach9.79 The Wolds and Driffield Showground are particular assets to 
the tourism potential of the sub area. Driffield Showground makes a significant contribution to the economy of the town, with a range of regular events attracting a significant number of visitors to Driffield and the surrounding area. Enhancing the facilities at the Showground has the potential to further increase visitor numbers and the economic benefits it brings to the area. The Tourism Accommodation Study (2016) highlights that the Yorkshire Wolds area could be developed into a recognisable and coherent short-break visitor destination for walking, cycling, horse riding and nature tourism. Small-scale accommodation such as bed and breakfast and self-catering units would support this objective, complemented by camping, touring and glamping facilities, particularly as part of farm diversification schemes. Policy EC2 will be used to determine whether tourism developments are appropriate, while Policy EC3 provides further detail on the approach that will be applied to tourism proposals that include main town centre uses.
Environment
9.80 The sub area is characterised by the landscapes and settlements of the Yorkshire Wolds, with elements of the Holderness Plain to the south and east. In particular, the Yorkshire Wolds is identified in Policy ENV2 as an Important Landscape Area, which includes the open high rolling farmland of the Wolds to the west of Driffield. Consideration is currently being given to whether parts of this landscape can be designated an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB). Any policy implications from such a designation will have to be considered as part of future reviews of the Local Plan. 
9.81 The sub area’s landform dips from northwest to southeast, from the high levels of the Wolds down to the headwaters of the River Hull. These headwaters are protected as a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) as set out in Policy ENV4. Parts of the Wolds, as well as the areas around the River Hull and the Hull Headwaters, are identified through Policy S9 as sub-regional and district green infrastructure corridors within which improvements to green infrastructure connectivity and landscape-scale biodiversity projects are targeted. The Wolds are also an important area for declining farmland bird species, and for buried archaeological remains.
9.82 The Landscape Character Assessment Update (2018) highlighted changes to the landscape since the previous assessment in 2005. Across the East Riding, land management practices have had an influence on the rural landscape, including in the Driffield and Wolds sub area. While on a relatively small scale, expanding settlements in the sub area, in particular Driffield itself, can change the landscape character. Wind turbine development has also had a limited impact on the landscape character of the sub area and proposals for additional turbines will need to consider the cumulative impact in accordance with Policy EC5. 
9.83 Improvements to the built environment of Driffield, particularly at key opportunity locations around the town centre, Showground and Riverhead area, will help to enhance the attractiveness of the town for residents, businesses and visitors. The gap between Driffield and Nafferton serves an important role in maintaining the separate characters of the two settlements. In addition, there are a number of valued heritage assets in the sub area which contribute to its character, such as Sledmere House and Gardens, and a concentration of nationally important archaeological features in the Yorkshire Wolds, including the Rudston Monument which is the largest single standing stone in England. Those 
202
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Updateelements that contribute to the character and setting of heritage assets will be protected in accordance with Policy 
ENV3. Previous assessments of the landscape character have noted that All Saints Church in Nafferton is also an important local landmark in the sub area.
9.84 There are Groundwater Source Protection Zones that extend northwest across the sub area from locations to north and southeast of Kilham, northwest of Hutton Cranswick, northwest of Driffield, south of Rudston and northeast of Burton Fleming. The integrity of the groundwater supplies must be maintained, and proposals for new development in these areas will need to be considered in accordance with Policy ENV6.
9.85 Parts of the sub area lie within areas of high flood risk, including the southern part of Driffield, where potential sources of flooding include Driffield Beck, Eastburn Beck and Nafferton Beck. Further south, large parts of the rural area are also at high risk of flooding from the River Hull and its tributaries. The River Hull Integrated Catchment Strategy provides the overall framework for managing flood risk within the natural River Hull catchment. It identifies a series of interventions including the raising of embankments along the Beverley and Barmston Drain, as well as a new pump for Hempholme pumping station, which was installed in 2020. Policy ENV6 and the Council’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (2019) will be used to manage the potential risk and impact of flooding with respect to new development. There is the potential to achieve flood risk management benefits through water storage and habitat enhancement measures within the River Hull Headwaters. 
Community and Infrastructure
9.86 The Infrastructure Study (2022) identifies where there is a need for new infrastructure provision in the sub area, and the findings from this are reflected in Policy A3. Additional primary school capacity will be needed across the Driffield school area to support the key areas of growth at Alamein Barracks and northeast of the town. In addition, the development of the area to the northeast of the town will be supported by the provision of a through route connecting the A614 Driffield by-pass to Scarborough Road.
9.87 Driffield is the main transport hub for the sub area with a bus depot and railway station connecting the town to other settlements in the East Riding and beyond. However, public transport provision is generally limited to a few scattered and infrequent routes away from the Driffield to Bridlington/Beverley routes, with Community Transport Operators seeking to address the gaps in service provision. One key objective is to improve connectivity in and around Driffield and enhance the links between Driffield Town Centre, Riverhead area, Kelleythorpe Industrial Estate and the Showground. 
9.88 The requirements for additional school capacity, in the form of extensions or new schools, has been informed by the Infrastructure Study (2022) and reflects the anticipated demand for school places at a particular moment in time. Adjustments in the number of pupils on roll for a wide variety of reasons will influence the assessment of demand on a school by school basis. As such, the Council’s education department will be consulted on schemes that either individually, or in combination with other known and future developments, are likely to increase demand for school places. The locations listed in Policy A3 for additional school place capacity should not therefore be regarded as exhaustive. 
203 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area ApproachPolicy A3: Driffield and Wolds sub area
Plans, strategies and development decisions in the Driffield and Wolds sub area should:
A. Housing
1. Support the role of Driffield as the main focus for residential development in the sub area, through 
the development of sites within the settlement.
2. Support the delivery of housing, at a level commensurate with the scale and function of the settlement, in Kilham, Hutton Cranswick, Middleton on the Wolds, Wetwang and Nafferton, through the development of sites within the settlements.
3. Support the redevelopment of the previously developed former military site at Alamein Barracks and the development of the land to the northeast of the town as the key areas of growth for Driffield.
4. Contribute to the overall mix of housing in the sub area, in line with the latest Local Housing Need Assessment.
B. Economy
1. Support appropriate expansion and diversification of the sub area’s key economic sectors, including tourism; logistics; agri-food and biorenewables; and manufacturing and engineering.
2. Promote employment development at Skerne Road and Kelleythorpe Industrial Estates in Driffield to accommodate small and medium enterprises.
3. Support the role that Hutton Cranswick Industrial Estate has in contributing to the rural economy.
4. Support the revitalisation of Driffield town centre, including new retail proposals, growth of the evening economy and enhancement of the Riverhead area.
5. Support sensitive development which capitalises on the area’s tourism potential, especially that of the Wolds, by enhancing facilities at the Driffield Showground and the provision of small-scale serviced and self-catering accommodation in Driffield and appropriately located farm diversification schemes, touring caravan and camping parks and boutique/specialist hotels.
C. Environment
1. Support integrated approaches to habitat and species management, safeguarding and enhancing designated sites, including the River Hull Headwaters SSSI, and green infrastructure corridors, and avoid development that would have a detrimental impact, working in conjunction with neighbouring authorities where appropriate.
2. Support measures aimed at improving the built environment of Driffield, particularly initiatives that raise the quality of open spaces and landscaping in the town centre, Showground and Riverhead area.
3. Retain the distinctive character and landscape setting of the Wolds villages.
4. Maintain the physical separation of Driffield and Nafferton.
5. Protect the diverse character, skyline and views across the steep sided dry dales and rolling tops of the Yorkshire Wolds.
204
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update6. Have regard to the character and quality of landmarks such as All Saints Church in Nafferton, and 
respect, and, where possible, enhance views of these features.
7. Ensure the integrity of the Burton Agnes, Elmswell, Haisthorpe, Hutton Cranswick, Kilham and Mill Lane Groundwater Source Protection Zones are protected.
8. Proactively manage the risk of flooding posed from the River Hull and its tributaries, including the risk of surface water flooding, having regard where appropriate to the relevant Strategic Flood Risk Assessment and flood risk management plans and strategies.
9. Protect those elements that contribute to the character and setting of the heritage assets of the sub area, including the buildings and parklands associated with the Sledmere Estate and the extensive prehistoric ritual landscapes of the Wolds.
10. Manage improvements to the Driffield Navigation where it would create economic, environmental and recreational opportunities, and does not adversely affect conservation initiatives or the quality of the natural environment.
D. Community and Infrastructure
1. Enhance connectivity within the sub area and with the rest of the East Riding by supporting 
transport infrastructure improvements, particularly:
i. measures that link together Driffield town centre, the Riverhead area, Showground, new housing at Alamein Barracks and Kelleythorpe Industrial Estate; and
ii. improvements to walking, cycling and public transport facilities, including those set out within the Local Transport Plan Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plans and major cross country routes, such as the Way of the Roses, Wolds Way, the public right of way network, and the National Cycle Network.
2. Support the provision of additional infrastructure, including:
i. primary health care capacity, including GPs and dentists across the sub area;
ii. drainage and flood alleviation schemes, particularly in Driffield and Nafferton; 
iii. additional primary school pupil capacity for existing schools in the Driffield school area; and
iv. additional capacity for special educational needs (SEN) and early years education.
205 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area ApproachGoole and Humberhead Levels sub area
9.89 The Goole and Humberhead Levels sub area has a population of around 47,000, just less than half of which, live in 
Goole. Goole provides a wide range of services for the surrounding, mainly rural, area and benefits from excellent multi-modal transport links, including the country’s largest inland port, which gives it a competitive edge as a business location. It is suitably located to serve and access the large markets of West and South Yorkshire, as well as being a gateway into European markets.
9.90 It is the sub area’s Principal Town and it is important that investment and development capitalises on this comparative advantage for businesses, helps to connect people and communities to employment opportunities, and improves the overall quality and appearance of Goole’s town centre and environs.
9.91 Howden is an important Town in the sub area with a long history. There is a strong relationship between Howden and Goole due to their proximity, with the two settlements providing significant housing and employment opportunities for the sub areas. Howden has a reasonable level of services and facilities mostly concentrated in the small but attractive town centre. It is well located to provide easy access to the motorway and rail network and has one of the best rail services in the whole of the East Riding. 
9.92 Evidence in respect of flood risk, alongside the need to adopt a precautionary approach to certain types of development, means that the strategy for the sub area is based on supporting sustainable development across Goole and Howden, taken together. 
206
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateFigure 19: Goole and Humberhead Levels sub area
City
of York
Selby
Bridlington
Withernsea
Hornsea
Pocklington
Market
WeightonBeverley
Howden
HedonElloughton/
BroughGooleDriffieldI
North Lincolnshire
DCDoncaster MBC Selby
Selby DC
Eastrington
Holme on Spalding Moor
Newpor t
Gilber dyke
SnaithHowden
Goole
RawcliffeBubwith
0 5 10kmN
The River Derwent Corridor &
Lower Derwent V alleyInternational natureconservation site Flood Zone 3
Strategic W aterways
Sub Area BoundaryPrimary V illage
Rural Service CentreTownPrincipal Town Key area of housing growthEnvironment Strategy and Places New Development Key:
The Thorne, Crowle & Goole Moors
Key Open AreaEconomic Focus
Transport Proposal
PortMotorwayRail Route and StationImportant Road LinksCore Bus Routes
Transport
East - W est Multi Modal
Transport CorridorRural Employment SiteRESMain focus for Housing
Enterprise ZoneVale of  York Sub Area
RES
EZEZ
Housing
9.93 Goole and Howden will be the main focus for residential development in the sub area. The planned level of 
residential development for Goole, as set out in Policy S5, could see delivery rates in line with historic levels, and reflects the level of residential commitments at the base date of the Plan. The principal area for residential 
207 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area Approachdevelopment will be on the north side of Rawcliffe Road where development is currently underway. The benefits 
of new housing development in the settlement are recognised, and it will complement investment in business and employment opportunities in and around Goole. New residents would have access to a wide range of services and facilities, as well as the physical and social infrastructure that underpins the goal of sustainable development. It is also important to support regeneration initiatives within Goole, which could potentially involve the renewal of older and poorer quality housing stock, delivering improvements to properties and reducing fuel poverty. 
9.94 The settlement sits to the immediate east of the River Ouse and close to the River Aire. Whilst significant investment in defences has taken place previously and this will continue to be case in the future, there remains a residual risk of flooding that needs to be considered and addressed. The design requirements set out in the Level 2 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) for Goole (2020) identify the measures that would need to be taken in order to address the residual risk of flooding as part of new developments. However, these measures are likely to be financially challenging as Goole has traditionally been a weaker housing market area with low development margins. On that basis, the deliverability of development schemes in line with the requirements of the SFRA is uncertain.
9.95 Taking a sequential approach to flood risk, by steering residential development to sustainable locations at a lower risk of flooding and recognising the challenges of viability in Goole, means that higher levels of housing development are planned for Howden than for Goole. 
9.96 Howden’s role as a Town, its proximity to Goole and its position on the motorway and rail networks, means that it is an ideal location to meet the development needs of the wider sub area in a sustainable manner, complementing investment in Goole. Housing development here will allow new residents easy access to jobs and services within Howden, as well as nearby Goole. A strategic extension to the north-east of the Town will provide an opportunity to deliver housing that meets the needs of the wider sub area, located within easy distance of Howden’s town centre to the south and railway station to the north. 
9.97 Development of this extension will need to provide for a relief road between Station Road and Thorpe Road, capable of accommodating heavy goods vehicles to divert them from sensitive parts of the Town including Flatgate and Hull Road. It will need to be accompanied by the relevant infrastructure to support the level of development planned for through Policy S5 and, given the size of the site, beyond the Local Plan timeframe.
9.98 A lower level of housing development, which supports the role and function of the settlement, will also take place in Eastrington and Snaith and will help meet local housing needs. No housing allocations are identified in Gilberdyke/Newport and Rawcliffe based on current evidence in respect of the level of flood risk. Housing development will be promoted on previously developed land and other suitable land within the development limits identified through the Allocations Document Update or a Neighbourhood Plan.
9.99 Policy H1 should be used to determine the appropriate housing mix for proposals in this sub area having regard to the latest Local Housing Need Assessment.
Economy
9.100 The sub area’s economy is centred on Goole with traditional employment sectors associated with the port, which now plays an important role in the renewable and low carbon energy industry, as well as biomass imports. The East Riding Economic Strategy 2018-2022 identifies manufacturing and engineering, ports and logistics and creative and digital as the growth sectors for the area, which offer the greatest potential to contribute to economic competitiveness, promote innovation and generate higher skilled employment. 
9.101 More recently, the Government has announced that much of the Humber ports complex will be designated as a Freeport. A potential tax zone at Goole has been identified as part of this initiative which could benefit local businesses by way of different business and tax arrangements. Policy EC1 provides the planning framework that would support the delivery of this site subject to further evidence base work and comprehensive plans. 
208
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update9.102 The Employment Land Review (2020) and Demand Update (2022) identify the Goole and Selby Functional 
Economic Area (FEA) as having a significant need for employment land under a higher growth scenario. Goole is noted in the Employment Land Review (2020) as having the one of the highest levels of demand for storage and distribution uses in the East Riding and is well placed to meet this demand due to its location along the A63/M62 corridor. In terms of land supply it is considered appropriate to maintain the Key Employment Site at Junction 36 (M62) at Goole. This area has the potential to become the focus of activity driven by opportunities from the location of Siemens Mobility, a 67-acre, £200m rail manufacturing plant, which could support up to 700 jobs. It is an investment that will bring significant local benefits and would take up the majority of the land identified originally for the Key Employment Site. The presence of the port and the strong road and rail connections to other parts of the country create strong potential for long term growth. This Key Employment Site may be able to expand to the west subject to further progress on planning for the Freeport tax zone. 
9.103 The development of employment sites at Goole will be complemented by wider programmes aimed at improving skills and increasing the employment rate in the town. In addition, a key regeneration priority is to increase the quantity, quality and diversity of business stock in the town. Whilst large-scale inward investors will help to deliver this, new business starter units will add to a wider-ranging portfolio of business workspace. 
9.104 There are also significant employment areas and a diverse range of businesses at Howden and Gilberdyke. The Employment Land Review (2020) highlighted the possible provision of further land for employment uses around Howden following the success of the ‘Ozone’ Industrial Estate. An expansion to this site has been identified as it benefits from good motorway access on the East-West Multi-Modal Transport Corridor and complements the larger scale opportunities at Junction 36 (M62) at Goole. Similarly, the ‘Green Park’ business park at Newport (Junction 37) will provide a complementary offer for businesses looking to locate along the East-West Mutli-Modal Transport Corridor. The wharf at Howdendyke also has an important role in the wider Humber Ports Complex and its continued operation is supported. There are extensive areas of the highest quality (Grade 1) agricultural land in this part of the East Riding which are an asset to the sub area’s economy and an integral part of the food and drink cluster. 
9.105 The Town Centres, Retail and Leisure Study (2019) recognised the relatively high level of convenience goods retail provision (e.g. supermarkets) within Goole, though there are high levels of vacant units in certain sections of the town centre. There is no significant need identified for additional retail provision in Goole. Instead, it recommends that efforts should be concentrated on improving the quality of the town centre environment and individual buildings, as well as reducing problems associated with the railway crossing that bisects the town centre. Building on this, initial funding has been secured from the Towns Fund that could see up to £25m made available for Goole to support urban regeneration, develop skills and enterprise infrastructure and improve connectivity as part of a Town Deal. Preliminary objectives for Goole Town Deal include identifying new uses for vacant commercial buildings and floor space, increasing activity in the town centre and addressing the leisure and cultural offer alongside the tea-time and evening economy. This complements previous objectives set out in the Goole Renaissance Prospectus (2007) and Goole Renaissance Plan which identified a number of schemes to further enhance the vitality and attractiveness of the town centre to visitors, residents and potential investors. 
9.106 Whilst the Town Centre, Retail and Leisure Study (209) did not identify significant additional retail requirements for Howden, the forecasting at the time did not account for the extension planned for the northeast of the town. The additional level of development proposed in this area is likely to lead to a requirement for additional retail floorspace to meet the needs of a growth in population. A new neighbourhood centre to the northeast of the town would also add to the sustainability of the development, supporting shorter trips. A balance will need to be struck between supporting the existing businesses and environment within Howden town centre, and managing the impact of growth on local infrastructure and the high quality built environment.
9.107 In relation to tourism, the Tourism Accommodation Study (2016) highlights the area’s potential for business tourism, with opportunities to develop hotels and other serviced accommodation along the M62/63 corridor. Such proposal would have to take account of the town centre-first approach established in Policy EC3. Previous studies have highlighted to potential to capitalise on wildlife and heritage tourism. Oakhill Country Park, which is adjacent to the Aire and Calder Navigation in Goole, is an important asset for the area and offers opportunities for countryside recreation to residents and visitors alike. The Trans Pennine Trail, which provides a link across the country from Hornsea to Southport, also runs through the sub area and is popular with walkers, cyclists and horse riders. There is an opportunity to maximise the potential for nature tourism through the use of natural assets, such as Blacktoft Sands and Saltmarshe Delph, which provide the south western point on the ‘Yorkshire Nature Triangle’ that covers much of the East Riding. Policy EC2 will be used to determine whether tourism developments are appropriate, while Policy EC3 provides further detail on the approach that will be applied to tourism proposals which include main town centre uses.
209 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area ApproachEnvironment
9.108 The East Riding’s Landscape Character Assessment (2005) divides the area into a number of different landscape 
character types, including River Corridors, Open Farmland, M62 Corridor and Drained Farmland. In general, these character types have very few trees or woodland and comprise intensively farmed high-grade arable land dependent on complex land drainage systems and washlands. Much of the landscape has been assessed as being of ordinary or poor quality, which reflects its fragmented nature and the presence of detractors. However, the Open Drained Farmland of the Humberhead Levels in the south and east of the sub area is highlighted as being of good quality, due to its strong sense of place, and the Thorne Moors are identified as an Important Landscape Area in Policy ENV2 as there are few similar landscapes remaining.
9.109 The Landscape Character Assessment Update (2018) highlighted changes to the landscape since the previous assessment in 2005. Specific to the Goole and Humberhead Levels sub area, industrial and commercial development along the M62 corridor has impacted views across the flat and open farmed landscape. Such development has also changed the landscape on the western edge of Goole. Wind turbine development along the M62 has also impacted on the landscape character of open farmland to the east and the drained open farmland to the south of Goole. In addition, land management practices have had an influence on the rural landscape, including in the Goole and Humberhead Levels sub area, and consideration needs to be given to the potential impact of expanding settlements, such as Goole and Howden, on the landscape character. 
9.110 The topography of the sub area is low-lying, and several major river systems converge and flow through the area into the Humber Estuary (Rivers Aire, Derwent, Don, Trent and Ouse). Consequently, the vast majority of the area is highly vulnerable to flooding, particularly tidal flooding from storm surges. This risk is expected to increase in the future as sea levels rise due to climate change. As such, flood risk management priorities for this sub area, as set out in the relevant river catchment flood management plans and Humber Estuary Flood Risk Management Strategy are to:
 
 Maintain and improve defences at Goole in line with climate change;
  Optimise the use of washlands and/or create additional flood storage areas along parts of the Lower River Aire,  
 Lower River Don, and Lower River Ouse to respond to climate change;
  Identify a sustainable, long term approach to current land drainage regimes;
  Identify appropriate means of reducing surface water flood risk;
  Improve flood awareness and flood warning take up and encourage property-level resilience in areas facing  
 increased frequency of flooding in the future;
  Review emergency response procedures; and
  Establish the potential for wetland creation, flood storage and managed realignment within the inner estuary.
9.111 While Goole is protected to a good standard, which should continue into the future, there is always a residual risk that defences can be overtopped or breached. Therefore, a Level 2 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) (2019) has been prepared for the town to inform how these scenarios can be managed when considering new development, and this will be used to provide the evidence base for the application of Policy ENV6. In addition, Groundwater Source Protection Zones have been defined to help protect the water quality of the Sherwood Sandstone aquifer, which is located to the far west of the sub area, and the impact of development in this area will need to be carefully managed in accordance with Policy ENV6.
9.112 The sub area has a number of important biodiversity and archaeological assets, and various projects and initiatives focus on their enhancement and better management. The major river systems and associated nature conservation designations are identified in Policy S9 as regionally important green infrastructure corridors and include the Rivers Aire, Derwent, Don/Dutch River, Humber, Ouse, and Foulness. They are likely to play an important role within Local Nature Recovery Networks identified in Policy ENV5. 
9.113 The biodiversity assets in this sub area that are afforded international and national status, as described in Policy ENV4, are:
210
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update  Thorne Moors - these straddle the border with Doncaster and North Lincolnshire and are the largest remaining  
 lowland peatland in England. They are protected from inappropriate development through Special Protection Area  
 (SPA), Special Area of Conservation (SAC) and Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) designations.
  River Ouse and Humber Estuary - the River/Estuary is protected from inappropriate development through SSSI  
 and SAC designations eastwards from Boothferry Bridge, and SPA designation eastwards from Yokefleet. The  
 Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA) for the Local Plan Update and HRAs for individual planning applications  
 have identified that some fields in proximity to the Humber Estuary provide important refuge and roosting points  
 for protected species. These are functionally linked to the habitat designation. An SPD provides a screening tool  
 that can be used to assess the ecological attributes of a site to identify its potential of being functional land. 
  Lower Derwent Valley - the northwestern part of the sub area forms the southern tip of this major river and  
 floodplain system, which is recognised as a discrete area of great agricultural, historic, cultural, environmental and  
 landscape value due to its flood meadow habitat and diverse range of species, particularly water birds. As such, it  
 is protected from inappropriate development through SAC, SPA, SSSI, and Ramsar designations. These  
 designations cross several local authority areas and will require close cooperation with neighbouring authorities  
 and other bodies. A Lower Derwent Valley Plan has been prepared and enables the full value of both the  
 designated land and the adjacent functionally connected land to be recognised. The Council has adopted it as a  
 supplementary planning document to provide further guidance on managing development in this area.
9.114 Improvements to Goole Town Centre, and the town’s public realm in general, will form a central part in its 
renaissance. This has already been identified in early work to support the Goole Town Deal and follows on from the Goole Renaissance Plan that highlighted how such improvements are needed to offer a stimulating environment for those who live, work, visit and invest in the town. 
9.115 Numerous heritage assets contribute to the character of the sub area, including listed buildings, such as Howden Minster and the two remaining boat hoists (known as the ‘Tom Pudding’ and ‘Coal Wagon’ hoists) at Goole, and a number of scheduled monuments and conservation areas. The significant urban extension at Howden provides an opportunity to open up more public views of the Minster and develop new neighbourhoods that create a sense of place. 
9.116 The Humberhead Levels is also an important archaeological area, and those elements which contribute to the character and setting of heritage assets will be protected in accordance with Policy ENV3. The 2005 Landscape Character Assessment noted that landmarks in the area’s skyline contribute to its identity, and to the east, in the neighbouring District of Selby, the power station at Drax is visible across much of the sub area. This landscape has altered since that time with the development of numerous wind farms and individual turbines that contrast with the otherwise flat landscape. The remaining open gaps between Goole and Hook and between Snaith and Cowick, help to maintain the separate identities and character of these settlements. 
Community and Infrastructure
9.117 The Infrastructure Study (2022) identifies where there is a need for new infrastructure provision in the sub area, and the findings from this are reflected in Policy A4. 
9.118 There are good connections by rail, water, and road, particularly along the East-West Multi-Modal Transport Corridor and also to the southwest along the M18. Good accessibility to these modes of transport means the area is in a particularly strong position to support multi-modal transfer of freight. The completion of the Tom Pudding Way link road south of Junction 36 (M62) at Goole has helped to improve road access to the docks, as well as facilitate further economic development. Improvements to Junction 36 of the M62 may be needed to facilitate further housing and economic development in the town. In Howden, improvements to Junction 37 of the M62 may be needed to accommodate traffic from its planned north east urban extension as well as an expanded Ozone employment area.
9.119 The requirements for additional school capacity, in the form of extensions or new schools, has been informed by the Infrastructure Study (2022) and reflects the anticipated demand for school places at a particular moment in time. Adjustments in the number of pupils on roll for a wide variety of reasons will influence the assessment of demand on a school by school basis. As such, the Council’s education department will be consulted on schemes that either individually, or in combination with other known and future developments, are likely to increase demand for school places.  
The locations listed in Policy A4 for additional school place capacity should not therefore be regarded as exhaustive. 
211 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area ApproachPolicy A4: Goole and Humberhead Levels sub area
Plans, strategies and development decisions in the Goole and Humberhead Levels sub area should:
A. Housing
1. Support the role of Howden as the main focus for residential development in the sub area with the 
northeast of Howden being the key area of growth for the town. 
2. Support the delivery of housing, at a level commensurate with the scale and function of the settlement, in Snaith and Eastrington through the development of sites within the settlements, avoiding areas of highest flood risk as far as possible. 
3. Contribute to the overall mix of housing in the sub area, including through the delivery of smaller properties.
4. Where suitable and appropriately mitigated, support the delivery of housing in Goole that takes account of the residual risk of flooding.
B. Economy
1. Support appropriate expansion and diversification of the sub area’s key economic sectors, particularly ports and logistics; manufacturing and engineering (including renewable and low carbon energy operations); creative and digital.
2. Make the most of the area as a prime location for economic development that takes advantage of its multi-modal transport infrastructure.
3. Support the development of Junction 36 (M62) as a Key Employment Site on the edge of Goole for manufacturing, storage and distribution uses.
4. Support the development of an expanded Ozone Industrial Estate at Howden, and the Green Park Business Park at Newport, predominantly for manufacturing, storage and distribution uses.
5. Support the role that Gilberdyke Industrial Estate has in contributing to the rural economy.
6. Aim to revitalise the town centre of Goole through public realm investment, property improvements and improved connectivity. 
7. Support initiatives aimed at linking employment opportunities with residential areas of Goole and the wider sub area.
8. Encourage value-added, port-related activities and maximise opportunities for intensification and expansion around the sub area’s ports and wharves at Goole and Howdendyke.
9. Support appropriately located developments aimed at promoting tourism in the sub area, including provision of hotels and the enhancement of Oakhill Country Park.
10. Support the decarbonisation of the economy through appropriate energy infrastructure (e.g. grid connection points, pipelines) that integrates with renewable and low energy generating uses.
C. Environment
1. Support integrated approaches to habitat and species management, safeguarding and enhancing designated sites and associated functionally linked land, including the Humber Estuary, Lower Derwent Valley, River Derwent, River Ouse and Thorne, Crowle and Goole Moors and green infrastructure corridors, and avoid development that would have a detrimental impact, working in conjunction with neighbouring authorities where appropriate.
212
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update2. Have regard to the character and quality of landmarks, such as the cranes, ‘Salt and Pepper Pot’ 
water towers and St. Johns Church in Goole, Howden Minister and Wressle Castle, and respect, and, where possible, enhance views of these features.
3. Protect those elements which contribute to the setting and character of the sub area’s heritage assets, particularly in Howden, and support initiatives to improve the quality of the public realm in Goole, including the revitalisation of the town centre.
4. Ensure the integrity of the Sherwood Sandstone aquifer, and the Pollington and Cowick Groundwater Source Protection Zones, is protected.
5. Proactively manage the risk of flooding posed from the Humber Estuary and the Rivers Aire, Derwent, Don (Dutch River), Ouse, and Trent, as well as the risk of surface water flooding, having regard where appropriate to the relevant Strategic Flood Risk Assessment and flood risk management plans and strategies.
6. Prevent coalescence by protecting the character and individual identity of settlements by maintaining Key Open Areas between Goole and Hook, and Snaith and Cowick.
7. Manage improvements to the River Aire, River Ouse, Aire and Calder Navigation and Dutch River where it would create economic, environmental and recreational opportunities, and does not adversely affect conservation initiatives or the quality of the natural environment.
D. Community and Infrastructure
1. Enhance connectivity within the sub area and with the rest of the East Riding and other important centres, 
such as Hull, Doncaster and Leeds, by supporting transport infrastructure improvements, particularly:
i. improvements to walking, cycling and public transport facilities, including those set out within the Local Transport Plan Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plans and major cross country routes, such as the Trans Pennine Trail, the Public Right of Way network, and the National Cycle Network;
ii. M62 Junction 36 Interchange improvements;
iii. M62 Junction 37 and linked roundabouts improvements;
iv. improved facilities and railway freight capacity at the port of Goole; 
v. improvements in and around the level crossing in Goole town centre; and 
vi. improvements that link the key area of growth to the north of Howden with the rest of the town and other locations in the sub area such as Goole.
2. Support the provision of additional infrastructure, including:
i. primary health care capacity, including dentists across the sub area;
ii. district heat networks, particularly as part of large commercial developments;
iii.  drainage and flood alleviation schemes, particularly for Goole; 
iv. additional secondary school pupil capacity and post-16 education capacity in the Goole and Howden School areas; and 
v. additional capacity for special educational needs (SEN) and early years education.
213 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area ApproachHolderness and Southern Coastal sub area
9.120 The Holderness and Southern Coastal sub area has a population of around 25,000. Hornsea is the largest town 
in the sub area, with a population of just under 9,000 and has a range of services and facilities for its residents and people living in the surrounding area. Withernsea, which is slightly smaller with approximately 6,500 residents, is a key focus for regeneration activity, including a focus on improving the range and quality of housing.
9.121 While the sub area has strong links to Hull, with people commuting to the City for work, leisure and education, much of the area is remote from the rest of the East Riding. This has led to many challenges related to peripherality and isolation, including limited inward investment, lower levels of demand for development and significant levels of economic and access deprivation, particularly in Withernsea. As a consequence, when compared to other sub areas, the proportion of development directed to Holderness and Southern Coastal is relatively low. Development in the sub area will be largely focused on Hornsea and Withernsea to strengthen their respective roles as hubs for a wider area and to support ongoing regeneration and renaissance. 
214
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateFigure 20: Holderness and Southern Coastal sub area
Hornsea
WithernseaKingston
Upon
Hull
GrimsbyAldbrough
Patrington
EasingtonHedonBeverley
& Central
Sub AreaBridlington Coastal
Sub Area
North East
LincolnshireRoosSkirlaughLevenBrandesbur ton
Bilton
ThorngumbaldKeyinghamPreston
0 5 10kmN
City
of York
Selby
Bridlington
Withernsea
Hornsea
Pocklington
Market
WeightonBeverley
Howden
HedonElloughton/
BroughGoole
Driffield
New Development Key: Strategy and Places
Town
Primary V illageRural Service Centre
Sub Area Boundary
Economic Focus
Transport
Core Bus Routes
Important Road LinksEnvironment
Heritage Coast
Flood Zone 3
International nature conservation
site
Offshore WindfarmsMain focus for Housing
215 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area ApproachHousing
9.122 The sub area’s links with the City of Hull mean there is a need to carefully manage the scale and distribution 
of housing development to support the ongoing development, regeneration and housing market interventions within the City. The absence of a Principal Town and a weaker housing market in general means that the amount of residential development directed to this area is relatively limited. However, new development and investment is required to meet localised needs and to support regeneration initiatives within the towns of Hornsea and Withernsea. Appropriate levels of development will take place in Aldbrough, Patrington and Roos, to reflect the role of these settlements and to help meet local housing need.
9.123 Policy H1 should be used to determine the appropriate housing mix for proposals in this sub area having regard to the latest Local Housing Need Assessment.
Economy
9.124 A number of important economic sectors operate in the sub area, including tourism, agriculture, food and drink, with the highest employment found in the tourism, health, retail and education. The sub area plays a major role in the UK’s energy industry with nationally important gas terminals at Easington and underground gas storage caverns at Atwick and Aldbrough, with the latter potentially storing hydrogen in the future. In particular, the Easington Terminals Complex plays a critical part in supplying much needed gas storage facilities which help ensure the country’s security of supply. The underground salt deposits between Withernsea and Bridlington make the sub area one of the few locations in the UK that are suitable for gas storage facilities.  The Langeled pipeline from Norway to Easington has the capacity to supply around 20 per cent of Britain’s peak gas demand. In addition, some of the largest wind farms in the world are off the coast of Holderness which, when fully commissioned, have the potential capacity of up to 6 gigawatts. Some of the onshore infrastructure required to support the operation of the smaller farms make landfall on the Holderness coast. As such, the energy industry, including the sector concerned with decarbonisation, has been identified as the key growth sector for the sub area, which has the greatest potential to contribute to economic competitiveness, promote innovation and generate higher skilled employment. 
9.125 Whilst the economy of the sub area’s coastal towns and villages tends to be reliant on traditional sectors, such as tourism and fishing, a large proportion of people work within the retail and public sectors. Remoteness creates challenges for economic diversification, and the sub area has been unable to attract significant new employment development in recent years, notably in Hornsea and Withernsea. 
9.126 The Employment Land Review (2020) and subsequent Demand Update (2022) set out the gross land requirements for each of the Functional Economic Areas (FEA) of the East Riding. This sub area falls within the Hull FEA though the FEAs do not align with the Local Plan sub areas so there is some overlap with others. The specific sites required to help address the conclusions of the Demand Update are set out in the Allocations Document Update. 
9.127 It is likely that the employment sites in Hornsea and Withernsea are likely to serve only an indigenous market, due to their relative peripherality and the tendency for businesses to prefer to be closer to larger centres of population and the Strategic Transport Network. However, it is considered that there is a need for sites in both Hornsea and Withernsea to be allocated to support the towns’ role and regeneration objectives, and to provide additional certainty and confidence for investment decisions in an area where the market is generally weaker. 
9.128 The Town Centres, Retail and Leisure Study (2019) did not identify a significant need for further retail floorspace provision in Hornsea and Withernsea. It noted that the modest levels of capacity in both towns did not necessarily merit the identification of further sites for retail development. The Action Plans completed alongside the Study identified a number of objectives for the two Towns, some of which have a spatial planning dimension. For Hornsea, it was recommended that connections between the town centres, green spaces and the seafront are improved alongside a general objective to improve the environmental quality of the town centre and public realm. Similarly, in 
216
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Updaterespect of Withernsea, the Action Plan recommends enhancing the public realm and street scene to improve the 
environmental quality and vitality of the town centre. 
9.129 While Hornsea and Withernsea have a busier tourism ‘season’ during summer months, a high proportion of visits are repeat visitors by owners of caravans and holiday home accommodation (e.g. static homes and chalets). Both towns are also popular with day visitors, but fail to attract a significant overnight stay market. As such, the Tourism Accommodation Study (2016) recommends supporting new commercial accommodation, particularly smaller-scale serviced, self-catering and hostel provision. 
9.130 Spurn Point is a unique environmental feature and an important visitor destination for the sub area. Nature tourism is important but it is crucial to give full consideration to the potential impact of additional visitors on the integrity of nature conservation sites. In addition, the Trans Pennine Trail, which provides a link across the country from Hornsea to Southport, also runs through the sub area and is popular with walkers, cyclists and horse riders. Seafront areas are identified in both Hornsea and Withernsea, which have an open character with a variety of recreational uses. Policy EC2 will be used to determine whether tourism developments across the sub area are appropriate.
Environment
9.131 The sub area’s landscape is characterised by the low-lying, relatively flat Holderness Plain and Humber Estuary, interspersed with various villages and hamlets. Three main character types are identified by the Landscape Character Assessment (2005) within the sub area; Coastal Farmland, Holderness Open Farmland and Low Lying Drained Farmland. These are generally of ordinary quality, with vertical features and large scale farm buildings detracting from its character. However, the landscape to the south of the sub area along the Humber Estuary, and to the west surrounding Hornsea Mere, is considered to be of good to high quality. Church spires and towers, including the historic St Patrick’s Church in Patrington, provide diversity in the farmland landscape and are a defining feature of the character of the sub area. Other historic assets include the heavy gun battery at Sunk Island. Sunk Island is the result of gradual land reclamation since the seventeenth century and is one of the largest conservation areas in England. These assets add to the character of the sub area and those elements which contribute to their character and setting will be protected in accordance with Policy ENV3.
9.132 The Landscape Character Assessment Update (2018) highlighted changes to the landscape since the previous assessment in 2005. Coastal erosion has resulted in loss of land and property along the East Riding’s coastline, impacting the landscape character. The tidal surge of 2013 resulted in erosion at Spurn, changing the peninsular and destroying the road access to the point. Managed realignment has been adopted in several areas to help manage local losses of land and reduce the risk of flooding. There are currently two managed realignment sites (Welwick and Paul Holme Strays) and a larger scale realignment at Skeffling / Outstrays is being planned by the Environment Agency. Development pressure around the Humber Estuary is likely to result in the creation of more managed realignment sites adjacent to the Humber Estuary as compensation for development on the fringes of towns and ports. 
9.133 The development of caravan parks and other recreational facilities are also increasing their influence on the landscape character of the coastal sub areas. Across the East Riding, land management practices have had an influence on the rural landscape, including in the Holderness and Southern Coastal sub area. Expanding settlements and additional onshore wind energy developments can change the landscape character though this has been on a relatively modest scale in this sub area. As noted above, the introduction of large scale offshore wind farm development off the coast at Withernsea and Spurn point has had a visual impact on the area’s seascape.
9.134 The coastal area, together with the north bank of the Humber, and the low lying area south of the A1033/B1445, are defined in Policy S9 as regional green infrastructure corridors. There are also the Hornsea and Hull-Hornsea local green infrastructure corridors partly within this sub area. 
9.135 There are several local, national and international environmental designations in the sub area, which are defined in Policy ENV4. The Humber Estuary is a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), Special Protection Area (SPA), Special Area of Conservation (SAC), and Ramsar site. The Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA) for the Local Plan Update and HRAs for individual planning applications have identified that some fields in proximity to the Humber Estuary provide important refuge and roosting points for protected species. These are functionally linked to the habitat designation. An SPD provides a screening tool that can be used to assess the ecological attributes of a site to identify its potential of being functional land. 
217 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area Approach9.136 Further SSSI and SPA designations cover Easington Lagoons, which 
is located at the southern end of the Holderness Coast, and Hornsea Mere to the west of the town. Spurn Point is a unique feature and one of the most extensive areas of coastal sand dune in the region and is designated as a Heritage Coast in recognition of its distinctiveness and strategic importance. It also includes some nationally significant military remains, and two distinctive lighthouses. Policy ENV4 identifies a Spurn recreational pressure zone of influence where new development, particularly in respect of tourism developments (including ‘roll back’), will have to rule out adverse effects on the designated site. 
9.137 Policy ENV4 highlights the need to ensure that the Hornsea Mere Special Protection Area (SPA) site is protected from inappropriate development that will raise nutrient levels. As such, all developments in the Mere’s hydrological system will have to demonstrate that foul and surface water can be appropriately addressed so that they are nutrient neutral.
9.138 As a very low-lying area sitting between the banks of the Humber and the North Sea, parts of the sub area are particularly vulnerable to flooding. This is most notable to the south of the area close to the Estuary, and is expected to increase with sea level rises resulting from climate change. The low-lying farmland is drained into the Humber by a number of watercourses, including the Burstwick, Roos, Keyingham and Winestead Drains. Policy ENV6 and the Council’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) (2019) will be used to manage the potential risk and impact of flooding in respect to new development. The flood risk management priorities for this area, as specified in the River Hull and Coastal Streams Catchment Flood Management Plan, River Hull Integrated Catchment Strategy and Humber Estuary Flood Risk Management Strategy, are to:
 
 Reduce the impact of flooding in Hornsea for those areas regularly affected, including optimising use of the Mere  
 to manage flood risk and regulating discharges into Stream Dyke;
  Reduce surface water flood risk in the Burstwick Drain catchment;
  Improve the understanding of combined flood risk from all sources in South Holderness to inform potential  
 management solutions, focusing on improving flood warning take up and reducing the consequences of flooding,  
 which is expected to increase with climate change and due to potential funding difficulties in maintaining the  
 Estuary’s defences (e.g. secondary defences and property level protection);
  Set back defences on the Estuary near Welwick to create inter-tidal habitat to compensate for losses caused by  
 sea level rise; and
  Replace habitat at Easington Lagoons that will be lost from coastal erosion/tidal inundation.
9.139 The stretch of coastline within the sub area is one of the fastest eroding in Europe, receding on average between 1.5-2.5 metres per year between Hornsea and Kilnsea, and individual cliff losses can exceed 20 metres per year. Losses in any particular year can be quite significant and are expected to increase with climate change. Consequently the Local Plan, as highlighted in Policy ENV6, will encourage sustainable coastal management where this is linked to the Shoreline Management Plan and Humber Estuary Flood Risk Management Strategy. This includes continuing to protect the towns of Withernsea and Hornsea, as well as the gas terminals complex at Easington as long as there is a strategic need for the facility. A Coastal Change Management Area is identified on the Policies Map Update and Policy ENV6 sets out how this will be used to manage the risk posed by coastal change. 
9.140 An attractive built environment and public realm will be important to the development and appeal of Hornsea and Withernsea. In Hornsea, the unique built character of parts of the town centre adds to its overall appeal, although the seafront promenade is in need of investment to increase its offer as a visitor destination. In Withernsea, the lack of quality public realm and built environment is seen as one of the barriers to attracting new investment, which local stakeholders are seeking to address. The maintenance of clean beaches is also important to the attractiveness of the towns and wider sub area.
218
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateCommunity and Infrastructure
9.141 The Infrastructure Study (2022) identifies where there is a need for new infrastructure provision in the sub area,  
and the findings from this are reflected in Policy A5.
9.142 The distance between the sub area and the motorway network, which lies on the west side of the City of Hull, and the absence of a connection to the railway network contributes to the isolation of the area. This results in the bus being the main form of public transport, however, services are infrequent in some locations. 
9.143 The requirements for additional school capacity, in the form of extensions or new schools, has been informed by the Infrastructure Study (2022) and reflects the anticipated demand for school places at a particular moment in time. Adjustments in the number of pupils on roll for a wide variety of reasons will influence the assessment of demand on a school by school basis. As such, the Council’s education department will be consulted on schemes that either individually, or in combination with other known and future developments, are likely to increase demand for school places. The locations listed in Policy A5 for additional school place capacity should not therefore be regarded  as exhaustive.
219 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area ApproachPolicy A5: Holderness and Southern Coastal sub area
Plans, strategies and development decisions in the Holderness and Southern Coastal sub area should:
A. Housing
1. Support the role of Hornsea and Withernsea, through the development of sites within the 
settlements.
2. Support the delivery of housing, at a level commensurate with the scale and function of the settlement, in Aldbrough, Patrington and Roos, through the development of sites within the settlements.
3. Contribute to the overall mix of housing in the sub area, in line with the latest Local Housing Need Assessment.
4. Support improvements to the quality of existing private housing stock in Withernsea, particularly the older terraced properties.
B. Economy:
1. Support appropriate expansion and diversification of the sub area’s key economic sectors, particularly energy; tourism; and agriculture/food and drink.
2. Promote employment development at Beacon Road Industrial Estate, Withernsea and Atwick Road in Hornsea.
3. Encourage the development of appropriately located small-scale serviced, self-catering and hostel accommodation.
4. Support facilities which encourage year-round tourism and related activities to help minimise the effects of seasonality.
5. Support the regeneration of Hornsea and Withernsea to increase their appeal for residents and visitors and minimise the effects of peripherality.
6. Encourage development that broadens the retail offer and encourages a variety of businesses to establish in Hornsea and Withernsea.
7. Support improvements to connect Hornsea Freeport shopping village and the Town Centre, and enhance facilities at the former provided they are of an appropriate scale and do not undermine the role of the Town Centre.
8. Support necessary infrastructure developments associated with the gas terminals at Easington and the infrastructure required to deliver offshore renewable energy developments.
9. Support the decarbonisation of the economy through appropriate energy infrastructure (e.g. grid connection points, pipelines) that integrates with renewable and low energy generating uses.
C. Environment
1. Support integrated approaches to habitat and species management, safeguarding and enhancing designated sites and associated functionally linked land, including the Humber Estuary, Hornsea Mere and Spurn Head, green infrastructure corridors and the coastal beaches, and avoid development that would have a detrimental impact, working in conjunction with neighbouring authorities where appropriate.
220
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update2. Ensure that developments in the Hornsea Mere hydrological system are nutrient neutral in respect 
of foul or surface water discharges. 
3. Protect those elements which contribute to the setting and character of the sub area’s heritage assets, including landmarks such as St Patrick’s Church in Patrington, St Nicholas’ Church in Withernsea and Withernsea Lighthouse.
4. Facilitate the relocation or roll back of existing development threatened by coastal erosion between Skirlington and Out Newton. 
5. Maintain coastal defences at Hornsea, Withernsea, Mappleton, and Dimlington and Easington Gas Terminals. 
6. Support appropriate temporary developments to take place in the Coastal Change Management Area where they would contribute to the local economy.
7. Sensitively maintain the character of the undeveloped coast, particularly the Spurn Heritage Coast, ensuring that development proposals manage public access, protect and enhance its distinctive landscape, conservation initiatives and the quality of the natural environment.
8. Maintain, and, where possible, enhance the attractive built environment and public realm in Hornsea and Withernsea town centre and seafront.
9. Proactively manage the risk of flooding posed from the Humber Estuary, the North Sea, and inland watercourses such as the Burstwick Drain, including the risk of surface water flooding, having regard where appropriate to the relevant Strategic Flood Risk Assessment and flood risk management plans and strategies.
10. Manage improvement to the Hornsea Mere where it would create economic, environmental and recreational opportunities, and does not adversely affect conservation initiatives or the quality of the natural environment.
D. Community and Infrastructure
1. Enhance connectivity within the sub area and with the rest of the East Riding and the City of Hull 
by supporting transport infrastructure improvements, particularly:
i. improvements to walking, cycling and public transport facilities, including those set out within the Local Transport Plan Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plans and major cross country routes such as the Trans Pennine Trail, the Public Right of Way network, and the National Cycle Network; and
ii. measures to reduce reliance on the private car.
2. Support the provision of additional infrastructure, including:
i. primary health care capacity, including GPs (in respect of the northern part of the sub area) and dentists across the sub area;
ii. drainage and flood alleviation schemes; 
iii. additional capacity for special educational needs (SEN) and early years education.
221 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area ApproachThe Vale of York sub area
9.144 The Vale of York sub area is predominantly rural in character and has a population of just over 38,000, of which just 
over 9,000 live in Pocklington and 7,000 live in Market Weighton. These settlements each have a reasonable range of services and facilities, which meet many of the needs of their own residents and those living in the surrounding area.
9.145 There is a strong relationship between the sub area and York. The relatively close proximity to the city places pressure on the sub area’s settlements as an attractive location for those people working in York who want to live in a more rural location. This is reflected by trends in in-migration to the area from York, and the relatively high level of out-commuting from the sub area to the city. In the future this trend will be reduced as the City Council seeks to increase housing development, which will meet housing needs within York, including through new settlements. York and its immediate environs offer more sustainable locations to meeting the needs of York’s housing market area compared with locations within the East Riding such as Pocklington. There is also a lesser, but still significant, level of commuting to other larger centres nearby such as Beverley and Hull. This contributes to high housing demand and puts significant pressure on the highway network, principally the A1079 which traverses the area and links it to York, Beverley and Hull. 
9.146 Supporting economic growth will create opportunities to both live and work in the sub area. The majority of development will be focused in Pocklington and Market Weighton to support the role and function of these Towns. 
222
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateFigure 21: The Vale of York sub area
Rural Employment SiteNew Development Key: Strategy and Places
Primary V illageRural Service Centre
Transport
Core Bus Routes
Important Road LinksEnvironment
Flood Zone 3Yorkshire W olds -
Areas of highest qualityTown
Sub Area Boundary
International nature
conservation siteThe River Derwent Corridor &Lower Derwent V alleyYorkshire W olds
Economic FocusMain focus for Housing0 5 10kmNMelbourne
City
of York
Selby
Bridlington
Withernsea
Hornsea
Pocklington
Market
WeightonBeverley
Howden
HedonElloughton/
BroughGooleDriffield
Stamf ord Bridge
Holme on
Spalding Moor
BubwithPocklington
Market Weighton
Beverley &
Central
Sub AreaRyedale DC
York UA
Selby DC
Goole & Humberhead 
Levels Sub AreaWilberf oss
Strategic W aterwaysMiddleton-on- 
the Wolds
RES
RES
RES
223 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area ApproachHousing
9.147 Most new housing in the sub area will continue to 
be provided at Pocklington and Market Weighton, where sustainable growth can strengthen their role in meeting the needs of this predominantly rural sub area and support development of further employment opportunities, services and facilities. The level of development steered to these settlements reflects their roles as Towns, below that of Principal Towns and the Major Haltemprice Settlements within the Settlement Network. Pocklington is the largest town in the sub area and is relatively well connected to York.  The scale of growth, as set out in Policy S5, reflects the fact that there has been a significant amount of house building in Pocklington since the base date of the 2016 Local Plan (2012) as developers have been swift to capitalise on the availability of sites, potentially at the expense of other locations in the East Riding. Development has been at such a pace that physical and social infrastructure improvements need to catch up. The scale of development proposals that currently benefit from the grant of planning permission is sufficient to meet the town’s needs for the plan period. 
9.148 The amount of housing development proposed in Market Weighton is lower than Pocklington, which reflects the lower number of jobs available and the higher level of out-commuting that currently takes place from the town. A lower level of housing development will take place in Bubwith, Holme on Spalding Moor, Stamford Bridge, Melbourne and Wilberfoss, which reflects the role of these settlements and helps to meet local housing need. Similar to the position with Pocklington, high levels of development have taken place in a short space of time at Stamford Bridge. Current challenges with highways (e.g. the single-carriageway bridge), heritage and ecological assets mean that, at this time, the housing needs of the sub area can be met within the other centres identified within the sub area without these potential impacts. Housing development will be promoted on previously developed land and other suitable sites within development limits.
9.149 Policy H1 should be used to determine the appropriate housing mix for proposals in this sub area having regard to the latest Local Housing Need Assessment.
Economy
9.150 The area’s traditional land-based agricultural and market town economy has diversified with a number of economic clusters operating in the sub area, particularly the tourism; agriculture/ food and drink; and manufacturing and engineering sectors which capitalise on links with York. The manufacturing industry provides more than 20 per cent of the employment in the sub area, followed by tourism and public sector employment. Along with the creative and digital sector, manufacturing and engineering has been identified as a growth sector for the sub area in the East Riding Economic Strategy 2018-2022.The A1079 has an important role for the economy in the sub area, linking businesses along the route to the national trunk road network and a wide range of potential markets.
9.151 The Employment Land Review (2020) and subsequent Demand Update (2022) set out the gross land requirements for each of the Functional Economic Areas (FEA) of the East Riding. This sub area falls within the York FEA though the FEAs do not align with the Local Plan sub area and there is some overlap. The specific sites required to help address the conclusions of the Demand Update are set out in the Allocations Document Update.
9.152 Service and manufacturing employment development has taken place on industrial estates close to Pocklington and, on a more limited scale, in Market Weighton. The Employment Land Review (2020) highlights the role of both these industrial estates in providing local employment opportunities. Development at these estates may help to slow down the rate of out-commuting to York and the other larger centres outside the sub area. Industrial estates at Holme on Spalding Moor and Full Sutton also have an important role in contributing to the rural economy, and proposals in these locations will be considered in accordance with Policy EC1.
9.153 The development of additional prison facilities at Full Sutton will provide further economic investment and will be 
224
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Updatecomplemented by the number of new homes planned (and recently developed) within the sub area to support 
sustainable patterns of development. 
9.154 The Town Centres, Retail and Leisure Study (2019) notes that Pocklington Town Centre outperforms other similar centres in the East Riding and benefits from a good range of shops and services and a relatively high level of viability and vitality. In Market Weighton, the study highlights the need to promote good links between new developments and the Town Centre to ensure that they complement each other and encourage linked trips and the retention of spending in the town. The Study identified modest levels of retail floorspace capacity in both towns at the time of the assessment.
9.155 In addition, the Tourism Accommodation Study (2016) highlights the Yorkshire Wolds as a major attraction for the East Riding. The high quality landscape is a significant asset for the sub area that attracts tourists, particularly walkers and cyclists. Market Weighton and Pocklington have significant potential to develop as tourist destinations for short-breaks, largely because of their location in relation to the Wolds and their own intrinsic character. There is also an opportunity to maximise the potential for nature tourism through the use of natural assets that can be found in the sub area. Policy EC2 will be used to determine whether tourism developments are appropriate, while Policy EC3 provides further detail on the approach that will be applied to tourism proposals that include main town centre uses.
Environment
9.156 The Landscape Character Assessment (2005) identifies that the sub area is fairly evenly divided into three countryside character areas:
 
 The Humberhead Levels is characterised by generally open farmland and the lower section of the River  
 Derwent Valley;
  The Vale of York makes up the middle part of the sub area and includes sections of the River Derwent, and the  
 Lower Derwent Valley, which includes the Pocklington Beck and Canal; and
  The Yorkshire Wolds is located to the northwestern portion of the sub area with high open arable farmland,  
 deep valleys and blocks of woodland.
9.157 The Landscape Character Assessment Update (2018) highlighted changes to the landscape since the previous assessment in 2005. Recreation facilities in the countryside have developed over the years resulting in a change to the characteristics of farmland particularly around Foggathorpe in this sub area. Across the East Riding, land management practices have had an influence on the rural landscape, including in the Vale of York sub area. While on a relatively small scale, expanding settlements in the sub area, in particular Pocklington, Market Weighton and Stamford Bridge, have had an impact on the landscape character in the immediate environs of these settlements. Wind turbine development has also had a modest impact on the landscape character.
9.158 The Yorkshire Wolds are identified in Policy ENV2 as an Important Landscape Area, and this sub area includes a number of important features including the western escarpment. Consideration is currently being given to whether parts of this landscape can be designated an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB). Any policy implications from such a designation will have to be considered as part of future reviews of the Local Plan.
9.159 The Lower Derwent Valley is a major river and floodplain system on the western boundary of the sub area. It is recognised as a discrete area of significant agricultural, historic, cultural, environmental and landscape value due to its flood meadow habitat and diverse range of species, particularly water birds. Consequently, it is given Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), Special Protection Area (SPA), Special Area of Conservation (SAC) and Ramsar status, as defined in Policy ENV4. As an internationally important area, the Valley is protected from inappropriate development, with Policy ENV4 providing further guidance. 
225 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area Approach9.160 The Lower Derwent Valley extends into neighbouring local authority areas and the Council recognises the need 
for close cooperation with these authorities and other bodies in order to safeguard its agricultural, historic, cultural, environmental and landscape value. A Lower Derwent Valley Supplementary Planning Document has been prepared to help manage development pressures in this area and ensure that biodiversity and landscape enhancements can be delivered that protect and enhance the Lower Derwent Valley.
9.161 Outside the Lower Derwent Valley, the risk of flooding is confined to narrow bands either side of the various becks and tributaries in the sub area. Both Pocklington and Market Weighton are within low risk areas except for the immediate edges alongside the becks that run through them. Both of these towns are particularly susceptible to surface water flooding. Policy ENV6 and the Council’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) (2019) and other evidence will be used to manage the potential risk and impact of flooding in respect to new development. In recent times, a water storage area to the north of Pocklington has been provided that seeks to reduce the risk of flooding within the town.
9.162 Flood risk management priorities for this sub area, as specified in the River Derwent and River Hull and Coastal Streams Catchment Flood Management Plans (2010), are to:
 
 Reduce the risk of surface water flooding in Pocklington, Market Weighton and other communities at risk;
  Reduce the risk of flooding from the Beck in Pockington, including managing localised sediment build up and  
 ensuring that key routes remain open during flood events;
  Investigate the interaction between Market Weighton Canal and the River Foulness to understand the level of risk  
 posed to communities;
  Identify a long term, sustainable approach to managing flood banks and land drainage assets on the Lower River  
 Derwent where future funding difficulties are expected, including potential for managed realignment, wetland  
 creation, and improving the condition of the sections designated as a SSSI;
  Ensure that key routes remain open where possible during flooding events in Stamford Bridge;
  Improve awareness and encourage property level protection (e.g. flood proofing) in areas most at risk; and
  Continue to maintain Barmby Barrage to ensure that fluvial/tidal flood risk does not increase.
9.163 There are a number of green infrastructure corridors, as shown in Policy S9, in the sub area, including the River Derwent and Pocklington Canal, parts of the Wolds, Bubwith disused railway line and the area around the River Foulness. In addition, there are areas of remnant heathland, including Allerthorpe Common, parts of which are designated as a SSSI and Local Wildlife Site. 
9.164 The Sherwood Sandstone aquifer lies beneath the western part of the sub area. New development will need to be carefully managed in accordance with Policy ENV6 to protect the depletion and contamination of this aquifer. Groundwater Source Protection Zones have also been designated, including west of Etton.
9.165 This area has a rich legacy of historic assets. Of particular note is the seventeenth century estate of Londesborough Park, which is identified as being at risk, and the Registered Battlefield at Stamford Bridge, which is extremely significant in England’s history. Stamford Bridge is also home to many other archaeological points of interest including the remains of ‘Deventio’, a Roman town, mostly found in the southern and western parts of the settlement. There is also a concentration of archaeological features in the Yorkshire Wolds and recent finds on the edge of Pocklington have been of international importance. Those elements that contribute to the character and setting of historic assets will be protected in accordance with Policy ENV3. 
9.166 The Landscape Character Assessment (2005) identifies the Yorkshire Wolds as being a high quality landscape, with the western escarpment in particular being a diverse and attractive landscape with many features of interest. It also notes that Church Hill, Holme on Spalding Moor, is an important local landmark in the landscape. The gaps between Market Weighton and Goodmanham, and Pocklington and Barmby Moor, also serve an important role in maintaining the individual characters of the settlements by preventing coalescence.
226
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateCommunity and Infrastructure
9.167 The Infrastructure Study (2022) identifies where there is a need for new infrastructure provision in the sub area, 
and the findings from this are reflected in Policy A6.
9.168 The sub area and its larger towns are relatively well connected, via the A1079 and A614, to the rest of the East Riding and beyond. In particular, the A1079 is a key inter-urban and regional link between the cities of Hull and York which also serves Pocklington and Market Weighton. A number of improvements on this route have already been made since 2012 including new roundabouts at Hodsow Lane, (Pocklington), at Holme Road (Market Weighton) and at Shiptonthorpe at the junction of the A1079 and A614. A need for further highway improvements, which aim to improve accessibility and reduce congestion, has been identified for the sub area through the Infrastructure Study (2022). This includes improvements to junctions along the A1079 and to the A64 Grimston Bar interchange with the A1079 which, although sited outside of the Plan area, facilitates movements to and from the sub area. The Council is working with Highways England and other relevant local authorities, including City of York Council, to reduce congestion and identify mitigation measures along the A64 corridor. A transport study for the A166 at Stamford Bridge has been completed that considers the options for two way traffic across the river. However, at this time, no deliverable solution has been identified and agreed. 
9.169 In addition, Yorkshire Water has identified the need to implement schemes to improve the water quality of Pocklington Waste Water Treatment Works, which in turn will increase its capacity to serve future planned development. 
9.170 The requirements for additional school capacity, in the form of extensions or new schools, has been informed by  
the Infrastructure Study (2022) and reflects the anticipated demand for school places at a particular moment in time. Adjustments in the number of pupils on roll for a wide variety of reasons will influence the assessment of demand on a school by school basis. As such, the Council’s education department will be consulted on schemes that either individually, or in combination with other known and future developments, are likely to increase demand for school places. The locations listed in Policy A6 for additional school place capacity should not therefore be regarded as exhaustive.
227 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area ApproachPolicy A6: Vale of York sub area
Plans, strategies and development decisions in the Vale of York sub area should:
A. Housing
1. Support the role of Pocklington and Market Weighton as the main focus for residential 
development in the sub area through the development of sites within the settlements.
2. Support the delivery of housing, at a level commensurate with the scale and function of the settlement, in Bubwith, Holme on Spalding Moor, Stamford Bridge, Melbourne and Wilberfoss through the development of sites within the settlements.
3. Contribute to the overall mix of housing in the sub area, including through the delivery of smaller properties.
B. Economy
1. Support appropriate expansion and diversification of the sub area’s key economic sectors including creative and digital; tourism; manufacturing and engineering; and agriculture/ food and drink.
2. Promote employment development at Pocklington Industrial Estate and York Road, Market Weighton.
3. Support the role that Full Sutton and Holme on Spalding Moor Industrial Estates have in contributing to the rural economy.
4. Support development and investment that will contribute to the viability and vitality of Pocklington and Market Weighton Town Centres.
5. Support sensitive development which capitalises on, or enhances, the tourism potential of the Yorkshire Wolds, including the provision of small scale serviced and self catering tourist accommodation in Market Weighton and Pocklington, and appropriately located touring caravan and camping parks, boutique/ specialist hotels or holiday parks.
C. Environment
1. Support integrated approaches to habitat and species management, safeguarding and enhancing designated sites and associated functionally linked land, including the Lower Derwent Valley and the River Derwent, and green infrastructure corridors, and avoid development that would have a detrimental impact, working in conjunction with neighbouring authorities where appropriate.
2. Protect the diverse character, skyline and views across the Yorkshire Wolds, including the steep sided dales, rolling elevated farmland, western escarpment and extensive prehistoric ritual landscape, and the Lower Derwent Valley Important Landscape Area.
3. Protect those elements that contribute to the character and setting of the sub area’s heritage assets including landmarks such as Church Hill at Holme on Spalding Moor.
4. Retain the distinctive character and landscape setting of villages on the Wolds.
5. Ensure the integrity of the Sherwood Sandstone aquifer, and the Etton and North Newbald Groundwater Source Protection Zones, are protected.
228
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update6. Protect the Registered Battlefield at Stamford Bridge, and its setting, from inappropriate 
development.
7. Manage improvements to the Pocklington Canal, River Derwent, River Foulness and Market Weighton Canal where it would create economic, environmental and recreational opportunities, and does not adversely affect conservation initiatives or the quality of the natural environment.
8. Maintain the physical separation of Pocklington and Barmby Moor, and Market Weighton and Goodmanham.
9. Proactively manage the risk of flooding posed from the River Derwent and urban watercourses such as Pocklington Beck, including the risk of surface water flooding, having regard where appropriate to the relevant Strategic Flood Risk Assessment and flood risk management plans and strategies.
D. Community and Infrastructure
1. Enhance connectivity within the sub area and with the rest of the East Riding and the City of York 
by supporting transport infrastructure improvements, particularly:
i. A1079 improvements including dualling and junctions with settlements such as Pocklington;
ii. Provision for two-way traffic on the A166 at Stamford Bridge; and
iii. improvements to walking, cycling and public transport facilities, including those set out within the Local Transport Plan Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plans and major cross country routes, such as the Wolds Way and the Way of the Roses, the Public Right of Way network, and the National Cycle Network.
2. Support the provision of additional infrastructure, including:
i. improvements to the Pocklington waste water treatment works;
ii. primary health care capacity, including GPs and dentists across the sub area;
iii. drainage and flood alleviation schemes, particularly in Pocklington and Market Weighton; 
iv. additional secondary school pupil capacity and post-16 education capacity in the Woldgate school area; and
v. additional capacity for special educational needs (SEN) and early years education.
229 Delivering Growth through a Sub Area Approach230
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update10. Delivery, Monitoring  
and Review
231 Delivery, Monitoring and Review10  Delivery, Monitoring and Review
10.1 The role of the Local Plan is to shape places, facilitating and promoting high quality development. It seeks to ensure 
that the right development takes place in the right locations, at the right time. The Strategy Document Update and the Allocations Document Update will help to deliver homes, jobs and better opportunities for the community, whilst protecting and enhancing the environment. Therefore, it is important that this Plan sets out how it will achieve its objectives through implementing the policies set out in the preceding chapters.
Delivery
10.2 The Local Plan Update is based on a strong, robust evidence base which will ensure that its policies and targets 
can realistically be implemented. The document is flexible and will allow for changing circumstances throughout the lifetime of the Plan, ensuring that development is not hindered in difficult times, and achieves the maximum social and environmental benefits, taking into account the viability of development.
10.3 Much of the strategy will be achieved through the determination of planning applications. However, it is important to recognise that the Council cannot deliver the objectives of the Strategy Document Update alone. It will be necessary for a number of external partners, particularly those involved in the Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP), utility and infrastructure providers, developers and land owners, as well as some voluntary bodies, for example civic societies, to play a part in the implementation of the strategy. 
10.4 The Local Plan Update draws together a number of other Council and partner strategies, aligning their objectives and enabling them to be delivered simultaneously. Where relevant, these have been identified through the supporting text to the policies. The Council is also working with partners to ensure the necessary funding to implement the overall strategy is available, and the extent to which this will impact upon the timescales for proposed development.
10.5 An Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) has been published alongside the Local Plan Update. This details the infrastructure that is likely to be needed to support the planned scale and distribution of development. It draws on information from the Infrastructure Study (2022) and identifies the main partners that will have a role in helping to deliver the Local Plan. The IDP also highlights those types of infrastructure considered to be essential in delivering particular developments that are included within the Local Plan Update. Other types of infrastructure are not essential to allow for the scale and distribution of development proposed by the Plan to come forward. However, such infrastructure is set out in the IDP as it would be desirable and/or would help deliver wider benefits. The IDP will be updated on a regular basis, which will take account of new evidence or funding streams.
10.6 The Council will continue to review the Local Plan Update evidence base and the approaches taken following the adoption of the Plan. In particular, the evidence on flood risk will be reviewed where new models and data from key stakeholders are available to ensure that all relevant considerations and mitigation opportunities are explored.
Monitoring 
10.7 The Local Plan Update will be monitored by collating information on a number of indicators set by the Council. These will be reported against relevant targets on a yearly basis, in the Annual Monitoring Report. Monitoring of these indicators will help to identify whether the: 
 
 Policies are achieving their objectives; 
  Policies are having unintended consequences;
  The assumptions and objectives behind policies are still relevant; and
  The targets are being achieved.
10.8 The indicators, shown in tables below, are split into four sections, Housing, Economy, Environment and Community Indicators, with the Spatial Strategy section monitored through the presentation of the indicators spatially where relevant. Targets have been set for most of the indicators, which will allow the Council to assess performance.
232
Proposed Submission Strategy Document Update10.9 It should be noted that additional indicators are set out in the Sustainability Appraisal. These indicators generally 
provide a more contextual picture of the East Riding which will offer a basis for reviewing the objectives for future iterations of both the Sustainability Appraisal and the Local Plan. 
Reviewing
10.10 The Annual Monitoring Report will be the mechanism for monitoring the effectiveness of policies in the Local Plan Update. Plan making regulations require local planning authorities to review local plans at least once every 5 years from their adoption date to ensure that policies remain relevant and effectively address the needs of the local community. Plans may require updating where there are significant changes in national planning policy or further evidence reveals a different approach is necessary. Also, if during the plan period it becomes apparent that policies are ineffective, or not satisfactorily achieving the desired outcome, then an Update is likely to be required. 
233 Delivery, Monitoring and ReviewMonitoring Framework
Housing
Ref Indicator Key Policies Target Delivery Agencies
Net additional homes 
provided (and gross)S3, S4, S5 1,100 dwellings per annumDevelopers/Registered Providers, landowners, ERYC, Homes England
Distribution of net additional homes provided (and gross)S3, S4, S5 In line with Policy S5Developers/Registered Providers, landowners, ERYC, Homes England
Supply of ready to develop housing sitesS5 Minimum 5-year supplyDevelopers/Registered Providers, landowners, ERYC, Homes England
Percentage of homes built on previously developed landS5, H4 20 per cent Developers/Registered Providers, landowners, ERYC, Homes England
Net affordable homes delivered (and gross)S5, H2 200 dwellings per annumDevelopers/Registered Providers, landowners, ERYC, Homes England
Net affordable homes delivered on exception sites (and gross)S5, H2 No target Developers/Registered Providers, landowners, ERYC, Homes England
Size (number of dwellings) of settlements S5, H2 Contextual indicator for implementation of Policy H2
Mix of housing delivered (by bedroom numbers) and existing housing stockS5, H1 To address deficits identified in latest housing needs assessment. Existing stock is contextual indicator for implementation of Policy H2Developers/Registered Providers, landowners, ERYC, Homes England
Number of specialist accommodation units and care-bed spaces for older people deliveredS5, H1 122 specialist units per annum113 care-bed spaces per annumDevelopers/Registered Providers, landowners, ERYC, Homes England
Percentage of sites meeting their affordable housing requirementS5, H2 100 per cent Developers/Registered Providers, landowners, ERYC, Homes England
Additional traveller pitches approvedH3 No target Developers, landowners
234
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateRef Indicator Key Policies Target Delivery Agencies
Supply of traveller pitches H3 Minimum 5-year 
supplyDevelopers, landowners
Average density of approved housing developmentsH4 Average of 30 dwellings per hectare across the East RidingDevelopers/Registered Providers, landowners, ERYC, Homes England
Plots granted for custom build and self build housingS5, H1 Sufficient to meet needs of register on a rolling 3-year basisDevelopers/Registered Providers, landowners, ERYC, Homes England
Economy
Ref Indicator Key Policies Target Delivery Agencies
Amount of employment land taken up (allocated and windfall)S6, EC1 No target Developers, landowners, ERYC, LEP
Number of tourism developments approved by type (and which address deficiencies in the T ourism Accommodation Study)EC2 No target Developers, landowners, ERYC, LEP
Vacancy rate in town and district centresS7, EC3 Below the national average for each centreDevelopers, landowners, ERYC, LEP
Proportion of non-retail (E(a)) commercial uses in Primary Shopping AreasS7, EC3 No target Developers, landowners, ERYC, LEP
Additional floorspace for main town centre uses delivered in and out of centresS7, EC3 No target Developers, landowners, ERYC, LEP
Major alterations to the strategic transport network deliveredS8, EC4 No target Developers, landowners, ERYC, LEP , National Highways
Capacity of major renewable energy generation schemes approvedEC5 No target Energy/Utility providers, Developers, landowners, ERYC, LEP
Installed capacity of renewable energyEC5 No target Energy/Utility providers, Developers, landowners, ERYC, LEP
235 Delivery, Monitoring and ReviewEnvironment
Ref Indicator Key Policies Target Delivery Agencies
Developments allowed on 
appeal which were refused on design groundsENV1 Zero Developers, landowners, ERYC
Developments allowed on appeal which were originally refused on landscape grounds, including coalescence and Key Open AreasENV2 Zero Developers, landowners, ERYC
Area covered by an up to date conservation area appraisalENV3 Increase from baselineERYC, Historic England, local civic societies
Amount of land designated as internationally, nationally and locally important habitat sitesENV4, S9 Increase from baselineDevelopers, landowners, ERYC, Natural England, Humber Nature Partnership, wildlife groups
Number of developments with agreed biodiversity  net gainENV5, S9 Increase from baselineDevelopers, landowners, ERYC, Natural England, Humber Nature Partnership, wildlife groups
Proportion of dwellings approved in Flood Zone 1ENV6 Over 80 per cent per annumDevelopers, landowners, ERYC, Environment Agency
Number of applications granted contrary to Environment Agency advice on flood risk or water qualityENV6 Zero Developers, landowners, ERYC, Environment Agency
Number of flood risk schemes implemented and properties protectedENV6 Increase from baselineDevelopers, landowners, ERYC, Environment Agency
Number of properties/caravan pitches granted roll back approvalENV6 All properties/caravans which are at riskHome owners, park operators ERYC, Environment Agency
Community and Infrastructure
Ref Indicator Key Policies Target Delivery Agencies
New infrastructure delivered C1 In line with Infrastructure Delivery PlanDevelopers, landowners, ERYC, Environment Agency, National Highways, Utility and Infrastructure providers
236
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateRef Indicator Key Policies Target Delivery Agencies
Pupil forecast C1 Contextual 
indicator for implementation of Policy H2 (assessed every 5 years)ERYC
Developer contributions: 
 Agreed
 Received
 Spent
 AllocatedC1 No target Developers, landowners, ERYC
Amount of open space per parish (per type)C3, S9 Increase from baselineDevelopers, landowners, ERYC, Sport England, sporting clubs and organisations, town and parish councils
237 Delivery, Monitoring and ReviewAppendix A: Planning Policies to be replaced
The Local Plan Update sets out a range of amendments to the planning policies contained in the East Riding Local Plan 
Strategy Document (adopted 2016) and to replace the entire Bridlington Town Centre Area Action Plan (AAP) (adopted 2013). On adoption of this document, all policies in the aforementioned documents are replaced. 
238
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateAppendix B: List of Villages
The list below identifies the Villages for the purposes of Policy S4: ‘Supporting development in Villages and the 
Countryside’. Villages are defined based on whether they have at least one of the following services; a village hall (meeting room); village shop selling everyday grocery items; a public house; or a primary school. Settlements with a good pedestrian or public transport link to another which provides one of the above services are also identified as Villages. For each Village listed below a development limit is defined on the Policies Map Update.
Airmyn
AllerthorpeArnoldAsselbyAtwickBaintonBarmby MoorBarmby on the MarshBarmstonBemptonBishop BurtonBishop WiltonBlacktoftBoynton BrantinghamBreightonBroomfleetBucktonBugthorpeBurstwickBurton AgnesBurton FlemingBurton PidseaCamertonCarnabyCatwickConistonEast CottingwithEast CowickEllerkerEllertonEttonEveringhamFangfossFoggathorpe  
Foston on the WoldsFridaythorpeFull SuttonGarton on the WoldsGoodmanhamGowdallGreat HatfieldHarphamHaytonHollymHolmptonHookHothamHuggateHumbletonKilnwick KirkburnLangtoftLaxtonLelleyLittle DriffieldLittle WeightonLockingtonLong RistonLow CattonLundMeltonMillingtonNew EllerbyNewton upon DerwentNorth DaltonNorth FrodinghamNorth NewbaldOld EllerbyOttringham  
Patrington HavenPaullPollingtonRawcliffe BridgeReednessRudstonRyehillSanctonSeatonSeaton RossSewerbyShiptonthorpeSigglesthorneSkefflingSkeltonSkidbySkipseaSproatleySutton upon DerwentSwinefleetThwingTibthorpeUlromeWansfordWattonWeltonWelwickWest CowickWest Ella
51
WithernwickWold NewtonWressleYaphamYokefleet
51 Due to its size and relationship with the Major Haltemprice Settlements, West Ella has been identified as a Village.
239 AppendicesAppendix C: Glossary of key terms
There are technical aspects to planning which may present challenges for those unfamiliar with the planning system. The 
table below is a simplified explanation of the key terms within the Strategy Document Update. An additional glossary of planning terms can be found in Annex 2 of the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF).
Term Definition
Affordable HousingHousing for sale or rent, for those whose needs are not met by the market, that complies with one or more of the following definitions; affordable housing for rent, starter homes, discounted market sales housing, other affordable routes to home ownership (including shared ownership and rent to buy).
Allocations Document UpdateA Local Plan document that allocates sites for development (such as housing, retail,  or industry) or protection (such as open space or land for transport schemes).
Amenity Green SpaceA type of open space that includes areas which provide opportunities for informal activities close to the home and workplace.
Annual Monitoring Report (AMR)Reports on the progress of preparing the Local Plan and the extent to which planning policies are being achieved and implemented.
Appropriate AssessmentThe assessment of the effects of a Plan or project (including planning applications) on Habitats sites. Enables a judgement to be made on whether there will be an adverse effect on the integrity of the site.
BiodiversityThe term given to the variety of life on earth, encompassing all life, from the smallest micro-organisms to the largest mammals and plants.
Brownfield RegisterA register of brownfield land prepared and maintained by the Council that is suitable for residential development.
Coastal Change Management Area (CCMA)An area identified as likely to be affected by coastal change (physical change to the shoreline through erosion, coastal landslip, permanent inundation or coastal accretion). The CCMA is shown on the Policies Map.
Combined Heat and Power (CHP)The combined use of power and usable heat created as a by-product from electricity generation that would otherwise be wasted.
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL)A levy allowing local authorities to raise funds from owners or developers of land undertaking new building projects in their area to support local infrastructure improvements.
Community-led housingGives residents an opportunity to build housing in their local area. Projects are delivered through community engagement, with a local community group or organisation owning, managing or stewarding homes for local people.
Community Service / FacilityPublic services and facilities that further (or have recently furthered) the community’s social well-being or social interests.
Comprehensive Sustainable Drainage System (Comprehensive SuDS)A Comprehensive SuDS scheme is designed to accommodate surface water from a wider area such as a large development site. They will often drain water to one central storage area where water can then be discharged at a controlled rate back into the environment. They may sometimes also be referred to as a ‘Regional’ SuDS scheme.
Conservation areaAn area of special architectural or historic interest, the character or appearance of which it is desirable to preserve or enhance. There are over 100 conservation areas in the East Riding. These are shown on the Policies Map.
240
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateTerm Definition
Core Bus RouteParts of the bus network, generally located between towns, that have a high number 
of services and passengers (see Figure 5). Core bus services provide access to key destinations and run Monday to Saturday with a minimum hourly frequency of service.
CouncilFor the purposes of this document, the Council refers to East Riding of Yorkshire Council which is the local planning authority.
Development LimitThe boundary line denoting the main built up part of the settlement. Development limits are shown on the Policies Map.
Development PlanThe term given to the collection of documents that are used to determine planning applications. Includes the adopted Local Plan and any ‘made’ Neighbourhood Plans. 
Duty to CooperateA statutory duty on local planning authorities to cooperate with other authorities and relevant bodies to maximise the effectiveness with which local plans are prepared.
DwellingA self-contained building, or part of a building, used as residential accommodation, usually housing a single household.
Employment LandLand which is classified as one of the ‘B’ Use Classes or ‘E(g)’. This includes offices, research and development facilities, industrial processes that can be carried out in a residential area without detriment to its amenity (Use Class E(g)(i)-(iii), previously known as Use Class B1), general industry (Use Class B2) and storage and distribution (Use Class B8).
Employment Land Review (ELR)A study undertaken to assess the likely demand for, and the supply of, land for employment uses.
Energy Energy includes energy for heating and cooling, as well as generating electricity.
Enterprise ZoneAreas of land designated by the Government. Sites within an Enterprise Zone benefit from financial and other incentives (including simplified or quicker planning processes) which aim to attract new businesses to an area, or promote investment from existing businesses. The Humber Enterprise Zone is the only Enterprise Zone designated in the East Riding and is the largest in the country, comprising 30 sites located along the north and south banks of the Humber ‘Energy Estuary’ including land at Goole (Junction 36 (M62)) and Paull.
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)A procedure followed for certain types of project to ensure decisions are made in full knowledge of any likely significant effects on the environment.
European Marine Site (EMS)Special Protection Areas and Special Areas of Conservation located below mean high water. European Marine Sites protect important marine and coastal habitats and species populations of which there are two in the East Riding; Flamborough Head and Humber Estuary.
European SiteSites protected by European legislation including Special Protection Area and Special Area of Conservation designations.
Flood ZoneAn assessment carried out by the Environment Agency of the likelihood of flooding in a particular area so that development needs and mitigation measures can be carefully considered. Flood Zone 3 represents an area of high flood risk and Flood Zone 1 an area of low flood risk.
Fossil Fuel EnergyEnergy produced from fossil fuels. Fossil fuels are non-renewable resources, they take millions of years to form, and reserves are being depleted much faster than new ones are being made. The production and use of fossil fuels raise environmental concerns, such as the release of greenhouse gases contributing to climate change.
241 AppendicesTerm Definition
GeodiversityThe term given to the variety of rocks, fossils, minerals, soils and landforms that 
determine the landscape character of our environment.
Greenfield LandUndeveloped land including agricultural and forestry land and buildings, private gardens, parks and recreation land, allotments, mineral extraction sites and waste landfill sites.
Green CorridorsA type of open space that includes linear features of open character including towpaths, riverbanks, cycle ways and disused railway lines.
Green InfrastructureA network of new and existing multi-functional green space, both rural and urban, which is capable of delivering a wide range of environmental and quality of life benefits for local communities (see Table 6).
Groundwater Source Protection Zone (SPZ)Areas identified by the Environment Agency where the aim is to safeguard drinking water by restricting development that can take place. Certain types of development are not allowed within SPZ1.
Gypsies and TravellersFor the purpose of planning policy, Planning Policy for Traveller Sites (2015) defines gypsies and travellers as; ‘Persons of nomadic habit of life whatever their race or origin, including such persons who on grounds only of their own or their family’s or dependents’ educational or health needs or old age have ceased to travel temporarily, but excluding members of an organised group of travelling showpeople or circus people travelling together as such. In determining whether persons are “gypsies and travellers” for the purposes of planning policy, consideration should be given to the following issues amongst other relevant matters:
 whether they previously led a nomadic habit of life,
 the reasons for ceasing their nomadic habit of life,
 whether there is an intention of living a nomadic habit of life in the future, and if so, 
how soon and in what circumstances.’Allocations for gypsy and traveller sites are shown on the Policies Map.
Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA)An assessment which identifies whether there are likely to be any significantly harmful effects from planning policies on a Special Protection Area or Special Area of Conservation.
Habitats SiteHabitats Sites referred to in the NPPF for the purposes of Habitats Regulation Assessment are European Sites and European Offshore Marine Sites defined under Regulation 8 of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended).
Heritage AssetA World Heritage Site, scheduled monument, listed building, protected wreck site, registered park and garden, registered battlefield or conservation area designated under relevant legislation, as well as other historic features that have not been designated (see Table 11).
Heritage CoastAreas of undeveloped coastline which are managed to conserve their natural beauty, and, where appropriate, to improve accessibility for visitors.
Infill Development The development of a relatively small gap between existing buildings.
InfrastructureBasic services necessary for development to take place, for example; roads, electricity, sewerage, water, education and health facilities.
Joint Minerals Local Plan (JMLP)The JMLP provides mineral planning policies for Hull and East Riding and allocates specific sites for future mineral workings. It forms part of the development plan and is the starting point for making decisions on mineral and other relevant planning applications, such as quarrying and oil and gas exploration.
242
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateTerm Definition
Joint Waste PlanThe Joint Waste Local Plan provides waste planning policies for Hull and the East 
Riding and allocates specific sites for waste management use. The Joint Waste Local Plan forms part of the development plan and is the starting point for making decisions on waste and other relevant planning applications.
Key DiagramDiagram showing the Spatial Strategy as set out in the Strategy Document Update (see Figure 3).
Key Employment SiteSites located along the East-West Multi-Modal Transport Corridor which present significant opportunity for employment development over the plan period. These are; Junction 36 (M62) (Goole), Hedon Haven, Humber Bridgehead (Hessle) and Melton. Key Employment Sites are shown on the Policies Map.
Landscape Character Assessment (LCA)Identifies areas of landscape character, making judgements about the quality, value, sensitivity and capacity for new development in each area.
Listed BuildingBuildings of national interest included in the statutory list of buildings of special architectural or historic interest.
Local Development Order (LDO)An Order made by local planning authorities (under the Town and Country Planning Act 1990) that grants planning permission for a specific development proposal or classes of development.
Local Development Scheme (LDS)The project plan and timetable for the Local Plan. It sets out which documents will be prepared over the next three years and is updated annually.
Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP)A partnership between local authorities and businesses that play a central role in determining local economic priorities and undertake activities to drive economic growth and the creation of local jobs.
Local Geological Sites (LGS)Sites of geological or geomorphological importance, valued for the educational value they hold, the role they play in the development of geological science or for the rocks, fossils or features they hold.
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL)A levy allowing local authorities to raise funds from owners or developers of land undertaking new building projects in their area to support local infrastructure improvements.
Local Nature Reserves (LNRs)Sites for both people and wildlife which are of special interest for their flora, fauna, geological or physical geographical features, managed for the purpose of their preservation, or for providing opportunities for study and research. They are also recognised as providing the public with opportunities for informal enjoyment of nature.               
Local PlanThe name for the collection of documents which together make up the plan for the future development of the East Riding. These form part of the development plan and are used to make decisions on planning applications.
Local Planning Authority (LPA)The public authority whose duty it is to carry out the planning function for its area.
Local SitesDesignated to ensure the conservation, maintenance and enhancement of species, habitats and geological features of significant nature conservation value (see Table 13).
Local Strategic Partnership (LSP)A body bringing together the public, private, voluntary and community sectors to work collectively to achieve important goals and improve the quality of life for local people.
243 AppendicesTerm Definition
Local Wildlife Sites 
(LWS)Locally important sites for the conservation of wildlife.
Low Carbon EnergyEnergy that is produced with reduced carbon emissions when compared to conventional use of fossil fuels.
Low Cost Market HousingMarket housing that is available to purchase or rent at a low price, but that does not meet the definition of ‘affordable housing’. It sometimes includes smaller units and/or the use of housing products, such as equity share, rent to buy, private renting schemes and other innovative approaches.
Main T own Centre UsesComprises retail development; leisure, entertainment facilities, and the more intensive sport and recreation uses; offices; and arts, culture and tourism development.
Major DevelopmentAs defined in Article 2(1) of the T own and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015. This includes residential schemes of 10 or more dwellings, or which are on a site of 0.5 hectares or more where the number dwellings is unknown, and non-residential schemes creating 1,000sqm of floorspace or on sites with an area of 1 hectares or more.
National Nature Reserves (NNR)Established to protect important habitats, communities of plants and animals and geological or physical geographical features of special interest as well as to provide ‘outdoor laboratories’ for research. There are three NNRs within the East Riding; Humberhead Peatlands, Lower Derwent Valley and Spurn. These are shown on the Policies Map.
National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF)A national framework for planning made up of economic, social and environmental planning policies. The policies in the NPPF are considered in making decisions on planning applications.
National Policy Statement (NPS)A document which sets out the Government’s objectives and provides a clear framework for investment and planning decisions regarding nationally significant infrastructure.
Natural and Semi-Natural Green SpaceA type of open space that includes woodlands, urban forestry, scrub land, grasslands, meadows, wetlands, nature reserves and wastelands.
Neighbourhood Development Order (NDO)An Order made by local planning authorities through which town and parish councils can grant planning permission for a specific development proposal or classes of development.
Neighbourhood Plan (NP)A Plan prepared by a town or parish council which sets out a vision and local level planning policies in relation to the development and use of land within a designated Neighbourhood Plan Area. They can also be used to allocate land for new development. Neighbourhood Plan Areas are defined on the Policies Map.
Net Developable AreaIn the case of residential development, the area that can be developed solely for houses. It excludes the parts of the site required for other uses, such as major roads or areas of green space that would serve the wider community.
Non-motorized users (NMU)Non-motorized users include walkers, horse riders, cyclists and variations of small-wheeled, human-powered transportation modes (e.g. skateboards, push scooters, wheelchairs).
Open SpaceAll open space of public value, including land and areas of water (such as rivers, canals, lakes and reservoirs) which offer important opportunities for sport and recreation and can act as a visual amenity. Allocations for open space are shown on the Policies Map.
244
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateTerm Definition
Plan PeriodA term referring to the period of time covered by the Local Plan. The East Riding 
Local Plan covers a 19 year plan period from 2020/21 to 2038/39.
Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)A web based resource of planning guidance created by the Government to supplement the National Planning Policy Framework.
Policies Map An illustration of all the policies contained in the Local Plan.
Previously Developed Land (PDL)Land which is or was occupied by a permanent structure, including the curtilage of the developed land and any associated fixed infrastructure. Also known as brownfield land.
Public RealmThis is the space that is visible and accessible to members of the public. It includes; streets, pedestrianised areas, promenades, squares, river and sea frontages, parks and areas of open space.
Ramsar SitesWetlands of international importance, designated under the 1971 Ramsar Convention, protected under the criteria of rarity and diversity of both habitat and species, and fragility of ecosystems. There are two Ramsar Sites in the East Riding, these are the Humber Estuary and Lower Derwent Valley as shown on the Policies Map.
Renewable EnergyEnergy derived from a natural source which can be continually replenished, for example wind or solar power.
Risk Management AuthorityAn organisation responsible for managing the risk of flooding from a particular source. Depending on the source, the Risk Management Authority could be the Environment Agency, Lead Local Flood Authority (the Council), Internal Drainage Board, Highways Authority (either the Council or Highways England) or a water company.
Roll Back A policy approach that allows properties (including holiday accommodation) at risk from coastal erosion to be relocated further inland.
Section 106 AgreementLegal agreements between a local planning authority and a developer, or undertakings offered unilaterally by a developer, that ensure certain extra works related to a development are undertaken.
Scheduled MonumentA nationally important monument due to its historic, architectural, artistic, traditional or archaeological interest.
Sequential ApproachAn approach that seeks to identify, allocate or develop certain types or locations of land before others. For example, land of low flood risk before land of high flood risk.
Shoreline Management Plan (SMP)A plan providing a large-scale assessment of the risk to people and to the developed, historic and natural environment associated with coastal processes.
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)Designated by Natural England under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 for habitat and natural features, including flora and fauna, geology and geomorphology. There are 50+ sites in the East Riding and notable examples include the River Hull Headwaters, Melton Bottom Chalk Pit, Hornsea Mere and Thorne, Crowle and Goole Moors. SSSI designations are shown on the Policies Map.
Special Areas of Conservation (SAC)Areas defined by regulation 3 of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 which have been given special protection as important conservation sites to maintain or restore natural habitats and wild species. East Riding designations are; Flamborough Head, Humber Estuary, Lower Derwent Valley, River Derwent and Thorne Moor. These are shown on the Policies Map.
245 AppendicesTerm Definition
Special Protection 
Areas (SPA)Areas classified under regulation 15 of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 which have been identified as being of international importance for the breeding, feeding, wintering or the migration of rare and vulnerable species of bird to ensure the survival and reproduction of migratory and other birdspecies. East Riding SPA designations are; Hornsea Mere, Thorne and Hatfield Moors, Flamborough and Filey Coast, Humber Estuary and Lower Derwent Valley. These are shown on the Policies Map.
Statement of Community Involvement (SCI)A document that sets out how the Council will involve and engage with the community and other stakeholders in planning. This includes the preparation of local plans, supplementary planning documents and planning applications.
Strategy Document UpdateThe overarching document setting out the strategic policies for the management of development in the area. It forms part of the East Riding Local Plan and contains policies that will be used to make decisions on planning applications.
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA)An environmental assessment of certain plans and programmes, including those in the field of planning and land use, which are likely to have significant effects on the environment.
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA)An assessment providing detail on the risk and impact of flooding, which is mapped and used to inform a sequential approach to the location of development.
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA)Provides insight into how housing markets operate now and in the future. It identifies the type of, and need for, new housing required across a housing market area.
Housing Land Supply Position Statement (HLSPS)An annual assessment identifying sites with potential for housing. local planning authorities are required to show they have a 5 year supply of deliverable housing land. A supply of specific developable sites or broad locations for growth, for years 6-10 and, where possible, for years 11-15 should also be identified.
Strategic Highway NetworkAs shown in Figure 5, the Strategic Highway Network consists of the Strategic Road Network (or trunk road network) managed by Highways England and local Strategic Road Network managed by the Council.
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD)A document used to elaborate on policies or proposals in the Local Plan. Used to provide further guidance for development on specific sites, or on particular issues. SPDs do not comprise part of the development plan.
Sustainability Appraisal (SA)Identifies and evaluates the effects of a planning strategy or plan, including a Local Plan, on a range of social, environmental and economic objectives.
Sustainable Community PlanThe strategy prepared by the Local Strategic Partnership with the aim of improving social, environmental and economic wellbeing in the area by coordinating the actions of local public, private, voluntary and community sectors.
Sustainable Drainage System (SuDS)A wide range of sustainable approaches to surface-water drainage management which aim to mimic natural drainage processes and remove pollutants from urban run-off at source.
Sustainable Transport ModesAny efficient, safe and accessible means of transport with overall low impact on the environment, including walking and cycling, low and ultra-low emission vehicles, car sharing and public transport (including rail and bus).
Use ClassUses of land and buildings grouped together in various categories for planning purposes (‘Use Classes’) dependent on the type of uses which take place on/in them.
246
Proposed Submission Strategy Document UpdateTerm Definition
ViabilityA measure of whether a development proposal is capable of being financially or 
commercially successful.
Windfall SiteA site not specifically allocated for development in the Local Plan but which unexpectedly becomes available for development.
247 AppendicesThis document can be made available in other languages or formats if required.  
To request another format, please contact us on  (01482) 393939