0 
  
0 
 This plan was adopted by Full Council on the 15th October 2015  
  
 1 
 East Staffordshire is a special place for the residents of the Borough. Our local vision 
for the way in which the Borough will change over the next 20 years has been 
developed through a process of evidence gathering, consultations with our public, 
partners and stakeholders. Who better to tell us what’s important both now and in the 
future?  
This  Local Plan delivers a planning framework which responds positively to meeting 
the development needs of the Borough.  It demonstrates how we intend to protect 
what is already good about the Borough , enhance  those areas requiring 
improvement whilst achieving a level of growth to provide us with a good standard 
of life through providing access to quality housing and a wide range of employment 
and leisure opportunities.  
The Local Plan focuses on the amount, type and location of growth across the 
Borough however this is only a small, albeit important, component of the document. 
The Local Plan is about managing change to benefit communities and deliver 
sustainable development. The policie s in this plan will ensure that infrastructure is 
delivered to support development such as roads, education, local shopping facilities 
and open spaces.  
Importantly, the Local Plan establishes the standards required for the delivery of a 
high quality natur al and built environment including design, layout, landscaping and 
the consideration of ecological and historic assets. We have listened to the many 
comments made during previous consultations and in response to the concerns of 
rural communities; we have i ntroduced the concept of Strategic Green Gaps.  These 
will afford protection to villages lying within 1 mile of the main towns of Burton and 
Uttoxeter and limit potential urbanisation.  
Overall  having an adopted Local Plan will shape our Borough for the ne xt two 
decades.  
( 
(Photograph courtesy of The National Forest Company)  
 
 
 
Councillor Julia Jessel  
Deputy Leader (Planning and Neighbourhoods ) 
2 
 Contents  
 Page number  
Part 1:  Introduction and Plan Context  5 
Part 2: The Sustainable Development Strategy  51 
Part 3: Strategic Policies  
Part 4: Detailed Policies  
Part 5: Monitoring Framework  67 
163 
185 
Appendices  & Glossary  207 
  
 
Figures  
 Page number  
Figure 1.1: Local Plan Relationships diagram  
Figure 1.2: Important Influences on the Local Plan.  
Figure 1.3: A well located Borough  
Figure 1. 4: Commuting Patterns in East Staffordshire  
Figure 1. 5: Deprivation by Ward  
Figure 2.1 : Key Diagram  
Figure 3.1: Housing Trajectory  10 
14 
24 
28 
39 
65 
81 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 Tables  
 Page number  
Table 1.1: Dwelling types by local housing market area  
Table 1.2:  Household growth 2012 -2013  
Table 1.3:  Number of homes by household type  34 
35 
36 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 
  
 
 
 
 
 Part 
 
Introduction and 
Plan Context  
 1 
 
1  
6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
Burton Gardens of 
Remembrance   
7 
 Introduction  
1.1 This Local Plan is aspirational and at the same time  realistic. The Plan 
addresses  the spatial and land use implications of economic, social and 
environmental change  and presents a development strategy and planning policy 
framework that will meet the development needs of the borough ’s residents 
over the period 2012 - 2031 .  
1.2 Development isn’t just about building houses, although we recognise that this 
issue is important for our communities  and East Staffordshire Borough Council 
have a duty to ensure housing needs are met. We want to be positive about 
planning and the opportunities that can be captured through mana ging change, 
such as supporting our economy, our rural communities and the environmental 
assets within the borough. Our aim is to create a borough that we can be proud 
of, more importantly, create a borough that future generations can be proud of 
where the re is better access to housing, jobs, facilities and services whilst at the 
same time protecting those things that are considered special.  
 
 
`East Staffordshire is a Borough where people matter and people want to 
live, work and spend their leisure time’.  
 
The Sustainable Community Strategy Mission Statement  
 
1.3 The  policies and proposals in this Local Plan will affect everyone that lives, 
works or visits East Staffordshire for the foreseeable future.  
How We Reached Adoption  
1.4 This  document  follows  the  earlier  Issues  and  Options, Strategic Options , 
Preferred Options and Pre -Submission  consultation  by  the  Council .  At each 
published stage the Council has invited comments from statutory age ncies, 
neighbouring councils, developers and their agents and  it has provided  an 
opportunity to engage with local communities . Consultation responses received 
have from all of these groups have  influence d plan content .   
 
 
  
8 
 What is a Local Plan?  
1.5 This Local Plan  sets out the opportunities for development and presents clear 
guidance on what will or will not be permitted and where.  The purpose of the 
Local Plan is to:  
 provide a practical and detailed basis for the control of development and use 
of land  – whereby applications for planning permission are submitted  to the 
Council ’s Development Control  Team  and determined  in accordance with the 
Local Plan;  
 
 provide potential applicants for planning permission with a clear indication of 
the type , quality  and location of development which East Staffordshire 
Borough Council would accept, encourage and facilitate and an equally clear 
indication of the circumstances in which development will be resisted and 
why; 
 
 provide a spatial framework for the coordinati on and delivery of other plans, 
programmes and strategies;  
 
 afford protection to the natural and built environment to ensure that those 
assets that are valuable to the borough are protected, conserved and 
enhanced;  
 
 promote the development of land to deliv er future growth thereby providing a 
framework for investment decisions;  and 
 
 bring locally specific planning issues before the public to provide an indication 
of how and when changes within the Borough are likely to occur and how the 
changes will affect s pecific interests.  
 
The National Forest   
9 
 Form and Structure of the Plan  
1.6 Following the publication of the Localism Act in 2011 and new Development 
Plan Regulations in 2012 the Council decided to prepare a Local Plan 
comprising a single document  which provides  both strategic planning for growth 
and detailed development management .  
1.7 The Local Plan is structured into the following  five parts:  
 Part 1 - Introduction and Plan Context:  delivers a spatial context and 
defines the issues and key planning challenges that the Borough faces. It 
provides a set of strategic objectives which provides a framework for Parts 2 -
5.  
 
 Part 2 - The Development Strategy:  describes and sets out the devel opment 
strategy for the borough and includes a key diagram.  
 
 Part 3 - Strategic Policies:  indicates the general provision to be made for 
key land uses such as housing, employment  in both towns and the rural area  
and re tail throughout the plan period. Part  3 also  defines a settlement 
hierarchy strategy and provides an indication of the areas across  the borough 
where policies for restraint will be appropriate.  
 
 Part 4 - Detailed Policies:  comprises detailed development management 
policies which supplement the strategic policies and sets out how decisions 
relating to specific development proposals will be made.  
 
 Part 5 - Monitoring Framework:  includes a set of indicators and targets to 
provide a basis for understand ing if, how and when t he plan is being 
implemented.  
1.8 Legislation1 describes the Local Plan as a Development Plan Document ( DPD),  
a statutory component of the Development Plan and a document which outlines 
the key development goals of the Borough Council. Figure 1.1 clarifies the 
relationship of the Local Plan Development Plan Document ( DPD ) with other 
documents that together will com prise the suite of documents that the Council 
will use to guide future development proposals. Of particular importance is the 
relationship between the Local Plan and Neighbourhood Plans.  
 
 
                                                           
1 The Town and County Planning  (Local Development) (England) Regulations 2012.   
10 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  1.1: Local Plan Relationships diagram  
 
 
11 
 Neighbourhood Plans  
1.9 The Localism Act2 makes provision for the preparation of Neighbourhood Plans. 
Neighbourhood Plans give local people the opportunity to decide the future of 
the places where they live and work. This will allow communities  to set out the 
vision for an area and the planning policies for the u se and development of 
land, which  can include choosing where new homes, shops, leisure facilities or 
employment opportunities should be built and what these buildings could  look 
like. It is important to note that  the focus of  neighbourhood plans is on  guiding 
development rather than stopping it.  
1.10 Neighbourhood Plans need to meet certain ‘basic conditions’ at local and 
national levels be fore they can come into force. Basic conditions for 
Neighbourhood Plans are:  
 They must have appropriate regard to national policy  
 They must contribute to the achievement of sustainable development  
 They must be in general conformity with strategic policies in the 
development plan (Local Plan) for the area  
 Must  be compatible with EU obligations, including human rights 
requirements  
1.11 The plan will also need to demonstrate involvement of the local community 
throughout the plan p reparation and decision making.  These basic conditions 
will be tested through the indepe ndent examination and be checked by the local 
planning authority (ESBC) prior to proceeding to referendum.  
1.12 There is no statutory duty for communities to prepare Neighbourhood Plans, 
only a right to do so if they wish. East Staffordshire Borough Council has  16 
designated Neighbourhood Plan areas as at October  2015 and other parishes 
are considering designation.  The 1 6 designated Neighbourhood Plans are:  
 
                                                           
2 The Localism Act was introduced in November 2011 and provisions came into force in April 2012.   Anglesey, Burton upon Trent  Rolleston on Dove  
Anslow  Stapenhill, Burton upon Trent  
Branston, Burton upon Trent  Stretton, Burton upon Trent  
Horninglow & Eton, Burton upon Trent  Tatenhill  
Newborough  Uttoxeter  
Outwoods, Burton upon Trent  Yoxall   
12 
 1.13 Upon adoption , neighbourhood plans will become a statutory plan carrying 
equal weight to the Local Plan and be part of the suite of documents that guide 
development. They will  be used in making decisions on planning applications by 
East Staffordshire Borough.   
1.14 The Council have also worked with Parish Councils on Village Design Guides 
and Conservation Area Appraisals will which will assist the decision making 
process. For some settlements, the Council have worked with Parish Councils 
on determining settlement bou ndaries, which form an important part of the 
development strategy.  
Supplementary Planning Documents  
1.15 Supplementary planning documents (SPDs) provide guidance on local planning 
matters and can be brought forward as circumstances change. An SPD is not a 
compo nent of the statutory Development Plan and  may cover a range of issues, 
themati c or site -specific, and provide  further detail of policies and proposals in a 
'parent' development plan document.   
Flexibility – Production of further Development Plan Documents  
1.16 The policies and proposals presented in this Local Plan represent a robust 
strategy which will deliver growth and across the plan period. The development 
strategy is supported by up to date evidence and clear monitoring that will 
demonstrate how the Counc il is performing against the development strategy 
over time.   
1.17 Whilst the Council will continue to deliver growth through this Local Plan, in 
terms of flexibility, the Council has asked itself `what if things do not go quite to 
plan’? The current recession has demonstrated to the Council that the delivery 
of growth is not always straightforward due to reasons beyond the control of the 
Local Authority. To demonstrate how the strategy can correct itself if delay 
occurs to key developments or if neighbourhood p lans are not forthcoming or 
are delayed, furthe r Development Plan Documents will  be programmed as a 
vehicle to deliver growth. These documents may change or strengthen policy 
and/or provide detailed allocations in response to emerging issues. Further 
information on other actions that have been considered are set out in the 
Monitoring Framework in Part 5.  
 Abbots Bromley  Marchington  
Shobnall  Denstone   
13 
 1.18 Following the period of consultation on Pre -Submission Local Plan there have 
been several events which fall outside the development strategy which have 
taken place. For example a number of applications, particularly for residential 
use have been granted pe rmission. In addition the proposed improvements to 
the A50 at Uttoxeter have been announced. These improvements will provide 
benefits to the delivery of site allocations, particularly  Land West of Uttoxeter  
however the improvements are not required to deliver the development 
strategy. It is likely that there will be additional projects and developments over 
the plan period and flexibility has been built within the plan to respond to 
unforeseen circumstances.  
Process and Monitoring  
1.19 The Council prepares a nu mber of documents that support the production of the 
Local Plan. The Local Development Sch eme provides relevant stakeholders 
and organisations with the Council’s project plan for the preparation of the Local 
Plan. The Statement of Commu nity Involvement  sets how the communities  will 
be involved in the Local Planning system, specifically:  
 
 What people will be involved in;  
 Who we will involve;  
 How we will involve them;  
 When people will be involved;  
 How the information collected will be used in policy making/decisions; 
and 
 How the information collected will be used in development control  
(planning application) decisions  
1.20 The Authorities ’ Monitoring Report  assesses the implementation of our Local 
Development Scheme and the extent to which p olicies are being successfully 
put into practice.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
14 
 Local Plan Influences  
1.21 The role of the Local Plan is to set out a development strategy and policy 
agenda in the context of national policy as well as other local strategies and 
programmes at the borough and county level which are shown in Figure 1.2. 
Figure 1. 2: Important Influences on the Local Plan.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 Key National Influences  
1.22 The National Planning Policy Framework sets out the Government’s 
requirements for the planning system and provides a framework within which 
distinctive local and neighbourhood plans can be prepared which reflect the 
needs and priorities of East Staffordshir e’s communities. The framework  defines 
sustainable development and sets out national development principles. It 
requires the Local Plan to identify and meet the housing, business and other 
development needs of an area and respond positively to wider opport unities for 
growth.  
1.23 The framework recognises that sustainable development is ce ntral to the 
planning system. It  is about positive growth, making economic, environmental 
and social progress for this and future generations. The Local Plan has been 
prepared in general conformity with the framework  and it  accords with the 
frameworks core principles of delivering a Local Plan which proactively drives 
and supports sustainable economic development, delivers development needs 
and which responds positively to wider opportunities for growth.  
Key Regional /Sub re gional  Influences  
1.24 The East Staffordshire Local Plan is influenced by other strategies and plans 
that also seek to deliver change and co -ordinate investment within the Borough, 
and as such have implications for the future use of land. The Local Plan has a 
role to play to ensure that spatial elements of other strategies and plans are 
reflected in the document.  
1.25 East Staffordshire is a member of the Greater Birmingham and Solihull Local 
Economic Partnership (GBSLEP).  The GBS LEP was established to help 
strengthen the local economy, encourage economic development and 
enterprise and improve skills across the region. As part of it’s `Place’ agenda 
the LEP has produced a strategic spatial framework plan titled the Spatial Plan 
for Recovery and Growth (SPRG). Delivery of a 20 year plan indicating the  
broad scale and distribution of growth across the LEP it is intended that the plan 
will directly align with the Strategy for Growth and be developed through 
collaboration between local  planning partners in the LEP. The SPRG provides 
context that will complement and inform emerging Local Plans rather than direct 
and supersede. The second draft of the Spatial Plan is expected to be 
consulted on in November 2014 and the final Spatial Plan published early 2015.   
The current t welve Drivers of Change across the GBSLEP are identified as the 
following:  
 
  
16 
  Creating a place to do business, the economic imperative for growth  
 Globalisation of trade and capital  
 Innovation  
 Population growth  
 Population change  
 Climate change (adaptation and mitigation)  
 GBSLEP centrality  
 Land scarcity  
 Public policy and opinion  
 Quality of life  
 Regulation  
 Civic and business leadership  
 
1.26 The SPRG is an emerging collaborative framework and East Staffordshire will 
continue to engage in its production over the next 6 to 12 months. The 
document has the potential to inform this emerging Local Plan and subsequent 
reviews of the document.  
1.27 A Duty to Cooperate Statement has been published to se t out the links that 
have been made with neighbouring areas and also statutory stakeholders . 
1.28 The Borough does not function or change in isolation. What happens within the 
Borough will have implications for neighbouring areas and our neighbours will 
plan for development which will impact upon East Staffordshire. In addition to 
the functional links with the GBS LEP and the historic links with other 
Staffordshire local authorities, the location of Burton upon Trent, in particular, on 
the edge of the former West/East Midlands regional boundary means there is a 
need to recognise that there are issues tha t are shared, cross -boundary, in 
particular between East Staffordshire and South Derbyshire, and also with other 
neighbouring authorities. Additionally East Staffordshire is also located within 
the Stoke -on-Trent and Staffordshire Local Enterprise Partners hip area, which 
could be a potential source of funding over the plan period. The aim of the LEP 
is to create 50,000 jobs and increase the size of the economy by 50 per cent by 
2021.   
 
  
17 
 1.29 The delivery of the strategy is dependent on a wide range of organisati ons, 
such as the Environment Agency and those responsible for services such as 
health, education, transport, community safety and water resources.  For 
example, we have been working with Staffordshire County Council as the 
Highway Authority, to demonstrate that the development strategy can be 
delivered in transport terms.  We have involved these organisations in preparing 
the strategy and the Infrastructure Delivery Plan that accompanies it. 
Landowners and developers are also central to this process and we are working 
closely with them to make sure that the strategy can be delivered. Making 
places better by integrating with the policies and programmes of our partners is 
what spatial planning is all about.  
Key East Staffordshire Influences  
1.30 Issues  addressed  by this Plan have been identified by residents, employers 
and businesses, local Councillors and by strategic partnerships working. In 
addition the Sustainability Appraisal has included an analysis of the relationship 
of the Local Plan to other plans, poli cies and programmes and highlighted 
where possible, those that have influenced and are linked to the Local Plan. 
Many of the initiatives and priorities of the Council and its community partners 
have a spatial (land use) component and can be delivered or su pported through 
planning policy to varying degrees.  
1.31 At the Local Level, the Local Strategic Partnership for Staffordshire and East 
Staffordshire have created a long -term vision for the area to tackle local needs. 
The Local Plan will implement those aspects  of the Sustainable Community 
Strategy that can be influenced through the planning system. The Local Plan 
and Sustainable Community Strategy are aligned to facilitate this.  
1.32 The Staffordshire Strategic Partnership is the county -wide partnership which 
provides a framework for identifying and delivering those higher level outcomes 
and priorities for Staffordshire which are better delivered in partnership than by 
individual organisations. The partnership is made up of a wide range of partners 
from the pub lic, private and voluntary sectors. The Partnership has identified 
two outcomes, which it has been agreed are important for Staffordshire people 
and place:  
 
 Staffordshire will have a thriving economy  
 Staffordshire will be a safe, healthy and aspirational p lace to live   
18 
 1.33 The East Staffordshire Local Strategic Partnership (LSP) brings together 
organisations from the public, private, and voluntary sectors within East 
Staffordshire, with the objective of improving local people’s quality of life. The 
vision which  the LSP has agreed for East Staffordshire is `to be a Borough 
where people matter and where people want to live, work and spend leisure 
time’. This vision provides the framework to deliver the Borough’s Sustainable 
Community Strategy (SCS), a plan which i s based on evidence and local 
consultation and sets out the key tasks that the partners in the area need to 
achieve to improve its well being. The SCS identifies the following priorities:  
 
 Reduce the gap: focus on the areas of most need  
 Reduce the number o f teenage conception rates  
 Reduce rates of infant mortality  
 Ensure young people’s mental health and well being  
 Reducing the number of children and young people killed or seriously injured 
in road accidents  
 Reduction in crime  
 Reduced mortality rates from coronary heart disease  
 Increase in gross weekly median pay per household  
 Reduce levels of worklessness  
 Reduce carbon emissions by individual, communities and businesses  
1.34 The planning system has a role to play in addressing the issues identified by the 
SCS by delivering sustainable communities where there is equitable access to 
opportunities, facilities and services regardless of where you live or work within 
the Borough.  
1.35 The key influences  set out guidance, plans and strategies have a top down 
influence on the preparation of the Local Plan. Ther e are also bottom up 
influences.  
1.36 In order to make sure that th e strategy addresses the right i ssues and to 
understan d the effects of the strategy the Council  have assembled an extensive 
evidence base . This is made up of two elements:  
 The views of the local community and others with a stake in the future of 
the are a; and  
 Research/fact finding evidence.   
19 
 1.37 A supporting consultation statement and the Council’s consultation response 
documents are on the Council’s website which provides further information on 
the type of comments received during plan consultation and how they have 
informed the plan making process. Consultation undertaken by the Council has 
been in accordance with the Council’s Statement of Community Involve ment .  
1.38 In all, 825 individuals, groups, companies and organisations made 
representations  at the Preferred Options stage .  These comprised, 741 private 
individuals, 40 from landowners/developers/agents, 5 from utility providers and 
businesses, 25 from non -governmental organisations and interest groups, 11 
parish councils and 3 local authorities.  In all, these respondents made some 
2267 comments . 
1.39 Many of the comments related to the level of growth and its impact upon 
physical, social and environmental infras tructure, in particular highways, 
education, health, employment opportunities, services, facilities and open 
spaces. Further evidence has been commissioned to support the delivery of the 
spatial strategy coupled with a policy to support sustainable development. Key 
policy areas which were highlighted during the consultation were rural economy, 
historic environment, lands cape protection and greenspace protection. Strategic 
policies have been drafted on all of these issues. The statutory agencies and 
non governmental partnerships commented on issues including the National 
Forest, minerals and the Water Framework Directive. All of these issues have 
been strengthened in the  Plan.  
1.40 In preparing the strategy we have collected a nd analysed relevant statistical 
evidence and commissioned a number of studies. These are referred to in the 
relevant sections of the strategy . 
1.41 In additi on, there are two key pieces of evidence base that are required under 
legislation and underpin the development of the Local Plan ; the Sustainability 
Appraisal and Habitats Regulations Assessment.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
20 
 Sustainability Appraisal  
1.42 A Sustainability Appraisal Report is published alongside the East Staffordshire 
Local Plan . Planning legislation requires that a Sustainability Appraisal  (SA)3  is 
undertaken  to consider the  likely social, economic and environmental effects of 
the evolving Local Plan. The appraisal has helped inform the Development 
Strategy  and the policies. T he SA Report i s available to view on the Council’s  
website . 
1.43 The Local Plan   has incorporated a number  of amendments to reflect the 
findings and specific recommendations of the Sustainability Appraisal.  
Habitats Regulations Assessment  
1.44 A Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA) screening exercise  was undertaken  
in 2012  by the Borough Council.  The screening report has since been updated 
and is available alongside the  Local Plan.     
1.45 A HRA identifies likely significant impacts of the possible effects of the Local 
Plans policies on the integrity of the Natura 2000 network of sites which 
includes Special Areas of Conservation (important habitats), Special Protection 
Areas (bird populations) and Offshore Marine Sites. The screening report also 
identifies likely significant impacts on potential Special Protection Areas , 
possible Special Areas of Conservation and listed or proposed Ramsar sites.  
1.46 There are no Natura 2000 sites within East Staffordshire Borough , however the 
HRA has a pplied a precautionary principle and considered possible impacts on 
sites within 15km of the Borough boundary.  
1.47 East Staffordshire Borough Council has worked in partnership with 
neighbouring authorities and Natural England to investigate possible 
recreational impacts on Cannock Chase Special Area of Conservation (SAC) as 
a result of new housing  development. Evidence to date demonstrates that 
combination with other plans and projects, new development will have a 
possible negative impact on Cannock Chase SAC. Therefore a policy to 
mitigate this impact has been included in the Local Plan , in order to ensure the 
plan meets national and European legislation.   
 
                                                           
3 S19(5) of the Compulsory Purchase Act 2004   
21 
 1.48 The overall conclusion of the updated screening process is that the  Local Plan , 
which includes a dedicated policy on European sites and Cannock Chase SAC , 
will not have any likely significant effects upon the integrity of the Natura 2000 
sites.   
What has  changed  since the Preferred Option July 2012 ?  
1.49 There have been a number of key changes in the influences that have 
underpinned the preparation of the  Local  Plan since the Preferred Option Local  
Plan was published in July 2012 . In particular the Council has broadened its 
evidence base and refreshed topics to meet the requirements of the national 
framework. This approach was further reinforced following the re vocation of the 
West Midlands Regional Spatial Strategy and Staffordshire Structure Plan on 
the 20th May 2013.  
1.50 The biggest change in the Council’s evidence base has been the Council’s 
housing evidence in the form of a new housing requirement and supportin g 
Strategic Housing Market Area Assessment. A new housing requirement figure 
has led to a revised sustainable development strategy which seeks to deliver 
more housing. This is also now tied into the economic aspirations of the 
Borough.  
1.51 In addition to this the Borough Council has had to determine applications for 
large greenfield residential development submitted to it and in accordance with 
the national framework and adopted Local Plan 2006. This has also influenced, 
in part, the sustain able development strategy which is set out in this  plan.  
1.52 Further changes include the continued development of the Local Plans relating 
to our neighbouring authorities and the evidence to support those plans which 
has led to a level of consistency and coh erence across local authority 
boundaries. The requirement of Duty to Cooperate has led the Borough Council 
to reach out and engage with many different organisations to ensure that the 
plan is prepared with continuous engagement supporting proposals.  
1.53 Follow ing an assessment of options as part of the Lichfield Local Plan 
modifications, the Brookhay Villages and Twin Rivers Park scheme was 
discounted due to the conclusions that the scheme can only work as a whole 
and it is not considered sufficiently advanced or certain to be progressed as a 
comprehensive scheme at this stage and does not relate well to the strategic 
priorities set out in the  Local Plan. Alternative sites have been identified to 
meet the Local Plan development strategy .  
  
22 
 1.54 East Staffordshire Bo rough Council has and will continue to work collaboratively 
with Birmingham City Council, other authorities and with GBSLEP, under its 
duty to co -operate, to establish objectively assessed long term growth. The 
Stage 1 Greater Birmingham and Solihull Strat egic Housing Study, which is due 
for publication in the Spring 2014 concludes that there is a weak relationship 
between East Staffordshire and the Birmingham Housing Market Area due to 
low levels of migration and commuting.  
1.55 Looking to the future, the Borough Council would want to consider in some 
detail the proposal and its impact on the Trent Valley landscape and its 
environmental assets. In particular the issue of coalescence of Burton upon 
Trent, Lichfield and the rural se ttlements in the A38 corridor between the two 
towns needs further consideration. The Borough Council will work with statutory 
agencies and national bodies to better understand the proposal, its need and 
acceptability in terms of delivering sustainable deve lopment.        
   
23 
 East Staffordshire Borough Profile , Issues and Trends  
1.56 This section provides the context  needed to support the Local Plan’s  strategic 
objectives, vision for the area, development strategy and proposed policies. It 
sets out a portrait of East Staffordshire, highlighting its principal characteristics 
as a place to live, work and visit. This is the foundation for understanding ho w 
the rural and urban areas function, the interaction of built and natural 
environments and the way in which our surroundings present opportunities and 
influence life in the Borough.   
1.57 This section  contains a narrative explaining the relationship of the Loc al Plan to 
other national and local strategies and plans which work together to influence  
the framework for delivering change within East Staffordshire communities in a 
joined up way.  
A Well -Located Borough in the Heart of England  
1.58 The Borough occupies a s trategic position on the  edge of the West  Midlands 
boundary , adjacent to the East Midlands and has significant social and economic 
links with both , as illustrated in Figure 1. 3. Its growth and character has been 
influenced by its rural location, the accessibility of the region and the existence of 
raw materials which have provided the basis for employment -led growth. The 
Borough is characterised by a mix of urban and rural areas and the principal town 
of Burton upon Trent dominates the housing and emp loyment provision, 
supported by the smaller market town of Uttoxeter.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JCB Heavy Products Site 
Uttoxeter   
24 
 Figure  1.3: A well located Borough  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 1.59 Our central position and good access has led to a number of significant national 
attractions and facilities being located in  the Borough. The National Forest is a 
visionary environmental project run by the National Forest Company which aims 
to convert one third of the land within the boundaries of the National Forest to 
woodland by encouraging landowners to alter their land. The forest is 200 square 
miles (520 km2) and extend s from Leicestershire in the east to Burton upon Trent 
in the west. Described as `a forest in the making’  the new planting will blend 
together with remnants of both Needwood and Charnwood F orests. The National 
Forest Company was set up in the 1990’s and is  transforming the landscape of 
the borough;  by October 2012 over 8 million trees had been planted in the area. 
There are v isitor centres  on Burton upon Trent’s doorstep in Rosliston, South 
Derbyshire and at Conkers in Moira, Leicestershire , with The Nation al Forest 
Adventure Farm at Tatenhill also attracting a high number of visitors throughout 
the year. The opportunities for East Staffordshire residents to enjoy the 
countryside and the economic opportunities in the forest are increasing and 
improving year on year. Burton upon Trent is proud to describe itself as the 
`Capital of the National Forest’.  Working in partnership with The National Forest, 
Staffordshire Wildlife Trust and local communities East Staffordshire Borough 
Council have supported  major proj ects such as acquisition of 32 hectares of land 
at Yoxall for forest planting, the recreation of 25 hectares of forest pastures at 
Brankley Pastures, Needwood and community based projects including securing 
5.95 hectares of land at Tatenhill and small pock et parks at Barton under 
Needwood.  
1.60 Opened in 2012 St George’s Park National Football Centre  is located in the 
National Forest on a 130 hectare site west of Burton upon Trent. The centre is 
the training base for 24 England teams and the focal point for the FA's coaching 
and player development work. The national football centre also includes offic es 
for the FA's technical experts, sports science and medicine facilities and hotel 
and conference facilities.  
1.61 Capitalising on Burton’s brewing heritage is t he National Brewery Centre , a 
museum and tourist attraction in Burton upon Trent. The town is know n for its 
brewing industrial heritage and was home to dozen s of breweries in its heyday. 
Located at Alrewas, just south of Burton upon Trent in Lichfield District  the 
National Memorial Arboretum is the UK's year -round centre of Remembrance 
which honours th e fallen, recognises service and sacrifice, and fosters pride in 
the country.    
26 
 1.62 The Borough is an important crossroads for a number of strategic transport 
routes; Burton upon Trent is situated on the intersection of two major strategic 
roads, the A38 which links the town to Birmingham  and M6 Toll Road  (and the 
GBS LEP area) and Derby with the A50 which is an important west -east route 
linking the M6 and M1. Uttoxeter is also located on the A50 which provides the 
town with links to Stoke on Trent and Burton upo n Trent. The A5121, A515, A444 
and A511 local routes also serve Burton.  
1.63 Burton has good Cross Country rail connections to Birmingham and Derby, and 
Uttoxeter railway station is served by East Midlands trains to Derby and Crewe.  
These train services connect East Staffordshire Borough to major East and West  
Midlands conurbations and cities across the UK. Burton upon Trent station has 
recently undergone an upgrade to the facilities and general environment of 
station. The Borough is served by local bus s ervices within and between 
settlements, and bus interchanges at Uttoxeter and Burton. New Street in Burton 
accommodates at least 1.1 million bus4 passengers per year.  Airlink buses to 
East Midlands airport, which is located in the M1/A50 interchange, operates an 
hourly service from Burton upon Trent.  
1.64 There are a number of important leisure transport routes through the Borough 
including the Trent and Mersey Canal . East Staffordshire has good national cycle 
connections. National Route 54 of the National Cycle Network runs from 
Stourport to Derby via Kidderminster, Dudley, and Lichfield  and Burton upon 
Trent . The route also includes the White Peak Loop from Derby to Cromford, 
Biggin, Uttoxeter  and back to Derby with links to National Route 68 . National 
Route 549 of the National Cycle Network connects Waterhouses on the southern 
edge of the Peak District with Etwall via Uttoxeter. Route 63 starts at the Trent & 
Mersey Canal in Shobnall, the beginning of the Kingfisher Trail, an d forms a 
junction with National Cycle Network Route 54.  Local cycle route maps can be 
found on the Council’s website. In addition, Tatenhill airfield is an established 
aerodrome in the Borough, with industries and facilities for recreational flying.   
1.65 The Borough’s location is a contributing factor to a number of our major 
employers locating within the Borough including JCB, Argos, Pirell i, Molson 
Coors and Fox’s Biscuits , Unilever (producers of marmite), Boots and 
SuperGroup .  
                                                           
4 Based upon latest information 2009/10. This information is no longer collected.   
27 
 1.66 Information from the Strategic Housing Market A ssessment  shows that 67.4%  of 
the population who live in East Staffordshire also work in the Borough 
demonstrating that the Borough is relatively self -contained. Burton -upon -Trent in 
particular stands out as an important employmen t hub in a wider geography with 
the surrounding areas. There are still a high proportion of people who travel to 
outsid e the Borough to live or work, however with the Borough’s principal town 
Burton upon Trent on the edge of the Borough this is perhaps not  surprising. 
There is a preference to ensure that the Borough captures job opportunities and 
at the same time delivers housing growth to minimise commuting into and out of 
the Borough each day.  
1.67 Only 4% of work journeys in the Borough are by bus and less t han 1% are by 
train, however walking and cycling levels are above the national average. In rural 
areas the car plays an important role to ensure that residents can move around, 
which will continue in the future.   
1.68 Burton upon Trent  has a particular  challenge  with transport which arises due to  
the town only having  two vehicular river crossings over the River Trent. Bridge 
Street (A511) is a route linking the town centre to roads at radiate north and east  
which is congested at peak times along with St Peter’s Bridge which links the 
A444 Stanton Road and A5189 to the town centre and to radial routes east and 
south. The closest alternative routes are 5.9 miles north at Willington or 4.3 miles 
south at Walton on Trent.  These river crossings represent bottlenecks at certain 
times of the day.  
1.69 High volumes of traffic are prevalent on the A38(T) to the north of Burton upon 
Trent, resulting in reduced journey time reliability. The A50(T) also experiences 
high volumes  of tra ffic and growth in both Burton upon Trent and Uttoxeter will 
add to this, The Highways Agency’s trunk road review will be essential to ensure  
that these important routes remain an  effective  way to travel around the Borough.  
1.70 The latest Department of Energy and Climate Change (DECC) Local Authority 
Statistics5 for carbon dioxide show that in 2010 East Staffordshire emissions 
were 8.6t per capita, slightly higher than the Staffordshire average of 6.8t.  The 
carbon dioxide totals include emissions from industry /commerce, domestic & 
road transport.  Since 2005 when emissions per capita were 9.7t there has been 
a gradual decline, although values for 2010 were higher than for 2009.  It is 
important that the new development strategy encourages sustainable modes of 
transport to reduce transportation contributions to carbon dioxide emissions. An 
important component of reducing the impact of cars is the availability of 
alternative fuels sources within the Borough suc h as electric hook up points.  
                                                           
5 DECC LA Statistics  (www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/statistics/local_auth/interactive/fuelpoverty/index.html)   
28 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  1.4: Commuting Patterns in East Staffordshire  
 
29 
  
Key challenges for the Local Plan  
 Encourage  sustainable modes of travel.  
 Ensure that  the Borough’s towns and villages provide homes , jobs and 
facilities for its residents to minimise the need to travel . 
 Manage the impact of growth on transport networks.  
 Capitalise on the accessible nature of the Borough without compromising on 
what makes the Borough special in landscape, environmental and built 
environment terms.  
 Work in partnership with organisations to bring forward the necessary 
infrastructure needed t o support new development.  
 
An economically successful Borough  
1.71 East Staffordshire, particularly Burton and Uttoxeter,  is a major employment hub 
which also provides employment for neighbouring authorities. There is a strong 
relationship with the East Midlands with information from 2001 indicates South 
Derbyshire and Derby as the two destinations with the highest out -commuting 
with 3,100 and 2,100 people respectively, as set out in Figure 1.5. East 
Staffordsh ire has growing linkages with the Birmingham economy, due in part to 
the relationship with the GBSLEP, growth along the A38 corridor due to the 
release of large strategic sites. The economy has proved to be reasonably 
resilient throughout the period of rec ession and recovery with new inward 
investment continuing to be attracted into the borough.  
1.72 Location is a key reason for the success of the local economy. The Borough’s 
links to the strategic road network and central location is attractive to business 
and there is a diverse mix of employment with representation across the 
employment sectors. The local economy has traditionally had low levels of 
unemployment and Burton is the main driver of the economy and has a higher 
percentage of new and sustained busine ss start -ups than the rest of 
Staffordshire. Burton also has an influence extending into neighbouring local 
authorities but other parts of the borough also have key employers such as JCB 
in Uttoxeter and Rocester.  
  
30 
 1.73 The Borough has a proud heritage and has  thrived historically due to the 
brewing industry, which encouraged the development of a strong engineering 
sector. However over the last decade the Borough’s traditional industries have 
been subject to re -structuring resulting in the decline  of manufactur ing, the 
legacy of which remains today. Manufacturing, although not the dominant sector 
it once was, is still an important sector of the economy employing 17.3% of the 
total employment base in East Staffordshire.6 
1.74 Burton upon Trent in particular has some c ontamination issues and brownfield 
sites interspersed within built up areas which has contributed to a lowering of 
environmental quality in some neighbourhoods.  
1.75 Economic restructuring in recent years has seen a rapid growth of service 
sector industries. I n particular there has been significant growth in the 
distributi on, warehousing, hotels and restaurants sector in Burton due mainly to 
the town’s excellent location and the availability of land.  
1.76 East Staffordshire currently provides around 61,600 jobs (2012), representing a 
reduction of around 4,300 since the peak in 2005. The unemployment rate in 
East Staffordshire has consistently been below that of the region and England 
and Wales over the period 2004 to 2012. However whilst unemployment overall 
has generally been below the national and regional averages, there are issues 
with the proportion of young people who are out of work in the borough.  In July 
2012, there were 2,007 job seekers in the Borough, representing 2.9% of the 
working age population. Of  this, 30% were aged between 18 and 24 years of 
age.7 
1.77 Cambridge Econometrics broad occupation categories are based on the Office 
for National Statistics classifications. These are designed to be useful in 
bringing together groups of occupations that are similar in terms of the level of 
skills, training and ex perience commonly associated with competent 
performance of work tasks. In 2012, the occupational structure of the East 
Staffordshire economy was relatively balanced, albeit with a higher proportion of 
people employed as Managers and Senior Officials than o ther occupations. 
Employment forecast figures suggest a more pronounced skew towards 
Managers and Senior Officials by 2031, with an increasing importance of 
Associate Professional and Technical Occupations8.  
                                                           
6 ONS 2011  
7 East Staffordshire - Enhanced Joint Strategic Needs Assessment November 2012  
8 Standard Occupational Classificati on (2010)   
31 
 By 2031 there is noted to be a forecast contrac tion in employment within a 
number of occupations including: Elementary Occupations, Process, Plant and 
Machine Operatives, Skilled Trades Occupations, and Administrative Clerical 
and Secretarial Occupations.  
1.78 There is a clear distinction between the rural and urban areas in terms of 
income, with concentrations of lower incomes evidenced within both Burton -
upon -Trent and Uttoxeter. In the rural areas there are also small concentrations 
of lower income households . The average household income for East 
Staffordshire is £ 35,360 .9  
1.79 In 2011, average weekly earnings10 for residents of East Staffordshire were 
£475.60, which is above the regional average of £470.50 but below the national 
average of £504. In terms of the w orkplace population, average earnings in 
2011 for East Staffordshire were £479.10, above the West Midlands regional 
average of £470.60 but below the national average of £503.60.  
1.80 At 2011 achievement in KS4 (5 GCSE A -C including Maths and English) was  
54%  in  East Staffordshire  against  58%  nationally. 24.70% of the residents in 
East Staffordshire have no qualifications, which is above the national average. 
Progression  into  Higher  Education  after  two  years  of further  education  in  
East  Staffo rdshire  is  27.6%  slightly better than the county average of 27.3%. 
The percentage of 16 - 74 year olds in full time employment is 40.70% which is 
above the national average.  Burton upon Trent’s  town centre is the focus of 
retail floorspace in the Borou gh. Burton has 78,790 Sq m of retail  floorspace, 
making it a  centre of  regional significance. It has three covered shopping 
centres, Coopers Square, The Octa gon and Burton Place, which provides for 
the majority of the floorspace. There are also retail park s within the town centre  
boundary  at Middleway and St Peters Retail Park  as well as an out of town 
retail  park which is anchored by a large Morrisons food store. Other princip al 
food stores in Burton are either within or on the edge of the town centre.  
1.81 Uttoxeter is much smaller and is characterised by smaller independent shops 
which compliment the historic fabric of the town. A large edge of centre Tesco 
dominates the food stores but this is soon to be joined by a town centre As da 
following the redevelop ment of the former Cattlemarket  site.  
 
 
                                                           
9 GVA ESBC SHMA 2013  
10 GVA ESBC Employment Land Review 2013   
32 
 1.82 The health of the town centres has suffered as a consequence of the recession  
and changing shopping patterns such as the increase of online shopping  and as 
a result, both town centres have slipped down the retail rankings. In Burton 
upon Trent’s case the increasing influence of new retail opportunities at the  
recently opened  West field Centre in Derby  and regeneration of Swadlincote 
Town Centre  has led to further compet ition. The recent retail assessment 
highlights the lack of quality retail offering at Burton  upon Trent , particularly the 
absence of a department store in Burton  as having a further impact on the 
health of the town centre. Burton is also in need of  public realm improvement 
and in particular re -establishing links with the Washlands, a large and important 
area of public open space in the heart of the town.  
 
Key challenges for the Local Plan  
 Addressing  the restructuring of employment sectors, both in terms of creating 
opportunities for new businesses to form and existing businesses to expand, 
re-locate and diversify, and in seeking productive and sustainable uses for 
land that has been vacated by manufa cturing industries.  
 Re-using  previously developed (brownfield) sites to ensure the efficient use of 
land and lift environmental quality.  
 Strengthening  and revitalising town centres and modernising shopping 
facilities, so that East Staffordshire town centr es can compete with centres 
outside the Borough  and changing shopping habits . 
 Meeting retail and employment needs within the rural area  
 Not constraining economic growth aspirations.   
33 
 Access to housing, services and facilities  
1.83 Under the Rural and Urban Area Classification (2013), 23% of the East 
Staffordshire population is classified as rural, compared with 18% nationally and 
24% of Staffordshire, with 21% of the Borough having no access to a private 
car. For many communities, b oth urban and rural, access to housing, education, 
healthcare, retail, leisure and cultural facilities is an issue. Within some areas, 
there is additional pressure on increased services and facilities due to an 
increasing population. The population of the Borough as set out in the 2011 
Census is 113,583, which is an increase of 9,800 from 2001. This 9.5% 
increase is higher than the county wide figure of 5.1% and national figure of 
7.9%. In addition our neighbouring authority , South Derbyshire has seen as 
increase of 15.9% increase in population. 22% of the Borough’s population is 
aged under 18, and 17% are aged 65 or above.  The provision and accessibility 
of services and facilities in rural areas plays an important part in the 
sustainability of these communi ties. However, as the cost of service delivery in 
rural areas can often be greater that in urban areas due to issues such as 
distance, demography and population spar sity; alternative means of both 
accessing and delivering services need to be considered  in rural areas of the 
Borough. With regard to population  within the Borough aged 65 and over, this 
group makes up 21% of residents in rural areas ( compared  to 16% in urban 
areas) and constitutes 28% of all residents aged 65 and over within the 
Borough. As a r esult, there is a need to ensure service provision  and facilities 
for older  people are rural pro ofed.  
1.84 The Council’s Strategic Housing Market Assessment identifies that the 
strongest housing market relationship is between Burton upon Trent and 
Swadlincote in South Derbyshire  district. At the higher level , East Staffordshire 
sits between housing markets centred on Derby and Birmingham, affected by 
both, but not belonging to either one or the other. Whilst geographically nearer 
to Derby, the Borough has strong economic links with Birmingham and is part of 
the Greater Birmingham Lo cal Enterprise Partnership . 
1.85 Burton upon Trent has a high proportion of terraced properties and a relatively 
low proportion of semi -detached and detached homes. By comparison the rural 
villages have a high proportion of detached properties . Over the last few years 
there has been an increase in the number of apartments being built, espe cially 
in Burton upon Trent.   
34 
 1.86 Terraced and flatted developments do  not satisfy the demand for larger 
properties either from those with large or extended families, or from employers 
looking to attract senior staff to the area. However, the terraces of inner  Burton 
upon Trent provide a valuable source of low -cost market housing and private 
rented accommodation, as well as helping to create the character of inner 
Burton. There is a high proportion of terraced housing in poor condition and the  
Council has fund ed a series of physical housing improvement schemes in the 
inner wards of Eton Park, Anglesey, Shobnall, Horninglow, South -West Stretton 
and Burton . The  Council is keen to continue support ing their maintenance and 
improvement. T he older cottages of the surrounding villages contribute 
significantly to the built and distinctive character of the Borough.  
1.87 The Council’s Employment Land Review highlights that the greatest amount of 
growth over the Plan period in numbers employed is li kely to occur in the 
Financial and Business Services Sector so that it accounts for over 25% of the 
total number of people employed in the Borough (up from 19%). In line with this, 
the occupational sectors forecast to grow the most are: managers and senior  
officers; professional occupations; associate professional and technical 
occupations; and personal service occupations. This housing mix in Burton 
currently provides limited choice to meet the aspirations of managers, senior 
officials and professionals. T he Council wants to attract employees to live in 
Burton upon Trent to avoid unsustainable commuting and to contribute to the 
town’s economic prosperity. The ambition is therefore to have high -value -added 
employment and housing choice in Burton to attract this specific group.  
 
1.88 The Strategic Housing Market Assessment identifies that there are five local 
housing market areas within the Borough.    
 
Table 1.1: Dwelling types by local housing market area11 
 Burton  (%) East  (%) North  (%) Uttoxeter  (%) West  (%) 
Detached  23 50 44 30 60 
Semi -
detached  30 33 37 41 25 
Terraced  31 11 14 19 10 
Flat 16 5 4 10 4 
Caravan  0.3 1.1 0.3 0 1.0 
                                                           
11 Source: Office for National Statistics Census 2011  
  
35 
 1.89 Between 2001 and 2011 the amount of private rented housing has increased by 
77% so that 16% of households now rent privately and  more than the 13% rent 
social housing. O nly a modest 2% increase in the amount of owner -occupied 
housing meant that the proportion of housing that is owner -occupied fell from 
76% in 2001  to 70%  in 2011 . 75% of all household growth since 2001has 
consisted of growth in private rented sector housing.  
1.90 The a verage house price  in the Borough is £1 69,087 (201212) which ranks 4 th 
out of the eight Staffordshire authori ties. However, neighbouring Lichfield’s 
average house price is £231,131, which is much higher.  This figure is roughly 4  
times that of the average household income which  when compared to regional 
and national average prices shows housing in East Staffordshire is relatively 
affordable. However the income of many local households means they are still 
unab le to access suitable housing.  
1.91 The Council’s Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) consultants have 
provided the Council with an assessment of the housing requirement to 2031.  
Underlying the housing requirement is projected population and household 
growth and this provides the basis for assessment of specific housing 
requirements.  The projected increase in households by type is as follows:  
Table 1.2: Household growth 2012 -2031  
Household type  Increase 2012 - 
2031  % of total 
increase  
Single and couple households aged 65+  7,595   +61%  66.6%  
Single and couple households aged < 65  2,711  +15%  23.8%  
Families & multi -adult households  1,103  +6% 9.7%  
All households  11,408  +24%  100%  
1.92 By 2031 it is projected that a larger proportion of households will be  single and 
couple households aged over 65, and a smaller proportion will be family and 
multi -adult households.  
 
                                                           
12 Q3 figure from CLG Live Table 581   
36 
 Table 1.3: Number of homes by household type  
Household type  2012  2031  
Single and couple 
households aged 65+  12,393  26% 19,987  34% 
Single and couple 
households aged < 65  18,190  38% 20,901  35% 
Families & multi -adult 
households  17,135  36% 18,238  31% 
All households  47,718  100%  59,126  100%  
1.93 Over 90% of the growth in household numbers will be of single person and 
couple households – households without children or other adults.  The 
projections show that the largest component of household growth will be older 
person households.  
1.94 The increase in older person households correlates with an increase in the 
population of older people and hence is primar ily due to people living longer. In 
common with much of the country, there is a trend towards an ageing 
population, with projection figures showing an anticipated growth of 81% of 
people aged over 65. However, there has also been a 10% increase in under 
4’s, which will create an additional need for primary school places.  Allied to a 
current under -provision of school places in some parts of the Borough the 
Council is working with the County Council to address this challenge.   
1.95 The choice of types of accomm odation available to older people has widened in 
recent years, with the development of extra care homes  and retirement villages  
in addition to the longstanding options of sheltered housing and suitable 
conventional homes and bungalows. The Plan support s the continued increase 
in choice and availability of homes for older people.   
1.96 Allied to this increase in the population of older people will be the need to 
consider the provision of facilities for health, shopping and community uses that 
are accessible loca lly to meet their needs. This underlines the need to ensure 
that new accommodation for older people is provided only in sustainable 
locations where access to these facilities can be by walking or by public 
transport - particularly important when driving a car may no longer be possible.   
1.97 Some members of the community will continue to need affordable housing and 
this will require the provision of new affordable housing over the lifetime of the 
plan.   
37 
 1.98 There is a national shortage of pitches for Gypsies, Travel lers and Travelling 
Showpeople. Whilst there is currently no identified need in East Staffordshire 
the Council needs to determine applications submitted for new sites.  
 
Key challenges for the Local Plan  
 Meeting  the housing needs of the growing number of households , with homes 
that meet the ir specific requirements  including affordable housing . 
 How to accommodate an ageing population . 
 Improving  equality of access to services and opportunit ies in all parts of the 
Borou gh. 
 Meeting infrastructure needs of an increasing popu lation, in particular 
education.  
 
Health, Well-being and Deprivation   
1.99 East Staffordshire has six areas in Burton Upon Trent that are in the 10% most 
deprived in England due to the surrounding environment, income affecting older 
people and children, housing, crime and education.  
1.100  The well being  of people in East Staffordshire  is mixed compared with the 
England average. Obesity levels have risen to 20% and are higher in inner 
Burton. Life expectancy for men is lower than the England average. Life 
expectancy is 9.9 years lower for men and 7.1 years lower for women in the 
most de prived areas of East Staffordshire than in the least deprived areas.  
1.101  Approximately 5% of the Boroughs population describes their health as bad or 
very bad, which is lower than many areas within the County. Low income, 
unemployment and area deprivation can in some instances be barriers to 
purchasing fresh or unfamiliar foods. In some areas high density populations 
have small or no gardens for home food production and so it is important that 
the plan recognises the benefit of allotments and community growing spaces as 
part of developments.  
1.102  East Staffordshire as a Borough has significant health inequalities which 
result in higher mortality and morbidity in the urban parts of the area, in 
particular. This is due to high income inequality across its area.  
  
38 
 1.103  Depression is also a  high risk to residents and there is evidence to suggest 
that 35% of people in lowest social grade s visit green spaces infrequently (less 
than once a month) due to low availability/bad quality or safety issues of green 
space in deprived  areas . Children in poor housing and with poor access to 
green spaces, are more likely to have mental health problems (anxiety, 
depression) and other ill health effects.  
1.104  There are a number of open spaces and green networks across the Borough, 
with Stapenh ill Gardens, the Washlands, the Trent and Mersey Canal network, 
Branston Water Park, the Kingfisher Trail in Burton upon Trent and Bramshall 
Road Park in Uttoxeter awarded as Green Flag status. The open spaces along 
with access to the countryside, national  forest planting and areas under 
development as part of the Central Rivers Initiative offer recreation opportunities 
for the local population with health and well being benefits.  
1.105  Providing opportunities which increase physical activity and sports 
participation is important because 51% of adults in the Borough are inactive, of 
which only 12% achieve 5 x 30 minutes of physical activity per week. The 
Sports   Development   Team   deliver   a  wide  variety   of  community projects   
across   East  Staffordshire   with  a  focus   on  deprived   areas. There is a strong 
Community Sport and Physical Activity Network which includes key partners 
from the Borough Council, Burton Albion Community Trus t, Schools, health 
groups, sports clubs and Sport Across Staffordshire and Stoke on Trent. This 
has lead to the delivery of major projects such as Skyride Cycling project and 
the Run England athletics project.  
1.106  A total of 9,808 households in East Staffordsh ire live in fuel poverty, where 
they spend more than 10% of their income on heating their home, equating to 
21.5% of Borough residents. The Borough Council have produced a draft 
Climate Change Strategy which identifies the aim of reducing households living  
in fuel poverty by 2% each year. It will be important that new development 
reflects the most up to date environmental standards to ensure fuel poverty or 
inefficient use of resources d o not take place in the future.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
39 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.5: Deprivation by War d 
 
40 
 
Key challenges for the Local Plan  
 Reducing  the relative disadvantage that some parts of East Staffordshire 
currently experience, including access to housing opportunities, education 
and training, jobs, health, shopping, open  space, leisure and recreational 
facilities and other community services.  
 Achieving  well maintained, safe and clean areas to promote play, sport and  
recreational  opportunities to interact with the community.  
 Reducing fuel poverty and ensuring energy efficiency homes are delivered  
 
A Distinctive Borough  
1.107  East Staffordshire occupies a transition point between the lowlands and 
uplands of England and this has led to a varied , contrasting  environmental 
character.  Villages, hamlets and natural assets such as habitats and woodlands 
are scattered across the landscape and have evolved in response to the 
landscape and terrain. The geology has also influenced the character of 
settlements, with locally available building materials, creatin g a consistent and 
harmonious language of traditional buildings.  
1.108  To the north of the Borough the landscape begins to resemble that of the 
English uplands, with small pasture fields bounded by stone walls. At the very 
northern end of the Borough , the land rises to the Weaver Hills, which are the 
foothills of the Pennine range. Settlements in this landscape resemble those in 
the Peak District further north wards . Settlements  follow the lines of hillsides or 
cluster close to crossing points o n the River Dove. They generally tuck 
themselves into folds in the landscape and take shelter in valleys.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Countryside around Ellastone   
41 
 1.109  Moving from the North to the hamlets and villages West of Uttoxeter through 
to the middle valleys , the landscape becomes follow ing and is dominated by 
agriculture. Meandering lanes and terrain restrict views across the valleys and 
towards settlements.  
1.110  The Needwood Plateau is an elevated and generally flat area in the centre of 
the Borough surrounded  by river valleys. It rises sharply from the north and 
east, where distinct scarp slopes are evident. From the south and west the 
plateau rises more steadily and gently. The villages in this area have a strong 
association with topography.  
1.111  The three rivers which define the boundary of much of the Borough are the 
Rivers Blithe, Trent and Dove. The character of the Borough in these locations 
is one of wide, flat river corridors , rich in biodiversity  value . The river valleys and 
their villages have a broad and flat topography. The towns and villages are 
varied and different with building materials providing the element that creates 
distinctive settlement character . Opportunities for using local materials in new 
developments come from minerals for aggregates and timber associated with 
woodland management.    
1.112  During the last two centuries , the River Trent valley has been changed by 
gravel extraction and this has resulted in the creation of several large water 
bodies which are now delivering benefits in terms of bio diversity and recreation 
following quarrying activities. The Central Rivers Initiative is an important 
partnership which seeks to optimise economic and tourism related opportunities 
in the restored gravel landscapes.  
1.113  The Borough has a large number of rich and varied nature conservation sites 
including 6 nationally designated Sites of Special Scientific Interest, 2 Local 
Nature Reserves and 3 Sites of Geological Interest. There are approximately 
800 locally designated S ites of Biological Importance, 155 sites of Biological 
Interest and 77 Biodiversity Alert sites.  
1.114  The distinctive character of the Borough represents many challenges when it 
comes to climate change. Climate change is expected to affect flood risk, due to 
higher and heavier rainfall and extreme storms. There are existing areas of 
flood risk in the Borough, mainly in the Trent and Dove river corridors. It is also 
important to consider the future availability and efficient use of energy 
resources. Within East Staffordshire there are a number of low carbon and 
renewable energy schemes .. It is important that where possible opportunities for 
low carbon and renewable energy are optimised without having a negative 
impact on communities and the landscape.  
 
  
42 
 Key chall enges for the Local Plan  
 The need to protect and enhance the B oroughs natural environment both for 
recreational use and to safeguard important habitats.   
 The need to deliver development which is sensitive to the landscape and 
distinctive using local mater ials from woodland management and quarrying 
aggregates where possible .  
 Ensure development is not subject to the effects of climate change and does 
not increase flood risk  elsewhere  
 Ensure development uses resources efficiently  
 
Built Environment  
1.115  The Borough has a vast wealth  of heritage assets which contributes to  local 
distinctiveness and sense of place through cultural significance, historic 
townscapes and the ch aracter and setting of villages. There are 25 
Conservation Areas, 59 Scheduled Monuments, nearly 900 Listed buildings , 
one registered Park and Garden  and heritage assets ranging from the brewing 
industrial archaeology to the historic castle of Tutbury.  
Burton upon Trent  
1.116  Burton upon Tren t is situated within the River Trent corridor and this has 
shaped its settlement pattern through its floodplain. Also known as the 
`Washlands’ the  floodplain dominates the centre of the town and provides a 
unique feature and valued recreation resource for residents.  
1.117  Burton upon Trent is firmly identified as a brewing town and the location of 
Molson Coors Brewing Company, Marstons and a growing number of small and 
independent micro breweries. The architecture and character of the town and its 
development have been heavily influenced by the brewing industry which sets 
Burton upon Trent apart from other towns, particularly within Staffordshire.  
1.118  Burton upon Trent mainly consists of brick built buildings in the typical 
Staffo rdshire style such as red and blue brick with blue and slate tiles. Many 
Victorian terraces around the periphery of the 
town centre have remained more or less intact 
with no significant post -war clearance 
/redevelopment schemes taking place for new 
housing  and roads. There has only been modest 
clearance of Victorian industrial buildings for 
other uses such as housing and employment 
uses, so Burton has retained much of its 
Terraced Houses in Inner Burton   
43 
 cohesive historic character and form.  Many of the best examples of Victorian 
architect ure is protected by conservation area status, which contain various 
different characteristics and distinctiveness.  
1.119  The inner Burton upon Trent urban area is characterised by some of its pre -
1939  housing stock in poorer condition associated with pockets of deprivation, 
economic inactivity, socio -economic problems such as low education 
attainment, low value and low skilled jobs, crime and anti social behaviour. 
These older buildings and streets hav e hard urban form with little soft 
landscaping, trees and open space. The Inner Burton Initiative  (IBI), a series of 
physical improvement schemes  focussed on the regeneration of the inner wards 
of the town, including Eton  Park, Anglesey, Shobnall, Horningl ow, South -West 
Stretton and Burton, aims  to improve visual amenity and sustainability for 
current residents and commercial ventures by encourag ing inward investment 
and migration to these areas.  
1.120  Various regeneration projects are also underway in other area s Burton upon 
Trent to improve its image including gateway improvements on Derby Road , 
redevelopment of the market  and the regeneration of the Bargates site, a key 
entrance to the town centre. The Council is also coordinating development 
within Burton town  centre through  public realm improvements, access to the 
Washlands  and promoting important development opportunities.   
1.121  Burton upon Trent is the capital of the National Forest. This has had, and will 
continue to have,  a  profound  effect  on  the  town,  facilitating  the  creation  of  
large  areas  of  new  woodland which provide multiple benefits from greening 
the urban environment to creating wildlife habitat and a locally important and 
well used recreation resource. The National Forest will also deliver a more 
robust landscape better able to meet the challenge of climate change.  
1.122  The Needwood plateau, which occupies the central part of the Borough, is the 
location of several historic parks, including Sinai Park which overlooks the town. 
The woods on the scarp of this plateau still hold considerable conservation 
interest.                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
  
44 
 Uttoxeter  
1.123  In contrast Uttoxeter is  a relatively small market town. It serves the rural 
population which extends into neighbouring authorities of Stafford, Staffordshire 
Moorlands and Derbyshire Dales.  The town   sits  within  a  landscape  of  mixed  
farming,  with  pasture  as the dominant land use. There  is  relatively  little  
woodland  within  this  landscape,  although  hedge  trees  are  abundant giving 
a well -treed appearance.                 
1.124  Its position  amongst the meadows and pastureland has had a major bearing 
on the town’s historical growth in terms of cattle grazing and subsequent cattle 
markets, the sale of dairy products, and the presence of some areas of mixed 
farming. This has traditionally provi ded Uttoxeter’s wealth as well as other 
agricultural activities. As with Burton upon Trent, Uttoxeter’s position adjacent to 
the River Dove provides a distinctive setting for the town  which sets out the 
transition between the lowlands and the uplands withi n the Borough. Uttoxeter 
is an attractive and intimate town with many remaining historic buildings , 
retain ing its rural market town character . Uttoxeter is a compact town centred 
on its market place and High Street. The heart of the town is relatively inta ct 
and there are some fine traditional buildings  with coherent stree tscapes.  
1.125  The Victorian period saw significant growth in housing as well as new and 
diverse industries. A brewery was established in the town centre during 1829 
which discontinued in 1930 - the site is on the present day The Maltings which 
is a shopping precinct. Th e 1840s saw the Bamford family moving to Uttoxeter 
to make agricultural machinery which included an iron foundary (Leighton 
Ironworks) and a site off Balance Street. The presence of the company was 
extremely important for the town and guided the developmen t of a substantial 
part of Uttoxeter. The cattle market was established in the mid 19th Century and 
similarly to Burton upon Trent, a Town Hall was established during the 1850s 
giving a more formal and civic presence to the town.  
1.126  The twentieth century, sa w the arrival of the racecourse in 1907 which 
attracted wealth with visiting gentry. Elkes’ biscuits , now owned and run by 
Fox’s B iscuits , was established to the north of the town in the 1920’s. Like 
Burton upon Trent , companies in Uttoxeter  were s ubject t o deindustrialisation 
and some manufacturing decline resulting in JCB and the cattle market mov ing 
out of the town.  
                    
 
  
45 
 Other Settlements and Communities  
1.127  East Staffordshire Borough contains numerous villages and hamlets many of 
which are historic settlements which have a very different feel due to their 
location, character, setting, size and level of amenities. The northern uplands is 
characterised by the P eak District, especially with its hillier topography, open 
views and more remote character and setting and contains the smaller villages 
of Church Mayfield, Middle Mayfield, Ellastone and Wootton. This contrasts with 
the lowland south where the topography is flatter with more intimate views, 
broken by wooded areas and the settlements of Abbots Bromley, Newborough, 
Yoxall and Kingstone, with Draycott in the Clay and Tutbury as well as the 
hamlets of Hoar Cross, Hadley End and Newchurch. Many of these settlem ents, 
such as Tutbury, Barton Under Needwood, Rolleston on Dove and Rocester 
contain a number of services and facilities, acting as service centres for 
surrounding villages and hamlets.  
1.128  The larger settlements outside of Burton Upon Trent and Uttoxeter are  Barton 
Under Needwood, Rolleston on Dove, Rocester and Tutbury. These settlements 
contain a number of services and facilities, acting as service centres for 
surrounding villages and hamlets.  There has been continued growth at these 
settlements with redev elopment of a higher education college in Rolleston, a 
bypass in Tutbury and other development associated with Nestle in Hatton, and 
a marina at Barton Under Needwood.   
1.129  Many of these settlements are rich in cultural heritage, which make the 
villages attra ctive for residents and visitors. Some examples of this are:  
 Horn dance and connection to Mary Queen of Scots as part of her time in 
captivity in North Staffordshire.  – Abbots Bromley  
 Well dressing – Newborough  
 Philanthropic architecture (model village built by the Bass family) – 
Rangemore  
 Historic Anglo Saxon settlements – Catholme  
    
Key challenges for the Local Plan  
 Ensuring  that new development does not have a detrimental impact on 
people’s quality  of life or the quality of the B orough’s built and n atural 
environment.  
 Raising  the standard  of design across the B orough to encourage investment 
and create a high quality urban environment.   
 Protecting, conserving and enhancing the Borough’s historic assets  
  
46 
 SWOT analysis (Strengths/Weaknesses/Opportunities/Threats ) 
1.130  Set out below is a SWOT analysis. It pulls together the main findings of our 
issues and trends in the Borough and leads into the vision and objectives.   
 
STREN GTHS WEAKNESSES  
 Accessible location of the Borough to 
the East and West Midlands  
 High quality rural environment with 
historic towns and villages which attract 
people to live, work and visit the 
Borough .  
 Relatively h igh levels of employment 
compared to other Staffordshire  
authorities   
 Major employment centres and many 
small loyal businesses.  
 Situated in the National Forest which is 
restoring the landscape, creating jobs 
and providing reasons to visit.  
 Well established Local Strategic 
Partnership   
 Pulling power of nearby larger centres 
means many residents look outside the 
borough  for work, shopping, 
entertainm ent and higher level services  
 Shortage of sk illed employees in some 
sectors  
 High per capita CO 2 emissions  than 
the West Midlands average   
 There are pockets of deprivation, 
particularly in Burton upon Trent  
 Poor ICT and broadband service in 
some rural areas  
 Borough is constrained by flood risk and 
topography  
 Some poor quality housing  
 Poorer health in the deprived areas of 
Burton compared to the  rest of the 
Borough.  
 
OPPORTUNITIES  THREATS  
 Potential for creating new jobs including 
high value jobs.  
 New housing gives opportunities to meet 
needs  and transform the town through 
brownfield redevelopment and  town 
centre  investment . 
 More housing in rural areas will support 
local services and village life.  
 New emphasis on infrastructure and 
delivery.  
 Partnership working   
 Potential for resource efficient 
developments that mitiga te and adapt to 
climate change  
 Use of Council owned land and Council 
regeneration initiatives to bring forward 
key gateway developments  
 Access to good quality Green 
Infrastructure  
  
 A lack of suitable new housing could 
restrict development of employment 
opportunities in the area  or increase in -
commuting .  
 Growing and changing population 
structure.  
 Increasing levels of traffic congestion 
impacting on the local economy  and 
consequent threat of poor air quality .  
 Risk of insufficient resources to deliver 
required infrastructure.  
 Continuing decline in rural se rvices.  
 Increasing size of elderly and 
dependent population with specific 
needs and requirements  
 The wrong mix of new housing 
development could reduce demand for 
some existing housing.  
  
47 
 The Vision :  A Progressive East Staffordshire:  
Our vision for East Staffordshire is drawn from the responses received from public 
consultations and working with stakeholders, Parish Councils, Members and officers 
of the Borough Council. The vision for the Borough provides the over -arching context 
for the Local Plan and pr ovides a clear declaration on which guides the Strategic 
Objectives and Policies in the Local Plan. The vision is as follows:  
In the future East Staffordshire’s communities will be well planned, vibrant, safe 
and inclusive.  New developments will be design ed to a high standard and will 
celebrate the rich diversity in the borough and its distinct settlements.   
Quality housing will be available with a variety that meets the needs of all 
sectors of the community and the aspirations of a growing population.  N ew 
landscaping and the existing environment  will allow for improved leisure 
activities on peoples doorsteps, increasing opportunities for following healthier 
lifestyles and sustainable travel.  
The council will lead a place -shaping agenda which over the ne xt 19 years will 
sensitively enhance the quality and extent of the commercial, business and 
housing offer that is currently available, whilst respecting the context and 
identities of detached settlements and the wider environment, taking into 
consideration  climate change and sustainability.  
Burton  upon Trent:  will be a positive and ambitious town, which has 
developed its sub regional status as an economic, retail, leisure  and cultural 
centre. The anticipated growth in employment opportunities over the next 
twenty years will have realised the potential to generate prosperity across 
communities in the borough and this will be supported by housing to ensure that 
development is  sustainable and reduces overall levels of commuting, especially 
by car.  
Burton upon Trent will be recognised nationally as the “Capital” of the National 
Forest, with a high quality and diverse green infrastructure network providing 
environmental, biodive rsity, health, and sustainable transport opportunities.  
The town will embrace its heritage and look to the future and capitalise on its 
enviable transportation links, using available brown field sites to increase the 
number of people living in the town an d improve the retail experience.  
Inner Burton will have an improved housing stock, through private sector 
investment and the development of brownfield sites. Environmental and 
infrastructure improvements will be delivered by both public and private funds.  
 
  
48 
 Uttoxeter:  will have a multi -functional, attractive Town Centre that 
incorporates a wide -ranging mix of activities set within a high quality network of 
pleasant streets and spaces, which create a strong identity and a place where 
people want to live, wor k and visit. The town will build upon its strategic 
location, its unique historic environment and its shops and markets, to attract 
and retain new investment for the benefit of local business and residential 
communities.  
 
Significant growth and change will  be welcomed through the implementation of 
sustainable urban extensions.  There will be associated environmental benefits 
to the growth with improvements to community and health facilities and better 
access to improved open spaces.  
 
The Rural Areas:  The boroughs’ rural areas are extensive and diverse and 
will be celebrated.  Opportunities for sustainable rural economic growth and 
jobs will be actively encouraged and will be supported by access to high quality 
broadband to help improve the prosperity of the borough as a whole.   
 
Larger strategic villages will build upon their role as rural centres for residents in 
the local area with services, facilities and jobs enabling people in the wider area 
to live and work locally.  Smaller village communities will also continue to thrive 
and will have distinctive and appropriate levels of growth, shaped by the people 
who live and work in the area.  
 
Well managed, sustainable tourism will be a major driver in regenerating the 
rural areas and enhancing their chara cter and quality.  In the east of the 
borough, the National Forest will continue to be a major driver in enhancing the 
rural environment and creating employment opportunities. There will be 
environmental, economic and social benefits from river corridor op portunities 
which will also link between existing attractions.  Embracing new technologies 
which meet the future needs of the population will facilitate the rural economy.    
 
Major redundant sites and remaining underutilised parts of the former military 
camps in the countryside will have been brought into suitable new uses to 
improve the environment and/or diversify the rural economy where appropriate, 
or restored to open landscaped countryside.  
 
In the countryside, the richness of the Borough’s landscape and its biodiversity 
will continue to be valued and protected in a way which sensitively 
accommodates the needs of farmers, rural businesses, visitors and residents. 
Landscape character and quality will be conserved and enhanced and 
biodiversity fostered w ith appropriate new landscaping encouraged. Public  
49 
 access to the countryside will be extended with new walking, cycling and horse 
riding routes developed.  
Strategic Objectives  
1.131  To deliver the Vision for the Borough the following Strategic Objectives will be  
the focus for the Local Plan sustainable development  strategy, strategic 
allocations and policies.  
 
SO1: Well designed  communities : To develop green infrastructure -led strategic 
housing growth providing  well designed communities that provide accessible green 
space, services and facilities ,  promote  distinctiveness , wel lbeing, whilst protecting 
and enhancing sensitive environments.  
 
SO2: Housing Choice:  To provide a mix of well designed, sustainable mark et, 
specialist and affordable homes that meet the needs of existing and future residents 
given ongoing and expected population change in the Borough.  
 
SO3: Accessibility and Transport Infrastructure:  To ensure that new development 
will be supported by effective transport infrastructure and wherever possible , 
designed in a way that reduces the need and desire to travel by car through 
encouraging the use of public transport, walking , cycling  and rail travel .   
 
SO4: Neighbourhood Planning: To ensure local communities have opportunities to 
help plan their own neighbourhoods to positive ly shape where development is 
located.  
 
SO5: Education Infrastructure:  To plan for and deliver new education infrastructure 
to meet the growing need of Borough  residents , particularly in Burton upon Trent 
where school place demand exceeds supply irrespective of further growth.  
 
SO6: Centres: Maintain and enhance Burton upon Trent and Uttoxeter town centres 
and other local centres as thriving, attractive and accessible places to live and visit . 
Ensuring that our centres are vibrant places with a range of retail, culture and leisure 
options to m eet local needs.   
50 
  
SO7: Economic Diversification: To foster and diversify the employment base of 
Burton upon Trent to support higher growth and higher quality jobs, and the 
employment base of Uttoxeter to reduce the reliance on a limited number of 
employer s, by allocating high quality sustainable employment sites and improving 
the environmental quality and image of these key economic centres by utilising 
Green Infrastructure.  
 
SO8: Rural Economy: To sustain and enhance employment opportunities in the 
rural part of the Borough in particular make the most of employment and business 
opportunities associated with the National Fores t and rural diversification.  
 
SO9: Heritage (Historic Environment – Sustainable Management and Use)  
To deliver high quality places that conserve and enhance the historic environment 
whilst promoting local distinctiveness, place making, significance  and sustainable 
development to support heritage -led regeneration and the sustainable use of 
heritage assets , particularly in Burton upon Trent, the market town of Uttoxeter, rural 
villages and the wider countryside.  
 
SO10 : Flood Risk: To plan for and reduce the impacts of climate change including 
ensuring that new development in settlements along our river cor ridors in particular 
are not exposed  unnecessarily to the risk of flooding or increases the risk of flooding 
elsewhere, recognising the benefit of Green Infrastructure.  
 
SO11: Prudent Use of Resources: To promote the prudent use of finite resources 
and the positive use of renewable resources, through the design, location and layout 
of development and by optimising the use of existing infrastructure.  
 
 
SO12: Countryside: To protect, conserve and enhance t he local countryside, 
character, distinctiveness and quality of the landscape and the diversity of wildlife 
and habitats.  
  
51 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Part 
 
The 
Development 
Strategy  
 2 Part 
 
The 
Development 
Strategy  
 4 
`A Spatial  Part 
 
The 
Development 
Strategy  
 4 
 `A Spatial Strategy will influence the distribution of people 
and activities in spaces of various scales’  Part 
 
 
The Sustainable  
Development Strategy  
 2 
 
2  
52 
 
Trent & Mersey Canal - 
Stretton   
53 
 The Sustainable Development  Strategy  
The Strategy to 2031  
2.1 East Staffordshire Borough Council wants to deliver growth in a responsible and 
sustainable way. This means that the sustainable development strategy will be 
coherent, planned, and will deliver growth over the entire plan period from 2012 -
2031 in a compre hensive and structured way. The intention is that sustainability 
drives the development strategy.  
2.2 The Local Plan will make the Borough a more sustainable place by the careful 
location of development and by protecting but also using the natural assets of 
the area to their best advantage. The Local Plan seeks to apply national policy 
together with those issues that are important to the local area. Proposals for 
development will be judged against their contribution to providing a sustainable 
future for the Bo rough with a strong focus on development in the main urban 
areas of Burton upon Trent and Uttoxeter.  
2.3 The Strategy takes account of known and anticipated constraints. This includes 
the careful consideration of development on land close to:  
 Areas of Flood Risk  
 Coalescence  
 Green Belt  
 Internationally and National designated Nature Conservation sites  
 Local nature reserves  
 Sites of geological interest  
 National and locally protected Heritage sites  
 High quality landscape features including Ancient Woodlands  
 The best and m ost versatile agricultural land    
 Noisy or polluting sites  
 Coal consultation areas  
 Gravel extraction  
2.4 In terms of infrastructure, land should be capable of being adequately served 
with:  
 An efficient and safe sustainable  local transport network  
 An adequate water supply system   
 Adequate surface and foul mains drainage  
 Easily accessible Utility Services including broadband and G4 networks   
 Green Infrastructure  
 Social and Community Infrastructure    
54 
 2.5 For many years the growth strategy for the Borough  has been based on 
compact  urban growth. This has been secured through the development of 
brownfield sites, a focus on the main towns within the Borough and strict control 
of development within defined settlement boundaries .  
2.6 The Sustainability  Appraisal has been a key component in guiding the final 
development strategy through the appraisal of different strategies and indi vidual 
site options.  
2.7 The Interim Sustainability  Appraisal (October 2012) appraised the following 
strategy options:   
 
Optio n 1 Urban extensions  Development in just Burton and Uttoxeter, 
no village development  
Option 2  Urban extensions plus 
villages  Development in Burton and Uttoxeter plus 
two or more strategic villages  
Option 3  Equal distribution  
 Development distributed equally across 
villages and towns  
Option 4  Single urban focus   All development to be in just Burton upon 
Trent or Uttoxeter  
Option 5  New Settlement  Create a brand new settlement in the rural 
areas  
2.8  The SA identified Option 2 as the most sustainable option due to the strategy 
providing a more balanced approach to growth by addressing some rural needs 
whilst placing the majority of growth in the main urban centres which would 
enhance the role and quali ty of the two main towns. The appraisal led to the 
rejection of further consideration of options 1, 3, 4 and 5.  
2.9 The Interim Sustainability Appraisal then appraised the further refined options of 
the strategy:   
 
Options  Description  
2a 
 Concentrating growth to the West and North in Burton and some growth to 
the West of Uttoxeter and the strategic villages  
2b 
 Concentrating most growth in the Outwoods and Stretton areas of Burton 
and some development to the South of Uttoxeter and the strategic villages   
55 
 2c 
 More dispersed growth surrounding Burton and some development to the 
South of Uttoxeter and the strategic  villages  
2d Concentrating growth in the South of Burton and some development to the 
West of Uttoxeter and in strategic villages.  
2.10 The appraisal identified Strategic Option 2d as the most sustainable Strategic 
Option, although recognised that Option 2c also scored well. It was considered 
that Option 2d represented the most sustainable Strategic Option by providing 
larger sustainable mixed -use urban extensions in both Burton and Uttoxeter, 
which as well as providing a broad range of housing type and mix, would also 
provide additional services and facilities for the towns, and more employment 
land.  In addition, this option proposed more development on brownfield sites in 
the towns which would increase the vitality and viability of the town centres .  
2.11 The fi nal development strategy  comprises a combination of many of the options 
above. The Sustainability Appraisal of the strategy including site allocations and 
individual policies accompanies  this consultation document. The appraisal 
concludes that the final st rategy offers a  sustainable strategy, meeting the 
housing and employment needs of the current and future population. Whilst 
some negative effects are identified, the implementation of all strategic and 
detailed policies will ensure these are mitigated  over the plan period .   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Charrington House  
Horni nglow Street – Burton   
56 
 2.12 The strategy in this Local Plan , which is informed by the sustainability appraisal  
and also by the viability assessment , is to encourage , economically viable, 
brownfield land and other suitable and available sites inside the existing urban 
areas for new housing whilst allowing  a controlled south and westward 
expansion  of Burton upon Trent and Uttoxeter into greenfield land adjacent to 
the existing boundary of the built  up area.  In addition a very limited number of 
sites in the villages are suggested. This is to:  
 provide a  range and choice of locations;  
 provide land supply that can be delivered over the lifetime of the plan through 
a choice of brown and greenfield sites of varyi ng sizes;  
 consolidate and integrate the existi ng and extended built up areas;  
 support the planning and implementation of community facilities according to 
clear defined locations and principles, and 
 maintain the strategic  gaps  between  Burton upon Trent and Uttoxeter   and  
surrounding  villages .  
Limits to Development  
2.13 In order to control development and to protect the  countryside,  it is necessary  to 
define precise limits to development , settlement boundaries,  around the main 
urban areas of Burton upon Trent, Uttoxeter and Tier 1 and Tier 2 villages.   
Strategic Green Gaps  
2.14 The western extension of housing development in both Burton upon Trent and 
Uttoxeter is to be limited by strategic green gaps between the t owns and the 
surrounding villages in the vicinity of Rolleston on Dove, Anslow and Tatenhill 
near Burton upon Trent and Bramshall near Uttoxeter. The purpose of this is to 
prevent the coalescence of these villages and  protect the ir character.  
Settlement Hierarchy  
2.15 The b orough contains the large urban area of Burton upon Trent, the market 
town of Uttoxeter and a great variety of villages and rural areas. A clear 
planning approach towards them is necessary based upon an understanding of 
their current charact eristics and function and any aspirations for the future. The 
settlement classification sets out the role of individual towns and villages in the 
Borough as a basis for the distribution of development through the settlement 
hierarch y.  
  
57 
 2.16 By identifying those places that have the greatest amount and range of 
community facilities and support services, are nearest  to main towns and 
employment sites and which are best served by public transport , the hierarchy 
identifies locations where the maj ority of the Borough’s population can live 
whilst minimising the need to travel. The Council’s settlement hierarchy topic 
paper supports the identification of a hierarchy  and justification for each 
settlement . 
2.17 Burton upon Trent and Uttoxeter are identified  as main towns. These two 
settlements  currently  accommodate the majority the Borough’ population and 
through the spatial strategy they will  accommodate the majority of the 
Borough’s growth.  
 
The suggested split of development across the Borough is:  
 Burton  upon Trent   - 73.5%   
 Uttoxeter                 - 17.7%     
 Villages ( Tier 1)     - 6.3%  
 Villages ( Tier 2 and 3) – 2.5%   
  
 
2.18 The majority of new development should be directed to sites in and 
around Burton.  This is the largest settlement in the Borough, and the one with 
most regeneration needs, particularly with regard to attracting investment in 
industries that will provide a more varied economic base to the town. It is also 
has the most facilities to serve  an increased population, with the most potential 
to increase and enhance the level of provision . New development which is 
access ible to  existing facilities is likely to be the most sustainable option. The 
evidence base shows l ow vacancy rates and relative ly strong prices , indicating  
confidence in strong market demand for the levels of growth the Council is 
proposing.  The transport evidence base also indicates that growth can be 
accommodated and mitigated in key locations.  
  
58 
 2.19 A significant amount of development should be directed to sites in and 
around Uttoxeter. Uttoxeter’s l ocation gives it identity but at the same time its 
relative remoteness  works against the town. The Local Plan needs to respond 
to this by supporting the t own and assisting with its regeneration. The Council is 
aware that to be successful Uttoxeter’s economic base needs to be bolstered 
and sites regenerated to attract investment. Additional housing will help to 
provide a sustainable location where new employ ees can live without the need 
to commute from other towns. The Council has overseen a continuing 
programme to regenerate Uttoxeter Town Centre, and an increased population 
will help to underpin this . 
2.20 Some development should be directed to the villages. The Local Plan seeks 
to deliver some growth in the rural areas to ensure that existing facilities and 
services and community life are supported. The level of development assigned 
to each village is appropriate given its  size, its hinterland and the nature of its 
facilities.  
2.21 The villages have been categorised into a three -tier hierarchy. The categories 
are defined the in table below.  
 
Tier 
1 Strategic 
Village  Strategic villages meet rural 
needs by providing a good 
range of facilities and services 
to their own populations and a 
wider rural catchment area.  Tutbury, Barton under 
Need wood, Rolleston on 
Dove , Rocester  
 
Tier 
2 Local 
Service 
Village  Tier 2 villages meet local needs 
by providing a more limited 
range of facilities and services 
which sustain village life. Abbots Bromley, Yoxall, 
Marchington, Mayfield, 
Denstone , Draycott in the 
Clay  
Tier 
3 Small 
Village  Tier 3 – these are very rural and 
small and have very limited 
facilities and services.  Bramshall, Stramshall, 
Church Leigh, Hanbury, 
Ellastone, Newborough, 
Kingstone, Anslow, 
Rangemore, Tatenhill, 
Stubwood, Stanton, Lower 
Leigh, Withington, Wootton  
2.22 Tier 1 Strategic Villages  will accommodate a strategic housing allocation the 
purpose of which is to meet need generated in the village, its rural hinterland 
and also to meet some of the needs of the Borough as a whole . This type and 
level of development will support the existing services in each of the villages 
without undermining it as a free -standing settlement, whilst enhancing its overall 
sustai nability. In addition to the strategic allocation Tier 1 villages will also  
59 
 receive a development allowance  which can be delivered as infill on appropriate 
and mostly brownfield sites within the settlement boundaries as opportunities 
arise over the plan period.   
 
2.23 Tier 2 Local Service Centres  will accommodate limited development over the 
Local Plan period, in s tep with the more limited range of facilities in each of 
them, and also their sensitivity to the erosion of their character. To ensure that 
housing  development is delivered, the Council is specifying a development  
allowance  for each settlement. The t wo lar gest villages, Abbots  Bromley and 
Yoxall are assigned 40 dwellings whereas the remaining 4 villages are assigned 
20 dwellings .  These levels of growth recognise that the two largest villages are 
relatively remote from Burton, Uttoxeter or any other town, a nd so perform the 
role of supporting a larger rural hinterland than the other Local Service Villages. 
The delivery of this development allowance will be community led. Communities 
can decide how the allowance will be delivered over the plan period and ther e 
are two options that can come forward. The first option is to rely on windfall infill 
development which will be allowed on appropriate  and most ly brownfield site s 
within settlement boundaries as opportunities arise over the plan period. The 
second option is the allocation of small sites, which has greater potential to 
deliver affordable housing and other community benefits. Where communities 
have already chosen an opti on settlement boundaries have been extended. 
Where communities have not yet decided, settlement boundaries will be 
revised, once they have chosen, through the adoption of Neighbourhood Plans.  
 
2.24 Tier 3 Small Villages  have no t been given  settlement boundarie s because of 
their size and lack of facilities . No site allocations are made but there is an 
overall development allowance  for all Tier 3 villages. This will be achieved 
through development under the  housing Exceptions Site policy  which will permit 
develop ment of a handful of new properties  in a village  over the Local Plan 
period  or through the Neighbourhood Plan process .    
 
2.25 Settlements which are smaller than the Tier 3 villages do not have sufficient 
scale to accommodate new housing development other than that linked to 
agricultural operations  or conversions in exceptional circumstances .  
2.26 Engagement  The Council has been working with communities through 
neighbourhood planning and where this is not happening through proactive 
engagement with Parish Council’s  to revise the settlement boundaries.  
2.27 Tier 1 villages have been visited and an assessment made of the capacity of 
the settlement boundary to bring forward the predicted level of growth  over the 
plan period.  It is concluded that the existing settlement boundaries in Tier 1 
settlements have the capacity for the level of growth  required over the plan  
60 
 period, with only the redrawing of the boundaries to take in the strategic 
allocations.  
2.28 For Tier 2 settlements ESBC officers have visited each Parish Council to 
discuss their existing settlement boundary and the level of growth deemed 
appropriate over the plan period.  Many of the Tier 2 villages have not had their 
settlement boundaries change d for many years and have over the past 10 years 
had infill development such that there is little capacity for more development.  
With this in mind officers have been working with Parishes to identify 
sustainable locations for growth and have amend ed settlement boundaries to 
reflect discussions .  Each settlement has been treated separately as there not a 
‘one size fits all’ approach.  Summaries of each approach can be found in the 
‘Settlement Boundary Review’ which support ed the Pre -Submission 
consultation.   
Spatial Strategy: Approach to Brownfield Development  
Housing  
2.29 This Local Plan acknowledges and encourages the delivery of housing on 
suitable brownfield sites  within development boundaries . Brownfield 
development is an important component to delivering a sustainable plan for the 
Borough. When driving around Burton upon Trent, in particular, it is clear that 
there are opportunities that would make great development sites for a wide 
range of uses.  
 
2.30 It is however important to recognise that such brownfield si tes are often difficult 
to bring forward and it is not a supply that can be completely relied upon unless 
there is certainty that sites will be developed within the timeframe of the plan. 
Brownfield sites are more likely to have development constraints, wh en 
compared to greenfield sites, due to previous uses, location, size, shape and 
proximity to other uses which often present issues that require careful planning 
resolution. Despite this , brownfield sites will be encouraged to come forward as 
both strategi c allocations and windfalls.  Viability work undertaken by the 
Borough Council indicates that brownfield sites are viable. In addition, the 
Borough Council can evidence that brownfield sites are being successfully 
approved and developed across the Borough.   
 
2.31 The Local Plan allocates only those strategic brownfield sites that are known to 
be deliverable and developable. These sites have the potential to create new 
neighbourhoods that will add value to existing communities, raise environmental 
quality through  good design, and introduce housing choice and flexibility. The 
brownfield allocations also have the potential to mitigate any impacts they 
generate owing to  the size of the developments. However t he intention is to re - 
61 
 use and recycle as much low quality, or under -used and surplus employment 
land as possible for future employment uses. This has been informed by the 
Council’s Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment and Employment 
Land Review.  
 
2.32 In previous years the Council has relied heavily on the su pply of brownfield 
windfall sites. There are many opportunities within Burton upon Trent in 
particular, owing to the way in which the town and has grown and developed. 
Employment and housing areas co-exist throughout the town reflecting the 
opportunities t hat have presented themselves at any one time in the town’s 
history. As a successful employment hub which is built on the success of the 
breweries and manufacturing  industries  the town has evolved and responded to 
changing employment needs.  Employment res tructuring, rationalisation of 
employment operations and the changing modern needs of business have 
presented development opportunities. As the employment base continues to 
change , further opportunities will become available.  
 
2.33 Brownfield development is an  important component to delivering a sustainable 
plan and the modest brownfield windfall allowance which the Council has set 
does not seek to cram as much development into the towns as possible. The 
Council will however continue to support the redevelopmen t of brownfield sites 
within development boundaries above the windfall allowances  set, providing 
proposals contribute to sustainable development.  
Spatial Strategy: Approach to Greenfield Development  
Housing  
2.34 There are not enough brownfield sites available across the Borough to 
accommodate the Council’s growth targets over the lifetime of the Plan. Difficult 
choices arise when considering how the remainder of growth will be distributed.  
 
2.35 Greenfield sites will need to be released to ensure that housing and 
employment requirements are met . Viability work undertaken by the Borough 
Council demonstrates that greenfield sites are deliverable. The strategy for 
greenfield release is the delivery of Sustainable Urban Extensions (SUE), which 
supports the Council’s inte ntion to deliver truly sustainable growth and 
developments that the Borough can be proud of. The scale of these extensions 
will enable the delivery of high -quality new places, characterised by high levels 
of design and open space , and which can deliver the  required infrastructure to 
ensure a critical mass of activity and high degree of sustainability.   
 
2.36 The Council has not chosen a strategy of piecemeal development whereby 
growth is scattered around different sites because of the impact this would have  
62 
 on existing communities. The SUEs will provide  Burton and Uttoxeter with a 
valuable legacy for future generations of East Staffordshire residents. We will 
ensure that our SUEs will deliver:  
 high quality housing that offers choice and flexibility to deliver li fetime 
communities where families can grow and mature;  
 a mix of uses that is well connected and has a functional relationship with the 
wider area;  
 a distinctive character and place which residents will enjoy and where people 
will be safe;  
 enhanced green in frastructure to ensure that development is balanced with 
green spaces for amenity use, health and well -being and to act as wildlife 
corridors with the surrounding open countryside;  
 facilities and services such as schools, local centres, playing pitches and  play 
areas that meet local requirements thereby reducing the need to travel; and  
 the necessary infrastructure which will mitigate the impact of development 
upon the environment and existing communities.  
 focus development in the most sustainable locations .  
 
2.37 The sustainable development  strategy seeks to provide a range of sites to 
ensure that growth is accommodated  across  the entire plan period. Major 
greenfield  SUE’s will be delivered in Burton upon Trent and Uttoxeter supported 
by smaller greenfield and brownfield allocations. Major Sustainable Urban 
Extensions traditionally take longer before delivery can commence owing to the 
size of the site, the complex pla nning issues that will need to be addressed and 
the infrastructure and site works that will often need to be undertaken prior to 
the completion of the first housing or employment unit. However , planning of the 
allocated SUEs is well advanced. When these si tes are underway they will take 
the majority of the plan period to be completed thereby providing a steady 
supply of houses. A number of the SUEs capitalise on the opportunities 
presented by their location close to the strategic road network to facilitate 
inward investment. In the short term the smaller greenfield sites will be readily 
available to accommodate supply more quickly.  
 
Employment  
2.38 The Locational Strategy proposes to provide a varied range of employment 
sites at the right locations across the Bo rough. This will include the 
development and redevelopment of existing employment areas and the 
provision of new employment land to meet future employment need.  
 
2.39 Burton -upon -Trent in particular is an important employment hub in a wider 
geography with the surrounding areas into South Derbyshire showing  
63 
 considerably lower densities of employment apart from Toyota at Burnaston. 
Within the borough JCB at Rocester is a concentration of employment  and 
Uttoxeter stands out in terms of a smaller concentration of jobs. The prison at 
Dovegate and Barton Business Park represent s other localised employment 
focuses. There are also a number of rural industrial estates which are an 
important component of the Boroughs employment land portfolio.                       
 
2.40 The spatial strategy directs employment growth to the two main towns of Burton 
upon Trent and Uttoxeter.  Further land is required for employment  uses over 
the plan period. Both employment sectors have vacant premises within Burton 
upon Trent and Uttoxeter whic h will contribute to meeting identified demand. 
Further land is required to top up the land supply for these towns  which will 
require the release of greenfield  sites. These sites form part of the two 
sustainable urban extensions proposed on the western side of both Burton 
upon Trent and Uttoxeter. Both sites will integrate employment land with a mix 
of uses including housing to create sustainable development. Th e intention is 
for the co -location of housing and employment with an aim of reducing 
commuting. The sites are also located close to the strategic road network which 
will facilitate inward investment.  
 
2.41 The Borough Council is committed to supporting the rur al economy. Business 
and tourism related development may be appropriate, if it is not intrusive in the 
landscape or incompatible with the openness of the countryside.  
 
2.42 Outside of the main settlements of Burton upon Trent and Uttoxeter 
employment developme nt is encouraged within the settlement boundaries of 
Tier 1 and Tier 2 villages providing the use is appropriate and can be 
accommodated within the fabric and character of the settlement. In the open 
countryside employment development is accepted providing  it supports uses 
accepted in a countryside setting. Our approach to the Camps in rural areas , 
which is a local term for the Rural Industrial Estates,  will be to allow some 
intensification and change of uses where employment is still provided.  
Supporting t he Town Centre and Retail Centres  
2.43 The strategy proposes to continue to protect the town centre in order to ensure 
its vitality and viability and support priorities for that area. The Local Plan will 
ensure that the hierarchy of retail and commercial centres are maintained and 
that their role, function, vitality and viability are maintained and enhanced in the 
future  and where possible centres adapt to changing behaviours.  Local Centres 
are identified to ensure that communities outside of the main town  centres have 
access to services and facilities that meet daily needs to reduce the need to 
travel.     
64 
 Safeguarding the Natural  and Built  Environment  
2.44 The  Borough  Council  will  look  to  protect,  manage  and  actively  enhance  
the biodiversity,  geodiversity,  landscape  character  and  Green  Infrastructure  
assets  of the Borough. The strategy is to protect and enhance existing green 
areas and to create new ones as part of new greenfield strategic allocations. 
The sustainable development strategy will also expect that where appropriate, 
development contributes towards National Forest planting.   
 
2.45 The Borough Council will look to protect, manage and  actively enhance the 
fabric of the Borough through good design, use of materials and proactive 
protection of the historic environment.  
 
Summary  
 Quantum and distribution of housing and employment growth assigned to a 
hierarchy of settlements defined on the  basis of role and function;  
 Community led decision making on the development allowance in Tier 1 and 2 
settlements to accord with the way in which these settlements want to grow;  
 Delivery of brownfield strategic housing sites to deliver sustainable 
develo pment to existing communities;  
 Delivery of large greenfield Sustainable Urban Extensions to deliver green -
infrastructure led development which will provide a lasting legacy for the main 
towns;  
 Quantum and distribution of town centre uses and growth assigne d to a 
hierarchy of centres defined on the basis of role and function;  
 Limits to development set for the main urban areas, Tier 1 and 2 settlements 
by settlement boundaries;  
 Protection and enhancement of the countryside with limited development to 
support rural communities;  
 Protection of the identity and character of rural settlements in close proximity 
to Burton upon Trent and Uttoxeter with the designation of Strategic Green 
Gaps;  
 Protection and enhancement of the Borough’s natural assets to ensure that 
the special rural character is not eroded;  
 Protection and enhancement of the Borough heritage assets to ensure that 
the special historic qualities of the Borough are not eroded.  
  
65 
 Figure 2.1 : Key Diagram  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
66 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
67 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Part  
 
Strategic  
Policies  
 3 
 Part 
 
Strategic 
Policies  
 3 
3  
68 
  
  
The River Trent – Burton Town 
Centre   
69 
 Index of Strategic Policies  
 
  Policy  Policy Title  Page Number  
Principle 1  Presumption in Favour of Sustainable Development  71 
SP1 East Staffordshire Approach to Sustainable Development  73 
SP2 Settlement Hierarchy  76 
NP1 Role of Neighbourhood Plans  77 
SP3 Provision of Homes and Jobs 2012 – 2031  79 
SP4 Distribution of Housing Growth 2012 – 2031  84 
SP5 Distribution of Employment Growth 2012 – 2031 
(allocations)  87 
SP6 Managing the Release of Housing and Employment Land  89 
SP7 Sustainable Urban Extensions  93 
SP8 Development Outside Settlement Boundaries  96 
SP9 Infrastructure Delivery and Implementation  100 
SP10  Education Infrastructure  102 
SP11  Bargates/Molson Coors Strategic Allocation  104 
SP12  Derby Road, Burton upon Trent, Regeneration Corridor  105 
SP13  Burton and Uttoxeter Existing Employment Land Policy  108 
SP14  Rural Economy  110 
SP15  Tourism, culture and leisure development  111 
SP16  Meeting Housing Needs  114 
SP17  Affordable Housing  117 
SP18  Residential Development on Exception Sites  119 
SP19  Sites for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  121 
SP20  Town and Local Centres Hierarchy  125 
SP21  Managing Town and Local Centres  127 
SP22  Supporting Communities  Locally  131 
SP23  Green Infrastructure  134 
SP24  High Quality Design  137 
SP25  Historic Environment  141 
SP26  National Forest  143 
SP27  Climate Change, Water Body Management and Flooding   146 
SP28  Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Generation  149 
SP29  Biodiversity and Geodiversity  151 
SP30  Locally Significant Landscape   153 
SP31  Green Belt and Strategic Green Gaps  154 
SP32  Outdoor Sports and Open Space Policy  156 
SP33  Indoor sports policy  158 
SP34  Health and Wellbeing  159 
SP35  Accessibility and Sustainable Transport  162  
70 
 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY POLICIES  
3.1  International and national bodies have set out broad principles of sustainable 
development. Resolution 42/187 of the United Nations General Assembly 
defined sustainable development as meeting the needs of the present without 
compromising the ability of fut ure generations to meet their own needs. The UK 
Sustainable Development Strategy Securing the Future set out five ‘guiding 
principles’ of sustainable development:  
 
 living within the planet’s environmental limits;  
 ensuring a strong, healthy and just society;  
 achieving a sustainable economy;  
 promoting good governance; and  
 using sound science responsibly.  
 
3.2 The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) translates European 
legislation and the UK strategy into guidance that underpins the planning 
system. Paragraph 6 of the framework clarifies that the purpose of the planning 
system is to contribute to the achie vement of sustainable development and the 
policies in paragraphs 18 to 219, taken as a whole, constitute the Government’s 
view of what sustainable development in England means in practice for the 
planning system. The framework sets out that sustainable  means `ensuring that 
better lives for ourselves don’t mean worse lives for future generations’  and 
development  means `growth ’.    
 
3.3 The framework states that there are three dimensions to sustainable 
development: economic, social and environmental. These dimen sions give rise 
to the need for the planning system to perform a number of roles:  
 an economic role  – contributing to building a strong, responsive and 
competitive economy, by ensuring that sufficient land of the right type 
is available in the right places  and at the right time to support growth 
and innovation; and by identifying and coordinating development 
requirements, including the provision of infrastructure;  
 a social role  – supporting strong, vibrant and healthy communities, by 
providing the supply of  housing required to meet the needs of present 
and future generations; and by creating a high quality built 
environment, with accessible local services that reflect the community’s 
needs and support its health, social and cultural well -being; and  
 an enviro nmental role  – contributing to protecting and enhancing our 
natural, built and historic environment; and, as part of this, helping to 
improve biodiversity, use natural resources prudently, minimise waste 
and pollution, and mitigate and adapt to climate cha nge including 
moving to a low carbon economy.    
71 
 3.4 These roles should not be undertaken in isolation, because they are mutually 
dependent. To achieve sustainable development, economic, social and 
environmental gains should be sought jointly and simultaneously through the 
planning system. The planning system should play an active role in guiding 
development to sustainable solutions.   
 
3.5 The Council has adopted a positive approach in seeking to meet objectively 
assessed development needs of the Borough. The polici es in the plan provide a 
clear framework to guide sustainable growth and the management of change, 
thereby following the Government’s presumption in favour of sustainable 
development.  
 
3.6 There may be instances where the Plan is silent or in future years, po licies may 
become out of date. To enable the Council to continue to take a sustainably 
positive approach to decision making, the applicant will need to assist by 
submitting evidence to demonstrate how benefits of the proposal outweigh any 
adverse impacts.  
 
3.7 The following model policy which embodies the frameworks presumption in 
favour of sustainable development is suggested by the Planning Inspectorate.  
PRINCIPLE 1   
Presumption in Favour of Sustainable Development  
When considering development proposals the  Council will take a positive approach 
that reflects the presumption in favour of sustainable development contained in the 
National Planning Policy Framework. The Council will always seek to work 
proactively with applicants to:  
 find solutions which result in the approval of development  proposals  
wherever possible; and  
 secure development that improves the economic, social and 
environmental conditions in the area.  
Planning applications that accord with the policies in this Local  Plan (and, where 
relevant, with policies in “made” neighbourhood plans, i.e. those that have been 
brought into legal force by the Council ) will be approved without delay, unless 
material considerations indicate otherwise.  
  
72 
 Where the development plan is a bsent, silent or relevant policies are out of date at 
the time of making the decision the Council will grant permission unless material 
considerations indicate otherwise – taking into account whether:  
 any adverse impacts of granting permission would signif icantly and 
demonstrably outweigh the benefits, when assessed against the policies in 
the National Planning Policy Framework taken as a whole; or  
 specific policies in  the National  Planning Policy Framework indicate that 
development should be restricted.   
 
East Staffordshire Borough Council’s approach to Sustainable 
Development  
3.8 Whilst the NPPF provides guidance  within which sustainable development can 
be considered, East Staffordshire 
Borough Council has its own 
principles of what constitutes 
sustainable development.  
 
3.9 The Council’s Sustainability 
Appraisal sets out criteria against 
which the sustainable development 
strategy, sites and policies have 
been assessed. The appraisal and 
its findings are integral to the 
development of the Pre Submission 
Local Plan.  
 
3.10 The Susta inable Community Strategy which was drawn up by East 
Staffordshire’s Local Strategic Partnership identifies that the key objective of the 
partnership is to improve the quality of life in East Staffordshire by addressing 
important issues affecting those who  live and work in the borough, such as 
health, housing, community safety, transport and education.  
 
3.11 The Partnership is committed to helping East Staffordshire to develop in a 
sustainable way. According to the partnership sustainable communities are 
commun ities which are:  
 Active, inclusive and safe  
 Well run  
 Environmentally sensitive  
 Well designed and built  
Tiger Court, Burton   
73 
  Well connected  
 Thriving  
 Well served  
 Fair for everyone  
 
3.12 The following policy seeks to address this local definition  and will be applicable 
to all development , in conjunction with all other local plan policies which add 
more detail on specific topics.   
 
3.13 The Council will facilitate the delivery of integrated sustainable development 
through a variety of means, including the appropriate use of planning conditions 
and obligations, planning performance agreements, neighbourhood plans and 
local development  orders, supplementary planning documents and further non - 
statutory planning guidance.  
STRATEGIC POLICY 1  
East Staffordshire Approach to Sustainable Development  
In line with Principle 1 , development proposals will be required to demonstrate the 
principles of sustainable development and will be assessed against the presumption 
in favour of sustainable development as interpreted and applied locally to Ea st 
Staffordshire Borough Council.  
In assessing whether a development proposal or allocation is as sustainable as 
possible, the Council will apply the following principles  depending on the type of 
application or development proposed : 
 located on, or with good links to, the strategic highway network, and should 
not result in vehicles harming residential amenity, causing highway safety 
issues or harming the character of open countryside;  
 it is convenient and safe  to walk, cycle and travel by public transport  between 
(and for larger sites, around) the site and existing homes, workplaces, shops, 
education, health, recreation, leisure, and community facilities and between 
any new on -site provision;  
 retains, enhances, expands and connects existing green infrastr ucture assets 
into networks within the site and within the wider landscape ; 
 re-uses existing buildings where this is practicable and desirable in terms of 
the contribution the buildings make to their setting  
 integrated with the character of the landscape a nd townscape, provides for 
archaeological investigation where this is appropriate and conserves and  
enhances buildings of heritage importance , setting  and historic landscape 
character;   
74 
  designed to protect the amenity of the occupiers of residential propert ies 
nearby, and any future occupiers of the development through good design and 
landscaping;  
 high quality design which incorporates energy efficient considerations and 
renewable energy technologies;  
 developed without incurring unacceptable flood risk or dr ainage problems and 
uses Sustainable Drainage Systems (SUDS) where appropriate;  
 does not harm biodiversity, but rather enhances it wherever possible,  
including increasing tree -cover, especially as part of the National Forest;  
 creates well designed and loc ated publicly accessible open space;  
 would demonstrably help to support the viability of local facilities , businesses 
and the local community  or where new development attracts new businesses 
and facilities to an area this does not harm the viability of existing local 
facilities or businesses;  
 would contribute towards the creation of sustainable communities through the 
provision of a mix of housing types and tenures;  
 uses locally sourced, sustainable or recycled construction materials (including 
wood prod ucts from the National Forest where this is appropriate), sustainable 
waste management practices and minimises construction waste;  
 safeguards the long term capability of best and most versatile agricultural land 
(Grade 1, 2 and 3a in the Agricultural Land  Classification) as a resource for 
the future;  and 
 would result in the removal of contamination and other environmental 
problems associated with the site.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
75 
 Settlement Hierarchy  
3.14  The sustainable development s trategy directs 
growth to the most sustainable places. Burton 
upon Trent and Uttoxeter are identified as main 
towns because of the size of the settlements 
and the level of services and facilities that they 
contain. What makes a sustainable Borough is 
captu red in the Council’s Sustainability 
Appraisal which support s the  Local Plan. The 
sustainability appraisal also supports a limited 
level of growth in the rural area due to the need 
to accommodate growth to allow for choice and 
flexibility in the housing st ock, meet local 
needs by providing a range of and mix of 
housing types, and in particular affordability. 
Rural development also has the potential to 
further support or provide new services and 
facilities in rural settlements.  
 
3.15 The following elements guide  the distribution of new development within the 
Borough over the lifetime of the Local Plan. These seek to:  
 Focus the majority of new development at Burton Upon Trent ; 
 Allocate a significant level of development at Uttoxeter ; 
 Identify and support those vil lages that have a range of essential 
services and good transport links, including public transport links , to 
larger towns  and their employment areas; and  
 Control new development in all other villages and hamlets.  
 
3.16 The purpose of identifying a network of settlements is to ensure that the right 
level of development takes place in the right places , recognising that each 
settlement performs a different role and function  within the network . 
Consideration has been given to ensuring development takes place in lo cations 
served by services, facilities and public transport , as set out in the settlement 
hierarchy evidence base . The Sustainability Appraisal shows that this strategy 
approach not only provides opportunities to allow easy access to facilities 
without usi ng a car, and supports social interaction in communities, the strategy 
also maximises the opportunities to support businesses, in both urban and rural 
areas. It is considered the best strategy for achieving all three dimensions of 
Sustainable Development.  
 
3.17 The benefits of identifying specific settlements within the policy provides a clear 
approach for communities, setting out where development will take place over 
Wyllie Mews, Station Street , 
Burton   
76 
 the plan period whilst also giving a degree of certainty to service providers who 
will be abl e to effectively plan future provision.  
 
3.18 Proposed amendments to settlement boundaries are shown on the Policies 
Maps.  Boundaries have been amended to incorporate strategic allocations in 
the main towns and Tier 1 villages. Further amendments to Tier 2 settlements 
have been identified following close engagement with parishes.  The hierarchy of 
settlements is explained in paras 2.20 to 2.28  above.   
STRATEGIC POLI CY 2  
Settlement Hierarchy  
Development will be directed towards the most sustainable locations in accordance 
with the following settlement hierarchy:  
Main Towns  
Burton upon Trent and Uttoxeter  
Tier 1: Strategic Villages  
Tutbury, Barton under Needwood , Rolleston on Dove and  Rocester  
Tier 2: Local Service Villages  
Abbots Bromley, Yoxall, Marchington,  Mayfield, Denstone and Draycott in the Clay.  
Tier 3: Small Villages  and other settlements  
Including Bramshall, Stramshall, Church Leigh, Hanbury, Ellastone, Newborough, 
Kingstone, Anslow, Rangemore, Tatenhill, Stubwood, Stanton, Lower Leigh, 
Withington, W ootton  and all other settlements not included in Tiers 1 and 2 above . 
New development should be concentrated within the settlement boundary of the Main 
Towns, Strategic Vill ages, Local Service Villages and Rural Industrial Estates, as 
shown on the policies  maps.  
Tier 3 Small Villages  and other settlements  (without settlement boundaries ) and 
employment areas without boundaries are  treated as open countryside where 
development will be permitted only in exceptional circumstances as set out in  NP1 
and Strategic  Policies  8, 14, 15, 18, 20 and 21.   
 
 Role of Neighbourhood Plans   
3.19 Neighbourhood Development Plans (Neighbourhood Plans) are part of the suite 
of community rights brought in by the 2011 Localism Act.  A Neighbourhood 
Plan is a community -led framework for  guiding development, regeneration and  
77 
 conservation of an area.  Many Parishes in East Staffordshire are proactively 
taking on this new right, with a significant number writing Neighbourhood Plans.  
 
3.20 A Neighbourhood Plan must meet the ‘basic conditions’ (se e list below), one of 
which is to be in general conformity with the strategic policies of the 
development plan for the area.  East Staffordshire Borough Council is 
committed to supporting Neighbourhood Planning areas.  To assist groups we 
have developed th e following policy to clearly set out what are considered 
strategic po licies in the development plan.  
NEIGHBOURHOOD  POLICY 1 
Role of Neighbourhood Plans  
Neighbourhood Planning legislation13 requires Neighbourhood Development Plans to 
meet the following basic conditions:  
 have regard to national policies and advice  
 contribute to the achievement of sustainable development.  
 be in general conformity with the strategic policies of the development plan for 
the area  
 be compatible with European Union (EU) and European Convention on 
Human Rights (ECHR) obligations.  
For the purposes of meeting the basic condition, East Staffordshi re Borough Council 
consider the following Local Plan policies to be strategic:  
 P1 – Principle of Sustainable Development  
 SP1 – East Staffordshire Approach to Sustainable Development  
 SP2 – Settlement Hierarchy  
 SP3 – Provision of Homes and Jobs 2012 -2031  
 SP4 – Distribution of Housing Growth 2012 - 2031  
 SP5 – Distribution of Employment Growth 2012 – 2031  
 SP8 – Development outside Settlement Boundaries  
 SP13 – Burton and Uttoxeter Existing Employment Land Policy  
 SP14 – Rural Economy  
 SP16 – Meeting Housing Needs  
 SP17 – Affordable Housing  
 SP18 – Residential Development on Exception Sites  
 SP20 – Town and Local Centres Hierarchy  
 SP32 - Outdoor sports and Open Space  
Neighbourhood Plans will be in general conformity with the relevant requirements set 
out in the stra tegic policies.  Of particular importance is SP2 which seeks to locate 
                                                           
13 paragraph 8(2) of  Schedule 4B to the Town and Country Planning Act 1990   
78 
 new development within existing settlements. Neighbourhood Plans have the ability 
to: 
 add settlement boundaries to existing settlements (those listed in SP2), or  
 extend existing settlement boundaries  
In addition, Neighbourhood Plans can plan for more growth than set out in the East 
Staffordshire Local Plan strategic policies. Where Neighbourhood Plans identify a 
strategy for growth the Borough Council will expect the plan to provide sufficient 
evidence to demonstrate deliverability of the strategy.   
For all other policies in the Local Plan there is an opportunity for Neighbourhood 
Plans to identify a specific local approach, which will only be supported by the Loc al 
Authority where there is evidence of a specific local circumstance.  
The Borough Council expects all Neighbourhood Plans to include proposals for 
monitoring the policies in the plan. Should monitoring indicate that the development 
is not coming forward as envisaged in the Neighbourhood Plan action will be taken 
by the Borough Council to bring forward sites through a Development Plan 
Document in accordance with SP6.  
Provision of Homes and Jobs 2012 – 2031  
3.21 We need to cater for a growing population.  The Council’s updated Strategic 
Housing Market Area (SHMA) Assessment 2013 identifies that there is a trend 
towards smaller households which means that we need to build more houses to 
accommodate the same populat ion as well as any new population over the life 
time of the Local Plan. The SHMA identifies that 90% of the growth in 
households will be of single person and couple households; those without 
children or other adults.  
 
3.22 Economic factors are also important a nd national guidance places particular 
importance on the development of the economy. We need to make sure that 
there is enough housing for the workforce who will drive the economy. 
Recognised as an economic hub within a largely rural hinterland, it is impo rtant 
that Burton upon Trent retains this important role and that there is sufficient 
housing of the right type available to support the employment workforce.  
 
3.23 In accordance with the NPPF the Council has based the provision of housing 
and employment upon an objective assessment of needs derived from the local 
area. The updated SHMA assessment identifies housing need between 2012 – 
2031 as 11,648 houses. Planning for this housing requirement figure will enable 
the Council to fully meet its demographically d erived housing requirements as 
well as supporting the projected growth of the economy and net employment 
gains.  
  
79 
 3.24 The updated Employment Land 
Review (2013) identifies the need for 
30 hectares of employment land 
over the plan period to be developed 
for a variety of employment uses, in 
particular B1, B2 and B8. The 
provision of 30 hectares is 
supplemented by an additional 10 
hectares located at Derby Road in 
Uttoxeter, which was allocated for 
employment development in the 
adopte d 2006 Local Plan.  
 
3.25 The Council wishes to facilitate a range of job opportunities to support a 
growing population, through a choice of sites that complement the existing and 
varied stock. There is recognition by the Council that older employment areas 
and smaller employment units are valuable to new and start up businesses and 
provide an important component of a larger portfolio of sites which includes new 
provision and modern working environments.  
 
3.26 Strategic Policy 3 will be delivered through working in p artnership with 
developers and landowners through decisions on planning applications, 
bringing forward land allocations, supporting changes of use and the 
redevelopment of sites.  
STRATEGIC POLICY 3    
Provision of Homes and Jobs 2012 – 2031  
The Borough Council will provide for 11,648 dwellings over the plan period of 2012 -
2031. The housing requirement will be delivered in accordance with the following 
indicative average annual rate:  
 466 dwellings per annum for 6 years (2012/2013 -2017/2018)  
 682 dwellings per annum for 13 years (2018/2019 -2030/2031)  
Provision will be made for 40 hectares of employment land  which consists of 30 
hectares of new provision B1, B2 and B8 employment land and a continuation of 10 
hectares of B1, B2 and B8 employment la nd. 
 
 
The JCB Academy  
Rocester   
80 
 Housing Trajectory  
3.27 The Local Plan allocates the majority of growth through strategic housing sites. 
It is expected that these will start to be delivered quickly but will take several 
years to be completed. Most of the sites have an outline planning permission 
with developers  already working up a reserved matters application which will set 
out in more detail the exact layout, distribution of uses, phasing and 
infrastructure development necessary to support the site.   
 
3.28 The large greenfield strategic sites will have infrastruct ure requirements in the 
form of utilities, roads and education facilities which will need in some cases 
early construction. Despite this, indications from the developers are that the 
houses will begin to be delivered towards the end of the 5 year period fo llowing 
the grant of permission.  
 
3.29 In contrast the strategic brownfield sites will require the demolition of existing 
structures in addition to potential infrastructure requirements although it is likely 
that utilities will already be in place.  
 
3.30 In the current economic climate, a build -out rate of around 40 homes per year is 
considered achievable, having taken advice from the SHLAA Panel of local 
development experts East Staffordshire Borough Council refer to on the 
deliverability of housing in th e Borough. It is likely though that this cautious 
delivery figure will improve as economic conditions improve. On the major 
Sustainable Urban Extensions more than one house builder will be on site at 
any one time and the annual delivery rates assumed for t hese sites have been 
adjusted accordingly . The Borough Council has also considered directly with the 
developers/agents of the strategic sites to determine where possible if delivery 
rates are higher or timescales compressed based upon their own individual 
circumstances . 
 
3.31 The housing trajectory reflects that the economic climate and associated low 
house building rates coupled with a strategy with sustainable urban extensions 
with slow initial delivery timescales requires a stepped trajectory to ‘backload’ 
the supply.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
81 
 Figure 3.1: Housing Trajectory  
 
 
Distribution of Housing Growth 2012 – 2031  
3.32 The NPPF states that the planning 
system should play an active role in 
guiding development to sustainable 
locations. Sustainability principles 
therefore need to be applied to the 
distribution and subsequent location of 
development across the Borough.  
 
3.33 The Council’s Settlement Hierarchy 
Topic Paper assists with growth 
distribution and is the basis upon which 
Strategic Policy 2 has been applied.  
 
3.34 The Local Plan sees a number of significant mixed -use urban extensions to 
Burton and Uttoxeter as the main focus for development in the Borough.  Other 
strategic housing sites have also been identified to meet the identified housing 
requirements, and to ensure a diverse, and flexible por tfolio of land supply.  
This includes a large proportion of brownfield sites within the urban areas, 
allowing for the regeneration and further improvement of existing areas and 
communities.  0 200 400 600 800 1000  1200  
Actual Completion Totals  Remaining Allowance Totals  
Construction at the old Re nold Chain 
Site - Horninglow Road, Burton   
82 
  
3.35 The Council has undertaken a Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment 
(SHLAA) which identifies land that has potential for residential development in 
the Borough. The results of the SHLAA are used to identify strategic sites 
capable of allocation in the Local Plan. The Council’s sustainability appraisal 
further re fines the SHLAA sites to arrive at a strategy underpinned by sites that 
are sustainable.  
 
3.36 A number of allocated strategic sites have already been consented for 
development. The Council will continue to allocate these sites to ensure that the 
housing requirement overall can still be met should any of the planning 
permissions lapse, for whatever reason.  
 
3.37 In addition to strategic allocations of development the main towns also receive a 
requirement  to capture development opportunities that arise over the plan 
period. This development allowance is informed by a windfall methodology 
paper and brownfield sites assessment. The evidence demonstrates that 
historically brownfield site development has formed an important component of 
growth in the Borough which is  likely to continue to present opportunities. The 
majority of sites contributing towards the development requirement will be 
brownfield . Greenfield may be acceptable in accordance with Strategic Policy 1 
and Detailed Policy 3.  
 
3.38 Settlements in Tiers 1 and 2 are assigned a development requirement to 
capture opportunities that come forward over the plan period and within 
settlement boundaries. These opportunities could be the development of infill 
sites, brownfield opportunities that become available, subdivi sion of properties 
or the conversion of properties into residential development  which can either be 
allocated or come forward as windfall . The development requirement can be 
accommodated at Tier 1 settlements without the need to amend settlement 
boundaries.  
 
3.39 The Borough Council has engaged with Tier 2 local communities to determine 
how development will come forward in these village locations. The Borough 
Council has either amended settlement boundaries in Tier  2 villages to 
demonstrate that development can be delivered or is relying on neighbourhood 
plans which many East Staffordshire parishes are signed up to. Amendments to 
the settlement boundary are known broad locations of growth which is not 
technically a windfall, however, a current or future as yet undesignated 
neighbourhood plan could determine a different pattern of growth. Additional 
growth in Tier 2 villages can be delivered via windfalls within settlement 
boundaries.  
  
83 
 3.40 Tier 3 villages, other settleme nts or countryside areas have a housing 
requirement which seeks to accommodate exceptional housing schemes in 
accordance with Strategic Policy 18 or appropriate re -use of rural buildings in 
accordance with Strategic Policy 8.  
 
3.41 Neighbourhood Plans in any l ocation across East Staffordshire could identify 
more housing than that set out in Strategic Policy 4 in line with Policy NP1 on 
Neighbourhood Plans.  
 
3.42 In relation to the development requirement allowance housing requirement 
permissions already granted sin ce the start of the plan period, will form part of 
the extant permission supply.  
 
3.43 Strategic Policy 4 seeks to accommodate 10,384 houses  across the Borough. 
This figure is below the total housing requirement of 11,648  by 1,264 dwelling 
units. This is becau se at April 2012 there were 153214 extant permissions which 
equate to 1379 permissions when a 10% lapse rate is applied. As at 31st March 
2014 there were 1663 extant permissions which equates to 1467 permissions  
when a 10% lapse rate is applied  which when a dded to the 10,38 4 dwellings as 
set out in the policy equals 11,85 1 dwellings.  This excludes those sites 
identified in Strategic Policy 4 which have planning permission.  In addition there 
are additional factors that will contribute further to supply includ ing 
neighbourhood plans and the Council’s strong track record for delivering 
windfall sites in Burton and Uttoxeter.   
                                                           
14 The Burton Road, Tutbury permission is removed from the figures. The permission was therefore not 
included in the April 2012 monitoring.  1756 extant permissions is lower than the figure recorded in the 
Preferred Option plan due to a data cleanse in 2012.   
84 
                                                            
15 This table is based upon the land supply situation at the start of the plan period: 1 April 2012. At that time 
none of the sites in Strategic Policy 4 had permission granted.  STRATEGIC POLICY 4  
Distribution of Housing Growth 2012 – 2031  
Land is allocated to meet to meet the housing provision of Strategic Policy 3 in 
accordance with the fo llowing distribution15: 
New strategic allocations in the Local Plan  
Main Towns:  Units  
Burton upon Trent  
Brownfield  
 
 
 
 
 
Greenfield  
 
 
  
Branston Depot  
Bargates/Molson Coors High Street  
Molson Coors Middle Yard, Hawkins Lane  
Derby Road  
Pirelli  
 
Land South Of Branston  
Branston Locks  
Tutbury Road/Harehedge Lane  
Beamhill/Outwoods   
Guinevere Avenue  
  
483 
350 
300 
250 
300 
 
660 
2580  
500 
950 
100 
 
Total  6473  
Uttoxeter  
Brownfield  
 
 
Greenfield   
Brookside Industrial Estate  
JCB,  Pinfold Road  
 
Uttoxeter West   
90 
257 
 
750  
85 
 Hazelwalls  400  
 
                                                                                                    Total       1497 
 
 
Barton under Needwood  
Rolleston on Dove  
Rocester  
Tutbury  Efflinch Lane  
College Fields Site  
Land south of Rocester  
Burton Road  
 130 
100 
90 
224 
Total   544 
Development Requirement  
The Development Requirement  assigned to the Main Towns and Tier 1 and Tier 2 
settlements will be delivered within settlement boundaries or in accordance with a Made 
Neighbourhood Plan.  
The Development Requirement assigned to Tier 3 settlements and rural areas will be 
delivered on wi ndfall sites such as on Exception Sites under Strategic Policy 18, in rural 
areas in accordance with Strategic Policy 8 or in accordance with a Made Neighbourhood 
Plan.  
 
Main Towns  (of Burton Upon Trent and 
Uttoxeter) : 1359 Development Requirement 
(minimum)  
Tier 1:  Strategic Villages:  Development Requirement  
Barton under Needwood  
Rolleston on Dove  
Rocester  
Tutbury  25 
25 
25 
26 
Tier 2: Local Service Villages:  Development Requirement  
Abbots Bromley  
Yoxall  
Marchington  
Mayfield  40 
40 
20 
20  
86 
  
Distribution of Employment Growth 2012 – 2031  
3.44 Burton upon Trent is the economic heart of the Borough with the highest 
proportion of existing employment land in and around the town and is 
considered a key location within the West Midlands. Uttoxeter also has an 
established employment base but is of a smaller scale. However, the town is 
strategically well l ocated on the A50 and JCB is a major employer in the town 
with both their World Parts Centre and Heavy Products factory in the town and 
the company has their world headquarters seven miles north in Rocester.  
 
3.45 No new allocations are made in the rural areas but they contribute to the 
existing employment base with businesses located on the former camps. These 
are usually smaller units though they are an important source of employment in 
the rural economy. Applicat ions for employment in the rural areas will be dealt 
with by Strategic  Policy 14 – Rural Economy.  
 
3.46 The Retail and Leisure Study includes an assessment of the Office market in 
Burton upon Trent. This confirms previous reports that Burton town centre does 
not have an established office sector and there is no demand for new provision. 
Whilst there is no quantitative demand, existing office space should be 
protected and new office development promoted to improve the qualitative offer 
in the town centre. This n ew provision should be part of a mixed use 
development on the Bargates/Molson Coors Strategic allocation.  Denstone  
Draycott in the Clay  20 
20 
Tier 3: Small Villages , other settlements  
and the countryside  
 Development Requirement which 
includes Housing Exceptions and 
development acceptable in the 
countryside (Strategic Policies 8 & 18) 
Include Neighbourhood Plans  
Including Bramshall, Stramshall, Church 
Leigh, Hanbury, Ellastone, Newborough, 
Kingstone, Anslow, Rangemore, Tatenhill, 
Stubwood, Stanton, Lower Leigh, Withington, 
Wootton  and all other settlements not 
included in Tiers 1 and 2 above.    
 
 
250 
Total  1870  
Grand Total  10,384 
  
87 
  
3.47 There are a number of sites committed through planning permission that have 
yet to be developed as well as a number of employment units that are vac ant or 
underutilised that are set out in the ELR report and considered of good quality. 
These sites should be protected from change of use to other uses to allow 
flexibility in delivering a range of sites for employment use.   
 
3.48 Strategic Policy 5 identifie s the location of new employment allocations in 
Burton and Uttoxeter. These are all locations included as part of proposed 
mixed use development except for Derby Road, Uttoxeter an allocation carried 
forward from the 2006 Plan, part of which now has consen t. The Council 
received funding through the Greater Birmingham and Solihull LEP for 
infrastructure work to open up the Derby R oad area from Dove Way.  
 
STRATEGIC POLICY 5  
Distribution of Employment Growth 2012 – 2031 (allocations)  
The Employment Land Review (ELR) considers the dynamic between supply and 
demand of employment land. The ELR identifies a shortfall of employment land 
against identified need.  Land is allocated to meet the employment provision of 
Strategic Policy 3 in accordance with the foll owing distribution:  
Burton upon Trent  Branston Locks  20 ha  
Uttoxeter  Uttoxeter West  
Derby Road  10 ha  
10 ha  
In general on sites allocated above and sites identified within the ELR, occupation by 
B1*, B2*, B8* and compatible and appropriate sui generis uses will be permitted. 
Non B class employment such as hotels or food and drink uses may be acceptable 
as enabli ng development where these can form a suitable high quality gateway 
development and cumulatively take up a small proportion of the total employment 
area.  
B8 uses will be permitted where they are required to meet the objectively assessed 
need in the Boroug h (as identified in the Employment Land Study) but should also 
allow for sufficient land to be available to allow quantitative and qualitative choice for 
B1 and B2 uses.  
*B1 uses = offices, research and development and light industry, B2 = general industr ial, B8 = 
warehousing and logistics  
 
 
  
88 
 Managing the Release of Housing and Employment Land  
3.49 The East Staffordshire Local Plan looks ahead to 2031. Over this timeframe 
situations will change, such as the economic climate, and the Local Plan needs 
to include  sufficient flexibility to deal with changing circumstances. The Council 
has asked itself the question `what if….’ the overall sustainable development 
strategy cannot be achieved within the Local Plan timeframe, `what then?’.  
 
3.50 The success of the strategy relies on the delivery of Strategic Policy 1 East 
Staffordshire’s Approach to Sustainable Development, Strategic Policy 7 
Sustainable Urban Extensions, as well as Strategic Policy 9 on Infrastructure 
Delivery and Implementation.  
 
3.51 To ensure that the overall strategy can be achieved, the following risks have 
been considered and contingency actions identified:  
(i) If the economic climate resulted in the expected amount of development 
not coming forward, the Council will:  
 Work with landowners and developers to bring sites forward;  
 Use Compulsory Purchase powers if necessary;  
 Review the Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment to identify any 
additional sites or if any existing sites could be developed earlier than 
estimated; and  
 Use the Authority’s Moni toring Report to assess how serious under 
delivery is each year against the housing trajectory; and if necessary bring 
forward a Sites Allocations Development Plan Document.  
(ii) If the funding for infrastructure is not available, the Council will:  
 Monitor the provision of infrastructure through the Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan  and Authority’s Monitoring Report in order to help phase 
development;  
 Seek additional funding streams; and  
 Consider the use of a Community Infrastructure Levy or if already in place 
review the local priorities for the spending of CIL in order to enable critical 
infrastructure to be brought forward.  
(iii)  As part of Duty to Co -operate working with neighbouring and other 
authorities the Borough Council acknowledges that as these Authorities 
review their housing requirement, and monitor delivery against this figure,  
89 
 it is possible that the situation could change. In these circumstances, East 
Staffordshire Council will:  
 work collaboratively with these Authorities to establish whether or not it 
would be reasonable to accommodate the shortfall, or part of it, within the 
Borough, considering particularly the existence or not of a closely linked 
and shared local market area overlapping both Authorities’ areas; and  
 in the event that the work identifies t hat further provision would be 
reasonable in East Staffordshire following the consideration of all 
reasonable alternatives, bring forward an early review of the Local Plan to 
address this additional need.  
 
STRATEGIC POLICY 6   
Managing the Release of Housi ng and Employment Land  
The release of land for housing and employment will be managed so that it will 
deliver the level and distribution of development set out in Strategic Policies 3, 4 and 
5. The release of land will be dependent on the timely provision of infrastructure 
necessary  to deliver growth. The adequacy of housing and employment supply will 
be assessed regularly through reviews of the Strategic Housing Land Availability 
Assessment, the Infrastructure Delivery Plan and the Authority’s Monitoring R eports.  
Following the adoption of the plan,  the Council will review every five years the 
evidence base which assesses the current and future levels of need and demand for 
housing to provide an appropriate basis for longer term housing and employment 
provis ion. Where there are significant changes to evidence on need and demand for 
development or within 5 years of the adoption of the plan, whichever is sooner, the 
Council will undertake a Local Plan Review.  
Should monitoring indicate that the Council is fall ing behind on delivering against 
development targets or Neighbourhood Plans do not come forward  action will be 
taken to bring forward sites through a Development Plan Document.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
90 
 Sustainable Urban Extensions  
3.52 The delivery of Sustainable 
Urban Extensions (SUE s) 
supports the Council’s 
intention to deliver truly 
sustainable growth and 
developments that the 
Borough can be proud of. 
The Council does not want a 
strategy bas ed upon 
piecemeal development 
whereby growth is scattered 
around the town and sites 
are unable to contribute in 
full to the infrastructure 
required by new and existing 
communities.  
 
3.53 The development of Sustainable Urban Extensions scored highly in the 
Susta inability Appraisal because of the co -location of a mix of uses and the 
opportunities that SUEs present in minimising travel and incorporating good 
design and green infrastructure.  
 
3.54 This strategy is consistent with national policy, particularly paragraph 52 of the 
NPPF, which states that the supply of new homes can sometimes be best 
achieved through planning for larger scale development, such as extensions to 
towns.  
 
3.55 The policy also encourages the promotion of mixed -use developments and 
ensuring developments that generate significant movement are located where 
the need to travel will be minimised and the use of sustainable transport modes 
can be maximised.  
 
3.56 The Borough Council consid er that a SUE should be a high quality, mixed use 
development, well connected and with a functional relationship with the wider 
area,  but  allowing  adequate  opportunities  to  access  local services  and 
facilities. An Urban Extension can be characteris ed as `sustainable’ if it meets 
the criteria of Principal 1 and Strategic Policy 1 (Presumption in Favour of 
Sustainable Development and East Staffordshire Approach to Sustainable 
Development). To be considered a Sustainable Urban Extension a site needs to  
be either of a size large enough to support its own facilities and services or be 
Layout Plan from the D esign & Access statement 
for Land at Burton Road, Tutbury   
91 
 located where there is a range of facilities already in existence sufficiently close 
to allow easy walking, cycling and bus access to these facilities.  
 
3.57 The Council expects that the planning of these Sustainable Urban Extensions 
should be through a masterplanning approach carried out jointly between the 
developer and the Council. The masterplanning approach should incorporate 
design codes and standards, in line with principle s set out in the Design 
Supplementary Planning Document, so as to secure high quality sustainable 
development. Masterplanning will demonstrate an understanding of the local 
natural and built environment as well as embracing sustainable development 
principl es set out in Strategic Policy 1, Strategic Policy 24 and the requirements 
of this policy.  
 
3.58 Masterplans will also address how the development will be resilient to the 
effects of climate change, how it will protect biodiversity and open spaces, deal 
with w aste, and reduce consumption of non -renewable resources.  The Council 
has liaised with the landowners and agents of the allocated urban extensions, 
and continues to do so, to ensure that the development is designed and 
delivered according to the above prin ciples. The Council is also working with the 
infrastructure partners at Staffordshire County Council, Highways Agency, utility 
companies, The National Forest Company, Central Rivers Initiative (for 
Branston Locks/Land south of Branston), Clinical Commissio ning Group and 
others to coordinate the development of integrated communities.  
 
3.59 Each SUE will encompass a wide range of land uses involving a number of key 
partners. A phasing plan for the delivery of housing, employment and 
infrastructure shall be agreed with the Borough Council in advance of the 
commencement of development. The following broadly identifies who will 
deliver the key land uses : 
 
1)  Housing.  New housing will be delivered by the developer.  The provision  
of  affordable  housing  will  be  f unded  by  the  developer  in partnership  with  
a  Registered  Social Provider  or  other  qualifying organisation. It is 
anticipated that the majority of funding and delivery will come through these 
bodies: notwithstanding this, opportunities for public funding for affordable 
housing will be explored.   
 
2)  Schools.  The developer will provide the required education facilities (new 
schools)  at locations set out in Strategic Policy 10 in liaison with Staffordshire 
County Council . 
 
3)  Health care faciliti es.  Where required, n ew General Practitioner surgeries 
will be funded primarily by the developer working in partnership with GPs.  
92 
 Opportunities   to   explore   public   funding   may   be   necessary   in 
exceptional circumstances. It is envisaged that a ppropriate locations for 
Health Care facilities will be identified and reserved as part of the 
development of the Masterplan, particularly at Beamhill, Branston Locks and 
West of Uttoxeter.  In addition as a result of development, there may be a 
need to expand existing health care facilities.    
 
4) Sustainable Transport. Key  walking  and cycling  networks  will  be  
identified  through  the  SUE  Masterplan with provision of routes and facilities 
along with their future maintenance made at the developer’ s expense. Links 
into the wider networks will be required and contributions to improving these 
networks made where reasonable and necessary  in partnership with 
Staffordshire County Council. The Transportation Study undertaken in 
conjunction with the County  Council will provide evidence for the nature of the 
works required.   
 
5) Where new bus network s are needed to serve the new development , the 
developer will fund provision for a time period agreed with Staffordshire 
County Council.  A  phased  approach  to  the  provision  of  public transport 
will be developed through the SUE Masterplan so that public  t ransport  is  
delivered  in  an  effective  and  proportionate manner  from the outset of 
buildings being occupied.  
 
6) Employment.  New employment will mainly be delivered and funded through 
the developer and partners  on Lawns Farm and land West of Uttoxeter . The 
components of employment within the site will be determined through the 
SUE Masterplan.  The SUEs afford an opportunity for the creation of high 
quality business parks (largely B1 office, research and development, light 
industry) for which there is a qualitative need. However, other employment 
uses should not be precluded, the emphasis being on stimulating economic 
growth and j ob creation within walking distance of new homes and facilities.  
The Employment Land Review will help to inform the amount of land needed 
in each SUE, and the types of employment for which land is required.  
 
7)  Retail facilities.  New retail facilities wi ll mainly be delivered and funded 
through the developer and their partners. The broad location and type of retail 
facilities within the site will be determined through the SUE Masterplan. The 
Retail and Leisure Study identifies very little need for additio nal retail capacity, 
especially outside the town centres, and so only small -scale new retail 
facilities, serving local needs, are likely to be required on the SUEs.  
 
8) Community Facilities . The  developer  will  be  required  to  facilitate new  
community   buildings,  services  and  facilities  either  through funding  or   
93 
 other  methods.  It is envisaged that the location of such facilities should be 
identified as part of the development through the Masterplan.    
 
9) Green Infrastructure. Open space and Green Infrastructure will be provided 
by   the developer as an integral part of the  new development. The areas of 
Green  Infrastructure  (which  includes Public Open Space), its phasing and 
subsequent maintenance will be identified  as  part  of  any  plann ing  
application  and  SUE  Masterplan and shall be agreed with the Local 
Planning Authority in advance of any development commencing.    
 
3.60  The Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) sets out the necessary infrastructure 
required to deliver the SUE’s in terms of gas and electricity, water, including 
waste water, education, community facilities, transport, healthcare and leisure 
facilities.  
STRATE GIC POLICY  7   
Sustainable Urban Extensions  
The following allocations are made for Su stainable Urban Extensions (SUE s) in the 
Borough:  
Major SUEs:   
(i) Branston Locks ; 
(ii) Land South of Branston16; 
(iii) Beamhill ; and  
(iv) West of Uttoxeter.  
Two smaller allocations are also made at:  
a) Harehedge Lane /Tutbury Road , Burton u pon Trent;   
b) Hazelwalls Farm, Uttoxeter; and  
All Sustainable Urban Extensions will make provision for:  
 A network of green spaces linking the Sustainable Urban Extension to the 
wider Green Infrastructure (GI) ne twork. The Council will require the 
development to meet the principles set out in Strategic Policy 23;   
 A broad balance and range of housing choice, including both market and 
                                                           
16 Employment land at LSOB is not allocated within Strategic Policy 5 as this is already committed and 
accounted for in the Employment Land Review 2013.   
94 
 affordable housing  and an appropriate amount of extra -care housing , with 
density being determined through a design -led approach (see Detailed Policy 
3) appropriate to the character of the locality;  
 A range of different employment uses on a specified part of the allocation will 
be agreed with the applicant , in line with t he provision in SP5 .  
 An appropriate level of retail, leisure, social, cultural, sport, community and 
health facilities that meet local needs but do not compete with town centres, 
and good links to existing facilities in adjacent urban areas;  
 Two tier or Three tier educational needs based on up to date data regarding 
existing and future school capacity and demand;   
 Well designed, secure cycleways and walking  routes serving the local 
facilities , separate from roads for motor vehicles where appropriate ; 
 Hous ing located within a maximum walking distance of 300m of a frequent 
and accessible bus service where viable;  
 Development that respects the environmental and historic environment 
character of its rural surroundings and existing townscape character. 
Particul ar attention should be given to the creation of a well designed edge to 
development and a sensitive transition to adjoining areas in the wider 
countryside. Proposals will need to include plans for the long term use and 
management of these areas;  
 Local was te management facilities and neighbourhood waste management 
facilities for the separation, storage and collection of waste, to increase the 
efficiency of its subsequent re -use, recycling and treatment.  
 Incorporate renewable or low carbon energy supply on a district -wide or 
decentralised basis unless it can be satisfactorily demonstrated that this is not 
possible without rendering the scheme unviable, or it would create serious 
amenity or environmental problems.   
 The conservation of water resources and the  implementation of sustainable 
drainage systems.  
The smaller Sustainable Urban Extensions should also make provision for the above, 
although the Council will be flexible where it can be demonstrated satisfactorily that it 
is not feasible or desirable to provide these because of the size of the site.   
The construction of all greenfield sustainable urban extensions will be built in line 
with an agreed infrastructure phasing schedule to ensure that the necessary 
infrastructure is operational before occupation of buildings. The schedule will take 
account of any other sites being developed concurrently, to ensure that infrastructure 
provision over different sites is co -ordinated by all providers.   
95 
 Development Outside Settlement Boundaries  
3.61 The countryside within East Staffordshire demonstrates a diversity of  character 
and form with many areas of high intrinsic value. Protecting the countryside 
needs to be balanced with the recognition that the rural economy, including 
tourism, is a vital part of the Borough’s total economy and that it faces 
continuing change and pressure over the Plan period. It is central government 
and Borough Council policy to support appropriate rural enterprise and this is 
reflected in a suitably flexible policy attitude towards necessary development 
that is of a suitable scale and design ed to fit into its landscape.  
 
3.62 The Borough Council has signed the Staffordshire Rural Declaration, along with 
over 40 other organisations, which sets out a commitment to make sure 
Staffordshire’s rural areas reach their full potential by adopting a  joined -up, pro -
active approach which empowers communities and delivers better outcomes in 
rural areas. It emphasises that rural areas are an asset; that rural people, 
communities and businesses should be listened to and not feel overlooked 
because of their locat ion; and that rural people and businesses should be 
supported and empowered to create a level playing field – especially where the 
challenges faced are caused or increased by living or working in a rural 
location.  
 
3.63 Priorities for rural Staffordshire were i dentified by a range of stakeholders at an 
event held in June 2012, and following this, various stakeholder consultations 
have taken place to refine these priorities. These priorities include balancing the 
need to protect and develop rural areas; promoting  balanced, inclusive, 
sustainable and empowered rural communities; and supporting a diverse rural 
economy. All nine priorities identified will be included within a Staffordshire 
Rural Strategy, for action by organisations within the county with a vested 
interest in rural communities, businesses and its environment. The Local Plan 
will inform the Borough’s 
involvement in helping to deliver 
the Staffordshire Rural Strategy.  
 
3.64 The Council is anxious to 
ensure that there is good 
reason to site new development 
in the countryside, and will not 
permit development that would 
be better situated in an 
accessible urban location 
(large -scale retail, for example) 
or that contributes littl e to the 
Northern part of the Borough   
96 
 benefit of the countryside, or where the benefits to the countryside are greatly 
outweighed by the disbenefits.   
 
3.65  This policy applies to open countryside and to settlements that do not have a 
settlement boundary, and should be read in conjunctio n with Strategic Policies 2 
and 24 and Detailed Policies 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6. It applies to all types of 
development, including housing.  
STRATEGIC POLICY 8    
Development Outside Settlement B oundaries  
Development outside settlement boundaries will not be permitted unless it is:  
 essential to the support and viability  of an existing  lawful business or the 
creation of a new business appropriate in the countryside in terms of type of 
operation, size and im pact and supported by relevant justification for a rural 
location ; or 
 providing facilities for the use of the general public or local community close to 
an existing settlement which is reasonably accessible on foot, by bicycle or by 
public transport; or  
 in accordance with a ‘made’ (i.e. legally in force) Neighbourhood Plan; or  
 development under the Rural Exception Site s policy  (see Policy 18 on 
Exception Sites); or  
 Appropriate re -use of Rural Buildings following guidance set out in the Rural 
Buildings SPD; or 
 infrastructure development where an overriding need for the development to 
be located in the countryside can be demonstrated; or  
 development necessary to secure a significant improvement to the landscape 
or the conservation of a feature of acknowledged importance; or   
 provision for renewable energy generation, of a scale and design appropriate 
to its location.  
 otherwise appropriate in the countryside.  
Proposals falling within one of these categories will be judged against the following 
criteria where applicable : 
 The proposed  development must not adversely affect the amenities 
enjoyed by existing land users, including, in the case of proposals for 
development close to an existing settlement, the occupiers of 
residential and other property within that se ttlement.  
 Proposals do not introduce considerable urban form   
97 
  Proximity to settlements where there are advantages of sustainable 
linkages, but this should not create unacceptable urban extensions or 
create the opportunity for unacceptable backfill between t he 
development and the urban area  
 The detailed siting of the proposed development and its associated 
environmental impact are compatible with the character of the 
surrounding area,  
 The design of the buildings, structures and materials are visually well -
related to the proposed site and its setting with careful choice of 
materials, landscaping, massing of buildings and attention to local 
architecture and roofscape design.  
 Landscaping associated with the proposal takes into account both the 
immediate impact a nd distant views of the development.  
 The proposed development will not have an adverse impact on the 
transport  and highway  network and provides  adequate access for all 
necessary users  
 The need to maintain land of high agricultural value for food producti on  
 
Development proposals that may affect farmsteads and their setting should be 
assessed using the relevant evidence base including the farmsteads mapping and 
landscape characteri sation . 
Where major residential sites are consented and implemented outside  but adjacent 
to the settlement boundary they will be excluded from this policy and for the 
purposes of decision making on future proposals such as extensions or replacement 
dwellings will be considered within the built urban area.   
 
Infrastructure Delivery and Implementation  
3.66  Successful and sustainable new 
and existing communities depend 
on suitable physical and social 
infrastructure being in place to 
meet the needs of their residents. 
Businesses also need 
infrastructu re to operate effectively 
and meet the needs of their 
employees.  
 
3.67 The provision of infrastructure is a 
crucial element to the 
Hamilton Avenue   Uttoxeter   
98 
 implementation of policies and proposals in the Local Plan and fundamental to 
delivering the spatial strategy.  
 
3.68 The definition of infrastructure is wide and includes a range of services and 
facilities provided by both public and private bodies. For the purposes of the 
Local Plan the definition of infrastructure is that set out in the box below.  
Definition of Infrastructure:  
Transp ort: road network  including bus networks , cycling and walking infrastructure, 
rail network, parking.  
Education:  further and higher education, secondary and primary education, nursery 
schools and early years provision.  
Health:  general and mental hospitals,  health centres/primary care trusts, ambulance 
services  
Social and community infrastructure:  supported accommodation, social and 
community facilities, sports centres, open spaces, parks and play space.  
Public services:  waste management and disposal, librar ies, cemeteries, emergency 
services (police, fire, ambula nce), places of worship.  
Utility services:  gas supply, electricity supply, water supply, waste water treatment, 
telecommunications infrastructure.  
Flood Alleviation measures : Flood water retention, w idening river channels, 
realignment of watercourses, creation of flood barriers.  
Green Infrastructure:  parks and gardens, natural and semi -natural urban 
greenspaces, green corridors, outdoor sports facilities, amenity greenspace,  heritage 
assets  provision for children and young people, allotments, cemeteries and 
churchyards, river and canal corridors.  
3.69 The Borough Council has produced an Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), which 
highlights the key infrastructure projects that will be required to deliver this Local 
Plan. The IDP sets out which projects are required, where they are required and 
by when, who will lead the delivery and how projects will be funded.  
 
3.70 Rather than being incorporated into the Local Plan document, the IDP sits 
outside of but alongside the Local Plan as a living document which can be 
updated on a regular basis to take account of changing circumstances such as 
project completions, start date s and funding streams. Projects identified in the 
IDP in the latter period of the plan will be more fluid at this stage and will evolve 
and strengthen over time as greater certainty emerges.   
99 
 3.71 The IDP supporting the Local Plan has been prepared in partnersh ip with other 
infrastructure providers.  The IDP will be regularly monitored and updated when 
necessary.  
 
3.72 Where the delivery of development is dependent upon key infrastructure 
projects, development should be phased to coincide with the release of 
additio nal infrastructure capacity. The IDP sets out which infrastructure projects 
are critical to the successful delivery of the Local Plan and contains a range of 
contingencies should infrastructure projects be delayed or cancelled.  
 
3.73 Through the IDP the Boroug h Council will identify funding gaps and, subject to 
viability, expect new development whether individually or cumulatively to 
contribute. In the short term contributions will be sought through s106 
obligations or unilateral undertakings with a potential l ong term view to securing 
such contributions through a Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL)  or in the 
event that the CIL scheme is superseded, by an alternative approach.  
 
3.74 Until the Council adopts a CIL Charging Schedule the level of contributions will 
be determined on a site by site basis taking into consideration the size of the 
development, neighbouring priorities, and the impact on infrastructure provision 
in the surrounding area, in accordance with local standards. The developer 
contributions17 must be : 
 
 Necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms;  
 Be directly related to the development; and  
 Be fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the development.  
 
3.75  The Council is preparing a CIL Charging Schedule which will be chargeabl e on 
some types of development over a set threshold in size. The contributions paid 
by the applicant will go towards the delivery of specific strategic infrastructure 
projects necessary for the Borough, set out on a “ Regulation 123 List” (a 
reference to th e Community Infrastructure Levy Regulations 2010 ). Developer 
contributions for work directly associated with the development – meeting the 
three tests above – will still be required through a s.106 obligation, including the 
provision of affordable housing.   
 
 
                                                           
17 See Regulation 122 of the community infrastructure levy regulations 2010   
100 
 STRATEGIC POLICY 9   
Infrastructure Delivery and Implementation  
Working with partners, the Borough Council will ensure that sufficient on and off site 
physical, social and community infrastructure is provided to support the development 
identified in this Local Plan.  
The Borough Council’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan w ill be used to identify the timing, 
type and number of infrastructure projects required to support the objectives and 
policies of the strategy as well as the main funding mechanisms and lead agencies 
responsible for that delivery . The IDP will be reviewed every 5 years to ensure it is 
up to date and relevant. Monitoring of Infrastructure Provision associated with 
strategic site applications will be reported in the Authorities Monitoring Report.  
Infrastructure and services required as a consequence of development, and 
provision for their maintenance, will be sought from developers and secured by the 
negotiation of planning obligations, by conditions attached to a planning permission, 
and/or other agreement, levy or undertaking, all to be agreed before planning 
permission is granted.  
In order to ensure a co -ordinated approach to the collection of developer 
contributions , the Council will introduce a Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL).  
Before CIL i s adopted, Planning Obligations will continue to be the basis to secure 
developer contributions. The level of contributions will be determined on a case by 
case basis taking account of the statutory tests. If an applicant wishes to 
demonstrate that the lev el of contributions being sought will threaten the viability of 
the proposal the Council will consider the merits of the case subject to a requirement 
for a financial viability appraisal.   
The Council will safeguard land  for future infrastructure provisio n through a Site 
Allocations Development Plan Document  (DPD) if necessary.  
 
Education Infrastructure  
3.76 Staffordshire County Council has a statutory duty to secure sufficient school 
places for the children of the county, and to promote choice, diversity and  high 
standards for every child. This is reflected in one of the nine key outcomes of 
Staffordshire’s Strategic Plan where:  
“Staffordshire’s children and young people can get the best start in life and 
receive a good education so that they can make a posit ive contribution to their 
communities”   
101 
 3.77  As a strategic commissioning authority Staffordshire County Council has to 
work closely with East Staffordshire Borough Council as the Local Planning 
Authority to ensure that the right numbers of school places are in  the right areas 
at the right time in order to meet changing demand; and that sufficient finance is 
available to secure school places in high quality environments.  
 
3.78 Getting the stock of schools and access to them `right’, is a pre -condition for 
successful teaching and learning.  
 
3.79 An Infrastructure Growth Options Assessment commissioned by the Borough 
Council in 2012 identified that the provision of education facilities within Burton 
upon Trent is a significant issue for the Borough Council.  
 
3.80 The birth rate in Burton is increasing and to accommodate the increased pupil 
numbers the County Council is investing over £20 million to implement the 
following proposals:  
 Relocate St. Modwen's Catholic Primary School to a new, larger 420  
place  school off Tutbury Road;  
 Build a new 420 place primary academy at Belvedere Park;  
 Increase the age range and capacity at  Christchurch Community 
Infants School providing an additional 195 places; and  
 Enlarge River View Primary and Nursery School by 105 places.  
 
3.81  These proposals provide an additional 930 places from September 2013 to 
alleviate the significant pressure on primary school places in Burton upon Trent 
and will meet the projected demand for places from pupils that already live 
within the area. The Bur ton upon Trent School Planning Study (2013) which 
was jointly commissioned with Staffordshire County Council confirms that the 
County Council’s investment will not be sufficient to accommodate pupils 
generated from any future residential developments.  
 
3.82 The significant basic need pressure for additional school places currently being 
seen at primary school level will impact on the secondary schools in Burton. 
Projections show that there will be significant pressure on the majority of 
secondary schools in the area from 2015/16 onwards from the pupils that 
already live within the Burton area. Any residential development in the Burton 
upon Trent area will require additional school places in excess of those required 
for the basic need pressures. Projections show t hat by 2018/19 there will be 
insufficient secondary school places at existing schools to accommodate the 
children currently living in the area.  
 
3.83 The proposed residential developments will increase pupil numbers further and 
necessitate additional secondary school places. Additional places will be  
102 
 provided through expansion to existing schools and by safeguarding a site for a 
future new secondary school.  
 
3.84 The Borough Council have been working with Staffordshire County Council 
since 2011 and will continue to w ork in partnership to ensure education 
infrastructure is delivered over the plan period in line with need arising, either 
predicted or unpredicted. Evidence prepared shows that a secondary school will 
be required on the west of Burton upon Trent. The Borou gh Council will 
continue to work with Staffordshire County Council on ensuring education 
infrastructure is provided in sustainable locations accessible for the 
communities it is intended to serve.  
Further Education  
3.85 Further education plays an important rol e in equipping young and older people 
with the skills and qualifications to find employment. The Council will support 
proposals that seek to improve facilities and accommodate the increasing 
number of students wishing to enrol.  
 
3.86 Burton and South Derbyshir e College, located in the heart of Burton upon Trent 
and adjacent to the town centre, adds vitality to the southern part of the town. 
The Council is supportive of the role it plays within the town and would wish to 
see the College thrive. In particular the  area within which the college sits 
represents an area of the town in need of regeneration.    
STRATEGIC POLICY 10    
Education Infrastructure  
It is expected that new primary school provision will be located in the following 
strategic allocations:  
 Branston Locks, Burton upon Trent  
 Branston Depot, Burton upon Trent  
 Land at Beamhill/Upper Outwoods, Burton upon Trent  
 It is expected that new first school provision for Uttoxeter will be met through 
the expansion of existing schools and through the identification of a site within 
the SUE at West of Uttoxeter  
In addition, it is expected that new primary school provision will be provided by 
enlarging a local school or located within the following strategic allocation:  
 Land South of Branston, Burton upon Trent   
103 
 The Cou ncil will work in partnership with Staffordshire County Council and 
Academies to bring forward additional new schools and  extensions to existing 
schools.  
Proposals for additional schools will be required to demonstrate a need for the 
development and the p roposals role within a wider strategy for education provision. 
To determine if the location of an education proposal is suitable, applications will be 
required to demonstrate that the location is accessible for the need for which it is 
intended to meet. Po licy SP1 will provide the framework for assessing suitability and 
impacts.   
Further education  
Schemes for further education, particularly those which contribute to the viability and 
vitality  of centres  will generally be supported.    
 
REGENERATION and EM PLOYMENT POLICIES  
Bargates/Molson Coors Strategic Allocation  
3.87 The Bargates /Molson Coors area on the High Street in Burton upon Trent  are 
two  important site s close to the heart of the town centre, adjacent to a major 
and historic eastern gateway alongside the River Trent Washlands and the town 
centre Conservation Area.  
 
3.88 The Bargates/Molson Coors area is unique and special. The Bargates site is 
owned by the Borough Council following the demolition in 2012 of the 1960’s 
concrete edge of centre shopping preci nct and former bowling alley. The 
Molson Coors site is currently in active employment use, by Molson Coors, as 
their UK Head Office. The site is a mixture of new and period office buildings 
and associated car parking.  
 
3.89 Land in the ownership of Molson Coor s is extensive in Burton upon Trent and 
interlaced with the town centre in a number of locations. The company has 
indicated that they wish to continue to rationalise their landholdings to improve 
efficiency . The Council’s Employment Land Review and Office s Report indicate 
that there is no latent demand for this amount of offices in the town centre. It is 
suggested that some employment use should be retained at this site but that 
the period buildings whilst meeting the needs of the existing occupier, would 
have limited wider appeal.  
 
3.90 Molson Coors continues to consult with the Borough Council in order to 
understand the potential for the redevelopment of the High Street area.  
104 
 Redevelopment should include a mix of uses that restore activity along the High 
Street and create a new active frontage to the riverside for people to enjoy. The 
Council is currently marketing the Bargates site to bring in a development 
partner and a Supplementary Planning Document for the site was prepared in 
2010. The Borough Council ha s committed £680,000 funding as part of the 
Inner Burton Initiative 3 area to improve the existing properties on the southern 
side of the High Street to act as catalyst for inward investment.  
 
3.91 Strategic Policy 11 is a guide for developers to ensure that ap propriate 
development regenerates the area by delivering an attractive town centre 
development, providing a mix of uses that contributes towards sustainable 
communities, delivers high environmental standards and links to the 
surrounding washlands and town centre.  The availability of each site is 
dependent upon a number of factors, including market conditions, however It is 
likely that the two sites would be delivered separately. The Borough Council will 
work in Partnership on the production of a development  brief in order to ensure 
a framework setting out development principles for the area is in place to guide 
development of the allocations which will recognise the different ownerships, 
constraints, timing and delivery and character of the two individual pa rcels of 
land.   
STRATEGIC POLICY 11  
Bargates  and Molson Coors Strategic Area  
The Strategic Site Area comprises two separate site allocations. The principles are 
that development should:  
 Contribute positively to a phased approach for the whole area  
 Include uses appropriate for the area , particularly retail, office, residential and 
leisure  
 Include a layout that supports linkages to the  Washlands and the High Street  
 Provide good linkages to public transport  
 Demonstrate a mix of housing types and tenures  
 Be designed to open up to the Washlands and encourage public use  
 Provide sufficient parking spaces for existing and proposed uses  
 Is of high quality design, reflecting the character of the area, surrounding 
buildings, the riverside setting, conserv ation area  and listed buildings  
 Is supported by a Flood Risk Assessment  
 Include s opportunities for ecological improvements  
 
  
105 
 Derby Road, Burton upon Trent, Regeneration Corridor  
3.92 The regeneration corridor is located to the south and south -east of Derby Road. 
Derby Road is a strategically important gateway into Burton upon Trent.  The 
allocated site is mainly occupied by a number of businesses falling within use 
classes B1, B2 and B8, alongside some ancillary A1 uses. There is a high 
proportion of vacant land and buildings. The area  bordering the road itself , due 
to high volumes of traffic accessing the wider transport network , is designated 
as an Air Quality Management Area.  Redevelopment of the area is a project of 
strategic importance, significantly im proving the area and contributing to 
improving the prosperity of East Staffordshire.   
 
3.93 The Council has worked in partnership with the National Forest Company to 
improve the landscape of the corridor from its junction with the A38 through tree 
planting, im proved signage and access to local green spaces and parks. The 
allocated Pirelli site will also contribute towards improving the landscape of the 
corridor whilst providing homes, jobs and community facilities. The Council in 
2010 produced a Masterplan for the area which sets out a broad framework for 
the way in which the area could be developed. The Council’s Employment Land 
Review and Offices Report indicate that a number of parcels of land within the 
Derby Road Corridor need to be developed in a comprehen sive way for it to be 
usable.  
 
3.94 Through the environmental assessment of development proposals, the Council 
have also ensured that air quality is improved, with results for 2013 showing no 
exceedences of emissions along Derby Road for a fourth consecutive year.  
 
3.95 The policy acts as a guid e for developers, to ensure appropriate development 
regenerates the area by delivering an attractive route into the Town, creating a 
sense of place, providing a mix of uses that contributes towards sustainable 
communities, delivering high environmental sta ndards and provides 
transportation links and network improvements.  
STRATEGIC POLICY 12  
Derby Road, Burton upon Trent, Regeneration Corridor  
In order to ensure that the  Derby Road, Burton upon Trent site allocation is brought 
forward in a strategic and comprehensive manner, planning permission will only be 
granted for development which contributes towards the wider Derby Road 
regeneration corridor. The principles are that development should:  
 Provide approximately 25 0 homes, including a mix of types and tenures;   
106 
  Provide employment and loc al community  facilities where appropriate ; 
 Create a sustainable, safe and high quality urban development based on 
principles set out in the Masterplan;  
 Provide excellent pedestrian  routes around and to  the development , linking to 
bus stops  along Derby Roa d;  
 Create distinctive elevations that front onto  Derby Road , and ensuring  new 
buildings relate  to existing buildings near the proposed development in terms 
of their height, scale, for m and massing.  
 Ensure buildings are set back from the highway sufficiently to avoid occupiers 
experiencing unacceptable air quality standards;  
 Create distinctive features and local landmark buildings where appropriate to 
the design and layout;  
 Use materia ls that match the local context in terms of type of material, colour, 
texture and detail  with locally sourced traditional materials specifically 
encouraged ; 
 Create a q uality public realm, reflecting Burton upon Trent’s position as the 
capital of the Nation al Forest ; 
 Larger sites should incorporate tree planting and landscaping as required by 
Strategic Policy 26. This shall include improvements to the public realm and 
tree planting to the site's frontage reflecting the Derby Road's position as a  
gateway to T he National Forest;  
 Incorporate quality hard landscaping and highway surfaces and furnishings 
that are attractive and easy to maintain;  
 Incor porate  the most up to date design codes such as Code for Sustainable 
Homes and BREEAM ; 
 Demonstrate how all buildings have incorporated waste recycling facilities and 
where appropriate existing materials from buildings are recycled onsite.   
Identification and Delivery of Regeneration Investment : High Street 
and Derby Road, Burton upon Trent . 
3.96 To ensure that the Local Plan delivers the development and regeneration 
necessary to support the policy the Borough Council will:  
 
 Work proactively and in partnership with landowners and developers to 
bring investment forward;  
 Use Compulsory Purchase pow ers if necessary;  
 Review the Bargates SPD and Derby Road masterplan to ensure that 
they are up to date and relevant;  
 Use the Local Authority Monitoring Report to assess applications in the 
area   
 Continue to monitor and report on the Air Quality Managemen t Area   
107 
  Set up a regular survey of the area in terms of social, economic and 
environmental issues  
 Work with partners such as the National Forest Company and 
Staffordshire County Council to bring about landscape and transport 
improvements  
 Consider reviewing  the local priorities for the spending of Community 
Infrastructure Levy, once a Charging Schedule has been adopted, in 
order to enable critical infrastructure and improvements to be brought 
forward.  
Burton and Uttoxeter Existing Employment Land Policy  
3.97  East Staffordshire has seen a period of continued employment change and 
growth over the last 15 years moving away from the traditional manufacturing 
and agricultural base with growth in logistics, professional , technical , mining 
quarrying and utilities sectors. East Staffordshire has weathered the downturn in 
the economy in part due to the success of the small business start ups in the 
Borough.  
 
3.98 Employment is concentrated around Burton upon Trent and the A38 corridor, 
Uttoxeter and the A50 corridor and in the rural area on industrial estates. It is 
considered that these main areas offer the most potential in terms of 
accommodating important high profile investors and being able to cater for a 
more diversified employment pro file in the future. There is a large mix of uses 
on existing employment sites which will be supported where they continue to be 
an employment generator.  
 
3.99 This policy aims to support the needs of current employers whilst encouraging 
new employment uses at existing employment areas which will achieve the 
objective of diversifying the employment base of Burton upon Trent, particularly 
for higher quality jobs, and the employment base of Uttoxeter to reduce the 
reliance on a limited number of employers.  
 
3.100  The E mployment Land Review 2013 assessed employment sites and land 
concluding that a number of the existing sites identified to be of ‘good’ quality 
with market demand. There is a need to consider both the protection of viable 
existing employment areas as far a s practicable whilst having regard to the 
potential future changing nature of employment land requirements, so as to 
ensure a buoyant and diversified local economy.   
 
3.101  Not all existing employment land will be needed in the future. The Review sets 
out a lis t of ‘legacy’ sites that should not be protected for long term employment 
use. These sites have not been included as part of the ongoing employment  
108 
 land supply.  However, it is important to protect the best sites should they 
become vacant or underused. Bro wnfield sites, once lost to another use, are 
unlikely to ever again become available for employment use. The Council must 
ensure that a choice of sites of different sizes and characteristics is available to 
meet the current and future needs of all types of  business.  
 
3.102  The Council defines existing employment areas as established business 
parks and existing employment land identified as ‘good’ quality in the ELR and 
currently or previously in B class use and capable of being re -used for 
employment purposes. T hese sites should be protected and retained as part of 
the diverse portfolio of sites.  These existing employment areas in Burton and 
Uttoxeter are set out in the ELR and are of varying size ranging from small -
scale individual units in good locations to la rge scale business parks. Smaller 
individual units offer an opportunity for cheap accommodation to start -up 
companies which are an important part of the overall economy. Burton has 
more successful start -ups than any other district within Staffordshire. Lar ger 
sites are likely to be home to a variety of businesses and should be retained for 
employment use either for expansion of existing or location of new business.  
 
3.103  Strategic Policy 13 sets out the criteria for new employment development on 
existing employ ment sites indicating the type of uses that may be appropriate.  
STRATEGIC POLICY 13  
Burton and Uttoxeter Existing Employment Land Policy  
To ensure the provision of a mix of employment types on existing sites, the Council 
will require a mix of B1, B2 and B8 uses to be provided. Exceptions may be made 
where:  
(i) a site is to be entirely or almost entirely developed for the specific 
requirements of a single user generating a significant number of jobs; or  
(ii) Where the site size, or general location, limits the suitability of the site to 
accommodate certain uses, or the ability  to accommodate a range of uses . 
Non B class uses will only be permitted if: 
(i) The land is no longer required to meet economic development needs; or  
(ii) The current activity is causing, or could cause, significant harm to the 
character of the area or the amenities of residents;  
(iii) The new use is an employment generator which could make a positive 
contribution to the local economy; and   
109 
 (iv) it would not prevent, or have a significantly detrimental impact u pon, the 
continued primary use of the employment site as a whole for employment 
use.  
(v) They are appropriate, compatible waste management uses  
For employment proposals on sites within the urban area adjacent to non -
employment uses, the Council will normally  grant permission following the 
demonstration of environmental sensitivities including traffic and highway impacts on 
the surrounding areas.   
Suitable sites for exceptional major job creating investment proposals will be 
investigated in partnership with th e LEP taking into account whether they can be 
accommodated  on existing or proposed sites.   
 
Rural Economy  
3.104  The vision sets out that 
East Staffordshire will 
have viable, attractive 
villages which will 
continue to foster 
appropriate, sensitive 
growth and vitality to 
support rural living and 
work ing. The character 
and appearance of rural 
areas will be protected 
whilst maintaining and enhancing their vitality and viability through limited small -
scale development, the provisi on of local services and facilities and promoting 
improved employment opportunity. Strategic and Local Service villages in the 
Borough, as identified in Strategic Policy 2, will be the rural centres for services, 
facilities and jobs acting to sustain the r ural areas; they provide the most 
accessible locations from which to travel.  Small -scale rural diversification 
projects, largely re -using existing buildings, will be generally suitable for smaller 
settlements and farm buildings.  
 
3.105  There are three rural Industrial Estates at  former military camps at Bramshall, 
Fauld and Marchington. These contribute towards the rural economy and have 
been developed for employment uses over the years alongside other uses. In 
addition there are other employment sites in the rur al are such as Lancaster 
Gate that whilst are not identified on the policies map, do provide an important 
Denstone Farm Shop,  
 Denstone   
110 
 source of employment in the rural area  and where development will be 
supported in accordance with policy SP8 . Development in the rural area  will be 
determined in light of this policy and policy SP8 and the Council will, if 
necessary, identify and /or redefine rural industrial estate boundaries in a future 
Sites and Allocations DPD.   
STRATEGIC POLICY 14  
Rural Economy  
New provision  
Within the Tier 1 and 2  settlement boundaries and rural industrial estate boundaries, 
employment development, including extensions to existing premises, mixed use 
development which would allow for an element of home working and change of use 
to employment development will be app roved if the development:  
(i) does not unduly affect the character of the settlement, amenity of 
neighbouring properties and will not detract from the environment; and  
(ii) is in accordance with other Development Plan policies.  
Permission will be given for new empl oyment development outside strategic or local 
service villages and rural industrial estates if it meets the criteria of Strategic Policy 
8, or there are exceptional reasons why it cannot be located in these villages or in 
established urban employment locat ions.    
Before new buildings are proposed, applicants should investigate the viability and 
suitability of re -using redundant buildings on-site (see ‘Re -use of Redundant Rural 
Buildings SPD) and demonstrate to the Council that none were viable or suitable.  
Farm diversification proposals will be supported where  they can make a long -term 
contribution to sustaining the agricultural enterprise as a whole and where the 
proposal is consistent with its rural location in terms of use, setting and scale . 
Within the National Forest as shown on the Policies Map, development directly 
related to the woodland economy will be considered favourably where it is o f a scale 
and environmental impact that is compatible with the character of its rural location.  
Loss of employment  
The Council will resist proposals which would lead to the loss of sites used for 
industrial/commercial use or other employment generating us es in the countryside or 
rural settlements unless there are overriding environmental considerations or 
another source of employment is being created nearby.  
Where a new rural business enterprise, or expansion of an existing one, requires on - 
111 
 site residential accommodation the Council may grant permission for temporary 
residential accommodation only (e.g. a mobile home or caravan) or grant permission 
for premises to be used for residential purposes for a temporary period only in order 
to allow time to assess the viability of the business. When this has been 
demonstrated, permission will be considered for more permanent residential 
accommodation.  
 
Tourism, culture and leisure development  
3.106   The Borough Council supports the development of tourism as an  important 
and growing industry in suitable locations. Although East Staffordshire is not a 
major visitor destination, the tourism industry is a significant employer in the 
area, employing over 4,000 people in a range of businesses. It has the potential 
to grow in specific forms of tourism. It is home to a number of established 
attractions such as, Uttoxeter Racecourse, Tutbury Castle, the National 
Brewery Centre, the Brewhouse Arts Centre , Barton Marina and Burton Regatta 
and is in close proximity to Alton  Towers, the National Memorial Arboretum, and 
Sudbury Hall. The National Forest is also a growing tourism destination – with 
the National Forest Adventure Farm located in the Borough at Tatenhill. With 
the recent emergence of canals as a vehicle for leisur e tourism, there is an 
opportunity for East Staffordshire to make more use of the Trent and Mersey 
Canal, together with other water -based initiatives on the Trent Washlands, 
(such as the Central Rivers Initiative), Leasowes Farm and Blithfield Reservoir.  
 
3.107  The Council recognises the excellent accessibility of the Borough to other 
parts of the Country and the high quality of the environment. East Staffordshire 
is proud to host St Georges Park on the doorstep of Burton upon Trent and is 
willing to consider ot her equally prestigious and important developments within 
the Borough providing proposals can demonstrate that there is a need which 
cannot be satisfied elsewhere.  The Borough Council supports tourism growth 
and it wishes to promote and enhance its enviro nmental, historic and natural 
assets which contribute to the Borough’s attractiveness.  
STRATEGIC POLICY 15  
Tourism, culture and leisure development  
New tourism and cultural developments , including the improvement of existing and 
development of facilities, will be assessed according to the extent to which they 
support the local economy and promote the distinctive character and quality of the 
Borough. The Borough Council will maximise oppo rtunities to develop and promote 
tourism by approving in principle proposals which:   
112 
  respect the character and quality of the landscape and built form of the 
Borough’s towns and villages , including heritage assets ; 
 champion exemplar design, environmental credentials and sustainable 
construction appropriate to their context;  
 make positive use of the natural assets of the Borough such as The National 
Forest , without harming their intrinsic qualities or adversely affec ting the 
natural environment and designat ed features of the built environment, 
including their settings, biodiversity, geodiversity or visual amenity ; and  
 do not adversely affect the local transport infrastructure or residential amenity, 
or mitigate such effects where they are likely to arise.   
Those activities attracting large numbers of people should be directed towards the 
accessible locations of the  Borough’s towns , unless the tourism initiative requires a 
countryside location or setting  or is directly related to a specific tourist destinatio n. 
Development of tourist facilities in the countryside will be limited to those that make 
use of the natural environment in a sustainable manner.  
Tourist accommodation should be provided within existing settlements where it can 
make use of existing infra structure and facilities. New tourist accommodation outside 
settlements will only be acceptable where it will have good accessibility to existing 
infrastructure , and will not have an adverse impact on the character and appearance 
of the countryside, featur es of historic or landscape value, biodiversity, or the 
amenities of nearby residents.  
Leisure, cultural and tourism development which supports the existing rail and canal 
network will also be encouraged.  
 
   
113 
 HOUSING POLICIES  
Meeting Housing Needs  
3.108  New housing developments need to help create or maintain sustainable and 
inclusive mixed communities. They will need to extend the choice of homes 
available in the area to better meet the needs of all types of household, for 
existing residents including ol der people, and also to attract new businesses by 
enabling employees and employers alike to live sustainably close to their 
workplaces.  
 
3.109  The Borough Council’s Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA), 
prepared in accordance with the NPPF  has assessed wh at mix of new housing 
is needed in the Borough over the plan period.  
 
3.110  New housing will be needed for older people, including specialised 
accommodation and mainstream market housing. Over the plan period the 
following specialised accommodation is needed:  
 
 965 new Extra -care Housing dwellings  
 558 new Retirement Housing dwellings  
 548 new places in Care and Nursing Homes  
 
3.111  In addition, 1,213 new units of Housing for Older People will be needed -
mainstream properties designed to be especially suitable for older people, 
around 14% of all housing approvals.   
 
3.112  Sustainable Urban Extensions will provide a suitable location for extra -care 
housing and will have the capacity to accommodate schemes of sufficient size 
to be sustainable. Strategic Policy 7 requires that the y make provision for an 
appropriate amount of extra -care housing . However most older people are 
expected to remain living in their current housing, which means that new 
housing will be needed for other households.  
 
3.113  The existing stock of housing in Burton provides substantial opportunities for 
single person and couple households. In particular, the Council’s vision is that 
Inner Burton terraced housing will be increasingly occupied by single people 
and couples who will enjoy living in modernised character h ousing in a vibrant, 
prosperous and sustainable community, bringing regeneration and stability to 
these areas, whilst families will increasingly live in housing which is more 
suitable for children. This means that only a limited amount of new housing for 
single people and couples is needed in Burton, particularly to meet demand for 
market rented housing. The mix of new housing in Burton will balance the 
existing supply and be consistent with the Council’s objective to provide housing  
114 
 in Burton to meet the n eeds of higher earning households, particularly those 
working in the town in order to reduce commuting. However there are not the 
same opportunities in other parts of the Borough and hence a need for 
significant amounts of housing for single people and cou ples outside Burton.  
 
3.114  The mix of mainstream market housing required  in different parts of the 
Borough is identified in the Housing Choice SPD and new housing development 
will need to provide this mix of types and sizes in order to meet the needs of the 
Borough’s changing population.  
 
3.115  The Council encourages the provision of market housing flats in Burton 
through the conversion of existing buildings and on town sites. The Council 
welcomes institutional investment in this type of development to create Market  
Housing for Rent (also see Affordable Housing below).  
 
3.116  The preferred type of flatted development elsewhere, apart from flats for older 
people, is the Duplex/Tyneside Flat so that flats externally resemble houses.  
 
3.117   Ensuring that different sizes and tenures of housing are fully integrated will 
ensure that new developments contribute to sustainable mixed communities.  
 
3.118  Building new homes to optional Building Regulations Requiremen t M4(2) 
where applicable will ensure th at new housing is accessible and adaptable to 
meet people’s needs as they change over time.   
 
3.119  The Council is keen to encourage the inclusion of a suitable number of Self -
build Plots within housing developments to provide an opportunity for residents 
to ch oose their own design of home and to foster innovation and diversity in 
housing design (also see Affordable Housing below).  
STRATEGIC POLICY 16  
Meeting Housing Needs  
Residential development in the main towns and Strategic Villages shall provide an 
appropriate dwelling or mix of dwellings given the mix required in that part of the 
Borough  according to the Councils evidence base or other evidence , including 
Housing for Older People.    
Residential development elsewhere shall provide a dwelling or a mix of dwellings to 
best meet local need according to a local housing needs survey or where applicable 
the Councils evidence base .  
Developments will also provide Affordable Housing in accordance with Strategic  
115 
 Policy 17  
Developments shall be permitted on Exception Sites in accordance with Strategic 
Policy 18.  
Different sizes and tenures of housing shall be fully integrated by means of dispersal 
around the site.  
All newly erected housing providing ground floor living accommodation shall me et 
requirement M4(2) of the Building Regulations (accessible and adaptable dwellings).  
Proposals to develop Extra -care Housing and Retirement Housing on suitable sites 
will be welcomed.  
Inclusion of an appropriate number of Self -build Plots within develo pments will be 
welcomed.  
Affordable Housing  
3.120  The Strategic Housing Market Assessment 2013 (SHMA) has identified that 
there is a need for new affordable housing to meet the needs of residents 
whose needs are not met by the market. The annual requirement for new 
affordable housing is 112 units.  This represents  around 18%  of the total annual  
housing requirement for the Borough. This is not expected to be  unachievable 
and hence does not require an increase in the total housing target.  
 
3.121  The Council  has decided  that development of 4 dwellings or more sho uld 
make provision for affordable housing, so that new affordable housing is shared 
around as many sites as possible.  However local policy has to comply with 
national policy.  
 
3.122   Taking account of extant permissions granted prior to the plan period means 
that market housing led development approved during the plan period on sites 
above this threshold needs to provide an average of 25% affordable housing.    
 
3.123  The amount of affordable housing to be provided by an individual market 
housing led site above the thr eshold will be  governed by viability and the 
availability of subsidy.  
 
3.124  Taking account of agreements already reached before adoption of the Local 
Plan, the affordable housing still needed equates to over 40% of the housing 
from which the affordable housing contribution has not yet been agreed. The 
Councils Plan  Viability Study assesses that some sites should be able  to  
deliver  40%  affordable  housing . 40%  is  the refore the affordable housing 
target and the   maximum  amount  of affordable  housing  which   will  be   
116 
 required  from  any  market  housing  led scheme, including both on site and off 
site provision (see below).  
 
3.125  The SHMA considers the Plan Viability Study alongside other evidence to 
establish what percentages of affordable housing are likely to  be viable  from 
different types of site, and these are indicated in the policy.  
 
3.126  The Housing Choice SPD sets out the percentage of affordable housing 
currently expected from sites based on that evidence  
 
3.127  Emerging national policy guidance requires a mechani sm to allow an 
applicant to demonstrate that planning obligations would make a development 
unviable and for obligations to be adjusted accordingly.  
 
3.128  The amount of affordable housing which will in practice be secured under the 
Local Plan without grant is th erefore uncertain. Whilst the availability of 
Government grant funding over the plan period cannot be anticipated, it is to be 
hoped that grant funded provision will make up any shortfall.  
 
3.129  However the Council wants to encourage the following types of development 
and will therefore not require affordable housing from them:  
 
 Self-build Plots of up to 250 square metres because these will be more 
affordable than larger plots and hence accessible by a wider range of 
households;  
 Market Housing for Rent, to e ncourage institutional investment in the 
development of such housing and in recognition of its lower value.  
 Retirement housing, to encourage investment and in recognition of its 
higher costs.  
 
3.130  The SHMA has assessed that it is necessary to meet some of the need for 
new affordable housing on site but that some of the need can be met off site by 
spending commuted sums. The assessed need for on -site affordable housing 
amounts to 13% of new permissions. Commuted sums will be spent on 
addressing housing need for example on funding extra -care affordable housing, 
assisting households to buy market housing, resolving overcrowding, or buying 
existing homes for affordable housing . 
 
3.131  New development should avoid an over -concentration of rented affordable 
housing for gene ral needs on any given site which would endanger the site’s 
integration into the wider community or forego the opportunity to increase the 
inclusivity and sustainability of the community.  
  
117 
 3.132  Further details about how the following policy will be applied and  the mix of 
affordable housing required on site are set out in the Housing Choice SPD.   
STRATEGIC POLICY 17  
Affordable Housing  
Market housing led residential development that will provide 4 or more  dwellings or 
on a site of 0.14 hectares or more  shall pro vide up to 40% of the dwellings as 
affordable housing. This threshold may be revised during the lifetime of the plan if 
national policy changes.  
 
 The affordable housing required from a particular scheme is the following 
percentage or the amount which is evidenced by an applicant to be viable. 
The percentages shown may be revised during the lifetime of the plan in the 
light of updated viability evidence.  
 
o On previously developed land within the built up areas of Burton and 
Uttoxeter: 25%;  
o On Greenfield sit es within and on the edge of Burton and Uttoxeter: 
33%;  
o On other land; 40%.  
 
 To evidence what other amount of affordable housing is viable an applicant 
will need to submit their development appraisal and supporting evidence to 
the Council on an open book basis and to fund the Council’s costs of 
assessing this.  
 An application for development which extends an earlier permission will be 
treated together with that permission as one scheme.  
 Planning permission will be subject to agreement to provide the require d 
amount of affordable housing, and on schemes providing less than 40% and 
likely to be developed in phases over the longer term to agreement of a 
suitable mechanism to increase the amount of affordable housing provided 
over time if viability improves.  
 Affordable housing is not required from Self -build Plots of up to 250 square 
metres in size, from Retirement Housing, or from Market Housing for Rent 
(definitions in the Glossary).   
 The amount of affordable housing which must be provided on site  will be as 
follows, with the balance commuted off site in accordance with the Housing 
Choice SPD:  
o On Burton and Uttoxeter - 13% of dwellings;  
o On Strategic Village sites, an amount consistent with local need;   
118 
 o On other sites , an amount determined by the housing needs  survey.  
Residential development permitted in accordance with a Made Neighbourhood Plan 
on a site which is outside a settlement boundary and not a rural exception site  shall 
provide an amount of affordable housing determined as above, or the amount 
require d by the neighbourhood plan if greater.   
Well-planned affordable housing led residential development providing an 
appropriate mix of housing will be welcomed.  
Extra -care developments are expected to include affordable housing alongside 
market housing in accordance with identified need, subject to the availability of 
funding including via the Council from commuted sums.  
On site affordable housing shall be provided as follows:  
 Affordable housing will normally be provided on each phase of a development.  
 The mix on Burton and , Uttoxeter developments shall be agreed with the 
Council based on the need identified in the Housing Choice SPD.  
 The mix on Strategic Village developments shall be agreed with the Council 
based on local need  
 The mix on other developments shall be agreed with the Council based on the 
housing needs survey carried out in accordance with Housing Choice SPD.  
 In accordance with the definitions in the Housing Choice SPD  
 Affordable housing shall be fully integrated by means of disper sal around the 
site in clusters of no more than eight dwellings  so that no street or part of the 
street is dominated by affordable housing.  
 Affordable housing shall be externally indistinguishable from market housing 
on the same site.   
 
Residential Development on Exceptions Sites  
3.133  A rural exception sites policy enables the development of affordable housing 
and Traveller sites to meet local need in settlements where this cannot be 
achieved within settlement boundaries or no such boundary exists. Such 
development is an exception to th e policy that most development will take place 
within settlement boundaries, and sites on which such development is permitted 
are therefore called rural exception sites.  
 
3.134  A rural exception sites policy is only justifiable to provide affordable housing 
and Traveller sites because they are types of development which cannot  
119 
 compete for available land and which are therefore unlikely to be otherwise 
deliverable. Such a policy can be effective because landowners will sell their 
land at less than its value for m arket housing knowing that market housing is 
not an option .  
 
3.135  However there has been a lack of rural exception site development in the 
Borough. The NPPF  states that local planning authorities should consider 
whether allowing some market housing would facil itate the provision of 
additional affordable housing to meet needs. The new policy therefore allows 
the inclusion of a minority amount of market housing to secure sites and 
subsidise the affordable housing or Traveller pitches.  
 
3.136  Where there is a local nee d for more new market housing than affordable 
housing in a village which does not have a settlement boundary or which cannot 
accommodate the housing within the settlement boundary, the route to meeting 
that need is neighbourhood planning. However the ident ification in a 
Neighbourhood Plan of a site outside a settlement boundary does not preclude 
it from bein g a Rural Exception Site.   
 
3.137  Whilst rural exception sites are an exception to policy in relation to housing 
development in the countryside, they are requ ired to conform to existing 
planning policy in other respects such as design and their impact on 
environmental designations, landscape and character setting, highway safety 
and flood risk.  
STRATEGIC POLICY 18  
Residential Development on Exception Sites  
Where the Council is satisfied in the light of evidence that there is a need for new 
affordable housing or Traveller pitches which will not otherwise be met ,  permission 
may be granted for a small development to specifically meet that need on a suitable 
site outside a settlement boundary provided that:  
 Evidence of need is provided in accordance with the Housing Choice SPD;  
 The development will specifically meet the assessed need;  
 The site is within or on the edge of a settlement;  
 The site is within easy rea ch of local services  and facilities;  
 The scale of development is appropriate given the size of the existing  
settlement;  
 The majority of units (dwellings and pitches) provided on the site will be  
120 
 affordable housing or Traveller pitches to meet the need. A minority of the 
units provided may deliver a mix of market housing that is appropriate to meet 
local need based firstly o n a housing needs survey and secondly on other 
evidence of need in that part of the Borough ;    
 Permission will be subject to agreement of cascade arrangements to provide 
priority  in perpetuity for local people;  
 Occupation of Traveller pitches will be restricted to Gypsies, Travellers and 
Travelling Showpeople;   
 Affordable housing will remain affordable in perpetuity . 
 The development complies with other relevant policies in this Plan.  
 
Gypsy, Travellers and Trav elling Showpeople  
3.138  The amount of accommodation needed for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople is small in comparison to wider housing needs, but the Council has 
a responsibility to address the need. Permitting new pitches to meet need will 
help av oid unauthorised encampments and developments.  
 
3.139  At the time of writing the Council’s Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation 
Needs Assessment updated in 
2013 has not identified any need 
for new pitches within the 
Borough. This assessment utilised 
all the available evidence, but 
there are two possible sources of 
potentially unidentified need; need 
from households living in ‘bricks & 
mortar housing’ and need from 
households living outside the 
Borough of East Staffordshire.  
 
3.140  Further work has been commissioned in partnership with Derbyshire County 
Council to upda te and extend the evidence base. It is expected that this will be 
completed in 2014. The Council will keep under review the outcome of the 
updated evidence base and monitor pitch provision within its Monitoring Report.  
 
3.141  Sites need to provide a safe enviro nment for residents and to enable their 
integration into the wider community. The following policy will be used t o assess 
applications for sites  
Travellers Site, East Staffordshire Borough   
121 
 STRATEGIC POLICY 19  
Sites for Gyps ies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople   
In assessing the suitability of sites for residential and mixed use occupation by 
Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople, and for the purposes of considering 
planning applications for such sites, proposals will be supported where the following 
criteria are met:  
 The site affords good access to local services including schools;  
 The site is not at risk of flooding or adjacent to uses likely to endanger the 
health of occupants such as a refuse tip, sewage treatment works or 
contaminated land;  
 The develop ment is appropriate in scale compared to the size of the existing 
settlement;  
 The development will be able to achieve a reasonable level of visual and 
acoustic privacy both for people living on the site and for those living nearby;  
 The development will pr ovide a high quality frontage onto the street which 
maintains or enhances the street scene and which integrates the site into the 
community;  
 The development will be well -laid out to provide adequate space and privacy 
for residents;  
 The development complies  with relevant national planning policies;  
 The development complies with the other relevant policies in this Plan.  
If and when a need is identified, the Council will set pitch targets and/or plot targets 
accordingly and will identify a site or sites to meet the need  through a Development 
Plan Document as necessary . 
   
122 
 RETAIL AND COMMUNITY FACILITIES POLICIES  
Town and Rural Centres  
3.142  The retail hierarchy is consistent with 
national guidance in the framework that town 
centre and retail development should be 
directed to existing town centres 
complemented by the need to provide for our 
rural area with its distinctive network of rural 
centres.   
 
3.143  A key element of the vision and supporting 
objectives is to maintain and enhance Burton 
upon Trent and Uttoxeter town centres and 
other local centres as thriving, attractive and 
accessible places to be for residents by 
ensu ring that our centres are vibrant places 
with a range of retail, culture and leisure 
options to meet local needs.  
 
3.144  The Council has previously worked hard to improve the environment within 
the two town centres adopting plans for both Uttoxeter (Uttoxeter Ma sterplan 
2003) and Burton (Masterplan Part 1 in 2010 and Burton Town Centre Strategic 
Framework 2012) which set out a range of schemes for different parts of the 
town centres, many of which have been implemented . In both instances the 
Council has sought to  deliver environmental and public realm improvements 
whilst also promoting the two towns for inward investment and regeneration 
opportunities. This has resulted in the redevelopment of the Cattlemarket in 
Uttoxeter for mixed use development, coming forward  for housing and retail 
use, currently under construction, being anchored by Asda. This will greatly 
improve the shopping ‘offer’ in the town centre which was commented as weak 
in the recent town centre health check. In addition, the former JCB Heavy 
Produ cts site has permission for a mixed use development including 4,180 sq m 
of convenience floorspace.  
 
3.145  In Burton, Tesco have permission for a new store on Hawkins Lane outside 
the town centre. This permission is for approximately 10,000 sq m and will 
provid e an equal proportion of comparison and convenience floorspace18. 
Following the approval of this application the Council bought the Bargates site 
                                                           
18 An application for a revised scheme was submitted in 2014 and as at June 2014 the site is currently being 
marketed for re -sale  
Uttoxeter Town Centre   
123 
 on High Street from Tesco and a development brief prepared promotes the site 
for a mix of town centre uses. Mor e recently the adjacent Coors Offices site on 
High Street has come forward and offers the opportunity for the whole of the 
High Street area around the Meadowside Centre to come forward together for 
mixed use development and offering additional opportunitie s to link the town 
with the Washlands.  
 
3.146  Other retail schemes in Burton include the approved extension to the Octagon 
centre and Burton Rugby club. In addition to this, there has also been interest in 
extending the Coopers Sq retail area to include a department store. These 
schemes would add both in quantitative floorspace terms but also qualitatively, 
adding a new dimension to Burton’s retail offer.  Upper storeys above shops 
also have potential capacity for retail space as well providing more efficie nt use 
of buildings and their maintenance, especially for older, traditional buildings.  
 
3.147  The rural centres, whilst they vary in size and variety of facilities, offer an 
essential service to the community. Whilst the Council does not consider these 
location s to have the physical capacity or wider catchment to provide significant 
retail development, it considers that there is potential over the plan period for 
modest growth.  
 
3.148  The retail hierarchy is informed by an assessment of the retail and leisure 
needs of our town centres and larger villages. The hierarchy of town centres 
aims to support facilities which keep communities strong with available day -to-
day services and also aims to maintain the general balance between market 
towns and villages.  
 
3.149  The Retail and Leisure Needs Assessment 2013 provides a robust evidence 
base on the capacity for additional retail and commercial leisure development in 
East Staffordshire throughout the plan period. It is supported by a household 
survey of shopping patterns and accu rately reflects current circumstances in 
terms of available data/assumptions and changes in national planning policy. 
The study identifies the retail hierarchy, current performance of Burton and 
Uttoxeter town centres and establishes the need for additiona l retail and leisure 
floorspace. A ‘health check’ concluded that although Burton, a sub -regional 
centre, was essentially a healthy town, boasting a good range of convenience 
and comparison retail and service facilities, it has slipped down the retail 
ranki ngs since the last retail study in 2007. Uttoxeter is an attractive market 
town but appears to be in decline as it has slipped down the rankings 
significantly since the last study and there is a disappointing level of published 
retailer requirements, low f ootfall and an increase in unit vacancy. However to 
address these concerns in both Burton and Uttoxeter, the Council, has already  
124 
 approved schemes for additional retail provision and, with particular reference 
to Uttoxeter, the redevelopment of the former cattle market is now underway.  
 
3.150  The Study identified no additional comparison goods requirement between 
2013 and 2016. However a requirement across the Overall Catchment Area 
(OCA) of 7,200 sq m of comparison goods sales area in the 2016 -2021 period 
rising to 21,100 sq m in total up to 2031. To assist in the strengthening of the 
town centres 70% of the growth should be directed to Burton and 20% to 
Uttoxeter with 10% dispersed across other locations within East Staffordshire to 
meet local needs, particular ly in the strategic villages. The Assessment also 
states that new commercial leisure provision should also broadly follow this 
pattern.  
 
3.151  As regards convenience goods, the Assessment considers that there is scope 
to improve the current retention rate across  the OCA.  Under this scenario there 
is no requirement for additional convenience goods floorspace between 2013 
and 2016.   However, there is scope for an additional 2,700 sq m sales area up 
to 2021, rising to approximately 5,750 sq m across the OCA up to 2031.  The 
scope for additional convenience retail floorspace is very limited, and so it is not 
considered appropriate to b reak this up and apportion across the Borough.  
 
3.152  Different centres perform different functions in meeting the needs of the 
Borough as  a whole and their immediate surroundings. To regulate the amount 
and manage the location of development and reflect the wider functions of 
centres in the Borough, a retail hierarchy has been set out in the Retail and 
Leisure Study identifying the hierarch y of centres. Further evidence base work 
in the form of Local Retail Designations assessment identified specific local 
centres throughout Burton. These Local Centres have been identified because 
they are a focus for their residential area and offer a range  of local services. 
The strategic villages are considered to act as local centres for the rural areas.  
 
 
 
  
125 
 STRATEGIC POLICY 20  
Town and Local Centres  Hierarchy  
Across the Overall Catchment Area (OCA) there is a requirement for 21,100 sq m of 
comparison g oods floorspace and 5,750 sq m of convenience goods floorspace  
The Borough’s town, local and rural centres will be supported and strengthened to 
ensure that they continue to be the focus of communities. Additional minimum  
floorspace requirements are set out for the c entres of Burton and Uttoxeter  and as a 
whole for the rest of the local and rural centres across East Staffordshire.  
Town Centres  
 
Burton  
 Additional comparison goods floorspace of approximately 14,800 
sq m across the plan period and a share of the additional 
convenience floorspace of 4,025 sq m identified across the 
Overall Catchment Area (OCA).  
Uttoxeter  Additional comparison goods floors pace of approximately 4,200 
sq m across the whole plan period and a share of t he 4,0 25 sq m 
of convenience floorspace across the O verall Catchment Area 
(OCA).  
Local Centres  
These centres are of varying size offering a basic level of convenience shopping and 
service function for the immediate residential areas. No specific additional retail 
floorspace requirements are identified in these centres.  
 
 Bearwood Hill Road, Winshill  
 Best Avenue, Brizlincote  
 Branston Road, Anglesey  
 Branston Village, Branston  
 Burton Road, Anglesey  
 Calais Road, Horninglow  
 Derby Road Loop, Shobnall  
 Derby Turn, Eton Park  
 Hawfield Lane, Winshill  
 Horninglow Road Centre, 
Horninglow  
 Horninglow Road North, 
Horninglow   
 Horninglow Road South, Eton Park  
 Main Street, Stapenhill  
 Main Street, Stretton  
 Rosliston Road, Stapenhill  
 Short Street, Stapenhill  
 St Peters Street, Stapenhill  
 Uxbridge Street Centre, Anglesey  
 Uxbridge Street north, Burton  
 Uxbridge Street south,  Anglesey  
 Waterloo Street, centre, Shobnall  
 Waterloo Street, north, Shobnall  
 Waterloo Street, south, Shobnall  
 Wellington Street, Shobnall   
126 
 Rural Centres  (Tier 1 Strategic Villages)  
Centres of varying size  offering a basic level of shopping  and service function for the 
village and immediate rural hinterland. These facilities will be protected and will 
share a proportion of the 1,050  sq m of comparison goods identified for ‘other 
locations across the OCA’.   
 Tutbury  
 Barton Under Needwood  
 Rocester  
 Rolleston on Dove  
 
 
Town Centre Boundaries  
3.153  Town Centre Boundaries define the area within a town where retail 
development and leisure uses are concentrated. New development for these 
purposes will generally be focused within the town centre bound aries.  
 
3.154  The Retail and Leisure Needs Assessment (2013) indicates the extent of the 
town centre boundaries capable of accommodating the retail needs identified in 
the plan period.  
 
3.155  The Council has also identified local centres that provide an opportunity for 
local needs shopping. These have not been given set boundaries but have 
been identified on the proposals map with ‘stars’ to identify their general 
location.  
Primary and Seconda ry frontages  
3.156  Primary frontages define the main retail area within the town centre boundary. 
Secondary frontages are those areas that are a mix of retail and service 
facilities.  The purpose of identifying these areas is to ensure the protection of 
the main  retail centre and to identify what uses will be acceptable in each part of 
the town centres.  
 
3.157  The above policy sets out the hierarchy of centres and Burton, as the main 
centre, should take the most additional development. Uttoxeter will also need to 
acco mmodate additional town centre development to support the level of growth 
within the town and arrest the decline noted in the Assessment. The following 
policy sets out how development will be managed to ensure the most 
appropriate development occurs in the  right place.   
127 
 STRATEGIC POLICY 21   
Managing Town and Local Centres  
Town Centres  
As well as new retail floorspace, suitable uses that support and promote both day 
time and night time economies include: offices; residential; cultural; leisure; and 
educatio nal uses. Other uses may also be appropriate if they contribute to the overall 
attractiveness and vitality of the town centre s. New development should:  
 Safeguard the retail character and function of the town centre and not 
detract from its vitality and viability;  
 Where appropriate contribute towards delivering improved pedestrian and 
cycling links to the Washlands  
 Be designed to meet a very high standard of quality, respecting and 
reflecting the town centre’s historic environment  and helping to improve the 
sense of place and legibility to the Town Centre experience  
 Meet the principles set out in the Council’s Public Realm Implementation 
Plan including opportunities to incorporate green infrastructure in designing 
the public realm within and around the development  
 Develop leisure, community and cultural activities and the evening 
economy,  
 Respect and enhanc e the historic fabric , encouraging housing 
opportunities,  
 Encourag e a mix of uses   
Sequentially the Council will expect proposals for town centre uses to be sited within 
defined town centres. Applications for such uses on sites outside town centres will be 
subject to the sequential test.   
An impact assessment will be required for planning applications for town centre uses 
outside the defined  town centre boundary when the floorspace proposed  meets  the 
following local floorspace thresholds:  
 Burton – 1,500 sq.m gross or more of convenience retail floorspace, or 750 
sq.m gross or more of comparison retail floorspace.  
 
 Uttoxeter – 750 sq.m gross o r more of convenience retail floorspace,  or 500 
sq.m gross or more of comparison retail floorspace.  
Retail Frontages  
Within the primary retail frontages of Burton upon Trent and Uttoxeter the Council will 
only permit Class A1 (retail) use at ground floor l evel unless it can be demonstrated 
that the proposed use will enhance the vitality of the primary retail area with a use  
128 
 that complements the main function of shopping and does not lead to the 
overconcentration of non A1 uses. In secondary frontages, the C ouncil will accept a 
wider range of changes at ground floor level to a uses that complements the function 
of the town centre as a whole.  
Local Centres  
Planning permission for the provision or extension of local  shopping facilities in 
existing local centres will normally be granted provided:  
 the scale of provision is to meet local needs only,  
 the site is readily accessible on foot or by bicycle  
 the intensification of any one use does not become detrimental to the amenity 
of residential or other adjoining uses;  and  
 the proposal would be compliant with the East Staffordshire Design Guide 
SPD (or any superseding document)  
Rural Centres  
In rural centres retail and other uses (including leisure, entertainment, cu ltural and 
tourist uses as well as other mixed -uses) that would support the vitality and viability 
of the centres will be granted provided they:  
 are of a scale and nature that is appropriate to the size and function of the 
centre,  
 would not lead to unsustainable trip generation from outside the catchment, 
and 
 would not undermine the role or function of other centres within the retail 
hierarchy  
‘Town centre’ proposals will not normally be permitted outside defined town centres 
unless it can be demonst rated that there will be no negative impact on town  and rural  
centres and the development would support existing tourism facilities meeting the 
criteria set out in Policy 15 Tourism.  
Safeguarding retail provision  
Development leading to the loss of uses wi thin Class A of the Use Classes Order in  
centres will only be permitted if:  
 the facility has been sufficiently and realistically marketed over a 6 month 
period;  
 that the current use is demonstrably no longer viable; and  
 the change of use would not harm vitality and viability of the local centre.  
 
  
129 
 Identification and Delivery of Town Centre Investment  
3.158  The Local Plan looks ahead to 2031 and over this timeframe situations will 
change, such as the economic climate. Retail Need s assessments are difficult 
to predict with certainty over long periods of time due to changing shopping 
patterns, preferences of consumers and innovation in the way in which people 
shop.  
 
3.159  To ensure that the Local Plan delivers the retail and leisure deve lopment 
necessary to support the future population of the Borough the Council will:  
 
 Work proactively and in partnership with the shopping centre owners, 
landowners and developers to bring investment forward;  
 Use Compulsory Purchase powers if necessary;  
 Produce a Town Centre Area Action Plan  
 Produce a Shopfronts and Advertisements Supplementary Planning 
Document  
 Review the Retail and 
Leisure evidence to keep 
the identification of need 
up to date;  
 Use the Local Authority 
Monitoring Report to 
assess retail 
commitments and 
completions; and if 
necessary bring forward a 
Sites Allocations 
Development Plan 
Document which 
specifically addresses 
town centre change.  
 Setup regular town centre health check monitoring.  
 Work with partn ers such as the National Forest Company to bring about 
public realm improvements  
 Consider the use of a Community Infrastructure Levy or if already in 
place review the local priorities for the spending of CIL in order to enable 
critical infrastructure to be  bought forward and to enable further retail 
investment.  
 
 
Station Street, Burton   
130 
 Supporting Communitie s Locally  
3.160  The Local Plan seeks to achieve 
sustainable communities across East 
Staffordshire Borough and to improve 
upon the well -being of its people.  
 
3.161  Community facilities act as the 
focus of community activity and 
contribute towards community 
cohesion. Such community facilities 
include, but are not limited to, primary 
schools, shops, post offices, banks, public houses, fuel -filling stations, pub lic 
halls, indoor sports facilities and small -scale health -care facilities. These types 
of community facilities are provided by a wide variety of agencies, including 
local authorities, other public service providers, churches and other religious 
organisati ons, and the voluntary and business sectors.  
 
3.162  Access to community facilities is important to both urban and rural 
communities. Community facility provision needs to reflect the needs of the 
population both existing and new and also reflect how the population will 
change over time. This is particularly  important given the ageing population of 
the Borough generally. To reflect the changing needs of the community, new 
ways of providing facilities continue to develop. Increasingly service providers 
are looking to co -locate.  Communitiy facilities range fro m local shops, meeting 
places for the local community, sports venues, cultural buildings, public houses 
and places of worship.   
 
3.163  Spatial planning can assist with the co -ordination and provision of new 
facilities and obtain appropriate developer contributio ns. The Vision and Plan 
Objectives seek to maintain and improve community wellbeing and therefore 
support will be given to proposals and activities that protect, retain or enhance 
existing community facilities, or lead to the provision of additional commun ity 
facilities. The policy also resists the loss of existing facilities. The Council will 
require that proposals demonstrate that a particular facility or service is no 
longer viable and explain the options that have been investigated to maintain 
the facil ity or service. Marketing of the property for a minimum of 6 months with 
an appropriate agent at an appropriate price would be required.  
 
 
 
Dog & Partridge, Tutbury   
131 
 STRATEGIC POLICY 22  
Supporting Communities  Locally  
To ensure that local communities have sufficient provision of community facilities the 
Borough Council will work with public, private and voluntary sector providers to meet 
demonstrable need.  
Proposals for new community facilities should:  
 be located where they can be accessed on foot, bicycle or public transport, 
rather than only by car;  
 where possible, be developed as part of mixed -use developments so that 
facilities are better linked to housing, jobs, shopping, leisure and other local 
services, in order to minimise travel distances;  
 be proportionate for the commun ity which they will serve  
 be located outside but adjacent to an existing settlement boundary or in close 
proximity to the community that the facility will serve in line with SP8 .  
Where appropriate, the multi -use of premises for a range of community uses  will be 
encouraged.  
The Council will approve extensions to existing community facilities, subject to 
compliance with other Local Plan policies.  
Proposals which result in the loss of a community facility will not be permitted unless:  
(i) adequate alternative provision is available within or adjacent to the        
settlement or will be provided as part of the development process;  
(ii) all reasonable efforts have been made to preserve the facility or service, 
including sharing of  premises, but it has been satisfactorily demonstrated to 
the Council that the service is no longer viable and has been actively 
marketed for a period o f at least 6 months; and  
(iii) the service or facility is in an inherently unsustainable location and the reuse 
of the site w ould be a more sustainable solution than the retention of the 
service or facility.  
 
ENVIRONMENT POLICIES  
Green Infrastructure  
3.164  Green infrastructure (GI) is a term used to describe a network of multi -
functional green spaces. This network of both public and privately owned land 
and water supports native species, maintains natural and ecological processes, 
sustains air and water reso urces (sometimes separately identified as “Blue  
132 
 Infrastructure”), and contributes to the health and quality of life of people and 
communities. The growth proposed in the Borough provides an opportunity to 
plan for a green infrastructure network, serving th e needs of both rural and 
urban communities and strengthening the links between them.  
 
3.165  Green infrastructure encompasses all open space elements within rural and 
urban landscapes and can include woodland, watercourses, playing fields, 
nature reserves, ceme teries, footpaths, hedgerows, allotments and amenity 
landscaping. Watercourses and water features also offer opportunities for the 
creation of multi -functional networks and this is recognised in Detailed Policy 9 
on water based recreation and blue infrastr ucture. Heritage assets should also 
form part of green infrastructure for example the Trent and Mersey canal 
corridor which is designated as a conservation area.  
 
3.166  A Green Infrastructure Strategy has been produced with the aim of providing 
a long term visio n for green infrastructure within East Staffordshire to ensure 
that the growth of the Borough is fully integrated with existing green 
infrastructure and new green infrastructure is provided to meet the needs of all 
communities. The Strategy also addresses the improvement of green 
infrastructure within the rural areas of the Borough and the maintenance and 
improvement of connectivity between the Borough’s urban and rural areas.  
 
3.167  The Strategy provides a set of green infrastructure standards outlining what is  
required for a high quality environment associated with new development, and 
sets out how development could and should help to enhance green 
infrastructure. These standards should be considered early on in designing 
schemes to ensure a green infrastructur e led approach.   
 
3.168  The Council will seek an overall gain in green infrastructure through the 
protection and enhancement of existing assets and the creation of new multi -
functional areas of green space that promote:  
 
 recreation and tourism;  
 public access  and green transport ;  
 green education;  
 biodiversity;  
 water management;  
 the protection and enhancement of the local landscape;  
 mitigation and adaptation  of climate change;   
 green economic uses;   
 sustainable land management ; and   
133 
  Health improvement through increased high quality cycling and walking 
access to locations and other quality greenspaces and opportunities for 
community growing spaces such as orchards and allotments  
 
3.169  Green infrastructure can also 
contribute towards ecosystems 
services provided by the natural 
environment that benefit people.  
Some  of  these  ecosystem  
services  are  well  known  including  
food,  fibre  and  fuel provision  and  
the  cultural  service s  that  provide  
benefits  to  people  through  
recreation  and cultural appreciation 
of nature. Other services provided by ecosystems are not so well known such 
as the  regulation  of  the  climate,  purification  of  air  and  water,  flood  
protection,  soil formation and nutrient cycling.  
 
3.170  It will be important that where possible, developments in Inner Burton will be 
subjected to soft landscaping as part of greening Burton, as set out in the retail 
policy to deal with what is a hard urban landscape. Gr eening Burton is therefore 
an important regeneration initiative which should enhance the landscape and 
setting of the townscape of Burton without affecting its historical context and 
character. This should also contribute to the overall green infrastructur e of the 
Borough as well as improving health and wellbeing.   
 
3.171  The provision of new Green Infrastructure will primarily be delivered as part of 
new developments at the expense of the developer. Where there are little 
opportunity for Green Infrastructure on  site contributions will be sought which 
will assist with the delivery of GI projects by East Staffordshire Borough Council 
alone or in partnership with other organisations such as Parish Councils, local 
community groups and non -governmental organisations such as the National 
Forest Company. An example of where this has taken place is with the National 
Forest Tender Scheme, where the National Forest Company, Forestry 
Commission and private landowners worked in partnership to achieve 
significant woodland cre ation.  
 
3.172  Several other  funding  sources  are  available  to  support  GI,  these include  
(but  are  not  limited  to): Parish Councils; Central Rivers Initiative funding, 
National Forest Company, Staffordshire County Council, aggregate companies, 
Woodland    Trust; environmental stewardship , and Heritage Lottery.  
 
The Washlands, behind Burton Library   
134 
 3.173  The Borough Council will continue to work in Partnership with the Central 
Rivers Initiative, the National Forest Company and other organisations where 
opportunities arise to deliver the aims of  the Green Infrastructure Policy and 
meet the standards set out in the Green Infrastructure Strategy.  
STRATEGIC POLICY 23   
Green Infrastructure  
Major and Minor Green Infrastructure (GI) corridors throughout the Borough, 
identified in the East Staffordshire Green Infrastructure Study19, connect locations of 
natural heritage, green space, biodiversity or other environmental interest. They will 
be safeguarded through:  
a) Not permitting development that compromises their integrity and therefore that 
of the overall g reen infrastructure framework;  
b) Using developer contributions to facilitate improvements to their quality and 
robustness;  and 
c) Investing in enhancement and restoration where opportunities exist, and the 
creation of new resources where necessary.  
Development should contribute towards the creation, enhancement or ongoing 
management of a series of local GI corridors linking with the Major and Minor GI 
corridors. In turn, these local GI corridors should be connected through green 
infrastructure into site -level ne tworks and green spaces.  
Priorities for the creation or enhancement of green infrastructure are those areas 
where net gains in the range of functions can be improved, particularly those that:  
i. improve walking and cycling access to and from the urban core a nd/or rural 
service centres and where possible improve the wider network; and/or  
ii. help to remedy local deficiencies in open space provision and equality, and/or  
iii. result in the creation, protection and enhancement of biodiversity habitats 
and/or  
iv. support the safeguarding of ecological networks, including the restoration and 
creation of new habitats through the opportunities provided within the Centre 
Rivers Initiative  
v. safeguard and enhance heritage assets.  
As referenced in the East Staffordshire Green Infrastructure Study, the following 
standards for green infrastructure are to be met:  
                                                           
19 Available on the Council’s website.   
135 
 a) Where possible new GI should connect to, and enhance, the existing green 
infrastructure network of East Staffordshire ; 
b) New green spaces should be designed to serve more than one function to 
maximise public benefit ; 
c) Developers should agree robust delivery and funding mechanisms with East 
Staffordshire Borough Council prior to the determination of an application to 
secure the on going management of green infrastructure ; 
d) New green infrastructure should be in keeping with the existing landscape 
character of development sites, including its habitat type and species 
selection ; 
e) Where practicable and appropriate in design terms taking i nto account site 
context developments should incorporate innovative green infrastructure into 
the design of buildings such as green roofs and green walls ; 
f) All development should enhance biodiversity habitats and environmental 
assets through positive manage ment, buffering, extension and linkage;  
g) All development design should include street trees and urban woodland, 
including National Forest pl anting where this is applicable;  
h) All developments should be served by Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems 
where feasib le. The component features of these systems should be designed 
and managed to deliver additional green infrastructure benefits, such as 
wildlife habitat improvement and provision, landscape enhancement and 
informal recreation.  
i) Green infrastructure within d evelopments should be designed as a connected 
network with linear features, such as retained hedgerows and footpaths, 
linking larger features, such as SUDS ponds and woodlands and other green 
infrastructure features adjacent to the site including existing footpath and 
cycleway networks.  
j) For larger developments, new GI should contribute towards the creation of 
healthy communities through the incorporation of community growing space 
such as orchards and allotments within the green infrastructure package of a 
scheme  
 
High Qu ality Design   
3.174  The framework stipulates the importance of high quality design in the delivery 
of Sustainable Development.   The Council therefore expects high quality design 
in new development within in the Borough. To complement  this, a 
Supplementary Planning Document on Design (“Design Guide”) has already 
been adopted by the Council and is used extensively to support and inform 
decisions on planning applications. The Guide makes it clear that design should  
136 
 respond to the surrounding archite ctural and urban design context. Some 
locations will be more sensitive than others, and the design of the development 
would need to reflect the context, style and pattern of the surrounding 
environment and buildings. The process of designing new developmen ts should 
be clearly articulated within Design and Access Statements. This should include 
an analysis of the development proposal site, its constraints, surroundings and 
opportunities, making it clear how proposals respond to their surroundings in 
urban de sign terms. (townscape/building line/materiality/etc) . 
 
3.175  Developers are encouraged to discuss their development proposals with a 
local community through public participation in order to inform the design of a 
new development. This should add a sense of ownership and aspiration within 
local communities so they ca n 
contribute to places and spaces. 
Community involvement will also 
encourage healthy and integrated 
communities through ensuring the 
design and layout aids movement, 
access to greenspace and the range 
of open spaces and facilities such as 
community buildin gs and projects 
such as allotments and community 
orchards meets current and future 
needs.   
 
3.176  New development should be delivered in an environmentally sensitive way in 
order to mitigate against and be adaptable to impacts of climate change.  
 
3.177  The High Quality Design policy should be read in conjunction with other 
relevant guidance including:  
 
 Design SPD  
 Re-use of Redundant Farm Buildings SPD  
 Guidance on Traditional Farmsteads within East Staffordshire  
 Guidance provided by CABE Design Review ( www.designcouncil.org.uk ) –  
 By Design by DETR/CABE  
 Code for Sustainable Homes (BREEAM)  
 Building for Life 12  
 Designing out crime guidance  
 Sport England’s Active Design guidance  
 
Hotel at St George ’s Park   
137 
 3.178  It is important that new development prop osals should make efficient use of 
land, however the Council will secure densities of development which are in 
context with its locality and which will have a benefit on the character, 
appearance, distinctiveness and environmental quality of an area  with no 
negative impact on amenity . The intensification of an existing locality will be 
resisted where it would be harmful to the character of an area.  
 
3.179  The Council will consider referring applications where appropriate, to design 
review panels and planni ng sub groups to secure good design.  
STRATEGIC POLICY 24  
High Quality Design  
Development proposals must contribute positively to the area in which they are 
proposed and:  
 Help to create a sense of place, building on the urban, suburban and rural 
local character, respecting local patterns of development and the historic 
environment, and using heritage assets to their best advantage,  
 Provide safe communities, through appropr iate use of clearly defined public 
and private spaces, passive surveillance  and active frontages  
 Reinforce character and identity, through local distinctiveness.  
 Enhance the landscape and protect and enhance biodiversity;  
 Aid movement and accessibility by providing clear and legible connections that 
work with existing routes and streets, and account for pedestrians and cyclists  
 Retain, enhance and expand green infrastructure assets within the 
development as the basis of the green infrastructure -led development.  
 Present an appropriate layout for new development that integrates with the 
existing environment and context, including space around dwellings, public 
and private space and open spaces;  
 Be adaptable in order to enable a change of uses where this is possible;  
 Provide innovative and contemporary architecture where this is appropriate;  
 Within The National Forest, reflect the c haracter of the Forest in their design, 
through street tree planting, showcasing timber in building construction where 
appropriate, incorporating wood fuel systems and green roofs, especially in 
Burton upon Trent, where this will contribute to the town bei ng considered as 
the Capital of The National Forest.  
 Provide well designed and integrated public art in substantial schemes in the 
town centres, and in other proposals where it is intended that the public have 
access into the site or where there is suitab le public space within the site.     
138 
  Minimise the production of carbon through sustainable construction and reuse 
of materials where possible and  promote  the use of renewable energy source 
technology solutions where possible;  
Development proposals should r eflect the existing density of its locality and therefore 
its character and form. Intensification of an existing built area will only be allowed 
where the development would represent a benefit and would not be harmful to the 
character and amenity of an are a.  
Developers will be required to demonstrate how they have responded to the above 
criteria in their applications, and, where appropriate, in master plans, Development 
Briefs, Concept Statements and Design Codes.  
Developers should refer to the Council’s Supplementary Planning Document on 
Design for guidance on design matters.  
The Council will consider referring proposals to a design review panel to secure good 
design. Such a review will take place at an early stage of the application process and 
the appli cant will be expected to meet any associated costs and respond positively to 
any recommendations.   
 
Historic Environment  
3.180  The Borough has a rich 
historic environment with many 
valued heritage assets 
consisting of a diverse range of 
designated and undesignated 
heritage assets,  secular and 
non-secular heritage assets  
from the prehistoric ceremonial 
sites in the Trent Valley  
including the river itself which 
has archaeological value ; 
Roman Rocester; the legacy of Burton upon Trent’s brew ing industry and 
Tutbury’s medieval castle. The Borough’s historic environment and heritage 
assets contribute to the local distinctiveness and character which is special and 
diverse. Such heritage assets are vulnerable to change and potential harm, and 
therefore should be managed proactively and sensitively, where the historic 
environment and heritage assets should be protected and enhanced in a 
manner appropriate to their significance. The protection and enhancement of 
the significance of the historic envi ronment and heritage assets forms part of 
sustainable development as set out in the NPPF, especially paragraphs 7 
Tutbury Castle   
139 
 (protection and enhancement), 9 (improvements in quality) and 126 
(irreplaceable heritage assets). Such heritage assets include listed buildin gs, 
conservation areas, registered parks and gardens and scheduled monuments 
as well as undesignated assets such as locally listed buildings and sites of 
archaeological potential.  
 
3.181  Development proposals may provide opportunities to enhance the historic 
environment either through new innovative and contextual development and 
design or through sensitive and informed repair which reinforces sense of place. 
Such development proposals should be encouraged as sustainable 
development that has economic, environment  and social (cultural) benefits for 
the Borough. Should it be considered that development would not enhance the 
historic environment or where it may impact upon potential archaeological 
remains then development proposals should clearly articulate the neces sity of 
harm using the relevant guidance set out by English Heritage. Loss of 
significance (such as loss of historic fabric which contribute to the setting of the 
historic environment) which may cause harm should be adequately justified 
(NPPF paragraphs 13 2-135).  
 
3.182  The historic landscape character of the Borough reflects the changes which 
have occurred over the centuries with early field patterns, including locally 
distinctive farmsteads dominating the north and west and a highly planned 
character, created i n the early 19th century, dominating the area of the former 
Needwood Forest. There are also two distinct characters within the Borough 
from the uplands  and the border with Derbyshire Dales District and Staffordshire 
Moorlands District to the lowlands where  the form and character of rural 
buildings have subtle differences. The Borough currently has a mix of urban and 
rural conservation areas, listed buildings that vary from brewery buildings to 
rural farmsteads that also have Scheduled Monument status and on ly one 
registered park and garden (Stapenhill Cemetery). Trent Valley has particular 
sensitivity where they may be undesignated below ground archaeological sites, 
which while not formerly designated, can be considered to be of national 
importance. Therefor e development proposals need to consider sites that may 
have unidentified archaeological remains and archaeological potential. Historic 
landscape character also includes key views, some of which may be identified 
in Conservation Area Appraisals. This is pa rticularly the case with the Trent and 
Mersey Canal Conservation Area which contain long views. The historic 
landscape character, including the Trent and Mersey Canal continues over the 
border into other local authorities so it is important to acknowledge the 
continuity of the landscape and similar issues that may exist, such as the Trent 
Valley in the southern lowlands (with Lichfield District) to the highlands in the 
north (with Staffordshire Moorlands District and Derbyshire Dales District). 
Relevant evi dence base should be consulted as part of development proposals  
140 
 that may affect historic landscape character including the farmsteads mapping, 
Extensive Urban Surveys and Historic Environment Character Assessments.  
 
3.183  Due to the significant quality of the historic environment within the Borough, 
any new development which may impact upon heritage assets should be 
protected and enhanced through high quality design and using the key 
principles that are set out in the Design SPD. Guidance is also set out for th e 
rural historic environment within the Re -use of Rural Buildings SPD, where 
more specific guidance is set for farmsteads in the Guidance on Traditional 
Farmsteads in East Staffordshire guidance document.  
 
3.184  Opportunities to enhance conservation areas are we lcomed, whether this is to 
a building or to the wider setting, such as public realm improvements. 
Implementation can be through heritage led regeneration or small scale 
interventions to safeguard the integrity of the conservation area and its 
character, es pecially for Conservation Areas at Risk within the Borough. There 
are important elements of a conservation area, not just the buildings which are 
contained within in it which should be considered as part of development 
proposals including spaces, street pa tterns, views and trees.  
 
3.185  The Council will continue to work closely with partners including English 
Heritage and Staffordshire County Council on Historic Environment matters as 
well as Parish Councils, especially those who have Neighbourhood Plans and 
local amenity groups who have a stake in the historic environment, such as 
identifying local heritage assets that can be added to a Local Heritage List. The 
Council will work with neighbouring authorities on development opportunities 
adjacent to our boundary t hat may impact the historic environment. Such work 
may include developing policy and guidance which may support policy within 
the Local Plan as well as specific development proposals.  
 
3.186  Development proposals should be informed by a Design and Access 
Stateme nt where it is considered necessary (applicants should refer to the 
Council’s Validation checklist) to include the following current sources of 
information, guidance and evidence base where necessary:  
 
 National Heritage List for England (which includes Lis ted Building list 
descriptions)  – provided by English Heritage  
 Conservation Area Appraisals  
 Heritage at Risk Register  
 Design Supplementary Planning Document (SPD)  
 Reuse of Rural Buildings (SPD)  
 Guidance on Traditional Farmsteads in East Staffordshire   
141 
  The Historic Environment Record (HER) (which includes Farmsteads 
data and mapping) – provided by Staffordshire County Council  
 Historic Landscape Characterisation – provided by Staffordshire County 
Council  
 Historic Environment Character Assessments – provided b y Staffordshire 
County Council  
 Extensive Urban Surveys – provided by Staffordshire County Council  
 Historic Farmsteads Survey & Regional Statement – provided by English 
Heritage  
 English Heritage publications, – for secular and non -secular buildings 
such as New Work in Historic Places of Worship  
 Any evidence provided alongside the preparation of Neighbourhood 
Plans  
 
3.187  The above sources and evidence base will be updated as and when it is 
considered necessary, where the Borough Council will continue to work with 
English Heritage and Staffordshire County Council on relevant studies.  
STRATEGIC POLICY 25  
Historic Environment  
Development proposals should protect, conserve and enhance heritage assets and 
their settings, taking account of their significance, as well as the distinctive character 
of the Borough’s townscapes and landscapes. Such heritage assets may consist of 
undesi gnated and designated assets including conservation areas, listed buildings, 
scheduled monuments, archaeological sites, registered parks and gardens and 
historic landscapes which contribute to the Borough’s historic environment and local 
distinctiveness.  
This should include the use of high quality design as stipulated in the NPPF and the 
Borough Council’s Design SPD. Development proposals that are likely to have 
negative impacts on the historic environment should demonstrate how harm can be 
effectively and  justifiably mitigated.  
Development proposals should be informed by the various information sources and 
evidence base that are available .  
The towns of Burton -upon -Trent and Uttoxeter, including their historic retail centres 
should be a focus for heritage -led regeneration and the repair of key heritage assets 
will be supported. Such regeneration should be informed by relevant historic 
environment evidence base . This will be delivered through various initiatives such as  
142 
 through new development proposals or r egeneration schemes with key partners such 
as English Heritage and the Heritage Lottery Fund.  
Inner Burton is a focus for regeneration in order to improve poor quality building stock 
which consists of Victorian terraced housing. Initiatives should therefor e consist of 
effective repair and refurbishment of Victorian housing stock as part of sustainable 
development with opportunities to introduce innovative energy efficiency technology, 
which reflects the local historic character.  
 
National Forest  
3.188  The National Forest is transforming the landscape to create a mosaic of land 
uses and enhance biodiversity; 
creating a major resource for 
tourism, recreation and education; 
providing a productive alternative 
use for fa rmland and enabling 
farm diversification; contributing to 
the UK’s timber needs; stimulating 
the economy and creating  jobs 
and making a small but significant 
contribution to the UK’s efforts to 
reduce atmospheric carbon 
dioxide.  
 
3.189  The National Forest covers both the south -eastern rural areas of East 
Staffordshire and the urban centre of Burton upon Trent, which is the capital of 
the National Forest. Since its establishment in the mid -1990s, around 1000 
hectares of new woodland have been created within The National Forest in East 
Staffordshire. The Borough Council will pursue a robust and imaginative 
approach towards development in the area whilst ensuring that the commercial 
return from development helps to support the implementation  of the National 
Forest Strategy 2004 -14.   
 
3.190  The Borough Council will continue to work in Partnership with The National 
Forest Company to ensure tree planting is included in new developments 
through the application of this policy in planning decisions, ens uring standards 
for tree planting are met on site and where appropriate off site in accordance 
with National Forest Planting Guidelines. Where possible the Borough Council 
will work with The National Forest Company and other organisations such as 
Staffords hire Wildlife Trust, the Woodland Trust and community groups to 
provide additional planting where opportunities exist.  
Byrkley Park Garden Centre, Rangemore   
143 
 STRATEGIC POLICY 26  
National Forest  
The Borough Council will support:  
(i) The implementation of the National Forest Strategy 2014 – 2024   
(ii) Conversion of land to woodland and other Forest related habitats and 
purposes where this complements existing natural and cultural heritage 
interests;  
(iii) Enhancement of built development through related landscaping;  
(iv) The Forest as an exemplar of sustainable d evelopment;  
(v) The development of tourism, leisure, rural diversification and the woodland 
economy;  
(vi) New developments that relate well to their National Forest setting  
Developments shall contribute towards the creation of the Forest by providing on -site 
or nea rby landscaping that meets the National Forest development planting 
guidelines as set out in the National Forest Company’s Guide for Developers and 
Planners and contained within Appendix 1.  
Landscaping will generally involve woodland planting, but can als o include creation 
and management of other appropriate habitats, open space provision associated with 
woodland and the provision of new recreational facilities with a wooded character.  
The appropriate mix of landscaping features will depend upon the setti ng and the 
opportunities that the site presents. The Borough Council recommends that pre -
application discussions are held with the National Forest Company.   
Implementation of planting and landscaping schemes for approved new development 
in The National Forest will be secured by means of conditions, a legal agreement, or 
will be a constituent part of the Community Infrastructure Levy.  The measures may 
include, as appropriate:  
  the means and time -scale for implementation;  
 arrangements for the management a nd maintenance of such landscaped 
areas, including any open space, by an appropriate person or body . 
In exceptional circumstances, where planting of this scale cannot be accommodated 
within or close to the development, the shortfall should be addressed by way of a 
commuted sum as set out in the NFC’s Guide for Developers and Planners. This will 
be used to either purchase land for tree planting, or create new woodland and/or 
other habitats, and to provide public access and maintain the site for at least 5 ye ars. 
Where appropriate and practicable, applicants will be required to identify individual 
planting projects via negotiation and agreement with the National Forest Company.    
144 
 Measures to secure the proper management of woodlands within The National Forest 
will be in accordance with the  
 aims of the National Forest Strategy;  
 guidance in National Forest ‘Guide for Developers and Planners’  
 interests of visual amenity;  
 desirability of maximising public access where appropriate;  
 principles  of good woodland management;  
 maintaining and enhancing the nature conservation resource;  
 retention and enhancement of the landscape character.  
 
In addition to meeting the Planting Guidelines, developments will be expected to 
reflect their Forest setting t hrough their design, character and sustainability. This will 
include integrating existing green infrastructure into the development, making 
connections with on -site or adjacent woodland and other habitats, showcasing timber 
in building design and incorpora ting renewable energy, especially wood fuel heating 
systems. Further details on how this can be achieved are set out in the National 
Forest Company’s Design Charter.  
 
Climate Change, Water Body Management and Flooding   
3.191  The most obvious effect climate 
change is likely to have on East 
Staffordshire is to increase the 
potential for flooding in certain parts 
of the Borough due to the greater 
incidence of sudden, extremely 
heavy episodes of rainfall forecast 
for the future.   
 
3.192  East Staffordshire Borough 
Council (ESBC) recognises the 
importance of the climate change 
and sustainability agenda and the benefits this can bring to the residents and 
businesses of our borough. The Council have produced a Clima te Change 
Strategy, and aims to be one of the leading Local Authorities in the region for 
addressing climate change and sustainability.  
 
3.193  Much of the built -up area of Burton upon Trent lies within areas at risk of 
flooding limiting new development to areas  not at risk severely curtails the 
options open for the growth of Burton on Trent town and similarly for Uttoxeter. 
River Dove, Ellastone   
145 
 Both existing and proposed development is heavily reliant on the continued 
upgrade and maintenance of flood defences. Where development is n ecessary 
in areas at risk of flooding it must meet the following main criteria :  
 
 It must be safe without increasing flood risk elsewhere  
 Opportunities should be sought to reduce the overall level of flood risk in 
the area and beyond through the layout and  form of the development, 
and the appropriate application of sustainable drainage systems.  
 Where there is significant residual risk of flood defence failure, either 
from overtopping or defence breach, it is essential that this is appreciated 
and sufficient ly mitigated against.  
 
3.194  The above is derived from evidence provided in the Water Cycle Study and 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessments. The aim of this  policy is to ensure that  
inappropriate development in areas at risk of flooding are avoided by directing 
development away from areas at highest risk, but where development is 
necessary, making it safe without increasing flood risk elsewhere.  
 
3.195  This policy also aims to ensure that no new development causes a negative 
impact upon the waterbodies and the ecological  quality of watercourses in the 
Borough in line with the requirements of the EU Water Framework Directive 
(WFD) which aims for all ground and surface waters such as rivers and lakes to 
achieve ‘good status’ by 2026. The WFD has been set up to improve and 
integrate the way water bodies are managed throughout Europe. It establishes 
a legal framework to protect and restore clean water throughout Europe to 
ensure its long -term sustainable use. WFD uses a system of classification 
based on river basins and the na tural geographical and hydrological units.  The 
Local WFD actions for East Staffordshire are contained within the Humber River 
Basin Management Plan (RBMP).  
 
3.196  The Council favours the use of Sustainable Urban Drainage systems (SuDs) 
wherever possible, and wil l look for imaginative ways of integrating these into 
the scheme. SuDs can include a wide variety of design from green roofs, rain 
water harvesting, permeable surfaces, swales, soakaways to water storage and 
can reduce flooding as well as providing ecologi cal benefits and recreation 
opportunities.   
 
3.197  Under the Flood & Water Management Act 2010, Staffordshire County 
Council became a Lead Local Flood Authority and will be responsible for setting 
up a SuDS Approving Body (SAB). The role, when in place, will be  responsible 
for approving, adopting and maintaining sustainability drainage systems. It is 
important that when in place, the SAB is involved in the design of SuDs early in 
the planning process.  Staffordshire County Council are responsible for the  
146 
 supervis ion and management of non -main “ordinary watercourses”. If a 
development is likely to result in works that would affect the flow of water in 
such a watercourse, then they need to apply for a Land Drainage Consent 
through Staffordshire County Council (SCC) as the Lead Local Flood Authority.  
 
3.198  The need for alleviation of surface water will be promoted via partnership 
working with Staffordshire County Council as the Lead Local Flood Authority 
through the planning application process and other partnership working 
arrangements. Where applications h ave watercourse and drainage implications 
it is advised that advice is sought from Staffordshire County Council and the 
Environment Agency before a planning application is submitted and this is 
reflected in the planning application.  
STRATEGIC POLICY 27  
Climate Change, Water Body Management and Flooding   
Proposals in flood risk areas, or proposals which would affect such areas, will only be 
permitted where they would not cause unacceptable harm to the following interests:  
(i) The protection and storage capacity of the flood plain, washlands and other 
areas at risk from flooding;  
(ii) Access to watercourses for maintenance;  
(iii) The characteristics of surface water run -off; 
(iv) The integrity of fluvial defences;        
(v) The drainage function of the natural watercourse system; or  
(vi) The necessity for  additional public finances for flood defence works.  
The Borough Council will require a Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) in areas at risk of 
flooding (land within Flood Zones 2 and 3)  and of proposals that have the potential to 
gene rate significant volumes of surface water runoff due to their size to assess the 
impact on the foregoing interests.  
FRAs for p roposals in areas behind the existing defences with need to assess the 
residual risk of defence failure,  either from overtopping or defence bre ach, and show 
how, through the design of development, residual risk  with be sufficiently mitigated.  
To alleviate the effects of climate change and meet the objectives of the Water 
Framework Directive, consideration will be given to the follow ing principles:  
 Development proposals and strategic plans must give due regard to the aims 
and objectives of the Humber River Basin Management Plan and shall not 
pose an obstacle to the meeting of the required ecological status or potential 
status for any  waterbody.   
147 
  Development proposals must p rovide adequate development easement for 
watercourses (culverted or otherwise);   
 Development proposals must i ncorporate measures for deculverting and 
renaturalisation of watercourses where practicable.  
 All new development should address surface water run -off and Sustainable 
Drainage Systems (SuDS) should be used.  
Water quality and quantity  
Development will only be permitted where it can be demonstrated that it will not have 
an adverse impact on surface or ground  water in terms of quality and quantity. This 
should include the requirements of the Water Framework Directive and Habitats 
Regulations. Development proposals should demonstrate that:  
 Adequate arrangements are made for the disposal of foul sewage, trade 
effluent and surface water to prevent a risk of pollution.  
 There is sufficient water and foul drainage infrastructure capacity to meet the 
additional requirements arising from a development should be in place.  
 Measures to reduce demand such as the use of grey water recycling and 
rainwater harvesting are incorporated into the development.  
 Foul and surface water run -off are separated  
Where adequate water resources do not exist, or w here the provision of water would 
be detrimental to the natural environment d evelopment will not be permitted .  
Sustainable Drainage  
All new development will be expected to incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems   
(SUDS). Each system should:  
 Discharge clean roof water to ground via infiltration techniques such as 
soakaways, green roofs, permeable surfaces and street trees etc unless 
demonstrated by an infiltration test that due to ground conditions this is not 
possible  
 Limit surface water discharge to t he greenfield run -off rate or, where this is 
demonstrated to not be viable, a reduction from the existing situation;  
 Protect and enhance wildlife habitats, heritage assets , existing open spaces, 
amenity areas and landscape value of the site, as well as bei ng 
sympathetically designed to meet the needs of the local community . 
 
 
 
 
  
148 
 Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Generation  
3.199  The Climate Change Act 2008 sets legally binding targets to reduce the UK’s 
greenhouse gas emissions by at least 80% by 2050 and sets carbon budgets 
on the pathway to this target.   The fourth carbon budget came into law in June 
2012 and covers 2023 -27 with a reduction target of 50% below 1990 baseline 
values.  
 
3.200  The Council supports the local generation of energy from renewable or low 
carbon sources in order to meet the UK targets. It is aware that some 
technologies can have a higher impact on their surrounding environment than 
others. However, over the time perio d of this Plan it is clear that existing 
technologies will develop, new technologies may emerge, and the ability of 
installations to integrate into their surroundings, or into the built development 
they serve may change. The sustainable reuse of historic b uildings can 
represent a reduction in waste to landfill and a reduction in carbon generation 
during building schemes as well as retaining and enhancing an areas historic 
character.   The Council have produced a Climate Change Strategy which sets 
out the rol e of planning in ensuring efficient use of resources. The Council is 
committed to producing a Climate Change Supplementary Planning Guidance 
to provide detail on policies contained in the Local Plan and guidance on how 
climate change and efficient design c an be incorporated into developments.  
 
3.201  The policy below is therefore flexible to changing circumstances, whilst 
protecting interests of acknowledged importance such as residential amenity, 
nature conservation and landscapes of high value.  
 
3.202  An evidence ba se document titled ‘Renewable Energy in Staffordshire’ has 
been produced and sets out where there are opportunities for different types of 
renewable energy opportunities. Developers should refer to this in their 
applications to ensure developments are loca tion in areas where there is 
opportunity.   
 
3.203  The Council will monitor the delivery of low carbon and renewable energy 
projects across the Borough on an annual basis along with reporting on carbon 
emissions. The Borough Council will prepare a Supplementary Planning 
Document with advice on the types and appropriate location of renewable 
energy technologies, low carbon design and climate change adaptation. In 
addition a landscape Supplementary Planning Document will also be produced 
which will assist with sett ing out the landscape qualities that will need to be 
considered in different areas of the Borough.  This policy should be applied 
alongside Detailed Policy 2 Designing in Sustainable Construction in order to  
149 
 ensure that developments optimise the opportunit ies for low carbon design and 
renewable energy delivery.   
 
3.204  Hydraulic fracturing, commonly known as “fracking” is a technique used to 
extract oil or gas from deep below the ground. There are currently no planning 
applications or sites permitted to carry ou t exploration or development of on 
shore oil or gas using fracking techniques in Staffordshire. Applications for 
exploration or development would need to obtain the correct license from the 
Department of Energy and Climate Change (DECC) prior to submitting  a 
planning application to Staffordshire County Council, as the Mineral Planning 
Authority. Staffordshire County Council would consult East Staffordshire 
Borough Council, neighbours, Parish Councils and a wide range of statutory 
and non statutory consultee s on all mineral development planning applications.  
STRATEGIC POLICY 28  
Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Generation  
The Council will promote and encourage all technologies and types of renewable 
and low -carbon energy generation, appropriate to the locati on in the Borough. This 
includes schemes that:  
 form part of proposed new developments (including stand -alone schemes);  
 are incorporated into existing developments; and  
 are community -led initiatives.  
The Borough Council will encourage technologies that provide the greatest 
renewable energy generation and carbon savings, whilst recognising the need to 
balance adverse impacts and location restrictions.  
The Borough Council will prepare a Supplementary Planning Document with advice 
on the types of renewable energy technology and low carbon design that may be 
most appropriate in the different types of location in the Borough.   
Opportunities where development can draw its energy supply from decentralised, 
renewable or low carbon energy supply systems and for c o-locating potential heat 
customers will be encouraged.  
To encourage the development of local wood fuel markets, which will, in turn, make it 
more viable for the woodlands of The National Forest to be brought into 
management, the Council will support the development of wood fuel systems which 
take advantage of the abundance of local woodland thinnings. Applicants will be 
expected to demonstrate that fuel is being sourced as locally as possible to the 
installation with an expectation that fuel is to be sour ced from within The National 
Forest.   
150 
 Renewable and Low -Carbon energy generation applications will be approved if their 
impacts are (or can be made) acceptable. Therefore all applications are subject to 
the following considerations:  
 the degree to which the  scale and nature of a proposal reflects the capacity 
and sensitivity of the landscape, townscape, natural, historical and cultural 
features and areas to accommodate the development  
 the degree to which the developer has demonstrated any wider 
environmental , economic, and social benefits of a scheme as well as to how 
any adverse impacts have been minimised (e.g. visual intrusion, noise or 
odour). This includes wider benefits arising from clean energy supply, 
reductions in greenhouse gas and other polluting e missions, and contributions 
towards meeting national targets for use of renewable energy sources  
 the proximity to, and impact on, transport infrastructure and the local highway 
network  
 the impact on designated sites of European, national, regional and loca l 
biodiversity and geological importance  
 the impact on relevant heritage assets  
 the impact on residential amenity  
In assessing whether or not adverse impacts are satisfactorily addressed, the 
Council will also take into account cumulative impacts.  
 
Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
3.205  The conservation and enhancement of biodiversity and geodiversity is 
increasingly seen as an essential element of sustainable development. A 
National Biodiversity Action Plan has been drawn up for the UK from which 
County and Local Biodiversity Action Plan s have been produced which includes 
targets relevant at the County and local levels respectively. The Staffordshire 
Biodiversity Action Plan (SBAP) has been in place since 1998. The aim of the 
3rd Edition SBAP is to focus conservation efforts on the areas within the county 
that will result in optimum benefit for ecological networks, habitats and species 
moving to biodiversity gain  and allow ing for greater resilience to climate change. 
East Staffordshire is covered by 
the following Action Plan areas:  
 
 River  Gravels  
 Central Farmland  
 Needwood Woods and 
Parklands  
 Species Rich farmland  
 Central Heaths and 
Woods  
 
Lake at Barton Marina   
151 
 3.206   Each action plan sets out priority habitats for the associated area. In addition 
the Council, in partnership with the Staffords hire Wildlife Trust (SWT), 
Staffordshire County Council, the Staffordshire Biodiversity Action Plan and the 
Environment Agency have produced a piece of work looking at biodiversity 
opportunities across the Borough. Biodiversity Opportunity Areas are areas 
where conservation action, such as habitat creation, restoration or expansion, is 
likely to have the greatest benefit for biodiversity. The Central Rivers Initiative 
has also produced Biodiversity Opportunities Maps to show where opportunities 
exist along the river corridor. The NPPF highlights the importance of landscape -
scale conservation and makes reference to planning for biodiversity at a 
landscape -scale across local authority    boundaries aswell as connecting 
designated  sites  of  biodiversity  impo rtance and areas  identified  by  local  
partnerships  for  habitat  creation  or  restoration.  
 
3.207  Biodiversity opportunity maps along with the Green Infrastructure opportunity 
map will be used in conjunction with the policy below when making planning 
decisions. Applicants will be encouraged to demonstrate how the opportunities 
identified have been inco rporated in the design of the development.  Where 
appropriate, East Staffordshire Borough Council will work in partnership with 
organisations such as Staffordshire Wildlife Trust, Staffordshire County Council, 
local community groups and the National Forest  Company to identify and 
deliver projects where there will be biodiversity and geological enhancements.   
STRATEGIC POLICY 29  
Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
In considering proposals for development the Council will seek to protect, maintain 
and enhance the biodiversity and geodiversity of the Borough through the following 
measures:  
 Ensuring that development retains, protects and enhances features of 
biologica l or geological interest, and provides for the appropriate management 
of these features  
 Ensuring that development produces a net gain in biodiversity in line with UK 
and/or Staffordshire Biodiversity Action Plan species, and biodiversity 
opportunities  
 Supp orting proposals which improve the environment by reclaiming and 
improving derelict, contaminated, vacant or unsightly land for biodiversity 
value  
 Supporting developments with multi -functional benefits, particularly those 
relating to health, education, soc ial inclusion and environmental protection  
 Ensuring development does not disturb or damage soils of high environmental  
152 
 value and, where development is proposed, soil resources are conserved and 
managed in a sustainable way  
Development proposals that would  have a direct or indirect adverse effect on  
European, national or local designated sites, non -statutory sites or Priority  
habitats and species will not be permitted unless:  
 They cannot be located on alternative sites that would cause less or no harm; 
and 
 The benefits of the development clearly outweigh the impacts on the feature 
and the wider habitat network; and  
 Prevention, mitigation and compensation measures of a comparable or 
enhanced value are provided.  
 
Locally Significant Landscape  and Landscape Character Areas    
3.208  The Borough has a varied and attractive 
landscape from urban townscapes to rural 
landscapes. Undeveloped areas around towns 
have a special role to play in maintaining the 
distinction between town and c ountry and in 
providing a rural backdrop and setting to the urban 
areas.   
 
3.209  Whilst there are no nationally designated 
landscapes in East Staffordshire, there are many 
attractive landscapes in their own right, particularly 
in the local and County -wide conte xt.  
 
3.210  The open spaces on the steeply sloping 
escarpments on the western fringes of Burton upon Trent are of a high visual 
landscape quality and provide an important green backdrop to the built -up area, 
and include a Grade 1 Site of Biological Importance (SBI), w hich is also ancient 
semi -natural woodland.  Similarly, to the east lies a scarp slope containing 
views of Scalpcliffe Water Tower and Waterloo Clump, which are important 
features on the local landscape. Within these locally important landscape areas, 
the Council will promote public access, together with landscape improvement 
and enhancement measures, such as tree planting to form part of the National 
Forest, especially when it complements the existing nature conservation 
resource. The countryside views fro m the urban areas of Burton upon Trent, 
along with other views such as views along the Trent and Mersey Canal at 
Burton upon Trent, the setting of Sudbury Hall and views of the Weaver Hills 
are important to local communities, as raised in consultation resp onses.   
 
Winshill Water Tower    
153 
 3.211  The Borough also has key urban views such as Marston’s Brewery, Shobnall 
Road, Burton Upon Trent and St Mary’s Church, Uttoxeter which contributes to 
local distinctive townscape character and sense of place.  The NPPF 
encourages the preparation o f jointly integrated landscape and historic 
landscape character assessments, particularly for those areas where there are 
major expansion options and landscape sensitivity.  
 
3.212  The purpose of the policy is to ensure important landscapes within the 
Borough are  protected and any development within areas of high landscape 
value is informed by the character and form of the landscape. The Council is 
currently working in Partnership with Staffordshire County Council and 
neighbouring Staffordshire authorities to upda te the descriptions of Landscape 
Character Areas across Staffordshire County. Landscape character 
assessments can make a valuable contribution to the decision making process. 
The work, due to be completed in 2014, will be adopted as a Supplementary 
Plannin g Document (SPD) and will describe areas within the Borough that are 
more sensitive to landscape change as well as identifying landscapes and their 
important features that are of particularly high intrinsic value. The SPD will also 
be informed by other evi dence produced by Staffordshire County Council and 
East Staffordshire Borough Council including the Historic Landscape 
Characterisation, Historic Extensive Urban Survey (EUS), the Historic 
Environment Character Assessment (HECA) and Conservation Area 
Appra isals.   
STRATEGIC POLICY 30  
Locally Significant Landscape   
Within the locally significant landscape areas development will not be allowed which 
would adversely affect the quality , character, appearance or the setting  of those 
areas .  
Development decisio ns across the Borough will be informed by the relevant sections 
of the Landscape Character Assessment for Staffordshire or any subsequent 
versions, and the Council will expect applicants to demonstrate that they have taken 
full account of the LCA and its g uidelines to produce a scheme which reflects 
existing landscape character and where possible seeks to enhance landscape 
quality.  
 
Green Belt  and Strategic Green Gaps  
3.213  As indicated on the Policies Map, a small portion of the Burton upon 
Trent/Swadlincote Green Belt lies within the Borough. This Green Belt is 
established, and no alterations to it are proposed in this Local Plan, in line with  
154 
 guidance in the NPPF and a par tnership approach with South Derbyshire 
District Council. The area within the Green Belt is also within the coal 
consultation area which is considered to be a constraint on development. The 
purpose of the Green Belt is to prevent the coalescence of these t wo 
settlements and assist with the regeneration of Swadlincote. The existence of 
the Green Belt therefore continues to be necessary and relevant.  
 
3.214  The Strategic Green Gap Topic paper sets out the justification for the 
identification of strategic green gap s, with the policies map identifying the 
location of this local designation. The purpose of Strategic Green Gaps is also 
to prevent the coalescence of settlements, and whilst not all development is 
precluded within them, only development that does not have  a negative effect 
on the openness of the landscape will normally be permitted. An example might 
be infill within an existing development which does not significantly exceed the 
height of surrounding buildings.  
STRATEGIC POLICY 31  
Green Belt  and Strategi c Green Gaps  
The Council will apply the policy guidance as set out in  the NPPF in considering any 
applications for development in the Green Belt, together with all relevant Local Plan 
policies.  
Development within Strategic Green Gaps will only be permitted where it would not 
have a negative impact on the openness of the landscape.  
 
HEALTHY COMMUNITIES POLICIES  
Open Space, Sports and Recreation Areas  
3.215  The provision and protection of open space, sports and recreation areas is 
vital to maintaining and improving well -being within the community as 
acknowledged in the Health policy. Within the Borough there are many such 
spaces and facilities that are of var ying quality which are well used, these 
include leisure centres, parks, equipped children's play areas, outdoor 
football/rugby/cricket pitches, allotments, semi -natural green spaces and 
amenity green spaces. Some open spaces can also encourage walking and 
cycling by acting as sustainable travel corridors, provide opportunities for 
physical activity to improve health and well being as well as improv ing the 
environment and landscape.  It is important that sports facilities have the 
necessary infrastructure to  encourage participation and maximise their usage: 
this will depend upon the nature of their use, and location, for example 
floodlighting or changing facilities.   
155 
  
3.216  The Council has in partnership with Sport England prepared and adopted an 
Outdoor Sports Delivery 
and Investment Plan, 
setting out a strategy for 
delivering additional 
provision of outdoor sports 
facilities within the Borough 
to address current deficits 
and new demand 
associated with planned 
housing and population growth.  
 
3.217  The document identifies two additional ‘Hub’ sites in the Borough, the first in 
Burton which is the forthcoming new Burton Rugby Club site in Branston and in 
Uttoxeter, a site at Leasowe s Farm, part of the quarry site, which has been 
identified. These sites are anticipated to be multi sports hub sites that will be 
able to sustain themselves due to a partnership approach to site development 
and future use.  Three existing sports hubs are a lso identified for protection and 
improvement (Shobnall Leisure Complex, Holland Sports Ground Barton under 
Needwood and Oldfield’s Sports and Social Club, Uttoxeter) . 
 
3.218  The Outdoor Sport and Infrastructure Plan 2013, also identifies a shortfall of 
junior f ootball, cricket, junior rugby and hockey pitches across the plan period, 
with the most acute current shortage and future potential shortfall being for 
junior football pitches in Burton. Due to the importance of open spaces and their 
contribution to health y lifestyles and the quality of the environment, all existing 
open spaces should be protected or replaced. Loss without replacement can 
only be permitted in exceptional circumstances. The Council’s Leisure service 
will be consulted on proposals for loss of  facilities or for new facilities, 
particularly with regard to demand, accessibility and deficits of provision. The 
Council supports the improvement of access by the community to school 
facilities . The current Open Space SPD, adopted in 2010 is based on th e 
‘PPG17 Audit’ that informed the Greenspace Strategy, adopted in September 
2009. This assessment of open space and outdoor sports facilities was partially 
updated as part of the Outdoor Sports and Infrastructure Plan.  The Council will 
update the Open Spa ce, Sport and Recreation SPD to ensure future provision 
of facilities.   
 
Sports Pitches, The Washlands   
156 
 STRATEGIC POLICY 32  
Outdoor Sports and Open Space Policy  
Where appropriate, the Borough Council will seek to deliver new provision and 
protect and enhance existing outdoor open space and sport facilities by safeguarding 
sites for the benefit of local communities and applying the standards  set out in 
Appendix 2.  
Developers will be expected to contribute either by on -site provision and/or a 
S106/CIL contribution as appropriate. The  Council may direct any outdoor sports 
contribution/provision to the established or proposed Sports Hubs in place of on -site 
provision where appropriate.  
Quality and value criteria for playing pitches and outdoor sports will be in accordance 
with Sport En gland and National Governing Body technical standards.  
Quality, and value criteria for open space will measured against the criteria set out in 
Appendix 2.  
Support will be given  to proposals which address deficiencies in football, cricket and 
hockey  pit ches, and to the creation of new facilities where unmet demand or need 
for improvements have been identified  
The co -location of facilities will be encouraged so that different types of sporting 
activities and facilities for sport and recreation can be located next to each other.  
The Council will support enhanced quantity and quality of sports facilities and  the 
improvement of access to school  facilities  by working with SCC and school 
academies and securing community use where opportunities arise and the 
improvement would meet an identified need.  
Open space, outdoor sports facilities and recreation land should not be built on  
unless an assessment has been undertaken which has clearly shown the open 
space, buildings or land to be surplus to requirements,  the loss resulting from the 
proposed development would be replaced by equivalent or better provision in terms 
of quantity and quality in a suitable location or the development is for alternative 
sports and recreational provision, the needs for which clear ly outweigh the loss. 
Where such spaces/facilities are lost any replacement must be made available prior 
to the loss of the original facility.  
Where appropriate, contribution towards recreational provision from non residential 
development, in the form of a menity space, which is designed to complement the 
nature of the development will be sought.  
Sites within the National Forest will be expected to contribute towards woodland  
157 
 planting in accordance with Strategic Policies 24 and 26 o n Green Infrastructure a nd 
the National Forest.  
The Council will support designation of Local Green Space through Neighbourhood 
Plans where the space has a special character and significance to the local 
community by virtue of its beauty, historic significance, recreational value  or wildlife 
value.  
 
Indoor sport  
3.219  Indoor sports facilities, specifically pools and 
sports halls , have a significant role in 
maintaining the health and wellbeing within 
the community. The e xisting facilities of 
Meadowside and Uttoxeter Leisure Centres 
are provided by East Staffordshire BC. 
Through partnership working with Burton 
College, Staffordshire County Council and 
individual schools, further indoor sports and 
pool sites are accessible throughout the 
Boro ugh. 
 
3.220  The private sector also provides some 
facilities such as health clubs, some of which 
have pools. Whilst these are member driven, 
all facilities play their part in meeting the 
needs across the borough. Community access to schools outside school hours 
will continue to be encouraged and extended where possible.  
 
3.221  The Council have worked in Partnership with Sport England to assess future 
need for indoor sports halls and swimming pools. The assessment looked at 
existing provision, the current demand as well  as the implication of both 
increases in participation and population over the plan period.  
 
3.222  The assessment does not identify a need for an additional sports hall or 
swimming pool. However, it does indicate that there will be some very full sports 
facilities in Burton and Uttoxeter if no action is taken. Both Meadowside and 
Uttoxeter Leisure Centr es would, by 2031, be operating at or near 100% 
capacity as would Shobnall leisure Complex, Paget High School Business and 
Enterprise College and De Ferrers Academy Trent Campus. However, there is 
spare capacity in other parts of the Borough and facilities  that are not currently 
accessible to the public that could become available.  
 
Meadowside Leisure Centre   
158 
 3.223  The Council will investigate with other service providers options for increasing 
the amount of sports hall and swimming pool supply to relieve the pressure on 
those facilities where capacity is above the recommended Sport England 
capacity level. For sports halls this is 80% and pools 70%. Another finding from 
the assessment is that, by 2031, the stock of indoor sports facilities will be quite 
old, even taking into account the su ccessful refurbishment of Meadowside and 
the forthcoming refurbishment of Uttoxeter Leisure Centre. A programme of 
modernisation should be therefore be maintained.  
STRATEGIC POLICY 33  
Indoor sports policy  
Making the best use of existing resources  
The Bor ough Council will seek to protect and enhance the existing indoor sports 
facilities throughout the Borough  and will work with partners to increase the supply of 
available sports hall and pool capacity to offset demand on those facilities that are 
already, or assessed as being at capacity by 2031.  
New Provision of Sports Halls and Pools  
The Council will monitor the level of provision and overall capacity of indoor sports 
facilities to ensure that there remains sufficient capacity throughout the Borough that  
is accessible to all. O pportunities for additional provision of indoor sports facilities , 
including pools, will be encouraged and supported either as a standalone facility or 
as part of another use. Additional provision should be located to avoid over -provision 
of one particular use in one location.  
The Council will support enhanced quantity and quality of sports facilities and the 
improvement of access to school facilities by working with SCC and school 
academies and securing community use.  
The delivery of additional facilities will, if necessary be listed in a CIL  s.123 List or as 
part of a S106 agreement if an identified need arises.   
 
Health and Wellbeing          
3.224  Health and sense of wellbeing is a key part in the delivery of sustainable 
development. Development should be delivered in order to enhance sense of 
wellbeing and safety. East Staffordshire Borough is an attractive place to live 
and it is therefore importa nt that new development consolidates the existing 
environment and distinctive sense of sense of place utilising high quality design 
which contributes to resident’s sense of wellbeing. East Staffordshire Borough,  
159 
 whilst a relatively affluent borough, has so me significant pockets of deprivation, 
particularly in Burton all of which have related health issues. The gap between 
the ward with the lowest life expectancy and the ward with the highest life 
expectancy is ten years for men and eight years for women. Li fe expectancy for 
men is slightly lower in East Staffordshire Borough (78 years) than the national 
average (78.9 years) East Staffordshire Borough has  higher levels of infant 
mortality compared to the England average and Child Health indicators suggest 
that East Staffordshire Borough and in particular Burton upon Trent, have 
higher rates of smoking in pregnancy as well as lower levels of breastfeeding. 
We know that safe and appropriate housing is an important factor in keeping 
rates low.   We recognise that  there are issues as stated within the Staffordshire 
Joint Strategic Needs Assessment 2012 with obesity, male life expectancy and 
also indicators which suggest poor mental health in East Staffordshire. It is 
important that the Local Plan does its part to d eal with these health issues by 
delivering high quality development that provides a high quality living 
environment and encourages healthy lifestyles. Evidence shows that health 
inequalities are often linked to factors such as poor access to green space an d 
poor housing.  
 
3.225  A wide range of factors in addition to the provision of health services are 
important for determining public health. Good health is related to good quality 
housing and developments, well designed streets including the layout of 
neighbourho ods, quality and efficiency transport systems, opportunities to 
experience leisure and cultural activities and green and open space. This 
variety of factors has led to the development of health impact assessments 
(HIAs) of policies, plans and projects whic h aim to appraise the health impacts 
of a proposal.  
 
3.226  Planning proposals can have a significant impact on improving health through 
the quality of the development, provision of a range of amenity and open space, 
layout of the development and linkages to the  wider infrastructure network .  
STRATEGIC POLICY 34  
Health and Wellbeing  
Health and sense of wellbeing is a key part in the delivery of sustainable 
development as well as improving the health of East Staffordshire Borough’s 
communities. Development proposals should be delivered in order to enhance health, 
safety and a sense of wellbeing through:  
 Providing high quality design which minimises and mitigates against potential 
harm from  risks such as air, noise, water and light pollution as well as land  
160 
 contamination;  
 Development proposals that maximise the opportunity for movement, social 
interaction and physical activity, through green infrastructure (networks), 
sustainable transport routes including  facilities for cycle storage, and open 
spaces, including where possible, community growing spaces such as 
allotments and community orchards;  
 Development proposals that take account of the need to create socially vibrant 
and connected communities  
For major  applications, and others deemed appropriate, Health Impact Assessments 
(HIAs) will be required.  
The HIA will need to demonstrate how the health and well being of the users and 
residents of the scheme have been considered, particularly demonstrating how 
healthy lifestyles and social interaction will be achieved once the scheme is 
completed .  
 
The Council’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan supports the Local Plan document. It 
identifies, where possible, the physical, social, community and green infrastructure 
required to support growth in the Borough.  
 
 
Accessibility and Sustainable Transport  
3.227  In order to deliver sustainable development within East Staffordshire, there is 
a need to encourage and enable a continued move towards more sustainable 
patterns and modes of travel, and ways of reducing the need to travel, 
especially to and within the urb an areas of Burton and Uttoxeter. The Local Plan 
policies have an important role 
to play in helping to reduce the 
need for travel by, for 
example, enabling people to 
work from home, and 
promoting the co -location of 
facilities that are likely to 
generate st rong flows of 
people wanting to go from one 
to another.  
 
3.228  But where this is not 
possible, then reducing 
reliance on the private car, especially for short journeys, will also contribute 
towards policy objectives relating to the quality of the places we crea te, 
improved air quality and reduced environmental impacts, opportunities to 
Uttoxeter Train Station   
161 
 improve health through walking and cycling, and reduced contribution by travel 
to climate change.  In addition, reduced congestion would support efforts to 
attract investment into  Burton in particular, and would reduce the time and cost 
caused by delayed journeys. In 2011, Staffordshire County Council published 
the third Local Transport Plan (LTP), setting out the County Council's proposals 
for transport provision within the county , including walking, cycling, public 
transport, car based travel and freight, together with the management and 
maintenance of local roads and footways. An Implementation Delivery Plan for 
Burton has also been published, setting out key objectives and areas  of 
improvement across the town, particularly on the main routes across the town 
where there are known congestion issues at peak times . In 2013 Staffordshire 
County Council in response to transport mode lling and technical work 
undertaken to support the production of the Pre Submission plan revised its 
Integrated Transport Strategy for East Staffordshire Borough. In it a package of 
measures are set out which will mitigate the strategic impact of development  
across the main towns.   
   
3.229  Through   adopting   Route Based Strategies, the  Highways  Agency (now 
Highways England)  aim  to  identify  network  needs relating  to  operations,  
maintenance and where appropriate, improvements   to   proactively facilita te 
economic growth. For Burton Upon Trent there are capacity issues along the 
A38, particularly at the Clay Mills junction. Large scale proposals will need to 
consider implications on the network and where necessary contribute towards 
the any projects iden tified as part of the Route Based Strategy.   
  
3.230  There are over 30 level crossings in the East Staffordshire area, both of a 
vehicular and pedestrian type, some being public rights of way and others being 
private user crossings only. Development proposals af fecting the safety of level 
crossings in the East Midlands are an extremely important consideration for 
Network Rail and it is important that possible impacts from development such 
as increases in vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic are considered to ensur e 
there are no impacts upon safety and service provision. The Council has a 
statutory responsibility under planning legislation to consult the statutory rail 
undertaker where a proposal for development is likely to result in a material 
increase in the volu me or a material change in the character of traffic using a 
level crossing over a railway.   
162 
 STRATEGIC POLICY 35  
Accessibility and Sustainable Transport  
The Council is committed to developing a well integrated community connected by a 
sustainable transport  system which connects people to jobs, services and community 
facilities. This will be achieved encouraging the use of sustainable modes of transport 
and by taking the following steps:  
 Supporting measures which facilitate the modal shift to public transpo rt, 
cycling and walking demonstrated in a travel plan;   
 Promoting and supporting traffic management measures and environmental 
improvements which increase safety, improve air quality, and make our towns 
and villages more attractive;  
 Promoting electronic communications allowing businesses to operate 
throughout the borough reducing the need to travel;  
 Ensuring development proposals provide appropriate infrastructure measures 
to mitigate the adverse effects of development traffic and other environmental 
and safety impacts (individually or cumulatively);  
 Securing appropriate provision or contributions towards the cost of any 
necessary highway improvements, provision of public transport services and 
facilities, and walking and cycling facilities in line with th e most up to date 
Staffordshire County Council Integrated Transport Strategy;  
 Requiring developments which are likely to have an impact on the wider 
highway infrastructure to be accompanied by a transport assessment clearly 
setting out how the likely impac ts of the development will be addressed.  
 
The Council’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan supports the Local Plan document. It 
identifies, where possible, the physical, social, community and green infrastructure 
required to support growth in the Borough.  
Rail Network  
Any planning application which may increase the level of pedestrian and/or vehicular 
usage at a level crossing should be supported by a full Transport Assessment 
assessing impact and mitigation measures including assessment of closure as a first 
principle. The developer is required to fund any qualitative improvements required to 
the level crossing identified as a direct result of the development proposed.  
Network Rail will not allow new level crossings except in exceptional circumstances  
whereby it may be replacement or relocation.   
 
 
  
163 
  
  
4
7 
 4
7 
  
29 Part 
 
Detailed 
Policies  
 4 
4  
164 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Barton  Marina   
165 
 Index of Detailed Policies  
 
Policy  Policy Title  Page Number  
DP1 Design of New Development  166 
DP2 Designing in Sustainable Construction  168 
DP3 Design of New Residential Development, 
Extensions and Curtilage Buildings  170 
DP4 Replacement Dwellings in the Countryside  171 
DP5 Protecting the Historic Environment : All Heritage 
Assets, Listed Buildings , Conservation Areas and 
archaeology  172 
DP6 Protecting the Historic Environment: Other Heritage 
Assets  174 
DP7 Pollution  and Contamination  176 
DP8 Tree Protection  177 
DP9 Advertisements  178 
DP10  Blue infrastructure  and  Water Recreation  179 
DP11  European Sites  181 
DP12  St George ’s Park 183 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
166 
 Design of New Development  
 
4.1 Strategic Policy 24 sets out the principles that applicants will need to address to 
meet  the Council’s commitment to ensuring high standards of design. Set out 
below are more detailed considerations that the applicant will need to take into 
account, and the Council will use these to assess the application. Additional 
policy guidance is given in this policy to  ensure all considerations are factored 
into the design of new developments.  
 
DETAILED POLICY 1 
 
Design of New Development  
Planning permission will normally be granted for development which responds 
positively to the context of the surrounding area and in itself exhibits a high quality of 
design and is compliant with the East Staffordshire Design Guide (or any 
superseding docu ment).  In assessing the design of development proposals, the 
Borough Council will have regard to the following factors where appropriate to the 
type of development:  
 The layout of the development in terms of its circulation routes and 
arrangement of build ings and how they relate to such factors in the 
surrounding area  including the pattern of settlements . 
 
 How the design of the development responds to the historic environment 
context and conserve and enhance heritage assets, including their setting.  
 
 How e lements of any open spaces, both hard and soft, in the proposed 
development relate to each other, the proposed buildings, the characteristics 
of the site and the surrounding landscape’s character and appearance , 
including appropriate public realm.   
 
 The density and mix of the development in relation to its context and the uses 
to which the development will be put.  
 
 The massing of the development in terms of the shape, volume and 
arrangement of the building or buildings in relation to the context of the 
development.  
 
 How the height and massing of the proposed development relates to the 
height of surrounding development and any vistas, views or skylines.  
 
 Materials to be used within the development and how they interrelate with 
each other, their immediate and overall context and any traditional  and 
vernacular  materials used in the area.  
 The detailing and construction techniques to be used in the development and  
167 
 how they interrelate with each other, and relate to the immediate and overall 
context.  
 
 The impa ct on the amenity of occupiers of nearby residential properties in 
terms of loss of light, outlook, or privacy.  
 
 The extent to which the design of the development takes into account the 
safety of users and reduces the potential for crime to occur in accor dance 
‘Designing Out Crime’ guidance  
The design and layout of parking areas will be in accordance with the Council’s 
adopted Parking Standards or updated document and will be required to:   
(i) Minimise the visual impact on the area, and integrate parking into the 
design to minimise the impact on the design and amenity of existing 
buildings, particularly on public facing frontages;  
(ii) Incorporate appropriate landscaping, particularly where necessar y to 
break up larger parking areas;  
(iii) Provide clearly demarcated parking bays and safe pedestrian routes 
through the parking area which link with existing routes  
(iv) Incorporate any required lighting sensitively to avoid adversely affecting 
the amenities of occ upiers of nearby dwellings, or the safe use of the car 
park itself and adjoining highways  
(v) Make adequate provision of spaces for disabled users  
(vi) Make adequate provision for the parking/storage of cycles  
  
Designing in Sustainable Construction   
 
4.2 All development should meet the needs of residents and businesses without 
compromising the ability of future generations to enjoy the same quality of life 
that the present generation aspires to. Development which positively addresses 
the impacts of climate cha nge and delivers a sustainable approach through 
achieving the highest viable standards of energy and natural resource efficiency 
and reduction in carbon emissions will be encouraged.  New development 
should be located and designed in ways which will reduce  greenhouse gas 
emissions.  
 
4.3 The Government’s Carbon Plan 2011 sets out how the UK will achieve 
decarbonisation within a framework of the Energy Act 2011, setting the low  
168 
 carbon economy transition, while securing energy security and minimising costs 
to consumers, particularly poorer households.  
 
4.4 This policy builds on Strategic Policy 23 on High Quality Design and 
complements Policy SP 28 on Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Generation 
by setting detailed sustainable construction and design criteria which wi ll 
contribute towards the reduction of carbon whilst also reducing the use of other 
resources. The Borough Council will prepare a Supplementary Planning 
Document with advice on the types of renewable energy technology and low 
carbon design that may be most  appropriate in the different types of location in 
the Borough.  The Borough Council will also optimise opportunities for 
renewable and low carbon delivery in line with national schemes such as 
carbon offsetting where possible.  
DETAILED POLICY 2 
Designing in Sustainable Construction   
The Council actively encourages the design and delivery of low carbon buildings and 
will permit energy improvements to existing buildings subject to the other policies in 
this Plan, particularly protecting the amenity of neigh bours.  
It is expected that development will:  
 follow the energy hierarchy of designing out energy demand from the outset, 
incorporating energy efficiency measures and introducing low carbon energy 
supply,  
 incorporate the best environmental practice and co nstruction techniques in 
line with the Governments zero carbon buildings policy  
 use appropriate materials, form, orientation and layout of buildings to 
maximise the benefits of passive solar heating, cooling, lighting and natural 
ventilation;  
 incorporate  facilities to minimise the use of water and the creation of waste, 
and which maximise opportunities for recycling;  
 incorporate ecologically sensitive design and features for biodiversity early on 
within a development scheme , following guidance in ‘Biodiversity by Design’ 
or future revisions ; 
 where appropriate prepare Site Waste Management Plans to ensure that at 
least 25% of the total minerals used derive from recycled and reused content;  
 aim to reduce predicted carbon emissions through the generat ion of  
169 
 decentralised and renewable or low carbon energy generation where 
practicable;  
 where on site renewable or low carbon energy generation is not practical, a 
contribution towards an off -site renewable energy or carbon reduction scheme 
will be acceptable;  
In developments large enough to make such systems feasible, the viability of 
decen tralised energy systems such as combined heat and power and community 
heating systems based on renewable and low -carbon energy should be explored. 
District or shared energy schemes between neighbouring developments, new or 
existing, will be considered posi tively.   
Where a planning application is submitted that involves an extension to an existing 
building, or the demolition and re -building of an existing building, the Council will 
expect those requirements above that are appropriate to the scale of develop ment to 
be met where it is feasible and reasonable to do so.  
 
Design of New Residential Development, Extensions and Curtilage 
Buildings  
 
4.5 Residential development, including extensions and buildings within the curtilage 
of a dwelling house can have particu lar impacts on the amenity of neighbours, 
and the following policy provides specific criteria for this type of development to 
avoid adverse effects.   
 
4.6 The East Staffordshire Design Guide provides guidance on how to meet the 
Council’s standards for high quality design as well as how new development 
and extensions can be blended successfully into their surroundings where this 
is appropriate.  
 
4.7 National policy states that there is no 
presumption that land which is 
previously  developed is necessarily 
suitable for residential development, 
and defines back gardens as 
‘greenfield’ land. In making decisions 
on the appropriateness of 
development on back garden land, 
the Council will apply the criteria in 
this policy and national po licy. 
 
Alders Reach, Rolleston on Dove   
170 
 DETAILED POLICY 3 
 
Design of New Residential Development, Extensions and Curtilage Buildings    
Planning permission for new residential development and/or extensions will normally 
be granted planning permission where they meet the following criteria  and would, in 
all other respects, be compliant with the East Staffordshire Design Guide (or any 
superseding document) and other relevant policies in the development plan:  
 the design and layout would not result in overlooking between principal 
windows of d wellings;  
  
 the development would not result in a material loss of light to principal 
windows or the private amenity space of adjacent dwellings;  
 
 the development would not have an unacceptably overbearing impact on 
adjacent dwellings;  
 
 the design and layo ut allows outdoor domestic activities to be undertaken in 
reasonable privacy, bearing in mind the type of dwelling and likely household 
size of both the existing surrounding dwellings and the proposed 
dwelling/extension;  
 
 buildings  constructed within the curtilage for uses that are ancillary to the 
dwelling are appropriately designed (especially in terms of scale) and sited for 
their intended ancillary use, paying regard to the size of  the dwelling and its 
curtilage.  
Where infilling  is proposed in the gardens of houses, it will only be permitted where:  
(i) it would not result in the unacceptable intensification of the area ; 
(ii) it would be sensitively integrated into the townscape or landscape;  
(iii) it would not be visually obtrusive or poorly screened from neighbouring 
properties ; and       
(iv) the size of garden to the new dwelling, and existing building is appropriate for 
the size of the dwelling and reflects the spatial pattern of the area . 
Outside Settlement Boundaries  
Extensions to existing dwellings will only be permitted if:  
 they are modest in relation to the original dwelling and retain its identity  
or 
 the extensions are necessary to improve a smaller or substandard dwelling to 
modern standards and the design criteri a in Supplementary Planning 
Guidance is followed; and   
171 
  buildings for uses ancillary to the dwelling are modest and designed 
specifically for that purpose.  
Extensions of residential curtilages within the countryside will only be permitted 
where they do not adversely affect landscape character by the intrusion of urban 
features.  
 
Replacement dwellings in the countryside  
4.8 The Council recognises that existing dwellings within the countryside may be 
subject to proposals to replace them. However this is limited to those which are 
not temporary in nature or the result of a temporary permission.   
 
4.9 The impact of a replacement dw elling is likely to increase with its size especially 
in relation to its impact on surroundings and being out of scale with its plot.  
DETAILED  POLICY 4  
Replacement dwellings in the countryside  
Planning permission for replacement dwellings in the countryside will only be granted 
where:  
(i) The proposed new dwelling is not significantly larger than that which it 
replaces;  
(ii) The proposed new dwelling is not more intrusive in the landscape than that 
which it  replaces;  
(iii) Residential use has not been abandoned.  
(iv) The  replacement would  not  result  in  the  loss  of  a  building which  displays  
the special qualities of a traditional rural building.  
(v) The replacement dwelling is more energy efficient than the original dwelling 
and where possible reuses bu ilding materials  
 
 
Protecting the Historic Environment  
 
4.10 The historic environment is a rich and precious resource and forms an important 
part of sustainable development as prescribed in the NPPF. National policy has 
changed in a way that views the histor ic environment in a holistic sense, which 
includes heritage assets but also the wider setting and landscape, including 
archaeology. Policy is informed by various pieces of evidence base, including 
Conservation Area Appraisals as well as Historic Environmen t Records, 
Extensive Urban Surveys and Historic Environment Character Assessments  
172 
 prepared by Staffordshire County Council’s Historic Environment team, 
documents prepared by English Heritage such as the West Midlands 
Farmsteads study and Village Design Sta tements prepared by Parish Councils. 
Such evidence should form part of the planning decision making process in 
addition to the historic environment policies contained in the Local Plan. The 
Council will continue to update the evidence base such as updating  
Conservation Area Appraisals.  
 
4.11 Further supplementary guidance will be provided to support the historic 
environment policies in the Local Plan, such as updating the Design 
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) and commissioning new SPDs to 
cover specific topic areas such as local heritage assets, vernacular rural 
buildings, historic shopfronts and Burton upon Trent’s brewing heritage . 
 
DETAILED POLICY 5 
 
Protecting the Historic Environment : All Heritage Assets, Listed Buildings, and 
Conservation Areas  and Archaeology  
The significance of the Borough’s historic environment and heritage assets 
(designated and undesignated) will be protected and enhanced where new 
development proposals will be expected to make a positive contribution to the fabric 
and integrity of existing  buildings, conservation areas or other non-designated  areas 
where there is distinctive character, strategic views or a sense of place.  
All heritage assets  
New development proposals within the historic environment such as within 
conservation area s or which  fixes or adjoins a listed building must respect the 
context of the character and appearance of such heritage assets  in terms of using 
sound design principles which are stipulated in the Design SPD. The design of new 
development must be informed by the con text of its surroundings and take account 
of the local character through the Historic Environment Record and/or other relevant 
sources of information/evidence base.  
 There may be an opportunity to introduce innovative development which 
complements the exis ting historic environment through high quality contemporary 
architecture and energy efficient technology, where such technology would not 
cause harm to the character, setting or fabric of the heritage asset.  
The reuse of heritage assets contributes to viab le places and should be seen as a 
positive opportunity. The reuse of a heritage asset should continue in its original 
function where possible, but where this is not economically viable, a sensitive 
change of use should be considered which retains the signi ficance of the heritage  
173 
 asset. Development Proposals should articulate how the heritage asset can 
accommodate the new use without causing significant harm to the context and fabric 
of the asset.   
Listed Buildings  
Alterations, extensions to listed buildings 
or development within the listed 
curtilage or that which affects the setting 
of a listed building will be considered if 
accompanied with a Statement of 
Significance which sets out how the 
proposal would p otentially affect the 
significance of the asset. It is expected 
that alterations and extensions to listed 
buildings should generally preserve and 
enhance the integrity and setting of a 
listed building without harm.  
If harm cannot be avoided, then this must  be articulated in the Statement of 
Significance with clear justification as to why harm is not avoidable and how such 
harm can be mitigated.  Development Proposals to reuse vacant listed buildings, 
such as those that are at risk or neglected, for reuse are  supported, subject to 
appropriate methods of repair and that conversions do not have an undue impact on 
the existing fabric of the building.   
The loss of listed buildings or significant fabric of a listed building, a significant 
building in a conservation  area or heritage asset normally constitutes substantial 
harm and therefore should be considered ‘wholly exceptional’. The loss of historic 
fabric through a development proposal must be clearly justified and the loss of an 
entire listed building must be ac companied by a structural survey and full economic 
viability study which should provide evidence as to why the listed building cannot be 
retained. Where any loss (either fully or partly) has been determined to be justified 
then suitable mitigation in the f orm of a record should be made to advance 
understanding of the heritage asset’s significance.  
Conservation Areas  
Development will be permitted in conservation areas, including demolition of existing 
buildings or structures, where it can be demonstrated tha t it would protect and 
enhance the character and appearance, including the setting of the conservation 
area and is in accordance with the principles set out in the Design SPD as well as 
using guidance set out in relevant Conservation Area Appraisals.  
Shoul d a Conservation Area Appraisal be absent, then a Character Statement 
Listed Building , Bagot Street, 
Abbots Bromley   
174 
  should be  submitted. It will be expected 
that any new development within or 
adjacent the conservation area will 
respect the existing character in terms of 
scale, form, materials and deta iling. Key 
views into and out of the conservation 
(some of which may be identified within a 
Conservation Area Appraisal) will remain 
uninhibited.  
Scheduled Monuments, Archaeology & 
Archaeology Sites  
Scheduled Monuments are legally protected under the Ancient Monuments and 
Archaeological Areas Act (1979).  No works are to be carried out on Scheduled 
Monuments without Scheduled Monument Consent.  Applications for consent are 
submitted to English Heritage in their role as advisors to the Secretary of State for 
Culture, Media & Sport.  
Scheduled Monuments and other nationally important archaeological sites and their 
settings should be preserved and development proposals shoul d take account of 
undesignated archaeological sites and sites of potential archaeological interest. This 
should be informed by relevant information including the Historic Environment 
Record (HER), Historic Environment Assessment (HEA) and the Extensive Urb an 
Survey (EUS) (if relevant). Archaeological sites should be subject to appropriate and 
relevant assessment and field assessment where appropriate especially to 
determine whether remains should remain in insitu or to be excavated. All 
subsequent archaeolo gical reports should be deposited with to Staffordshire County 
Council so that the information is made publicly available.   
DETAILED POLICY 6 
 
Protecting the Historic Environment : Other Heritage Assets  
Shopfronts and Advertisements  
Traditional shopfronts  which form part of a listed  building , on a building within 
conservation areas or on a building that may be undesignated but is considered as a 
heritage asset should be retained and repaired. If a replacement shopfront is 
considered necessary, it should be  designed appropriately to relate to its host 
building and using the correct proportions. New shopfronts should utilise the existing 
facia and use appropriate materials, finishes and illumination. For shopfronts on 
listed buildings and on buildings within conservation areas, traditional materials and 
Converted Building within Clarence Street/ 
Anglesey Road Conservation Area   
175 
 finishes will be expected.  
Non-designated heritage assets   
Should planning permission be granted which includes the loss of an undesignated 
heritage asset an appropriate level of recording should take place prior to, and/or 
during, the commencement of works.  
Setting  
Planning permission will be permitted for development proposals that can 
demonstrate that the integrity and setting of a heritage asset will be protected and 
enhanced, through the use of high qual ity design, materials with appropriate scale 
and massing. This could be in the form of new building or new public realm.  
The roofscape and skyline of the towns of Burton upon Trent and Uttoxeter reinforce 
the character of not only the respective towns but the approaches to them. These 
should be protected with the sensitive location of new development and appropriate 
massing in order to retain an appropriate skyline.  
New development in villages and rural areas should carefully consider scale, 
massing and lay out (including orientation). This includes new the change of use and 
new development for historic farmsteads, where the historic layout and form should 
be preserved and legible.  
Historic Landscape and townscape character  
Where  Statements of Significance and Environmental Impact Assessments are 
required the applicant should also assess the impact of new development upon the 
wider historic landscape character, p otential  
unseen archaeology and local townscape 
and seek to protect a nd enhance it where 
appropriate. The assessment of historic 
character should also be used to inform the 
design of any new development and seek 
opportunities to retain any significant or 
defining assets of the historic 
landscape/townscape as part of open 
space and Green Infrastructure provision 
where appropriate.  
  
Registered parks and Gardens and Other Significant Landscapes  
Development proposals should consider the setting of a Registered Park and 
Garden and other significant landscapes in terms of potenti al overall impact of the 
wider landscape.  
 
The JCB Academy, Rocester   
176 
 Pollution  
4.12 Where a development is likely to be affected by, or generate a source of 
pollution, advice will be sought in the first instance, from the Council’s 
Enforcement service as to potential impacts, potential mitigation measures and 
other material considerations.  
 
4.13 In addition, coal mining activities have taken place within parts of the East 
Staffordshire area, particularly in the eastern part of Burton upon Trent. These 
activities will have left a legacy of potential land instability and other public 
safety issues.  
 
DETAILED POLICY 7 
 
Pollution  and Contamination   
Development  proposals will only be granted planning permission where they will not 
give rise to, or be likely to suffer from, land instability and/or unacceptable levels of 
pollution in respect of noise or light, or contamination of ground, air or water  
New developme nt proposals within the affected coal mining areas will need to take 
account of coal mining legacy issues and include appropriate mitigation or remedial 
measures.  
 
Tree Protection   
4.14 With parts of the Borough within the National 
Forest, and historically the Needwood Forest 
covering much larger areas, trees – whether 
within the town or the countryside – are 
important features worthy of protection. Whilst 
National Forest planting aims at increasing 
the amount of tree co verage, existing trees 
covered by Tree Preservation Orders (TPOs) 
need to be protected too.  Some significant Canals  
Development Proposals should take account of the historic significance of canals 
and its setting. New development alongside the Trent and Mersey Canal, including 
any brownfield sites should interact and int errelate with each other and utilise 
appropriate high quality design. Historic fabric and heritage assets such as 
structures that are related to the canal should be conserved.  
 
A Protected Tree within 
the Borough   
177 
 trees form part of historic and established landscapes, including historic 
farmsteads, so relevant farmstead evidence base including mapping should  be 
consulted as part of any development proposal.  New planting in developments 
can usually satisfactorily replace non -protected trees, but aged and mature 
trees can house a highly complex interdependent range of wildlife species 
which would be lost if the  tree was to be felled, as well as the visual amenity, so 
there has to be very good reason to allow felling.  
 
DETAILED POLICY 8 
 
Tree Protection  
Proposals which relate to both protected and non -protected trees will be subject to 
the following:  
Protected trees  
Felling of protected trees will only be granted consent where either:  
 the tree is in poor health and/or has lost its intrinsic visual amenity value; or  
 the tree is causing demonstrable harm/damage to the structural integrity of a 
building or other built form, and the harm cannot be remedied by other 
reasonable means.  
 
Following felling of protected trees replacement planting will be required unless there 
are exceptional circumstances which justify waiving this requirement .  
Works to protected trees will only be granted consent where the tree is of public 
visual amenity value and the works would not adversely affect the appearance of the 
tree and the contribut ion it makes to the visual amenity of the locality.  
Development will not be permitted that would directly or indirectly damage existing 
mature or ancient woodland, veteran trees or ancient or species -rich hedgerows  
Trees within development sites  
Proposals  where there are existing trees of value on site must ensure that  new 
developments or extensions to existing developments  are designed to:  
 Retain as many existing trees and other natural features as possible;  
 Minimise harm to existing trees and other na tural features  either in the short 
or long term;   
 Minimise conflict between trees and buildings in the future  through the 
design, layout and construction of the development   
178 
 Where tree removals are exceptionally agreed, a greater number of replacements 
will be expected at an appropriate level of maturity to ensure the visual amenity of 
the locality is not unduly harmed by the loss of established trees.  
Existing high quality woodland should be retained where possible within 
development designs to achieve an overall net gain in woodland area.  
 
Advertisements  
4.15 The term 
“advertisement” 
covers a very 
wide range of 
advertisements 
and signs 
including, but not limited to; posters and notices, placards and boards, fascia 
signs and projecting signs, pole signs and canopy signs, directional signs and 
flag advertisements.  
 
4.16 Whilst advertisements  are normally acceptable, they have a potential to cause 
visual intrusion and harm, especially in sensitive areas such as on listed 
building s and within conservation areas. In determining applications the Council 
will apply the principles  set out in this policy . 
 
DETAILED POLICY 9  
 
Advertisements  
Advertisements will normally be granted consent where the following criteria are met:  
 The advert  is well located in relation to the building or site on which it is to be 
displayed;  
 The advert is of a suitable size, colour and design;  
 The advert is of a design and materials that are acceptable in the locality;  
 The advert does not stand out as an inapp ropriate or unduly prominent 
feature;  
 The advert does not contribute to visual clutter in the street scene;  
 The advert does not impact upon the amenity of immediate neighbours;  
 The advert does not adversely affect the safety of users of any form of 
transport and pedestrians;  
 Any proposed illumination is appropriate to the locality and its position on the 
building or site.  
Advertisements at Barton Marina   
179 
 Blue Infrastructure and water based recreation  
4.17 The Borough contains the important natural watercourses of the River Trent and 
the River Dove, the River Tean and the Trent and Mersey Canal.  The Local 
Plan seeks to protect rivers and watercourses from developments that would 
have an adverse affect on th eir drainage functions, on water quality, nature 
conservation or their landscape 
value whilst encouraging 
development that contributes to 
the delivery of Blue Infrastructure, 
as a multifunctional green space 
and an important component of 
social infrastruct ure.  
 
4.18 Some of these watercourses and 
canals perform a variety of 
important recreation functions, 
which can include fishing, rowing 
and canoeing, or riverside walks and bike rides.  Opportunities to extend public 
access to rivers and canals will be support ed provided that their primary 
functions are protected. The Borough Council, working with partner 
organisations such as the Central Rivers Initiative and neighbouring authorities, 
will investigate opportunities for a joined -up approach to the Trent Valley area in 
order to balance the objectives of increased public access to river areas, 
recreation and leisure with landscape restoration and change, wildlife interests 
and mineral workings. The Council where possible will ensure that the 
objectives of the Cent ral Rivers Initiative are embedded into the early design of 
proposals, particularly for sustainable urban extensions and restoration projects.   
 
4.19 Delivery of the Central Rivers Initiative has the potential to be an important 
element of Green and Blue Infras tructure. The Central Rivers Initiative is a 
broadly based partnership working together to shape and guide the progressive 
restoration and revitalisation of the river valley between Burton -on-Trent, 
Lichﬁeld and Tamworth. The overall objective is to create  a landscape linking 
Burton with Tamworth that people are proud of and enjoy, with healthy rivers, 
lakes and valleys attracting wildlife and a thriving, sustainable, economy.  
 
DETAILED POLICY 10  
 
Blue Infrastructure and water based recreation  
Proposals f or recreational and tourist development on the boroughs river, canal or 
lake areas to improve public access and for suitable water sports, including fishing, 
Trent & Mersey Canal , Burton   
180 
 swimming, rowing and canoeing, will be encouraged provided that they do not 
adversely affect water  quality, carrying capacity of the watercourse, amenity, visual 
quality, navigation or value as a wildlife habitat of a watercourse, associated 
wetlands and surrounding environment.  
Developments should be integrated into the existing footpath, cycleway an d public 
transport network and highway access and parking issues should be satisfactorily 
resolved.  
Central Rivers Initiative  
The Borough Council, as a partner in the Central Rivers Initiative, will continue to 
support its objectives and work with appropr iate partners  to help realise the unique 
economic and tourism benefits of the Trent Valley corridor. Proposals related to the 
Trent River Corridor will be positively supported and promoted where they:  
 are of local relevance and significance  
 are consistent  with the Central Rivers Initiative strategy  
 maximise opportunities for landscape and agricultural restoration which  
contribute to positive landscape and ecological change  
 create a network of safe mixed use routes for walking, running, cycling, 
wheelchair , pushchair and equestrian access which, where possible link to 
or incorporate other local places of interest  
 lead to the formation or use  of lakes from former gravel quarries which 
offer a variety of recreation activities.  
 include tranquil areas for wild life and quiet activities  
 contribute towards long term water and habitat management  
 maximise opportunities for businesses both directly and indirectly  
 maximise opportunities for landscape and agricultural restoration  
 do not conflict with other planning policies in this document.  
For large scale mixed use developments in the Trent Valley Corridor the Council will 
encourage early consideration of the aims of the Central Rivers Initiative in the 
design process.   
European Sites  
4.20 East Staffordshire Borough Council has worked jointly with Staffordshire County 
Council , neighbouring Staffordshire District and Borough Councils , the Black 
Country authorities and Natural England on studies in relation to Cannock 
Chase SAC 20. Studie s have highlighted that the likely increase in pressures as 
a result of population growth across all the District s will have a significant 
negative impact on Cannock Chase SAC.  
 
                                                           
20 Habitats Directive 92/43/EEC   
181 
 4.21 Much of the Cannock Chase SAC falls within a popular and well -used Country 
Park. Visitor pressures 
include dog walking, horse 
riding, mountain biking and 
off-track activities such as 
orienteering, all of which 
cause disturbance and result 
in erosion, new track creation 
and vegetation damage.  
 
4.22 The studies provide recommendations f or addressing impacts such as 
additional recreation spaces together with other mitigation measures such as 
positive habitat management. The recommendations will form the basis for 
continuing discussions between the partners on the development of a Mitigati on 
and Implementation Strategy Supplementary Planning Document (SPD). 
Through implementation of the Detailed Policy, supported by a Supplementary 
Planning Document, suitable mitigation measures will be put in place to 
overcome possible adverse effects on t he integrity of the SAC. East 
Staffordshire Borough Council will continue to work with the SAC Partnership to 
ensure that developments will not have a significant negative effect on Cannock 
Chase through the production, adoption and implementation of a Mit igation 
Strategy.  
 
DETAILED POLICY 11 
 
European Sites  
Development will only be permitted where it can be demonstrated that it will not lead 
(directly or indirectly) to an adverse effect upon the integrity of a European Site, 
alone or in combination with other plans or projects.  
Cannock Chase Special Area of Conservation (SAC)  
All development that results in a net increase in dwellings within 15km of Cannock 
Chase SAC will be required to mitigate any adverse impacts upon the SAC in line 
with ongoing work by partner authorities to develop a Mitigation and Implementation 
Strategy.  This may include contributions to access management and visitor 
infrastructure; publicity; education and awareness raising;   
The effective avoidance and/or mitigation of any identified adverse effects must be 
demonstrated and secured (e.g. by legal agree ment) prior to approval of the 
development .  
 
 
 
182 
 The National Football Centre – St. George ’s Park  
4.23 St. George’s Park site extends to approximately 143 hectares and is located 7 
kilometres to the west of Burton upon Trent within an area of open countryside 
in the National Forest. It includes the 
National Football Centre complex 
which is a centre for exce llence in 
football training and development. 
Opened in 2012 the centre consists 
of a range of new buildings including 
a full size indoor synthetic football 
pitch, a sports hall and associated 
facilities for sport fitness, science and 
medicine, changing roo ms and 
ancillary office and training 
accommodation, as well as a 228 
bedroom hotel incorporating conference facilities and a health and fitness suite.  
 
4.24 The wider St. Georges Park site comprises a number of pitches as well as 
areas of grazed parkland, arab le farmland, woodland and wetland.  
 
4.25 St. George’s Park’s status as a sporting facility of national significance and the 
quality of facilities on offer acts as a strong catalyst for futher inward investment 
to the Borough. The site creates employment both d irectly and indirectly, uses 
local services and suppliers. It is apparent that a number of other businesses 
and sports -related activities and businesses are showing an interest in 
establishing a presence at St Georges Park because of the potential synergie s, 
interation and networking.  
 
4.26 It is also apparent that St Georges Park will need to undertake a number of 
developments to enhance the operation and management of the site, to enable 
opportunities for new development to be realised and operational requirements 
to be addressed. This Policy 
provides a framework within which 
new developments can be 
considered thereby ensuring that 
St.George’s Park is both capable of 
positively responding to investment 
in facilities and operational 
requi rements that will enable the site 
to establish itself at the forefront of 
sports, sports science and business 
training development.  
 St George’s Park   
183 
 DETAILED POLICY 12 
The National Football Centre – St. Georges Park  
The Local Plan  supports the development and operation of  St Georges Park as a 
centre for sports -related training, business development/research and community 
activities.  
The Borough Council will work in partnership with St Georges Park to prepare a 
development brief which sets out a masterplan and delivery pla n which will guide the 
future development of the site. The Borough Council will approv e in principle 
proposals where it can be demonstrated that there are no significant impacts on:  
 
1. the ecological interests within  the site  
2. the local transport infrastructure; and  
3. drainage/surface water run -off.  
 
Proposals will also have to:  
 respect the character and quality of the landscape;   
 champion exemplar design and incorporates  environmental credentia ls and 
sustainable construction; and  
 be in general accordance with a masterplan.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
184 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
185 
   
Part 
 
Monitoring 
Framework  
 5 
5  
186 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Entrance to St Peters Bridge  
Burton upon Trent   
187 
 Monitoring Framework  
5.1 The Local Plan will be delivered by the Borough Council working with partners, 
delivery agencies and through planned investment by the public and private 
sector. The key partners include service and infrastructure providers such as 
the strategic health aut hority or utility companies, housing associations, 
landowners and developers. The partnerships established through the Local 
Strategic Partnership (LSP) and Local Economic Partnership (LEP) provides an 
important framework within which the Local Plan will n eed to operate and 
important mechanisms for delivering the Local Plan vision, objectives and 
policies.  
 
5.2 The Council’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan supports the Local Plan document. It 
identifies, where possible, the physical, social, community and green 
infrastructure required to support growth in the Borough. Infrastructure planning 
is fundamental to the sound delivery of the Local Plan and the IDP will be 
reviewed regularly to ensure that it responds to any changes to funding 
streams, delivery partners and timescales. As a living document through regular 
review, the IDP will reflect the progress made through the lifetime of the Local 
Plan.  
 
5.3 The Local Plan is a single document which contains both the strategic 
overarching policies to facilitate growth within the Borough and detailed policies, 
both of which provide the decision making framework. Whilst it is not intended 
to prepare a site alloc ations document, this plan is clear when circumstance 
might change requiring the Local Plan will to respond quickly, succinctly and in 
a way that secures the delivery of the sustainable development strategy. A site 
allocations DPD is one example of the mec hanisms available to the Borough 
Council to introduce flexibility in the delivery of the policies set out in this Local 
Plan.  
 
5.4 Many proposals will need to be developed and delivered through more detailed 
policy documents:  
 
 Development briefs for strategic  sites;  
 New and existing Supplementary Planning Documents;  
 Conservation Area Appraisal reviews  
 Guidance and advice notes on specific subjects  
 
5.5 Monitoring the Local Plan is an important activity as it identifies the 
implementation of policies. The Council i s required to prepare a Local 
Authorities Monitoring Report on an annual basis which will contain an 
assessment of progress in preparing the Local Plan against identified  
188 
 milestones in the Local Development Scheme. It will also contain an 
assessment of the  extent to which objectives set out in the Local Plan are being 
achieved and targets are being met. The annual monitoring will be the first 
indication if objectives and targets are not being met, or circumstances have 
changed nationally or locally, which m ay give rise to a review of the Local Plan 
or other elements such as Supplementary Planning Documents or additional 
Development Plan Documents.   
 
5.6 The monitoring framework for the Local Plan is set out below. This contains a 
series of performance indicators  which will be incorporated into future 
Authorities Monitoring Reports.  
 
5.7 The monitoring framework will be reviewed and refined over time. The 
assistance of the implementation agencies and partner organisations that will 
be involved in implementing the policies and the proposals in the plan will be 
important in collecting data a nd measuring performance. The Monitoring 
Framework for the Local Plan is set out below.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
189 
  
 
  
 Strategic Policy  Objective  Indicator  Target  Trigger  Contingency  Data Source  
1 East 
Staffordshire 
Approach to 
Sustainable 
Development  The indicators, targets and contingency measures set out below for the policies all collectively contribute to the delivery of Po licy 1.  
2 A Strong 
Network of 
Settlements   
SO1, SO2, 
SO3, SO7   
1. To deliver 11,648 
homes in the 
Borough 
between 2012 -
2031 (613 per 
annum).  
2. To deliver 30 
additional 
hectares of 
employment land  
3. Total amount of 
employment 1.To ensure that 
the housing 
and 
employment 
requirements 
are delivered 
and directed to 
the network of 
settlements 
over the plan 
period.  Sites allocated 
not coming 
forward  Should a five 
year supply not 
be 
demonstrated or 
housing and 
employment 
sites are not 
delivered in a 
timely way then 
consider 
measures to 
bring forward In house monitoring and 
maintaining an up to date 
housing trajectory.  
3 Provision of 
Homes and Jobs 
2012 – 2031  
4 Distribution of 
Housing Growth 
2012 – 2031  Principle 1   
Presumption in 
Favour of 
Sustainable 
Development  The indicators, targets and contingency measures set out below for the policies all 
collectively contribute to the delivery of Principle 1.   
190 
  Strategic Policy  Objective  Indicator  Target  Trigger  Contingency  Data Source  
5 Distribution of 
Employment 
Growth 2012 – 
2031 
(allocations)  floorspace built.  
4. % of new 
development 
directed to 
Burton upon 
Trent, Uttoxeter, 
Tier 1 and 2 
villages and rural 
industrial estates  
5. Maintain a five 
year supply of 
deliverable sites.  2.To ensure that 
there is a 
flexible five -
year supply of 
deliverable 
housing sites.  
 
 sites in 
accordance with 
Policy 6 and its 
supporting text 
which sets out 
contingency 
mechanisms.  
 6 Managing the 
Release of 
Housing and 
Employment 
Land  SO1, SO2, SO3, 
SO5, SO8 and 
SO9 Significant 
changes in 
evidence base 
for housing and 
employment  
7 Sustainable 
Urban 
Extensions  
 SO1 and SO3  Commitments and 
completions on 
Sustainable Urban 
Extensions  To deliver a 
diverse mix of 
uses which 
supports new 
communities  No applications 
or no 
commencements 
on more than on 
Sustainable 
Urban Extension  Production of 
development 
briefs  In house monitori ng through the 
development control process   
191 
  Strategic Policy  Objective  Indicator  Target  Trigger  Contingency  Data Source  
8 Development 
Outside 
Settlement 
boundaries  
 SO2 and SO8  % of new housing 
and employment 
development taking 
place outside 
Burton upon Trent, 
Uttoxeter, Tier 1 
and 2 villages, 
Neighbourhood 
Areas and rural 
industrial estates 
not linked to rural 
diversification, rural 
exceptions policy or 
reuse of rural 
buildings  To ensure that 
the housing and 
employment 
requirements are 
delivered and 
directed to the 
network of 
settlements and 
industrial estates 
over the plan  
period  Significant 
increase in 
developments 
outside 
settlement 
boundaries  Review 
settlement 
boundaries as 
part of Sites and 
Allocations DPD  In house monitoring through the 
development control process.  
 
9 Infrastructure 
Delivery and 
Implementation  
 SO3 and SO5  Number of 
developments with 
legal agreements 
for infrastructure 
contributions and 
what the 
contributions are to 
deliver.  Contributions in 
line with the IDP  S106 for major 
developments 
not progressing  Regular review 
of IDP to ensure 
that 
infrastruc ture 
keeps pace with 
growth and 
existing/new 
funding streams 
are available.  In house monitoring and review 
of IDP   
192 
  Strategic Policy  Objective  Indicator  Target  Trigger  Contingency  Data Source  
10 Education 
Infrastructure  
 
 
 
 SO5 Delivery of schools 
as set out in the 
policy.  Education 
infrastructure 
provision  as set 
out in the policy.  No primary or 
secondary 
schools being 
progressed  Regular review 
of IDP to ensure 
that 
infrastructure 
keeps pace with 
growth and 
existing/new 
funding streams 
are available.  In house monitoring and review 
of IDP  
11 Bargates/Molson 
Coors Strategic 
Allocation   SO6 Delivery of 
development on the 
site. Development 
delivered.  
 No planning 
applications or 
pre application 
discussions on 
site As policies 2 -6. 
Partnership 
working with 
landowners and 
developers  
Compulsory 
Purchase Order  In house monitoring  
 
12 Derby Road, 
Burton upon 
Trent, 
Regeneration 
Corridor  SO6 No planning 
applications or 
pre application 
discussions on 
site  
193 
  Strategic Policy  Objective  Indicator  Target  Trigger  Contingency  Data Source  
13 Burton and 
Uttoxeter 
Existing 
Employment 
Land Policy  SO7 Available 
employment land  No planning 
applications 
granted on 
employment site 
defined as `good’ 
in the ELR 
leading to loss of 
employment land.  Significant loss 
of employment 
land Sites and 
Allocations DPD 
to identify and 
allocate 
employment 
land In house monitoring through the 
development control process.  
Regular Employment Land 
Review   
14 Rural Economy  
 SO8 Number of planning 
applications 
granted for 
countryside -based 
enterprises.  No planning 
applications 
granted that 
would have a 
detrimental 
impact.  Significant 
number of 
applications for 
rural based 
enterprises  The 
development 
control process 
and pre -
application 
discussions will 
be used to 
mitigate impacts 
and ensure that 
only appropriate 
activities are 
located within 
the countryside.  In house monitoring through the 
devel opment control process.  
  
194 
  Strategic Policy  Objective  Indicator  Target  Trigger  Contingency  Data Source  
15 Tourism, culture 
and leisure 
development  
  
SO1, SO6, SO8, 
SO9, SO12   
1. Number of 
applications 
approved for 
tourist 
accommodation.  
2. Number of 
applications for 
new and 
improved 
tourism/cultural 
and leisure 
related 
development.  Encourage more 
activity within the 
Borough, diversify 
the tourism offer 
and support 
initiatives within 
the National 
Forest.  No applications 
for tourism, 
culture and 
leisure 
development  Work with 
tourism partners 
and the ESBC 
regeneration 
team to promote 
tourism further if 
tourist activity is 
not coming 
forward.  Partnership working.   
195 
  Strategic Policy  Objective  Indicator  Target  Trigger  Contingency  Data Source  
16 Meeting Housing 
Needs  
  
SO2  
1. Number and type 
of dwellings built 
each year 
(including the 
number of 
bedrooms in 
each property).  
2. Number of 
dwellings 
completed to 
provide specialist 
accommodation 
to meet the 
needs of an 
ageing 
population.  
3. Number of 
homes built to 
Building 
Regulations 
requirement 
M4(2)   
1. To deliver a 
diverse mix of 
dwellings which 
includes 
smaller bed 
houses in 
accordance 
with the 
Council’s 
evidence.  
2. To deliver 
homes to meet 
the ageing 
population in 
line with 
identified need.  
3. To deliver 
homes to 
Building 
Regulations 
requirement 
M4(2) where 
applicable   
Major 
residential 
schemes not 
providing mix 
of housing 
required in 
line with 
evidence  
 
  
1. Revise the 
Council’s 
SPD on 
Housing 
Choice.  
2. Update the 
SHMA 
evidence  In house monitoring.   
196 
  Strategic Policy  Objective  Indicator  Target  Trigger  Contingency  Data Source  
17 Affordable 
Housing  
  
SO2  
1. Number of 
affordable 
houses built 
each year.  
  
1. To deliver 
112 
affordable 
homes per 
year across 
the plan 
period.  
 No affordable 
homes being 
provided on site 
or by way of off 
site contributions 
on major 
residential 
schemes  Work with 
parishes and 
Registered 
Landlords to 
bring forward 
affordable 
needs surveys.  In house monitoring and through 
development control processes.  
18 Residential 
Development on 
Exception Sites  
 SO2 Number of houses 
granted permission 
on exception sites.  90 units across 
the plan period.  No Exception 
sites coming 
forward  Consider 
reviewing policy 
and providing 
additional 
guidance in an 
SPD. Work with 
parishes and 
Registered 
Landlords to 
bring forward 
affordable 
needs surveys.  In house monitoring and through 
development control processes.   
197 
  Strategic Policy  Objective  Indicator  Target  Trigger  Contingency  Data Source  
19 Sites for 
Gypsies, 
Travellers and 
Travelling 
Showpeople   SO2 Number of 
additional pitches 
(net) Requirement set 
out in evidence.   
Evidence 
demonstrates an 
increase in 
pitches required   
1. Review 
evidence 
regularly.  
2. Consider a 
DPD to 
address the 
issue.  In house monitoring and through 
development control processes.  
20 Town and Local 
Centres 
Hierarchy  
 SO6 Total amount of 
retail, leisure, office 
and cultural 
floorspace granted 
planning 
permission within 
Town Centre 
boundaries.  Focus for retail, 
leisure, office and 
cultural facilities 
on Burton upon 
Trent and 
Uttoxeter.    
No 
developments 
coming forward 
within town, rural 
and local centres   
1. Identify why 
facilities are 
not being 
delivered or 
lost and 
prepare an 
alternative 
delivery 
strategy 
and/or 
review policy 
if necessary.   
3. Set up 
annual town 
centre health 
checks.  In house monitoring   
198 
  Strategic Policy  Objective  Indicator  Target  Trigger  Contingency  Data Source  
21 Managing Town 
and Local 
Centres  
 SO6 Number of 
developments 
requiring retail 
assessments 
granted planning 
permission.  All developments 
qualifying to 
undertake a retail 
assessment.  Increase in 
applications for 
town centre uses 
outside of town 
centre boundary  Review policy if 
necessary.  In house monitoring  
22 Supporting Local 
Communities  
 SO6 Number of 
community facilities 
lost. Loss of facilities 
contrary to policy   
Significant loss 
of community 
facilities   
1. Work with 
developers 
at pre -
application 
to ensure 
that policy is 
adhered to.  
2. Review 
policy of 
necessary.   In house monitoring  
Partnership working to 
investigate ways to combine 
services and facilities  
23 Green 
Infrastructure  
 SO1 Major 
developments to 
provide green 
infrastructure and 
link to existing 
green corridors  
 Rural and urban 
development will 
provide GI and 
link existing green 
corridors.   
Major 
Developments 
not incorporating 
green 
infrastructure 
principles into 
development  
schemes   
1. Work with 
developers 
at pre -
application 
to ensure 
that policy is 
adhered to.  
 
2. Prepare 
additional 
guidance if 
necessary.  Through development control 
processes.  
 
 
Partnership working with open 
spaces team, , community 
groups, Parish Councils and 
National Forest to deliver Green 
Infrastructure through CIL   
199 
  Strategic Policy  Objective  Indicator  Target  Trigger  Contingency  Data Source  
24 High Quality 
Design  
Historic 
Environment  
 SO1 Number of 
proposals  refused 
on design 
principles and 
historic 
environment  
impacts.   
 
 Ensure good 
design in decision 
making.  
Ensure 
protection, 
conservation and 
enhancement of 
historic assets.  Increase in 
developments 
refused planning 
permission on 
design grounds   
1. Training of 
staff, use of 
specialists in 
the 
development 
control 
process.  
2. Prepare 
additional 
guidance to 
assist 
developers  
3. Work with 
developers 
at pre -
application 
to ensure 
that policy is 
adhered to.  Through development control 
processes.  
25 SO9 Increase in 
heritage at risk 
(buildings and 
conservation 
areas)  
26 National Forest  
  Contributions 
secured through 
s.106 agreements  
 
 Planting of new 
woodland in line 
with National 
Forest Strategy  
 No on -site 
planting or off 
site contribution 
for planting 
sought  Work with 
developers at 
pre-application 
to ensure that 
policy is 
adhered to.  Through development control 
processes.   
200 
  Strategic Policy  Objective  Indicator  Target  Trigger  Contingency  Data Source  
27 Climate Change, 
Water Body 
Management 
and Flooding   
 SO10  1. Developments 
permitted contrary 
to advice from 
Environment 
Agency and 
Staffordshire 
County Council  
2. Developments 
permitted in Flood 
Risk areas  
3. Developments 
incorporating 
sustainable urban 
drainage systems 
(SUDS)   1. No 
developments 
permitted 
contrary to advice 
from Environment 
Agency and 
Staffordshire 
County Council.  
2. No 
development is 
permitted in flood 
risk areas.  
3. All new 
development to 
incorporate 
SUDS where 
required.  Developments 
not incorporating 
SUDS  
 
 
Increased in 
planning 
permissions 
granted contrary 
to advice from 
the Environment 
Agency and 
Staffordshire 
County Council  Include SuDs 
and flood risk 
sections  within 
Climate Change 
SPD In house monitoring through 
development control processes  
28 Renewable and 
Low Carbon 
Energy 
Generation  
 SO11  Number of low 
carbon and 
renewable energy 
schemes installed 
in the Borough  In line with 
national targets 
for renewable 
energy 
generation  
 No applications 
for low carbon or 
renewable 
energy proposals  Training of staff, 
use of 
specialists in the 
development 
control process.  
Partnership 
working to 
investigate 
funding sources In house monitori ng through 
development control records   
201 
  Strategic Policy  Objective  Indicator  Target  Trigger  Contingency  Data Source  
for appropriate 
schemes  
29 Biodiversity and 
Geodiversity  
 SO12  Number of 
developments 
impacting on 
biodiversity or 
landscape  
 Development will 
only be permitted 
where it delivers 
a net gain for 
biodiversity.  
Development 
accords with 
landscape 
character type.  
 Increase in 
applications 
permitted with 
biodiversity loss   
1. Training of 
staff, use of 
specialists in 
the 
development 
control 
process.  
2. Prepare 
additional 
guidance to 
assist 
developers  Through development control 
processes.  
30 Locally 
Significant 
Landscape  
 SO12  Planning 
applications 
granted with 
negative impact 
on landscape   
202 
  Strategic Policy  Objective  Indicator  Target  Trigger  Contingency  Data Source  
31 Green Belt and 
Strategic Green 
Gaps  
  Applications 
approved in the 
Green Belt/SGG   
No application 
approved 
contrary to policy  
 
 Major 
applications  
approved in 
Green Belt and 
Strategic Green 
Gap Work with 
developers at 
pre-application 
to ensure that 
policy is 
adhered to.  
 In house monitoring and through 
development control processes.  
32 Outdoor Sports 
and Open Space 
Policy  SO1, SO3, SO6   
1. Net loss of  
open space or 
recreation 
space.  
2. Projects 
improved to 
increase 
spaces and 
facilities.    
1. No net loss of 
open spaces 
or facilities.  
2. New and 
improved 
open spaces 
and facilities 
in areas of 
deficiency  
 Loss of outdoor 
or indoor sports 
provision  
No new provision 
of sports facilities   Review 
evidence base 
and revise 
policy if 
necessary.  In house monitoring and through 
development control processes.  
33 Indoor sports 
policy  
34 Health  SO1 1. Number of 
planning 
permissions 1. All major 
development  
applications to be Major 
applications not 
accompanied by Work with 
developers at 
pre-application In house monitoring and through 
development control processes.   
203 
  Strategic Policy  Objective  Indicator  Target  Trigger  Contingency  Data Source  
granted for 
development with 
secured Health 
Impact 
Assessments.   
2. Applications 
providing 
community growing 
space.  supported by a  
Health Impact 
Assessment  
2. Major 
development to 
provide 
community 
growing space 
where possible.  a HIA  
Major 
applications not 
incorporating 
growing space 
within proposal  to ensure that 
policy is 
adhered to.  
35 Accessibility and 
Sustainable 
Transport  
 SO3 Number of planning 
permissions 
granted for 
development with 
secured Travel 
Plans.  All major 
development 
applications to be 
supported by 
Travel Plan  Major 
applications 
being approved 
without a Travel 
Plan Work w ith 
developers at 
pre-application 
to ensure that 
policy is 
adhered to.  In house monitoring and through 
development control processes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
204 
  Detailed Policy  Objective  Indicator  Target  Trigger  Contingency  Data Source  
1 Design of New 
Development   
SO1  
1. Number of 
planning 
permissions 
refused for major 
developments on 
poor design 
grounds.  
2. Number of 
developments 
meeting standards 
with the BREEAM 
and Building for 
Life standards.  
3. Number of 
residential 
planning 
permissions 
refused on poor 
design grounds.  
4. % of permissions 
refused in 
accordance with 
policy   
1. Development 
should deliver 
a high quality, 
sustainable 
built 
environment.  Increase in 
applications 
refused on 
design grounds  Ensure high quality 
design is delivered 
through development 
control process.  
 
Review East 
Staffordshire Design 
SPD.  
 
Produce Climate 
Change and 
Sustainable 
Construction SPD  In house monitoring 
and through 
development control 
and building control 
processes.  2 Designing in 
Sustainable 
Construction   
3 Design of New 
Residential  
Development, 
Extensions and 
Curtilage 
Buildings  
 
4 Replacement 
Dwellings in the 
Countryside  
5/
6 Protecting the 
Historic 
Environment  SO9 Number of 
Conservation Area 
Appraisals and 
management plans.   
1. Ensure 
development 
has a positive 
impact on the 
natural and 
historic 
environment  
 
2. Protect and Increase in 
development 
permitted 
resulting in 
harm to the 
historic 
environment  Ensure high quality of 
design  is delivered 
through development 
control process.  In house monitoring 
and through 
development control 
processes.   
205 
  Detailed Policy  Objective  Indicator  Target  Trigger  Contingency  Data Source  
enhance the 
Borough’s 
heritage 
assets, 
historic 
character and 
designated 
conservation 
areas.  
 
7/
8/
9 Pollution/Tree 
protection/Adve
rtisements  SO1, SO6, SO11, 
SO12  Number of planning 
permissions approved 
contrary to policy.  No permissions 
granted which 
would be contrary 
to policy.   
Increase in 
enforcement 
action relating 
to pollution, 
tree protection 
or 
advertisements   
1. Work with 
partners both 
internally and 
externally to 
review policies 
and procedures in 
relation to 
policies.  
2. Work with 
developers at pre -
application to 
ensure that policy 
is adhered to.  
3. Prepare guidance 
to assist 
applicants with 
proposals.  In house monito ring 
and through 
development control 
processes.  
10 Water 
Recreation and 
Blue 
infrastructure  SO12  Number of proposals 
coming forward.  Ensure 
development has 
a positive impact 
on the water 
environment.  Applications 
permitted not 
meeting criteria 
in policy  1.Work with partners 
both internally and 
externally to review 
policies and 
procedures in relation In house moni toring 
and through 
development control 
processes.   
206 
  Detailed Policy  Objective  Indicator  Target  Trigger  Contingency  Data Source  
  to policies. Work with 
developers at pre -
application to ensure 
that policy is adhered 
to. 
Prepare guidance to 
assist applicants with 
proposals.  
11 European Sites  SO12  Condition of the 
European Sites.  No planning 
permissions 
granted contrary 
to policy which 
would have a 
detrimental 
impact on the 
European Sites.  Applications 
permitted 
contrary to 
policy  If condition 
deteriorates work with 
partners to identify 
mitigation 
strategy/prepare 
mitigation SPD.  Monitoring of sites by 
Natural England.  
12 St Georges 
Park SO12  Applications in 
relation to St Georges 
Park 
 No of applications 
in accordance 
with policy.  Applications 
permitted 
contrary to 
policy  Work with partners to 
review masterplan  In house monitoring.   
 
 
 
  
207 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Appendices 
& Glossary  
Appendice s 
& Glossary  
  
208 
 Appendix 1 - National Forest Planting Guidelines  
  
1. Housing:  
(a) Sites under 0.5 ha: Normal landscaping appropriate to site  
(b) Sites over 0.5 ha:  20% of development area to be woodland         
(c) Sites over 10ha and Sustainable Urban Extensions: 30% of the development 
area to be woodland planting and  landscaping  
 
2. Industrial:   
a) Sites under 1 ha: Normal landscaping appropriate to the site’s setting and 
landscaping  
b) Sites over 1 ha: 20% of the development area to be woodland planting and 
landscaping  
c) Sites over 10ha and Sustainable Urban Extensions: 30% of the development 
area to be woodland planting and landscaping   
 
3. Highway Schemes in the National Forest : 
Highway schemes should achieve well wooded settings with planting 
adjoining the roadside and off site.  Appropriate landscaping should also 
accompa ny road improvements.  
 
 
 
 
 
   
209 
 Appendix 2 – Open Space and Playing Pitch Standards  
 
Analysis 
area Standard (ha per 1,000 population)  
Burton  1.73 
Rural 1  2.47 
Rural 2  2.12 
Uttoxeter  1.40 
 
 
 
 
210 
 Quality and value criteria for playing pitches and outdoor sports  will be in 
accordance with the Sport England  Facilities Planning webpages.  
Quality, and value criteria for open space  will measured against the criteria set out 
below:  
 Physical access, e.g., public transport links, directional signposts.  
 Access -social, e.g., appropriate minimum entrance widths.  
 Parking including disabled parking and cycle parking.  
 Information signage, e.g., presence of up to date site information.  
 Equipment and facilities, e.g., assessment of both adequacy and maintenance 
of provision such as seats,  benches, bins, toilets.  
 Location value, e.g., proximity of housing, other greenspace.  
 Site problems, e.g., presence of vandalism, graffiti.  
 Healthy, safe and secure, e.g., staff on site.  
 Maintenance and cleanliness, e.g., condition of landscape.  
 Typology specific profile, e.g., presence of environmental education facilities 
(natural/semi -natural provision).  
 Groups that the site meets the needs of, e.g., elderly, young people.  
 Site potential.  
 Multifunctionality and connectivity with the wider GI network   
  
211 
 Appendix 3 – Housing Trajectory    
 
Strategic Site AllocationExpected 
CapacityExpected 
Capacity 
(minus actual 
completions)2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 2015/16 2016/17 2017/18 2018/19 2019/20 2020/21 2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 2027/28 2028/29 2029/30 2030/31
Branston Depot 483 483    25 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 58
Bargates 100 100 40 60
Molson Coors  High Street 250 250 40 40 40 40 40 50
Molson Coors – Middle Yard 300 300 0 30 30 40 40 40 40 40 40
Derby Road, Burton 250 250 40 50 50 50 60
Pirelli, Burton 300 300 20 40 40 40 40 40 40 40
Land South of Branston 660 660 50 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 50
Branston Locks 2580 2580 0 40 120 120 120 150 150 200 200 200 200 200 200 230 225 225
Tutbury Rd /Harehedge Ln 500 500 9 15 0 0 0 40 40 40 40 40 50 60 60 60 46
Beamhill 950 950 0 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 90 90 100 110
Guinevere Ave 100 100 30 40 30
Brookside Ind Estate 90 90 0 30 30 30 0
JCB Pinfold Road, Uttox 257 257 0 40 40 40 40 40 40 17
Uttoxeter West 750 750 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 70 70 70 70 70 60 60
Hazelwalls 400 400 0 0 50 50 50 50 50 70 80
Barton, Efflinch Lane 130 129 1 40 50 39
Rolleston College Fields 100 100 40 40 20
Land South of Rocester 90 90 0 50 40
Tutbury, Burton Road 224 171 0 2 51 45 45 45 36
Total Allocations 8514 8460 0 2 52 164 380 444 621 610 760 720 710 730 677 540 510 528 510 331 225
8460
2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 2015/16 2016/17 2017/18 2018/19 2019/20 2020/21 2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 2027/28 2028/29 2029/30 2030/31
228 204 246 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
12 7 28 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
20 15 16 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
8 6 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
2 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
270 232 30054 988 7472
Units Actually Completed
Completions
Burton & Uttoxeter Completions
Tier 1 Completions
Tier 2 Completions
Tier 3 Completions
Completions not in the above areas (rural)
Total Completions 0 0
802BURTON UPON TRENT Brownfield Allocations
UTTOXETER Brownfield Allocations
UTTOXETER Greenfield Allocations
TIER 1: STRATEGIC VILLAGE AllocationsBURTON UPON TRENT Greenfield AllocationsUnits actually delivered 
in...Housing units due for delivery in......... 
212 
 Appendix 3 – Housing Trajectory Continued   
 
 
Windfall AllowanceOriginal 
AllowanceRemaining 
Allowance*2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 2015/16 2016/17 2017/18 2018/19 2019/20 2020/21 2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 2027/28 2028/29 2029/30 2030/31
Burton & Uttoxeter Windfall 1359 1131 71 71 71 71 71 71 71 71 71 71 71 70 70 70 70 70
Barton allowance 25 21 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 1 1 1
Rolleston allowance 25 21 9 8 2 1 1
Rocester allowance 25 21 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 1 1
Tutbury allowance     26 22 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 1 1 1
Tier 2 villages allowance 160 143 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 8
Tier 3 villages  allowance 250 241 16 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15
Total Windfalls * 1870 1600 0 0 0 111 108 100 99 99 98 98 98 98 99 101 100 100 98 97 96
1600
* Projections have been reduced by 270 to take into account completions in the first three years of the plan (1870-270 = 1600). 270 units have been proportioned in line with the percentage of completions for each tier/area.
Expected 
Capacity2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 2015/16 2016/17 2017/18 2018/19 2019/20 2020/21 2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 2027/28 2028/29 2029/30 2030/31
300 0 15 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 15
250 40 40 40 40 40 50
37 20 17
83 20 20 20 23
140 40 40 35 25
53 25 28
18 18
10 10
Barton Marina 75 35 40
25 11 14
991 0 0 0 0 88 203 212 125 118 80 30 30 30 30 30 15 0 0 0
991
11,375.00
11,051.00
11,051.00
11,907.00Total of actual Completions 856
Total of actual completions + projected supply for 1st 6 
years of plan2454Total of actual completions + 
projected supply for plan periodTotal of Units - Proportioned over the plan period 1598 9453Roycroft Farm, Uttoxeter
Land North of Rocester 
Land at Eyes Farm Rocester
Land at Demountfort Way, Uttoxeter 
Efflinch Lane (additional to Strategic Site)
Total Outside Strategy
0 291 700
Total Site Capacity (Original)
Total Site Capacity (Remaining)Land of Henhurst Road, BurtonWINDFALL  ALLOWANCE - Burton upon Trent and Uttoxeter
DEVELOPMENT ALLOWANCES – Tier 1: Strategic Villages
DEVELOPMENT ALLOWANCES – Tier 2: Local Service Villages
DEVELOPMENT  ALLOWANCE – Tier 3: Small Villages and Other Settlements
0 319 1281
Units actually delivered in...
Sites Outside the Strategy
Forest Road, Burton upon Trent
Red House Farm, Burton Upon Trent 
St Marys Drive, StrettonHousing units due for delivery in........ 
213 
 Appendix 4 – Glossary   
Adopted Local Plan : A local plan that has been through all of the stages of 
preparation, including Local Plan Examination, and has been formally adopted by the 
Local Planning Authority.  
Affordable housing : Social Rented, Affordable Rented and Intermediate housing 
which is provided to eligible households whose needs are not met by the market and 
which will remain affordable unless the subsidy is recycled for alternative affordable 
housing provision.  
Afford able housing led residential development:  residential development which 
is entirely or predominantly affordable housing.  
Affordable Rented housing : Housing which is let by a Registered Provider of 
Social Housing to a person allocated that Dwelling in accor dance with the Council’s 
Allocation Scheme at a controlled rent of no more than 80% of the local market rent.  
Agricultural land classification : The process used to classify land according to its 
quality in terms of its soil productivity and topography. Grades 1, 2 and 3a are the 
most versatile classifications.  
Ancient woodland : An area of woodland that has had a continuous cover of native 
trees  and plants since at least 1600 AD and in special circumstances semi -natural 
woods of post 1600 but pre 1900 origin.  
Biodiversity : The variety of life on earth embracing all species, communities, 
habitats and ecosystems associated with the terrestrial, aqu atic and marine 
environments. Usually the term refers to the variety of species within a specified 
area.  
Brownfield land : Previously developed land, which is or was occupied by a 
permanent structure, including the curtilage of the developed land (although  it should 
not be assumed that the whole of the curtilage should be developed) and any 
associated fixed surface infrastructure. This excludes: land that is or has been 
occupied by agricultural or forestry buildings; land that has been developed for 
mineral s extraction or waste disposal by landfill purposes where provision for 
restoration has been made through development control procedures; land in built -up 
areas such as private residential gardens, parks, recreation grounds and allotments; 
and land that wa s previously -developed but where the remains of the permanent 
structure or fixed surface structure have blended into the landscape in the process of 
time.   
214 
 Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL):  A levy on new development that will be set 
by local planning aut horities, and can be used to pay for new infrastructure such as 
schools and roads.  
Conservation area : An area of special architectural or historic interest, the character 
or appearance of which it is desirable to preserve or enhance, designated under 
section 69 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990.  
Density : The intensity of development within a given area, usually measured for 
housing in terms of the number of dwellings per hectare.  
Designated Heritage Assets:  A World Heritag e Site, Scheduled Monument, Listed 
Building, Protected Wreck Site, Registered Park and Garden, Registered Battlefield 
or Conservation Area designated under the relevant legislation.   
Development Plan:  A development plan sets out the policies and proposals for the 
development, conservation and use of land and buildings in a particular local 
planning authority area. The development plan is the most important consideration 
for local planning authorities when they decide on a planning application. The 
developme nt plan generally includes Development Plan Documents (DPDs) that are 
part of a local planning authority’s Local Plan. This includes waste and minerals 
documents prepared by county councils. The Localism Act 2011 made two key 
changes to the development pla n. First, the Regional Strategies that have been part 
of the development plan since 2004 have been abolished. Secondly, Neighbourhood 
Plans that have been prepared covering any part of the local planning authority area 
will become part of the development p lan when they have been adopted.  
Development : Defined in section 55 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 as 
‘The carrying out of a building, engineering, mining or other operations in, on, over or 
under land; or the making of any material change in t he use of any building or land.’  
Discounted Sale housing:  Housing which is sold in perpetuity to an eligible person 
for their occupation at not more than 60% of the open market value.  
Duplex/Tyneside Flats:  A building providing one flat on the ground flo or and one 
flat on the first floor, each with a separate entrance, so that the building resembles a 
single two -storey dwelling.  
Dwelling:  An individual self contained unit of accommodation containing the normal 
facilities for cooking, eating, washing and s leeping associated with use as a dwelling 
house. Includes self contained units within a development which may also provide 
communal facilities and services and non self  contained accommodation.  
Edge of centre : A location which is just beyond the town centre boundary.  
Environmental impact assessment : A procedure and management technique 
which ensures that the likely effects of a new development on the environment are  
215 
 fully appraised and taken into account before the determination of development 
proposal s. 
Evidence Base:  The information gathered by a planning authority to support the 
preparation of development documents. It includes quantitative (numerical values) 
and qualitative (feelings and opinions) data  
Examination in Public: The method of considerin g public views on a draft Local 
Plan or proposed changes to it.  
Extra -care Housing:  A development of clustered dwellings and communal facilities 
for households with varying care needs where overnight on site care services will be 
available to occupiers so that they are able to remain in their own homes as their 
care needs increase. May also include accommodation  for staff.  
Flood plain : All land adjacent to a watercourse over which water flows in times of 
flood or would flow but for the presence of flood de fences where they exist. The 
limits of the flood plain are defined by the peak level of a 1 in 100 year return period 
flood or the highest known water level, whichever is greater.  
Geodiversity:  Geodiversity is the variety of rocks, minerals, fossils, soils , landforms 
and natural processes.  
Government Planning Policy:  National planning policies that local planning 
authorities should take into account when drawing up development plans and other 
documents and making decisions on planning applications. These po licies are 
mostly included in the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF), with some also 
included in Minerals Planning Policy Statements and Guidance notes.  
Greenfield land : A general term to describe all sites that have not previously been 
developed.  
Gypsies and Travellers:  Persons of nomadic habit of life including such persons 
who on grounds only of their own or their family’s or dependents’ educational or 
health needs or old age have ceased to travel.  
Habitats Regulations Assessment:  A Habitats Regulations Assessment is the 
assessment of the impacts of implementing a plan or policy on international 
protected sites for nature conservation. These sites are Special Protection Areas 
(SPAs) for birds identified under the Birds Directive an d Special Areas of 
Conservation (SACs) for habitats and species under the Habitats Directive. Ramsar 
sites (wetlands of international importance designated under the Ramsar 
Convention) are also considered under the assessment, as are candidate SACs and 
proposed SPAs. The purpose of Habitats Regulations Assessment is to ensure that 
plans will not result in significant damage to protected wildlife sites. The assessment 
considers the impacts of a land use plan against conservation objectives of the site  
216 
 and id entifies whether it would adversely affect the integrity of the site. Where 
significant negative effects are identified, alternative options should be examined to 
avoid any potential damaging effects.  
Hectare (Ha) : An area of 10,000 m2 or 2.471 acres.  
High way: Road and/or footway (usually adopted by the County Council for the 
purpose of maintenance).  
Housing for Older People:  Bungalows or houses which are specifically designed 
with older people wanting to downsize in mind, offering for example a downstairs 
bathroom and/or a level access or low threshold shower . These are mainstream 
market dwellings which will be  sold freehold without any age restriction or 
requirement to pay service charges.  Applicants will need to evidence that proposed 
dwellings have been designed with older people in mind.  
Housing need : Assessed by examining the suitability of present housing and the 
ability of households to afford market priced housing.  
Infrastructure : The network of communications and utility services such as roads, 
drains, electricity, water, gas and telecommunication, required to enable the 
development of land. The term is also used in relation to community or social 
services such as schools, shops, lib raries and public transport.  
Intermediate Housing:  Discounted Sale housing and Shared Ownership housing.  
Listed building : A building of special architectural or historic interest. The planning 
(Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 gives the De partment of Culture, 
Media and Sport on advice from English Heritage, powers to list buildings of special 
architectural and historic interest. Listed buildings are graded according to their 
importance (Grades I, II* and II).  
Local centre : A small group of shops and services generally serving the immediate 
local area.  
Local distinctiveness : That which sets a locality apart from anywhere else.  
Local Nature Reserve : A Local Authority designation, in consultation with Natural 
England , under the provisions of t he National Parks and Access to the Countryside 
Act 1949, to protect sites of special wildlife interest and enhance public enjoyment of 
wildlife.  
Local Plan:  A portfolio or folder of documents setting out the planning strategy for a 
local planning authorit y area. The Local Plan identifies where future development 
should take place to meet local needs for homes, businesses, shops and other 
services, plus the infrastructure to support them. It also decides which areas should  
217 
 be protected from development beca use they are important to local people or have 
environmental or heritage qualities that should be conserved.  
Local Strategic Partnership:  Local Strategic Partnerships are bodies with 
representatives of the community, public, private sector and other agenci es that work 
to encourage greater public participation in local governance by drawing together 
local community plans and producing an overall community strategy for each local 
authority area. Local Plans must have regard to, and should be the spatial 
expre ssion of, the community strategy.  
Localism Act 2011:  A major piece of new legislation, which includes wide -ranging 
changes to local government, housing and planning. Significantly, the Act abolishe s 
regional planning, and introduces Neighbourhood Plans as part of the development 
plan.  
Market Housing for Rent:  A development of dwellings which will be owned by an 
Institutional Investor or Registered Provider of Social Housing which will let the 
individual dwellings to individual household occupiers at market rents for at least 10 
years following completion.  
Market housing led residential development: residential development of 
predominantly market housing.  
Masterplan : Comprehensive plans for an area of renewal or development, where 
particular attention must b e paid to site specific variables, in consultation with the 
local community.  
Material consideration : A legal term describing a matter or subject which is relevant 
(material) for a local authority to consider when using its powers under planning law.  
Monito ring:  The regular and systematic collection and analysis of information to 
measure policy implementation. Planning authorities are required by law to produce 
a Local Authorities Monitoring Report covering the monitoring of policies in the Local 
Plan that t hey are responsible for preparing.  
Nature conservation : Conservation of natural features, including geographical and 
geomorphological features, flora and fauna.  
Neighbourhood Plan:  Neighbourhood Plans, or Neighbourhood Development 
Plans, were introduced by  the Localism Act 2011. The term may also be used by 
some to refer to Neighbourhood Development Orders, which were also introduced by 
the Localism Act 2011 and are a second tool to enable neighbourhood planning. 
Communities will be able to prepare neighbou rhood planning documents, outlining 
how they envisage their area developing in the future.  
Non-designated Heritage Assets:  These are buildings, monuments, sites, places, 
areas or landscapes identified as having a degree of significance meriting  
218 
 considerati on in planning decisions but which are not formally designated heritage 
assets.   
Overall Catchment Area (OCA):  This is the area defined by the population and 
existing volume of retail expenditure for residents within the local area. Factors that 
influence consumers’ decisions on where to shop include, presence and strength of 
‘anchor’ traders, volume, quality and mix of retail provision, additional services and 
facilities, accessibility, parking and shopping environment . 
Planning permission : Needed before carrying out most types of development. To 
obtain planning permission it is necessary to make a planning applic ation to the local 
planning authority.  
Playing field : Areas reserved or maintained as outdoor playing space principally for 
organised pitch sports (football, cricket, rugby and hockey).  
Policies map : A map illustrating each of the detailed site specific po licies and 
proposals in the written statement, defining sites for particular developments or land 
uses, or for protection. The Policies Maps also includes more detailed Inset Maps.  
Ramsar site : A Wetland site listed under the Convention of Wetlands adopte d 
following an international conference in Ramsar, Iran, 1971. A Ramsar site is a 
statutory nature conservation designation.  
Regional Spatial Strategy:  Regional Spatial Strategies (or Regional Strategies) 
were introduced by the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004, and set out 
planning policies for each of the English regions outside of London. The Localism 
Act 2011 introduced powers that allow ed the Secretary of State to abolish Regional 
Spatial Strategies (and other Regional Strategies). The West Midlands Regional 
Spatial Strategy was revoked on the 20th May 2013.  
Renewable energy : The term renewable energy covers those resources that occur 
and re occur naturally in the environment. Sources include solar, wind, biomass and 
wave/hydroelectric power.  
Residential development:  any development of housing, including housing as part 
of a mixed use development  
Retirement Housing:  A development of clustered dwellings and communal facilities 
meeting requirement M4(3) of the Building Regulations (wheelchair user dwellings) 
with occupation restricted to older people. May also include other accommodation for 
staff.  
Secretary of State: The secretary of state is the most senior Government minister 
responsible for the work of his or her department. The Government department 
responsible for planning is the Department for Communities and Local Government 
(DCLG).   
219 
 Self-build Plot:  A serviced plot which will be sold to an individual household which 
will build, or have built by a builder unrelated to the vendor, a dwelling for its own 
occupation.    
Shared Ownership housing:  Housing which shall be occupied by eligible persons 
on a part rent/part sale basis under a HCA mod el lease or equivalent where the rent 
does not exceed 3% of the balance of the Capital Value and annual rent increases 
are limited to the Index plus 0.5%.  
Site of Special Scientific Interest:  A site of special scientific interest is identified by 
English N ature under section 28 of the Wildlife & Countryside Act 1981 as requiring 
protection from damaging development on account of its flora, fauna, geological 
and/or physiological features.  
Social Rented housing:  Housing which is let by a Registered Provider o f Social 
Housing to a person allocated that dwelling in accordance with the Council’s 
Allocation Scheme at a rent determined through the national rent regime (Rent 
Influencing Regime guidance).  
Spatial Strategy:  The spatial strategy identifies what and how  much development is 
needed to meet local needs, and broadly where it should be concentrated.  
SEA Statutory Consultees:  The 3 statutory consultees are English Heritage, the 
Environment Agency and English Nature.  
Supplementary planning documents (SPD) : Non statutory supporting information 
and advice which amplifies the policies and proposals of the Local Plan. SPD’s will 
be taken into account as a material consideration in deciding planning applications or 
appeals if it is consistent with the Development Pla n and has been subject to 
consultation.  
Sustainability appraisal  (SA): A systematic review of the Borough Council’s Local 
Plan policies, in order to evaluate their impacts on achieving sustainable 
development. The appraisal is an integral part of the plan  making and review 
process, which allows for the valuation of alternatives and is based on a quantifiable 
baseline of environmental, social and economic aspects of achieving sustainable 
development.  
Sustainable Community Strategy:  Sustainable Community St rategies are 
prepared for every local authority area. These provide a strategy for promoting or 
improving the economic, social and environmental well -being of their area and 
contributing to the achievement of sustainable development. They set out the issue s 
which are important to local people, and how they might be tackled, to move towards 
a ‘vision’ of how the place should be in the future.   
220 
 Sustainable development : The Bruntland Report provides the accepted definition 
of sustainable development as ‘Develop ment that meets the needs of the present 
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs’ 
(WCED, 1987). The principle of sustainable development may be broadly described 
as encompassing social, environmental and economic issu es, and also entailing 
concern with intra -generational and inter -generational themes.  
Telecommunications : An expanding range of communication services involving 
radio, television and telephone networks provided by means of cable, microwave 
and satellite.  
Town Centre : A town or traditional suburban centre, which provides a broad range 
of facilities and services, and which fulfils a function as a focus for both the 
community and for public transport.  
Transport assessment/travel plan : A system of assessment t o be submitted 
alongside applications for major development, which illustrates the likely modal split 
of journeys to and from the development together with details of proposed measures 
to improve access by public transport, walking and cycling.  
Travelling showpeople:  Members of a group organised for the purposes of holding 
fairs, circuses or shows. This includes such persons who on the grounds of their own 
or their family’s or dependents’ more localised pattern of trading, educational or 
health needs or old  age have ceased to travel.  
Trunk road : Roads carrying strategic traffic and under the jurisdiction of the 
Highways Agency. Also known as the Strategic Road Network.  
Vitality and viability  of town centres : The term relates to the economic health of 
town centres.  
Watercourse : Includes all rivers, streams, ditches, drains, cuts, dykes, sewers 
(excluding public sewers) and passages through which water flows.  
Wildlife corridor : Areas of natural/semi -natural habitat protected from development 
in order to main tain the movement of wildlife through the urban area.  
Windfall site : A site which comes forward and receives planning permission in a 
location which was not antic ipated or allocated in the Local Plan for that purpose.  
 
 
 