Epping Forest District 
Local Plan 
Submission Version 2017 The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
i | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
 
 
 contents  
Paragraph/ 
Chapter  Subject  Page  
 How do I respond to this document?  iv 
 Forew ord v 
Chapter 1 – Introduction and Setting the Scene  
 The P urpose of the Plan                           2 
 The Requirements of Plan Making   2 
 The Plan Making Process   3 
 Neighbourhood Planning   3 
 The Plan Area   3 
 Key issues for the Plan to address   9 
 Finding your way around this document   10 
Chapter 2 – Strategic Context and Policies  
 Strategic Context  14 
 Strategic Planning and Meeting the Duty to Co -operate  14 
 London Stansted Cambridge Corridor (LSCC) Core Area Strategic 
Vision  15 
 The West Essex and East Hertfordshire Strategic Housing Market and 
Functional Economic Market Area  16 
 Lee Valley Regional Park  17 
 Conservators of Epping Forest  18 
 Vision and Objectives for Epping Forest District to 2033  19 
 The Strategic Policies  21 
 Policy SP 1 Presumption in favour of sustainable development  23 
 Policy SP 2 Spatial Development Strategy 2011 -2033  31 
 Policy SP 3 Place Shaping  34 
 Policy SP 4 Development and Delivery of Garden Communities in the 
Harlow  and Gilston Garden Town  40 
 Policy SP 5 Garden Town Communities  42 
 Policy SP 6 Green Belt and District Open Land  51 
 Policy SP 7 The Natural Environment, Landscape Character and Green 
and Blue Infrastructure  52 
  The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | ii 
                             
 
  
Chapter 3  – Housing, Economic and Transport Policies  
Housing, Economic and Transport Policies   
 Housing   56 
 Policy H 1 Housing mix and accommodation types   57 
 Policy H 2 Affordable housing   59 
 Policy H 3 Rural exceptions   60 
 Policy H 4 Traveller site development   62 
 The Economy and Town Centres   63 
 Policy E 1 Employment sites   65 
 Policy E 2 Centre Hierarchy/Retail Policy   66 
 Policy E 3 Food production and glasshouses   69 
 Policy E 4 The visitor economy    71 
 Transport   71 
 Policy T 1 Sustainable transport choices   74 
 Policy T 2 Safeguarding of routes and facilities   75 
Chapter 4 – Development Management Policies  
Development Management Policies   78 
 Natural Environment and Green Infrastructure  78 
 Policy DM 1 Habitat protection and improving biodiversity   79 
 Policy DM 2 Epping Forest SAC and the Lee Valley SPA  82 
 Policy DM 3 Landscape Character, Ancient Landscapes and 
Geodiversity  84 
 Policy DM 4 Green Belt  84 
 Policy DM 5 Green and Blue Infrastructure  86 
 Policy DM 6 Designated and undesignated open spaces   88 
 Historic Environment  88 
 Policy DM 7 Heritage Assets   90 
 Policy DM 8 Heritage at Risk  91 
 Design  91 
 Policy DM 9 High quality design  92 
 Policy DM 10 Housing design and quality   94 
 Policy DM 11 Waste recycling facilities on new development   95 
 Policy DM 12 Subterranean, basement development and lightwells  96 
 Policy DM 13 Advertisements   97 
 Policy DM 14 Shopfronts and on street dining   98 
 Environmental policies  98 
 Policy DM 15 Managing and reducing flood risk   100 
 Policy DM 16 Sustainable Drainage Systems  102 
 Policy DM 17  Protecting and enhancing watercourses and flood 
defences  103 The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
Epping Forest District Local Plan   
iii | Submission Version December 2017  
Policy DM 18 On site management of waste water and water supply  105 
Policy DM 19 Sustainable water use  106 
Policy DM 20 Low carbon and renewable energy  108 
Policy DM 21 Local environmental impacts, pollution and land 
contamination  109 
Policy DM 22 Air Quality  111 
Chapter 5 – Places  
Overview of the site selection process  114 
Policy P 1 Epping  116 
Policy P 2 Loughton  122 
Policy P 3 Waltham Abbey  128 
Policy P 4 Ongar  134 
Policy P 5 Buckhurst Hill   139 
Policy P 6 North Weald Bassett  143 
Policy P 7 Chigwell  148 
Policy P 8 Theydon Bois  152 
Policy P 9 Roydon  155 
Policy P 10 Nazeing  158 
Policy P 11 Thornwood  160 
Policy P 12 Coopersale, Fyfield, High Ongar, Lower Sheering, 
Moreton, Sheering and Stapleford Abbotts  164 
Policy P 13 Rural sites in the east of the District  174 
Policy P 14 Rural sites in the west of the District  176 
Policy P 15 Rural sites in the south of the District  179 
Chapter 6 – Infrastructure & Delivery 
Delivery of Infrastructure  
Policy D 1 Delivery of Infrastructure  183 
Policy D 2 Essential Facilities and Services  186 
Policy D 3 Utilities  186 
Policy D 4 Community, Leisure and Cultural Facilities  188 
Policy D 5 Communications Infrastructure  189 
Policy D 6 Neighbourhood Planning  189 
Policy D 7 Monitoring and Enforcement  190 
Appendices  
Appendix 1  Acronyms and Glossary  191 
Appendix 2  List of Plan Policies  replaccing policies of the Epping Forest District 
Local Plan (1998) and alterations (2006)  207 
Appendix 3  List of measures to monitor the effectiveness of policies in the Local 
Plan  217 
Appendix 4  List of Policy Designations  221 
Appendix 5  Housing, Employment and Traveller Trajectories   241 
*Please note Appendix 6 is published in a separate document and should be read in conjunction with 
the
 Submission Version of Epping Forest District Council's Local Plan 2017The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | iv 
                             
 
 
 
 
  
How do I 
respond  
to this 
document?  
  
   
 Please go to www.eppingforestdc.gov.uk/planningourfuture  and com plete the online representation 
form.   Guidance Notes on how to fill out the form are provided online.   
 
Representations should be made on the prescribed form  and should give details of why you consider 
the Submission Version of the Local Plan is not legally compliant, is  unsound or fails to comply with 
the duty to cooperate. Use of the prescribed form  is strongly recommended a s this will ensure that 
responses  are in a format so that they can be passed on for consideration at the subsequent 
examination by a Planning Inspec tor.   
 
Please note that copies of all representation s received, including any necessary personal data, will 
be made available to the public as part of the public examination and therefore cannot be treated as 
confidential.  
 
If you cannot access the internet then please 
request a representation form either by 
calling Epping Forest District Council on 01992 
564517 (between 10am –  4pm Monday to 
Friday, or leave a voicemail message outside 
these hours), or by email (ldfconsult@eppingforestdc.gov.uk
).  
 
 
Please send your completed form to:  
The Planning Policy Team, Directorate of 
Neighbourhoods, Epping Forest District Council, Civic Offices, 323 High Street, Epping, Essex, CM 16 4BZ. 
 
   
 
Representations  must be received between 18 
December 2017 and 5pm on 29 January 2018  
 
If you would like a copy of this document in large 
print or another language please contact Epping 
Forest District Council on 01992 564517 between 
10am – 4pm Monday to Friday, or leave a 
voicemail message outside these hours) or email ldfconsult@eppingfore stdc.gov.u kThe Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
v | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Foreword  
 
Dear Resident  
We are now well on the way to production of a new Local Plan that will help shape our District for the coming 
years until 2033. This is not the Council’s Local Plan, but rather a  Plan which belongs to all of us for our area. 
The Local Plan sets out the strategy for the next 1 6 years to meet the economic and housing growth in the 
District, identifying potential sites for development and regeneration and sets out the development 
management policies. We developed this Plan through m any years of evidence gathering, hard work and 
regular checkpoints with input from you and your representatives.  
 
Previously, you have helped us shape the emerging 
Plan through the Community Visioning consultation in 2010/2011 and then the 
Community Choice s (Issues and Options) 
consultation in 2012.  Most recently , we have the 
Draft Local Plan consultation in 2016. The feedback from all of those has been listened to, 
analysed , considered and factored in to the 
decisions before reaching this point. This 
document is the one we intend to submit to the 
Planning Inspectorate for examination and is the 
Plan that the Council would like to adopt subject 
to that examination.  The six -week  publication 
period gives you the opportunity to make any 
representations on the soundness of the plan fo r 
the Inspector to consider.  This is not a 
consultation looking for changes to be considered 
in the future, but rather an assessment of whether 
the Pl an has followed guidance and is therefore 
sound.  
This Plan is necessarily a balance between the requirement from Government to deliver the 
identified and evidenced need for economic and 
housing growth, and the need to protect the 
greenness of our District .  We continue to do this 
by ensuring i t is delivered in as sensitive, 
sustainable and fa ir a way as possible across the 
whole District . You may have seen in the Press the 
government announcements around changes to 
housing targets. We are on schedule to del iver the 
Plan to the Inspectorate before the end of March 2018 deadline. By doing this we will be able to continue to make use of our extensively 
researched housing  requirement . To fail to do this would expose us all to the risk of the housing 
requirement rising from 11,400 to over 20,000 
homes by 2033.  
We have been clear all along that we will do our 
best to follow what you told us and so the Plan 
seeks to ensure that, as far as possible, the Green 
Belt is protected for future generations, whilst 
providing  for our housing needs. Failing to provide 
for the evidenced need of housing would result in 
a greater risk to the Green Belt  from undirected 
development . We recognise that  development 
comes with a need for infrastructure for transport, health, education, leisure and social needs . This 
Plan outlines the necessary infrastructure to 
support the development and good planning of 
the District. It also takes the design of places very 
seriously and we seek to ensure that the new 
streets that are delivered, as well  as changes to 
existing places, happen in a way that gives 
residents and users a high quality of environment.  
The Plan will be published for a period of six weeks 
to allow representations to be made between 18 
December 2017 and 29 January 2018 after the 
Local Plan was  approved for publication at a 
special  Council meeting on 14 December 2017.  
Copies of the document, background papers and evidence, are available on the new Planning Our 
Future website 
www.eppingforestdc.gov.uk/planningourfuture
.  
Further information will be via the Council’s 
Twitter and Facebook feeds.  
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | vi 
                             
 
 
If you wish to make representations please fill in the form online or on paper . The closing date for 
representations is 5pm  on 29 January 2018.   
 
 
Councillor Chris Whitbread  
Leader of the Council  Councillor John Philip  
Planning and Governance Portfolio Holder  The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | vii 
                             
 
 
This page is intentionally left blank   
 
 
 
Chapter One  
Introduction  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
2 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
The Purpose of the Plan  
1.1 The Epping Forest District Local Plan sets out the 
strategy for meeting the District’s needs from 
2011 up to 2033. It is based on up to date 
evidence and the results of the previous 
consultations  undertaken in 2010/11, 2012, and 
2016. This Submission Plan is now published for 
representations on soundness prior to the 
submission of both the plan and those 
representation s to the Secretary of State for 
examination by the Planning Inspectorate . 
1.2 The Local Plan sets out  the approach and 
detailed policies  for the whole Di strict for the 
period up to 2033.  It sets out : 
• the Council’s vision and objectives for the District’s deve lopment over the p lan period;  
• policies to ensure that de velopment 
delivers high quality and  sustainable homes, 
built to a high quality of design and 
maintain s our high quality built and natural 
environment;  
• the future distribution for housing growth and requirements for affordable housing;  
• policies to build a strong, competitive 
economy and set out the future distribution 
for new employment land space and thus 
new jobs;  
• policies to maintain and enhance the 
vibrancy and vitality of our town centres  
• policie s to support a sustainable transport 
and road infrastructure network; and 
• proposals for delivery including an 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) to 
demonstrate the infrastructure 
requirements necessary to support the site 
allocations.  
1.3 The Local Plan will s hape how the District 
develops until 2033 attracting and guiding investment in the District from the private 
sector, the Council itself, and other public 
bodies. Such investment will include new 
homes, new offices and employment 
opportunities, colleges and  schools, shops and 
leisure centres, GPs and clinics , as well as 
improvements to existing physical and green 
infrastructure. It will guide decision making on planning applications to build or change the  use 
of buildings and land. It will also provide the 
strategic policies that form the context for any 
Neighbourhood Plans produced in the District.  
1.4 This Local Plan includes the policies that the Council considers to be in line with the  most 
suitable way to develop the District in the 
future . Once adopted, the new Epping Forest 
District Local Plan will replace all of the surviving 
policies of the Local Plan 1998 and the 2006 
Local Plan Alterations (see Appendix 2) . 
Minerals and Waste Policy remains the responsibility of Essex County Council. The 
current Essex Minerals Local Plan was adopted 
in July 2014 and the Joint Essex and Southend-
on-Sea Waste Local Plan  was adopted in 2017.  
More information on which can be found on the 
Essex County Council website .  
The Requirements of Plan Making  
1.5 The Epping Forest District Local Plan has been 
prepared under the legislative provision of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 
and appropriate regulations including the Town 
and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) 
Regulations 2012. The Local Pla n has taken into 
account national planning policy, currently set out in the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) (DCLG,  2012) , Planning Policy for 
Traveller Sites (DCLG, 2015) and the web based published Planning Practice Guidance. The 
National Planni ng Policy Framework sets out a 
presumption in favour of sustainable development, which is the core aspect of 
national planning policy.  
1.6 The Council’s policies must be backed up by 
credible, robust and proportionate evidence 
that supports the approach taken and justifies 
what is being proposed.   It is the Council’s job to 
balance all of the evidence and find the most 
suitable way forward. Th e evidence base 
includes research on housing, employment, 
retail, health and  wellbeing, the built and 
natural environment, accessibility and flooding 
as well as the views of local people, businesses, 
landowners and public agencies involved in the District.  The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 3 
                             
 
 
1.7 The Council must identify needs for 
development in an objective manner and seek 
to provide for the development need it 
identifies. As well as meeting the identified need the proposals in the Plan have to be 
economically viable for delivery by the market 
and be achievable.  
1.8 In accordance with the ‘Duty to Co -operate’ set 
out in the Localism Act 2011 the Local Plan has 
been produced through close partnership 
working with the neighbouring authorities to 
ensure that sub- regional and cross boundary 
planning issues have been taken into account.  
1.9 To ensure that the policies of the Local Plan are in line with the objective of susta inable 
development, a Sustainability Appraisal of the 
plan has been undertaken throughout preparation. The appraisal assesses  the impact 
of planning policies in terms of their social, 
economic and environmental impacts. The 
Sustainability Appraisal address es the 
requirements of the European Union Strategic 
Environmental Assessment Directive (OJEC, 
2001) and compliance with the Habitats 
Directive (OJEC, 1992). An Equality Impact Assessment has been  undertaken alongside the 
Sustainability Appraisal. The Equal ity Impact 
Assessment has considered how the plan impacts upon matters relating to gender, age, 
ethnicity, religion/belief, disability, sexuality and 
low disposable income.  
The Plan Making Process  
1.10 The Council has consulted throughout the 
preparation of th e Plan , and in particular 
through three formal consultations: Community Visioning in 2010/ 2011, Community Choices in 
2012; and Epping Forest District Draft Local Plan 
Consultation 2016. There has been on- going 
consultation with Parish and Town Council ’s 
through a range of workshops and  briefings. The 
results of the public consultations can be found 
on the Council’s website at the following 
location: http://www.efdclocalplan.org/
.  
1.11 All of the comments received have been 
considered during the production of this Local Plan. Prior to submission of the Local Plan for examination a full consultation statement will be prepared.  
Neighbourhood Planning  
1.12 Neighbourhood Plans were introduced thr ough 
the Localism Act 2011. Communities can shape 
development in their areas through the 
production of Neighbourhood Development 
Plans, Neighbourhood Development Orders and 
Community Right to Build Orders. When made, 
following an examination and successful  
referendum, neighbourhood plans will become part of the development plan for the area. 
Locally distinctive Neighbourhood Plan policies 
must  reflect the strategic policies of the Epping 
Forest District Local Plan.  
1.13 There are Neighbourhood Plans in various stages of production  across the District.  The 
position on progress will change across the life 
of the Local Plan -  details of the up to date 
position can be found on the Epping Forest District Council website.  
The Plan Area  
1.14 Epping Forest District is in th e south -west of 
Essex abutting both Greater London and 
Hertfordshire. The south –west of the District is 
served by the London Underground Central Line 
(both the main line and the ‘Hainault via 
Newbury Park’ loop). Epping Station is the most 
eastern terminus  and there are 7 other stations 
in service in the District1. There is one national 
railway station in the District at Roydon on the 
Liverpool Street to Stansted and Cambridge line, 
although other railway station s (Broxbourne, 
Sawbridgeworth, Harlow Town an d Harlow Mill) 
are close to, and accessible from, the District. 
The Central Line previously ran further than 
Epping, through stations  at North Weald and 
Blake Hall to the end of the line at Ongar. Blake Hall station closed in 1981 with the line closing 
in 1994. In recent years the ‘Epping Ongar 
Railway’ has been established  as a heritage line 
along the former Central Line track . There is 
                                                      
1 These are The ydon Bois, Debden, Loughton and Buckhurst 
Hill, together with the stations on the branch line at Roding 
Valley, Chigwell and Grange Hill.  The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
4 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
currently no operational rail connection 
between the heritage rail line and the Central 
Line track at Epping, but the ‘Epping Ongar 
Railway’ runs some shuttle bus services locally.  
1.15 The M25 runs east -west through the District, 
with a local road interchange at Waltham 
Abbey. The M11 runs north– south, with a full 
interchange (Junction 7) at Hastingwood just 
south of Harlow, and  a northward – off/ 
southward  on interchange (Junction 5) at Loughton. There is also a motorway only 
interchange with the M25 south –east of Epping 
(Junction 6). The A414 is a key east -west route 
and this crosses the District from Harlow to Ongar on the way to Chelmsford and the Essex 
coast.  
1.16 The District has 20 parish council ’s and 4 town 
councils and covers an area of approximately 130 square miles.  
Figure 1.1 Epping Forest District  
  
The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 5 
                             
 
 
Population  Profile  
1.17 The 2011 Census recorded a population of 
about 124,660 people making up 52,083 
households.2 In the 2016 projections these 
figures rise to 130,300 and 54,867 respectively.3 
The population is therefore estimated to have 
increased by just  over 5,000 since 2011.  
1.18 Compared to the rest of England, the District 
had higher levels of people aged 45 -64 and 65 
and over  in 2011 with the proportion of people 
aged 65 and over in the District projected to grow substantially by 2033. Alongside this 
increase, the number of 30 -64 year olds is 
projected to drop, with the number of 15 -29 
year olds projected to drop slightly and the proportion of people aged 0 to 14  to rise a little.    
1.19 The number of households is projected to rise to 
66,460 by 2033. The numb ers of households 
consisting of one person or a family with 
dependent children are expected to increase 
with fewer households consisting of one couple , 
as shown in Figure 1. 2. 
Figure 1.2 Projected household breakdown by type to 2033  
 
1.20 Life expectancy both at birth and at age 65 in Epping Forest District in 2010 -12 was higher 
than the national and Essex averages, and 
similar to the of the East of England region.  The 
                                                      
2 A household is defined as a single person who lives alone 
or a group of people who live together.  
3 ONS population estimates and DCLG household projections  District’s life expectancy at birth has risen since 
2000 from 76 to 79 for males and from 81 to 83 
for females .  Births and deaths have remained 
relatively steady since 2007.  There have been 
more births than deaths, contributing to a rise in 
population.  
1.21 The District’s population is affected by three 
main types of population change:  
• natural change (the net gain of births minus 
deaths, of District residents);  
• internal migration (the net gain of people 
moving to the District from elsewhere in the 
UK, or vice versa); and  
• international migration (the net gain of 
people moving to the District from outside 
the UK, or vice versa).  
1.22 Internal migration is projected to be the largest 
contributor of population growth as a result of 
the District’s proximity and connections to 
London. Natural change has had a smaller but 
positive impact on population growth. Whist 
future migration trends may be affected by the 
UK leaving the EU; it is currently unclear what 
the likely implications might be  for international 
migration .  However current projections show 
this element only  make s up a small p ropo rtion 
of population change .  The ONS 2014- based 
population  data does project that the net 
international migration is projected to decrease in the period from 2014 -2015 to 2020- 2021 by 
roughly 44%, so there is only a need to look at a 
decrease in housing pr ovision if it exceeds this 
prediction.  
Key Characteristics   
1.23 The District is largely rural and over 92% of the 
land is currently designated as being in the Metropolitan Green Belt. Agriculture is mainly 
arable, particularly in the north east of the 
District. There is a significant amount of horse 
keeping in parts of the south and glasshouse 
horticulture is a prominent land use in parts of 
the Lea Valley especially in Roydon and Nazeing. 
The District has two town  centres and four 
district centres –  Loughton/Loughton Broadway 
and Buckhurst Hill in the south, Waltham Abbey to the west, Epping in the centre of the District, 
and Ongar towards the east.  Epping, Ongar and 
The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
6 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Waltham Abbey are market towns of medieval 
origin. Villages and smaller settlements ar e 
dispersed throughout the rest of the District. Several of these villages are also designated as conservation  areas. There is a significant 
concentration of population in the south of the 
District .  
1.24 The countryside  of the District  is gently  
undula ting,  dissected  by two river  valleys  (the Lea 
and the Roding)  and their  tributaries.  The District  
has an abundance  of areas  of importance  for 
conserva tion and leisure  for both  the local  and 
London’s  popula tion. Epping  Forest,  which  is 
owned  and managed  by the City of London 
Corpora tion is a key natural  feature  of the 
District.  The main part of the Forest runs from 
Wanstead (in London) along the north- west 
boundary of Buckhurst Hill, Loughton and Theydon Bois and extends to the southern end of Epping. A separate are a (The Lower Forest) 
abuts Epping on its north- eastern edge.  
1.25 The whole of Epping Forest south of Epping is a 
‘Special Area of Conservation ’, designated in 
2005, and has special protection under the European Habitats Directive (designed to protect a variety  of wild animals, plants and 
habitats). The Lower Forest is also one of 8 ‘Sites 
of Special Scientific Interest’ in the District 
which also affords a significant degree of 
protection . Nearby, the Turnford and Cheshunt 
pits in the Le e Valley are a ‘Special  Protection 
Area’ which falls partly within the District. Special Protection Areas are internationally 
important for birdlife, and in this instance for 
wetland birds. There is also a designated Le e 
Valley ‘Ramsar’ site (a wetland of international importan ce), covering the part of the Turnford 
and Cheshunt pits within Epping Forest District.  
1.26 Nine local nature reserves have been designated 
and the Essex Wildlife Trust has identifi ed over 
220 local wildlife sites. In addition to Epping 
Forest there are severa l other ancient 
woodlands in the District, including remnants of 
Hainault Forest, together with a significant 
number of ancient and veteran trees
4, including 
hedgerow pollards.  
                                                      
4 “An ancient tree is in its third or final stage of life….A 
veteran tree is usually in its second or mature stage of its 1.27 Most of the western edge of the District 
(excluding the built -up areas of Walth am Abbey 
and Nazeing) is included in the Lee Valley 
Regional Park (LVRP). This is managed by the LVRP Authority as a place for leisure, recreation, 
sport and nature conservation.  
1.28 Built and natural heritage features are an 
important part of the character of  the District. 
25 conservation areas have been designated and there are over 1,300 statutorily listed buildings. There are currently a further 300 
“locally listed” buildings. In addition, there are 
over 30 scheduled monuments ranging from the 
earthworks of  a Norman castle, to a Second 
World War fortification. There are also several 
registered parks and gardens.  
1.29 Construction from the mid to the late 19
th 
century of what is now part of the London 
Underground Central Line, and the proximity to 
London, have gre atly influenced the scale and 
location of development in the District.  
Significant growth of Buckhurst Hill and Loughton/Loughton Broadway and, to a lesser 
extent, Chigwell, Epping and Theydon Bois, 
followed the devel opment of the railway. The 
post -World War II London overspill estates led 
to considerable expansion of Waltham Abbey 
and Loughton Broadway (also known as 
Debden).  
1.30 The District’s two town centres: Epping and 
Loughton High Road and four  small  district 
centres: Loughton Broadway, Ongar, Buckhurst  
Hill and Waltham Abbey are the main 
retail/service centres. These centres are all fairly small compared with much larger centres 
nearby - notably Brookfield Shopping Park (in 
Broxbourne Borough), Chelmsford, Harlow 
Town, Romford and Westfield Stratford Ci ty; 
this causes significant and growing competition. 
In common with all other main retail/service 
centres, the growth of internet shopping is also 
an increasing threat to the viability and vitality 
of the District’s retail/service centres.  
  
                                                                                  
life”. (The Woodland Trust, 
http://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/visiting -woods/ancient -
treehunt/w hat-are-ancient -trees/).  The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 7 
                             
 
 
Economic Profi le 
1.31 Economic activity rates in the District are high 
for both men and women, with 78.5%  of 16-64 
year olds in employment which is similar to the 
average for England (78%) and slightly lower than the East of England average (80.2%)
5. 
Within this, male employ ment (81%) is higher 
than female employment (76.1%). At 17%, self -
employment makes up a significant proportion 
of overall employment and is higher than the 
East of England and England averages.  
1.32 There is a large proportion of ‘micro’6 and 
‘small’7 business es in the District in comparison 
to the averages for Essex, East of England and 
whole of England, which sho ws their importance 
to the District economy. There is also a high level of business start -ups in the District and this 
number rose by 11.7% from 2009  to 2014, 
which is higher than the Essex (7.6%), East of England (6.45%) and England (9.57%) increase 
over the same time period. In comparison to the 
East of England, there are more ‘higher’ 
classification jobs such as managers and 
profession al occupations  in the District.  
1.33 The horticultural glasshouse industry has a long -
standing and visible presence in Epping Forest 
District, as the larger part of a concentration of 
activity in the Lea Valley that produce significant 
crops for the London and UK markets.  
1.34 In 2015, the proportion of the District’s 
residents with no qualifications was lower than 
the average for the East of Engl and and for 
England as a whole ; the level of District 
residents with NVQ4 and above was higher than 
the regional and national averages;  however 
qualifications from NVQ1 and above to NVQ3 
and above were lower than the averages .  
1.35 In addition to the main retail/service centres, 
the main employment sites within the District 
are in Loughton Broadway, Epping, Nazeing, 
North Weald Bassett (inclu ding the Airfield) and 
                                                      
5 NOMIS, Labour Market Profile for Epping Fores t District, 
downloaded November 2017, data relating to the period of 
July 2016- July 2017  
6 0 to 9 employees –  one person who is self - employed and 
has no employees counts as zero  
7 11- 49 employees  Waltham Abbey, where the larger industrial 
estates are located. Around half of the District’s 
working residents commute out of the District 
for work, with the largest proportion travelling to London.  There is evidence of proportionally 
high levels of working from home in the 
District
8.  
1.36 The majority of  people  who commute into the 
District come from Harlow and the London Borough of Redbridge, and the greatest number 
of District residents commuting out go to 
Westminster . In 2014 there were 44,100 
employee jobs based in the District, of which 
approximately 64.8% were full -time and 35.2% 
part -time.  The construction, accommodation 
and food services and financial and business services are the most common in the district, as 
shown  in Figure 1. 3. 
Figure 1.3 District employee jobs by industry  
 
1.37 Large employers in the District include: Kier and 
Higgins (with headquarters in Loughton 
Broadway); Sainsbury’s (with a distribution 
centre in Waltham Abbey and stores in 
Loughton, Loughton Broadway and Ongar), 
Tesco in Waltham Abbey, Epping Forest District 
Council, Sp orts and Leisure Management (Places 
for People, which manages th e Epping Forest 
District Council’s leisure centres), Essex County 
                                                      
8 4.05% of employed residents, 2011 Census  
 
The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
8 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Council, the National Health Service, the Bank of 
England Printing Works, Epping Forest College 
and the working glasshouses which form the 
Epping Forest District part of the Lea Valley glass house industry.  
1.38 District residents most commonly travel to work 
using a car or van (or taxi ), following the pattern 
for Essex, the East of England and England as a 
whole. However, there is far higher use of 
‘Underground, metro, light ra il or tram’ public 
transport for commuting from the District than 
any of those other three areas, due to the 
proximity of London and the presence of many 
London Underground Central Line stations in 
the District.  
1.39 Using the Government’s Indices of Deprivatio n 
(2015), the majority of the District experiences 
less ‘deprivation’ than the rest of the country. 
However, there are pockets of deprivation 
within the District when looking at factors 
including access to housing and services, and 
adult skills.  Similarly,  when considering health 
measures overall the indicators are good 
however there is variation at a more localised 
level. For instance  life expectancy is higher than 
the national average  when considering the  
district level ; however  it varies significantly in  
different areas within the District  – the 
difference can be up to  5.3 years lower (males) 
and 4.6 years lower (females) in  the most 
deprived areas compared to the least deprived areas in the district . 
1.40 Figure 1. 4 gives an overview of the 78 Lower 
Super Output Areas (LSOAs) in the D istrict and 
how they fall into the national categories of 
deprivation. None of the areas within the 
District ranked within the 10% most depr ived 
nationally (also known as the 1st decile). Parts of Loughton Alderton and Waltham Abbey 
Paternoster wards were ranked within the 20% 
most deprived (2nd decile), with parts of Grange 
Hill, Waltham Abbey North East and Waltham 
Abbey High Beach wards in the 30% most deprived (3rd decile).  The District’s pockets of 
deprivation are found both in urban and rural 
areas. The rural areas often (but not exclusively) 
score worse on the Index of Multi Deprivation 
solely due to sub rankings relating to the distance  to specific local services and access to 
affordable housing.  
Figure 1.4 Rankings of areas within the district by Indices of 
Deprivation  
Category of deprivation  Number of the 
District’s Lower 
Super Output Areas  
in this category  
1st decile (10% most 
deprived nationally)  0 
2nd decile  2 
3rd decile  3 
4th decile  15 
5th decile  10 
6th decile  8 
7th decile  9 
8th decile  12 
9th decile  14 
10th decile (10% least 
deprived nationally)  5 
Total  78 
1.41 Housing affordability in the District has been a 
significant problem in more recent times. This is 
the same for similar areas situated on the 
border of Greater London, which are attractive 
to city commuters.  
1.42 The Council’s own housing waiting list stood at  
1,360 households in August 2016. It has in previous years been significantly higher, but it 
dropped in 2013 when a revised Housing 
Allocations Scheme was applied, requiring 
applicants to have lived within the Epping Forest 
District for at least 3 years (o r 2.5 for current 
residents).  
1.43 Figure 1. 5 shows the projected need for 
affordable housing (measured in households) in 
the District (and in East Herts, Harlow and 
Uttlesford Districts) from 2011- 2033.  These 
numbers take into account current unmet need 
for affordable housing and starter homes, 
projected future need arising from new households which will form in the future,  and The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 9 
                             
 
 
also the number of existing households which 
are likely to fall  into need in future. Further 
breakdowns of need by,  for example size of dwelling, are shown in the Strategic Housing Market Assessment (2015).   
 
Figure  1.5 Overall affordable housing need (in households) 2011 -2033 
 
 
This Figure measures affordability through the ratio of the lowest (25th) percentile of house prices in the area to the lowest (25th) 
percentile of e arnings in the area  (shown on the Y axis) . The 25th percentile is the value quarter of the way through the range when 
ordered f rom the lowest to the highest. The year is shown on the X axis.
Key Issues for the Plan to A ddress  
1.44 There are several important issues that the Plan 
must address. More detail about them is found 
in Chapter s 2-6. They include:  
• ensuring that sustainable development is 
achieved, and that climate change is considered in the policies and proposals of 
the Plan;  
• how to manage and accommodate the 
needs of the current and future population 
and the future  economic needs of the 
District, which is  indicated by the evidence 
to be approximately 11,400 new homes and 
the creation of 10,000 new jobs over the Plan period (2011- 2033). This will need to 
be supported by necessary infrastructure;   
• there is very little land remaining in the 
District within the settlements that is not 
already developed -  in order to plan 
properly for the future, a District -wide 
review of the Green Bel t has been 
undertaken to identify the potential for 
future development;  
• the continued protection of the remaining 
Green Belt , and in particular preventing the 
merging of settlements and checking the 
unrestricted sprawl of large built -up areas;  
• a recognised  need for significant 
regeneration of Harlow, which will be 
supported by the development of the 
The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
10 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Harlow Enterprise Zone, together with 
significant growth in new homes;  
• the need to ensure a housing stock that 
matches the needs of the population, 
including ca tering for an ageing population 
and more single person households, 
providing affordable housing and starter 
homes for those who cannot afford market 
prices and providing for the Traveller 
communities;  
• providing the right type of sites for jobs in 
the right  locations;  
• establishing which existing employment 
sites, if any, should be released for other 
purposes;  
• encouraging new uses and activities to 
ensure the survival, vitality and viability of 
the District’s six town and  small  district 
centres , in response t o growing 
competition;  
• protecting local services in the District’s 
rural areas and facilities in villages;  
• providing for future rural retail and 
commercial development, rural 
employment and supporting agriculture and 
horticulture whilst ensuring that unused 
horticultural and other agricultural buildings 
are reused;  
• addressing the transport needs of current 
and future populations for both rural and 
urban populations along with many other infrastructure needs such as health, 
education, community spaces a nd places, 
faith, culture, sport and leisure 
opportunities;  
• the management of congestion, HGVs on 
local roads and provision of opportunities 
for walking, cycling and public transport, in 
addition to the management of commuter 
parking around London Undergro und 
stations;  
• protecting and improving the impressive 
range and quality of places for enjoyment of 
the outdoors, sport and nature 
conservation in the District; and  • protecting and enhancing historical 
artefacts and buildings, protected trees, 
hedgerows and landscape.  
1.45 The Council has produced this P lan in close 
cooperation with partner organisations such as 
Essex County Council, the Environment Agency, 
Natural England, SHMA partners and adjoining 
authorities. The successful implementation of 
the Plan depends upon a range of agencies and 
organisation as well as the private sector and 
developers. The Epping Forest District Local Plan 
will provide the future framework for the 
District up until 2033.  
Finding Your Way Around This 
Document  
1.46 The document is structured as follows:  
• Chapter Two explains the broader context 
of the Local Plan,  and the overall vision and 
objectives for the Local Plan together with 
the draft strategic policies which set out:  
− how much development is to be 
planned for;  
− where that development s hould be 
located together with major transport infrastructure;  
− Policies for the Garden Town and 
allocations for Garden Town 
communities;  
− Green Belt boundaries and Policy; 
and 
− Green and Blue networks.  
• Chapter Three contains policies on housing, 
employment  and transport;  
• Chapter Four contains development 
management policies  including natural 
environment, historic environment, design 
and environmental policies;  
• Chapter Five contains policies that apply to 
specific  places and has a section on each of 
the main  settlements and town centres;  
• Chapter Six sets out the infrastructure 
policies and approach for seeking 
contributions from developers as well as 
how the Plan will be delivered and 
monitored;  The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 11 
                             
 
 
• the Appendices include a range of key 
supporting information:  
− Appendix 1:  Acronyms and 
Glossary   
− Appendix 2: List of Plan Policies 
replacing all policies of the Epping 
Forest District Local Plan (1998) 
and Alterations (2006)  
− Appendix 3:List of measures to monitor the effectiveness of 
policies in the Local Plan  
− Appendix  4: List of Policy 
Designations  
− Appendix 5:  Housing, Employment 
and Traveller Trajectories  
− Appendix 6:  Site specific 
requirements for site allocations  
(this is included as a separate document)  
 
 
  The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
12 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
This page is intentionally left blank  
 
  
  
 
 
 
Chapter T wo 
Strategic 
Policies  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
14 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Strategic Context  
2.1 This section sets out the strategic context, 
including the Vision and Objectiv es against 
which the policies of the Local Plan  have been 
developed.  It includes the key policies which set 
the strategic direction of the Plan including a 
positiv e approach to sustainable development, 
the amount of development needed in the District and the associated infrastructure requirements, the proposed spatial  distribution 
of this development,  policies for the Harlow and 
Gilston Garden Town and the delivery of new 
communities in the Garden Town,  the approach 
to the Green Belt and the Green Network 
(including Epping Forest and The Lee Valley 
Regional Park ). 
Strategic Planning and Meeting the 
Duty to Co -operate  
2.2 National Policy requires that public bodies have 
a duty to cooperate on planning  issues that 
cross administrative boundaries, particularly 
those which r elate to the strategic priorities . 
The Government expects joint working on areas 
of common interest to be diligently un dertaken 
for the mutual benefit of neighbouring authoritie s. It also expects local authoriti es to 
demonst rate evidence of havi ng effectiv ely 
cooperated to plan for issues with cross -
boundary impacts when their Local Plans are 
submitted for examination. This could be by way 
of Plans or policies prepared as part of a joint 
committee, a memorandum of understanding or 
a jointly prepa red strategy which is presented as 
evidence of an agreed position. Cooperati on 
should be a continuous process of engagement 
from initial thinking through to implementati on 
resulti ng in a fi nal positi on where plans are in 
place to provide the land and infra structure 
necessary to support current and projected 
future levels of development.  
2.3 This Local Plan  has been prepared taking into 
account  the Duty to Co -operate in section 33A 
of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 
2004 (as amended by the Localism Act 2011 and 
national policy on the Duty t o Cooperate . 
Section 33A of the 2004 Act places a legal d uty on local planning authorities , county councils 
and specified public bodies to engage 
constructively, activ ely and on an ongoing basis 
to maximise the effecti veness of Local Plan 
preparati on in relati on to st rategic cross 
boundary matters.
1 
2.4 There are ten adjoining local authority 
neighbours, four in Essex (Brentw ood, 
Chelmsford, Harlow and Uttles ford), t wo in 
Hertfordshire (Broxbourne and East Hertfordshire),  and four London Boroughs 
(Enfield, Havering, Redbridge and Waltham 
Forest) together with Essex and Hertfordshire County Councils and the Greater London 
Authority. There are in addition, a wide range of 
organisations that have an interest in strategic 
planni ng in the District. These organisati ons 
include important partners such as Historic 
England, the Environment Agency, Highways 
England, Natural England, the Lee Valley 
Regional Park Authority, the City of London 
Corporati on (as the Conservators of Epping 
Forest) and others.    
2.5 The Councils established the Cooperation for 
Sustainable Development Member Board in 
October 2014 (the Co -Op Board) in order to take 
a strategic approach to the delivery of housing , 
economic and other cross boundary issues 
across the area.   In January 2017 Epping Forest 
District, Harlow District and East Hertfordshire District Council s were given Garden Town status 
for the Harlow and Gilston Garden Town .  A 
Garden Town Member Board has been 
established with representatives from these authorities and the two County Councils  to 
consider issues specifically associated with the 
Garden Town . 
2.6 The District Council is a member of many 
partnership groups containing different mixes of 
these partners, and others, depending upon the relevant matters. These groups are working to 
address the strategic matters that this P lan 
addresses. In brief the matt ers are:  
• the amount, type and distributi on of 
housing across the Strategic Housing 
Market Area;  
                                                      
1PPG Ref ID: 9 -001- 20140306 The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 15 
                             
 
 
• the economic role of Epping Forest 
District in the Functi onal Economic 
Market Area including retail, and the amount and type of development required to meet needs;  
• the role of Epping Forest District as a 
locati on within the London Stansted 
Cambridge Corridor;  
• future planning poli cy for glasshouse food 
production which extends beyond the 
District;  
• strategic social infrastructure such as 
secondary and higher educat ion and 
hospitals;  
• the extent of the Green Belt and any 
alterati ons through Local Plan processes 
by Epping Forest District Council and 
neighbouring authoriti es; 
• the recreation and conservation role of 
Epping Forest and other green 
infrastructure in a wider  context; and  
• strategic transport infrastructure –  road, 
rail, London Underground, bus, and other 
networks.  
2.7 A number of critical pieces of evidence for the 
Plan have been commissioned on a joint basis 
across administrative boundaries (see below). 
Key partners such as Essex County Council, 
Highways England, the City of London 
Corporation (as owners of Epping Forest), the 
Lee Valley Regional Park Authority, Historic England, the Environment Agency and Natural 
England have been engaged in developing the 
Policies  in the Plan on an ongoing basis. The 
District surrounds Harlow on three sides and 
this presents an opportunity to provide 
development to support the broader 
regeneration and growth for Harlow Town, and 
together with East Herts District Council, to 
creat e a new Garden Town. This requires a 
shared commitment with neighbouring 
authorities, infrastructure providers and 
National Government to provide a strategic approach.  London Stansted Cambridge 
Corridor (LSCC) Core Area Strategic 
Vision  
2.8 The London Stansted Cambridge Corridor (LSCC) 
covers the area of London north from the Royal 
Docks, Tech City, the City Fringe, Kings Cross, 
and the Olympic  Park, north, through the Lea 
Valley, the M11, A1 and A10 road, the East 
Coast and West Anglia Mainline rail corridors to 
Stevenage, Harlow and London Stansted 
Airport, and through to Cambridge and 
Peterborough.  
2.9 The District Councils of Broxbourne, East Hertfordshire, Epping Forest, Harlow and Uttlesford form the LSCC Core Area which lies at 
the heart of the LSCC. This cor ridor has, over the 
past decade or more, been the engine of UK growth with its world class industries and 
businesses.  
2.10 Over the past fiv e years the Corridor’s dynamic, 
knowledge -based economy has grown at a rate 
almost double that of the UK average and as a 
result rates of populati on growth have 
increased. Transport links are excellent; with 
two major rail routes - the East Coast and West 
Anglia main lines -  serving the Corridor. The 
A1(M), A10 and M11 motorways link its towns and citi es with the capital, wh ile London 
Stansted Airport offers international 
connecti ons.  
2.11 With a significant number of jobs in knowledge -
based industries, the Corridor is a leading 
knowledge economy and a show case for tech 
industries and firms. There is a high rate of 
innovati on. 
2.12 The Corridor accounts for 24,700 jobs in the life 
sciences sector contributing 11% of all national 
employment. This success is built on research 
insti tutes and notable firms and organisati ons, 
including Amgen and AstraZeneca in Cambridge, 
GlaxoSmithKline in Stevenage, and Public Health England in Harlow.  
 
  
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
16 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Vision for the London Stansted Cambridge 
Corridor Core Area  
A. The Core Area will build on its key strengths 
including its skilled workforce in sectors such as 
health, life sciences and pharmaceuticals, 
advanced engineering and aerospace, its high 
quality environment and education opportunities. 
Together with London Stansted Airport, the local 
authorities will deliver sustainable growth which  
supports the economic ambition of the LSCC and 
the UK through:  
(i) Complementing and supporting the economic 
performance of the Corridor whilst 
maintaining and enhancing the special 
character of the area, including the locally 
distinctive historic character of its market 
towns and rural settlements;  
(ii) the delivery of housing, supported by good 
access to social, leisure, co mmunity and 
health facilities, education and jobs, that 
meets the needs of local people and supports 
sustainable economic growth, whilst ensuring 
it remains an attractive place for people to 
live and locate  to; 
(iii) capitalising on existing  economic sectors and 
promoting growth of expanding industries 
including in the food production, life sciences,  
pharmaceuticals and technology sectors; 
tourism including hotels, London Stansted 
Airport's expansion, recreation , green assets 
including the Lea Valley, Stort Vall ey, Epping 
Forest and Hatfield Forest National Nature 
Reserve;  
(iv) working with partners to protect and 
enhance the high quality environment, its 
unique landscapes and places of special 
wildlife value. This wo uld be achieved by 
place -shaping initiatives  which would include 
measures to conserve areas of high 
biodiversity; the provision of new, alternative  
green spaces for people and wildlife; and the 
increase of g reen infrastructure connection  
between these a reas, t o provide greater 
opportunities for more sustainable access to 
nature for everyone living in the corridor;  
(v) working with partners to secure investment 
in major infrastructure including increasing 
rail capacity on the West Anglia Mainline and 
maximi sing  the opportunities  that Crossrail 2 
can deliver, together with road 
improv ements including a new junction on the M11 at 7A and improvements to junction  
7 and 8, and to the A414, A120, A10 and 
M25; and delivery of superfast broadband;  
(vi) supporting the del ivery of new jobs in the 
Harlow Enterprise Zone, and the north side of 
London Stansted Airport, Broxbourne Park 
Plaza, Brookfield and Bishop’s Stortford –  all 
identified as Strategic Opportunity Sites 
within the corridor; and 
(vii) the regeneration of existing u rban areas 
including at Harlow, Waltham Abbey, 
Loughton and Waltham Cross.  
B. The Core Area supports the development and 
sustainable growth of Greater Harlow and key 
growth locat ions at  Broxbourne, Brookfi eld and 
Bishop’s Stortford together with London Stanst ed 
Airport growing to its full permitted capacity and 
as a business growth hub. These centres, with 
proportionate growth throughout the wider area, 
and the right investment, would create an 
economic powerhouse.  
C. Putting in place these critical building blocks will 
provide the foundations for looking further ahead 
to 2050. Certainty through further investment and 
delivery of key infrastructure, including in the 
West Anglia Mainli ne, Crossrail 2, the M11 
junction M25 junction A414, A120 and A10 is a 
vital component of this.  
2.13 In developing the Local Plan  the Council has 
recognised, and taken into account, the wider 
context within which it is located, and therefore 
the need t o reflect the aspirations and 
opportuniti es identified in the LSCC Vision.  
The West E ssex and East 
Hertfordshire Strategic Housing 
Market and Functional Economic 
Market Area  
2.14 Epping Forest, East Hertfordshire, Harlow and 
Uttlesford District Councils together with the 
two county councils have a substantial history of 
co-ordinated working on  strategic planning 
issues, not least on assessing housing need and 
planning for future growth.  
2.15 Three Strategic Housing Market Assessments 
(SHMAs), published in 2010, 2012 and 2015 
have been undertaken for the combined area of 
East Hertfordshire, Epping F orest, Harlow and The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 17 
                             
 
 
Uttlesford Districts. The 2015 Strategic Housing 
Market Assessment (SHMA) gives an up to date 
and policy compliant assessment of housing 
need over the Housing Market Area (HMA) for the period 2011- 2033.   Further partial updates 
were also undertaken in 2016 and 2017.  
2.16 The four authorities have also commissioned 
joint economic and employment studies , to 
consider the Objectively Assessed Economic Need (OAEN) of the Functional Economic Market Area (FEMA ), which has been found to 
be the same as the Strategic Housing Market 
Area , and inform the future distribution of 
growth .  
2.17 A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has 
been agreed  by the four District Councils, and 
supported by Essex County Council, 
Hertfordshire County Council and Highways 
England in  respect of the ‘Distribution of 
Objectively Assessed Need across the West 
Essex/East Hertfordshire Housing Market Area ’ 
in March 2017. This forms part of the 
mechanism for delivering the LSCC Vision. Further MoUs were agreed in 2017 by the four 
authoritie s, Essex County Council, Hertfordshire 
County Council and Highways England in relation to the provision of Strategic Highways 
and Tran sport Infrastructure to support the 
delivery of the strategic housing and economic 
needs of the wider area, and with Natur al 
England and the Conservators of Epping Forest 
to ensure that the Epping Forest Special Area of 
Conservation is monitored to ensure that the 
growth does not adversely affect air quality in 
the Forest. These three Mo Us are available as 
part of the evidenc e base for the Local Plan . A 
fourth MoU to agree the distribution of economic growth across the FEMA is in 
preparation.  
Lee Valley Regional Park  
2.18 The Lee Valley Regional Park (LVRP) was created 
by a unique Act of Parliament in 1966 as a 
“green lung” for London, Essex and 
Hertfordshire. It follows the course of the River 
Lea for almost 23 miles (37 km) from the 
southern edge of Ware in Hertfordshire to the 
River Thames at East India Dock Basin and  comprises some 4,000 hectares of open space 
interspersed wi th various leisure faciliti es with 
some pockets of residenti al, industrial or 
horticultur al developments.  
2.19 The main body of the Regional Park extends 
from W are to Leyton, with a substantial  area 
lying within Epping Forest District ( 1,590 
hectares or 39.75% , of which 97.97% is in the 
Green Belt) includ ing the River Lee Country 
Park, recreati onal open space resources at 
Nazeing, Glen Faba and Roydon, a range of 
family orientated visitor faciliti es located at 
Fishers Green and Hayes Hill Farm, well 
established sailing facilities at Nazeing lagoons, 
and angling , walking and cycling facilitie s 
throughout. Important ecological resources including parts of the Lee Valley Special 
Protecti on Area (SPA) and R amsar site provide 
opportunitie s to enjoy and learn about nat ure 
with good access for  all abilities. Further visitor 
and educati onal opportunities are provided by 
the key heritage assets at Waltham Abbey 
Gardens, Royal Gunpowder Mills and Royal 
Gunpowder Park. The Lee Valley White Water 
Centre lies just across the D istrict border in 
Broxbourne. 
2.20 The Lee Valley Regional Park Act 1966 (the Park 
Act) defined the boundary of the Park and 
established the Lee Valley Regional Park 
Authority  (the Regional Park Authority) . It has a 
statutory responsibility to either provide directly 
or work with partners to provide facilities for 
sport, recreation, leisure, entertainment and 
nature conservation throughout the 4,000 hectares of the Park. It has an appointed board 
of 28 Member s. The Members are elected and 
nominated to the Regional Park Authority by 
their own constituent a uthorities. Epping Forest 
District Council has two members appointed to 
the Board.  
2.21 Section 14 (1) of the Park Act requires the 
Authority to prepare a Plan set ting out 
proposals for the future management and 
development of the Reg ional Park  (the Park 
Plan) .  Local p lanning authoritie s whose area s 
are included within the Park are subject to a 
statutory duty to include those parts of the Park 
Plan affecting their area within their  
development plan  (Section 14(2) (a)) ; although The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
18 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
inclusion shall not be treated as indicating the 
approval of the local planning authority to the 
Park Plan  (Section 14 (2) (b)). The Regional Park 
Authority is in the process of preparing a s uite 
of documents, the Park Development 
Framework (PDF), which will establish its 
aspirations and specific proposals for the future 
use and development of the Regional Park. In 
July 2010, the Authority adopted the Vision, 
Strategic Aims an d Principles.  Ad option of a 
series of Thematic Proposals followed in January 
2011 set ting out development and management 
proposal s on a broad Park- wide thematic basis.  
2.22 The Regional Park Authority is not a local 
planning authority for the purposes of either Local Plan preparation or a decision maker for 
planning application purposes. Consequently, 
the Local Plan will be an important document in 
terms of the protection, enhancement, develop ment and management of the Regional 
Park and the public enjoyment of its leisure, 
ecological, heritage, and sporting resources. It 
will need to recognise and support the Regional 
Park as a key asset for the District, and component of the region's green infrastructure.  
 
Lee Valley Regional Park Vision  
A. The Lee Valley Regional Park Vision outlines a 
common purpose for the Regional Park and 
expresses the desirable characteristics of the 
Regional Park. The vision is:  
(i) to be a cohesive, sustainable and valued 
regional green lung;  
(ii) to be an area of enhanced and protected 
natural biodiversity for the enjoyment of all;  
(iii) to achieve full utilisation of the unique land 
and water assets of the Regional Park for 
specialist leisure and recreational facilities 
developed in ac cordance with principles of 
sustainability and design excellence; and 
(iv) to be an accessible and permeable, 
integrated visitor attraction to serve the 
region which will include local communities.  
2.23 The Vision for the Lee Valley Regional Park  is 
included in the  Local Plan und er section 14(2)(a) 
of the Park Act.  The delivery of the Vision is 
supported by the Local Plan  through a number 
of policies including:  • Policy  SP 6 Green Belt  and District Open 
Land ; 
• Policy  SP 7 The Natural Environment, 
Landscape Character and Green and Blue Infrastructure;  
• Policy  E 4 Visitor Economy;  
• Policy  DM 1 Habitat protection and 
improving biodiversity;  
• Policy  DM 2 Epping Forest SAC and the 
Lee Valley SPA;  
• Policy  DM 3 Landscape character, a ncient 
landscapes and geodiversity; and 
• Policy  DM 9 High Quality Design.  
2.24 The Lee Valley Regional Park Aut hority is also 
preparing specific proposals for the future use 
and development of individua l sites and areas 
that collectiv ely form the totality of the Regional 
Park, which are being produced to cover eight 
areas across the Park. Part of Epping Forest 
District is included within Area 5 proposals 
which were adopted by the Lee Valley Regional 
Park Authority in April 2013 –  this aims to 
enhance current visitor facilitie s at the Royal 
Gunpowder Park to create a visitor hub and improve pedestrian and cycle links. Other parts of the District will be included within Areas 6 
and 7 for which no proposals have yet been 
published.  
Conservators of Epping Forest  
2.25 The Conservators of Epping Forest are charged 
with the duties and responsibilities for 
conserving and protecting Epping Forest under 
the Epping Forest Act 1878. Epping Forest Land 
covers 5% of the District, and together with the 
Buffer Lands, over 7% of the District. It is a 
major public recreation and touris t destination , 
which makes a major contribution to the provision of open space within the District. The 
Forest is protected by Site of Special Scientific 
Interest status and is designated as a Special 
Area of Conservation  (SAC). As the competent 
authority under the Conservation of Habitats 
and Species Regulations 2017, the Council is 
subject to statutory duties to ensure that plans 
and projects will not adversely affect the integrity of the Epping Forest SAC and the The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 19 
                             
 
 
reasons for its designation . There are identified 
issues  in relation to poor air quality in and 
around the Forest  and also pressures as a result 
of its recreational opportunities.  The Council is 
committed to working with partners to address  
these issues.  
2.26 The future conservation and enhancement of Epping Forest through the management of 
potential impacts as a result of development and potential opportunities to enhance  its 
biodiversity is supported by the Local Plan . A 
Memorandum of Understanding to manage the 
impacts of growth with in the West Essex/East 
Hertfordshire Housing Market Area on Epping 
Forest SAC was agreed in March 2017.  Policies 
in the Plan which support the objectives include : 
• Policy  SP 7 The Natural Environment, 
Lands cape Character and Green and Blue 
Infrastructure;  
• Policy  E 4 Visitor Economy;  
• Policy T 1 Sustainable Transport Choices  
• Policy  DM 1 Habitat protection and 
improving biodiversity;  
• Policy  DM 2 Epping Forest SAC and the 
Lee Valley SPA;  
• Policy  DM 9 High Quality  Design ; and  
• Policy DM 22 Air Quality . 
Vision and Objectives for Epping 
Forest District to 2033  
2.27 The following section presents the Council’s 
aspirations for the area and forms the vision and 
objectives for the Loca l Plan. Individual visions 
for settlements  within the District are contained 
in the relevant sections in Chapter 5.  
Vision for the District  
A. By 2033 Epping Forest District will be a place 
where:  
(i) residents continue to enjoy a good quality of 
life; 
(ii) new homes of an appropriate mix of sizes, 
types  and tenures  to meet local needs have 
been provide d and well integrated 
communities created;  
(iii) development respects the attribut es of the different towns and villages;  
(iv) development needs will be met in the most 
sustainable locati ons; 
(v) Epping Forest  will be conserv ed and 
enhanced;  
(vi) the recreational aims of Lee Valley Regional 
Park  will be  supported;  
(vii) a more sustainable local economy  including 
tourism, aviation, research and development, 
and food production will be developed;  
(viii) a distinctive and attractiv e network  of town 
and village centres will have been 
maintained;  
(ix) access  to places by public transport, walking 
and cycling will be promoted; and  
(x) signific ant residenti al development  will be 
located around  Harlow to support the 
economic regeneration of the town.  
 
How we will achieve this  
Development needs including the provision of new 
homes will be met in the most sustainable locations, 
balancing the use of existing infrastructure, the ability 
to deliver new infrastructure, minimising the adverse 
impact on the natural and historic environment and 
maintaining the Metropolitan Green Belt where it 
continues to make a contribution to its nationally 
defined purposes.  
 
Epping Forest will be conserved and enhanced and will 
continue to form a key part of the District’s unique 
and distinctive identity. Residents will have access to 
open and natural spaces including the Forest, the Lee 
Valley Regional Park and the countryside.  
 
The District’s economy will contin ue to have strong 
links with London whilst supporting significant 
economic growth planned for Harlow and London 
Stansted Airport. This will contribute to the wider 
economy whilst developing a more sustainable local 
economy which builds on its strengths and assets 
including tourism, aviation, research and 
development,  food production , the va riety of small 
businesses as well as the skills of local people.  
 
The District will maintain a distinctive and attractive 
network of town and village centres which can be 
accessed by public transport, walking and cycling as an The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
20 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
alter native to the car, and which support local 
communities. All new development will be built to a 
high quality design and development opportunities 
within existing settlements will be maximised without 
compromising th eir distinctiveness and attractiveness. 
In order to cater for the housing and economic needs 
of both the District and the wider area, including 
supporting regeneration and economic growth at 
Harlow, a significant proportion of new homes will be 
located around Harlow through the creation of new 
sustainable communities.  
 
In addition, the settlements within the District will play 
a role in the delivery of the development strategy by 
accommodating some development on new sites in 
order to cater for more local needs, provide choice 
and support the achie vement of mixed and balanced 
communities.  
 
Local Plan Objectives  
A. Environment and design  
(i) to protect the Metropolitan Green Belt within 
its revised boundary, and to encourage the 
re-use of previously developed land;  
(ii) to conserve and enhance  Epping Forest and 
its setting , including the buffer lands;  
(iii) to protect, and encourage appropriate 
management of other designated wildlife 
sites in the District, including the Lee Valley 
Special Protection A rea, Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest, Local Nature Reserves and 
Local Wildlife Sites;  
(iv) to protect and encourage the enhancement 
of heritage resources including Scheduled 
Monuments, statutorily and locally listed 
buildings, Registered Parks and Gardens, and 
Conservation Areas;  
(v) to ensure that the design, density, layo ut and 
landscaping of new development is sensitive 
to the character of the surrounding area, is of 
a high quality and is designed so as to reduce 
opportunities for crime and anti -social 
behaviour; and 
(vi) to ensure new development takes full 
account of, and mi tigates where necessary, 
potential problems from air pollution, land 
contamination and noise.  
B. Housing  
(i) to make provision for objectively assessed market and affordable housing needs within 
the District, to the extent that this is 
compatible with national pl anning policy;  
(ii) to ensure that new homes provide an 
appropriate mix of sizes, types, forms and 
tenures to meet local needs and create 
balanced, mixed and well -integrated 
communiti es. This includes supported 
housing for elderly people and other groups 
with s pecial needs; and 
(iii) to make provision for the identified needs of 
Travellers and Travelling Showpeople.  
C. Economic Development  
(i) to meet the objectively assessed economic 
and town centre needs in the District to the 
extent that this is compatible with national 
planning policy;  
(ii) to diversify the District’s two Town Centres 
(Epping and Loughton High Road) and four 
Small District Centres (Loughton Broadway, 
Ongar, Waltham Abbey and Buckhurst Hill) to 
support their future vitality and viability by 
encouraging other fo rms of town centre uses 
including residential, cultural, leisure, tourist 
and commercial activities appropriate to their 
roles;  
(iii) to encourage the growth of local businesses 
and start ups, through supporti ng home-
working, provision of a range of fle xible an d 
affordable business facilitie s and the 
provision of high -speed broadband across the 
District;  
(iv) to support the diversification of the 
agricultural economy, including the expansion 
of the glasshouse horticulture industry, 
subject to appropriate environmental  
considerations; and  
(v) to support tourism in the District through the 
promotion of, and improving access to, a 
wide range of existing attractions in the 
District including Epping Forest, the Lee 
Valley Regional Park, the Royal Gunpowder 
Mills site, the histo ric towns, village centres 
and countryside, and through the provision of 
new visitor accommodation.  
D. Infrastructure  and Movement  
(i) to iden tify and help  fund and facilitate  the 
timely delivery  of necessary infrastructure and 
services through a planned and coordinated 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) working The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 21 
                             
 
 
with relevant authorities, agencies, 
developers and stakeholders;  
(ii) to improve public transport, w alking and 
cycling opportunitie s with the aim of 
promoting healthy lifestyles, reducing the 
effects of traffic congestion and improving 
accessibility to services and the countryside 
without requiring the use of the car; and 
(iii) to provide access to green spaces and leisure, 
play and sports fa cilities and to make 
appropriate provision in new development.  
E. Climate Change and Flood Risk  
(i) to locate new development where ther e are 
the greatest opportunities for utilising public 
transport and cycling and walking instead of 
private car use;  
(ii) to require development to meet high 
standards of energy e fficiency and use of 
renewable energy;  
(iii) to ensure new development makes full 
provision for recycling and, where 
appropriate, encourages the production of 
energy from waste; and  
(iv) to ensure that new development is located 
away from areas at risk of flooding, and that 
such development will not increase flood risk 
elsewhere.  
The Strategic Policies  
2.28 The Council has a key role to play in supporting 
the London Stansted Cambridge Corridor Core 
Area Strategic Vision.  This includes the 
allocation of land to provide for new 
employment floorspace to support its economic 
role; and facilitating the delivery of new homes 
and necessary infrastructure and services to 
support the needs of existi ng and future 
residents, which will also support the economic 
performance of the area.  The Council, through the development of this Local Plan has 
responded to this within the context of a District 
significantly constrained by Metropolitan Green 
Belt, and the need to protect the environmental 
assets within the District, including Eppi ng 
Forest and the Lea Valley.  
2.29 The Council has worked with East Hertfordshire, 
Harlow and Uttlesford District Council’s to 
ensure that the spatial distribution of new homes and employment opportunities across 
the aligned Housing Market Area (HMA) and 
Functi onal Economic Market Areas (FEMA) 
support these strategic priorities through the 
Cooperation for Sustainable Development 
Member Board established in 2014.  Through 
this Board  three Memorandum s of 
Understanding have been agreed relating to the distribution of housing, transport infrastructure 
and the impact on Epping Forest.  
2.30 These strategic priorities have influenced the approach that this Local Plan has taken in both 
its policy development and site allocations (both 
in terms of quantum and location) whilst 
understanding and taking into account the more 
local needs of the District.  
2.31 The spatial strategy therefore provide s for new 
homes around Harlow recognising its strategic 
role from an economic perspective and the 
need to support job creation as a result of  the 
relocation of Public Health England and the establishment of an Enterprise Zone.  Such an 
approach also contributes to creating sufficient 
new housing that will support the provision of 
strategic infrastructure (particularly for 
transport), opportuniti es for the relocation of 
Princess Alexandra Hospital, and providing 
choice in terms of new homes. The growth 
identified in and around Harlow has provided 
the right conditions for creating sustainable 
communities as evidenced through the recent 
designation of the Harlow and Gilston Garden 
Town.  
2.32 The Council recognises the opportunities that existing employment areas can contribute to 
jobs growth through regeneration and 
intensification.  A core focus of the Local Plan 
therefore is to protect and encourage 
regeneration of  existing employment  areas 
through allocation to provide market confidence 
to attract investment, and to minimise the need 
to take land out of the Green Belt.  The scale 
and location of new employment land has taken 
account of local market  information, the need 
to ensure  flexibility to accommodate a range of 
uses, and sizes of units, the opportunity to maximise accessibility, provide jobs to existing 
and new homes to support sustainable patterns 
of movement, provide choice within the market The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
22 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
and to complement rather than compete with 
employment opportunities in adjoining local 
authority areas.  
2.33 The allocation of land for new homes and the 
opportunities for delivering the associated 
supporting infrastructure around Harlow is not 
sufficient to provid e the number of new homes 
required in the District to support the 
requirements across the Housing Market Area.  
The spatial strategy underpinning the Local Plan therefore focuses on opportunities for 
accommodating new homes within existing 
urban areas.  Th is provides only limited 
opportunities in terms of overall numbers and 
so the Council has identified a range of sites 
which reflect the opportunities to create 
sustainable communities of different size and 
which  can support sustainable transport choices 
to reduce the need to travel by car , thus 
reducing impacts on the Epping Forest in 
particular.  The Plan  has also sought to 
recognise and reflect the emerging work of a 
number of Neighbourhood Plans.  In doing so the Local Plan provides a balance between 
supporting the Council’s strategic priorities, 
reducing any likely significant effect on 
environmental assets, minimising the need as 
much as possible to develop on Green Belt land 
whilst supporting local priorities and 
opportunities.  
2.34 The overarching strategy  of the Local Plan  is 
contained in the following seven policies . These 
sit within the context of the Plan ’s vision and 
objectives. The policies set out the overall 
approach to facilitating the delivery of development in the District and in particular the 
amount of new homes and jobs that the Plan 
seeks to achieve, the distribution of that 
development between settlements, the overall 
approach to locating new homes and jobs, the 
development and delivery of garden 
communities around Harlow, the future 
protecti on of the Green Belt and the approach 
to the natural environment and green 
infrastructure for new development. It also 
explains the approach of the Plan to addressing 
sustainable development and climate change. 
These threads of the strategy are viewed as 
equally important.  Sustainable Development  
2.35 The fundamental purpose of the Local Plan is  to 
deliver the vision, objectiv es and strategy for 
the District for the Plan peri od up to 2033 whilst 
contributing to sustainable development which 
can be described as positive growth that achieves economic, environmental and social  
progress. This p rinciple is supported 
internationally through United Nati ons 
definiti ons and national policy makes it clear 
that its achievement is the purpose of the 
planning system.  
2.36 The ch allenge for the Local Plan is to address 
the economic, environmental and social facets of sustainable development jointly and 
simultaneously, seeking to achieve gains in all 
rather than, for example, achieving economic 
progress at the expense of social and  
environmental progress. The Local Plan take s 
advantage of economic opportunities, and 
meet s the needs of existing and future 
residents, businesse s and visitors, whilst 
protecting and enhancing the natural and 
historic environment and built heritage and 
addressing the impacts of a changing climate. 
The strategy and policies in this Plan as a whole 
seek to address the matter of sustainable 
development holistic ally and recognise the 
interr elation s between elements of new 
development and the existing settlemen ts and 
countryside. Sus tainable development is define d 
as development which meets the needs of the 
present without compromising  the ability of 
future generations to meet their own needs.  
2.37 The national presumpti on in favour of 
sustainable develop ment means that unless 
specific  national  policies indicate otherwise o r 
adverse impacts would significantly and demonstrably outweigh the benefits, the Local 
Plan is required to:  
• take a positiv e approach that reflects the 
presumpti on in favour of sustainable 
development;  
• positively seek opportunities to meet the 
development needs of the District; and  
• meet , as far as possible, objectively 
assessed needs, with flexibility to adapt to 
rapid change.  The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 23 
                             
 
 
Key Evidence  
• Sustainability and Equalities Impact 
Appraisal (AECOM, 2017) ; and  
• Habitats Regulati on Assessment s 
(AECOM, 2017) . 
Approach  
2.38 The Council recognises the importance of 
pursuing sustainable development for the 
District, as noted in national policy. This 
highlights that sustainable development involves seeking positive improvements in the 
quality of the built, natural and historic 
environment, as well as in people’s quality of 
life including but not limited to: making it easier 
for jobs to be created in cities, towns and 
villages; moving from a net loss of bio -diversity 
to achieving net gains for nature; replacing poor 
design with better design; improving the 
conditions in which people live, work, travel and 
take leisure; and widening the choice of high 
quality homes.  
2.39 To ensure that all development reflects the 
presumptio n in favour of sustainable 
development the Local Plan has include d an 
overarching policy so that it is clear that development proposed locally which is 
sustainable can be approved without delay. The 
Council is committed to help achieve 
sustainable developm ent and will give 
favourable consideration to proposals which will contribute towards delivering: a strong, flexible 
and sustainable economy; the protection and 
enhancement of the natural, built and historic 
environment; the prudent use of natural 
resource s; mitigation and adaptation to climate 
change; and which support strong, vibrant and 
healthy communities . This approach is 
embodied in Policy  SP 1 and is reflected in all 
policies in the Local Plan and planning decisions 
made by the Council.  
 
 
  
 
 Policy SP 1 Presumption in favour of 
sustainable development  
A. The Council will take a positive approach to the 
consideration of dev elopment proposals, 
reflecting the presumption in favour of 
sustainable development contained in the 
National Planning Policy Framework. The Council 
will work proactively with applicants to find 
solutions for development proposals that help to 
improve the economic, social and environmental 
condition in the District.  
B. Proposals which accord with the development 
plan will be approve d. Proposals that do not 
accord with the development plan will be refused, 
unless material considerations indicate otherwise. 
When taking decisions, the Council will apply  the 
presumption in favour of sustainable 
development within national planning policy .  
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
24 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
The Spatial Development Strategy  
2.40 This section looks at the number of new homes 
and amount of additional employment 
floorspace that the Council will facilitate 
delivery of over the Plan period. Other types of 
development will also be needed in the Di strict 
over the Plan period .  This includ es for example 
retail growth, as well as the provision of 
infrastructure , commu nity facilitie s, and services 
necessary to support this development . These 
requirements are explored further in the 
settle ment chapter (Chapter 5) and the 
Infrastructure and Delivery chapter (Chapter 6).  
Housing  
2.41 The Council has worked closely with East 
Hertfordshire, Harlow and Uttlesford District 
Councils to understand the level of housing 
need across the local authority areas .  This has  
enabled agreement to be reached on how this 
would be best distributed in order to meet that 
overall need whilst recognising the differing 
environmental, policy and infrastructure 
constraints and support strategic objectives. 
Part of the evidence to inform  this has been 
through the commissioning of technical work 
set out in what is known as a Strategic Housing 
Market Assessment (SHMA).  
2.42 The purpose of the SHMA is to objectively 
assess housing need taking into account 
population and household projections, 
affordable housing needs, jobs growth and 
market signals about the cost of new homes. A 
full review of earlier SHMAs was published in 
2015.  However, in 2016, following the 
completion of that work the Office of National 
Statistics and Department for Communit ies and 
Local Government issued further population and 
household projections. It is important that the 
authorities use the most up to date information 
available wherever possible in order to ensure 
that the needs of existing and future residents 
across the  whole of the Housing Market Area 
(HMA) are met .  The local authorities have 
considered the most recent population and 
household projecti ons. They have identified the 
potential to increase the level of housing to be 
delivered across the Housing Market Area  but the level of infrastructure constraints, as well as 
environmental and policy designations are such 
that the  full objectively assessed housing need 
based on the 2016 figur es can almost be met 
and accord  with other policies set out in 
national guidance .  Evidence on transport 
constraints has shown that the maximum 
amount of growth for the Plan period is around 
51,100 homes for the Strategic Housing Market 
Area.  
2.43 The latest updates to the 2015 SHMA were 
published in July 2017.  This assessed the 2016 
natio nal population and household projections 
data together with further sensitivity testing 
specific to local circumstances, including for 
migration.  This update has indicated that the 
full objectively assessed need for housing across 
the HMA amounts to some 51,700 new homes 
over the period 2011 -2033.  It then identified 
that for Epping Forest District some 12,573 new 
homes were needed within that period.  
However, this figure is a ‘starting point’ and 
does not take into account environmental, 
policy and infra structure constraints.  It is for 
Local Plans to consider the most appropriate 
spatial distribution for achieving the full 
objectively assessed need across the HMA.  The 
four local authorities across the HMA have 
worked together to inform the development o f 
their individual Local Plans within this context.  
2.44 Taking this into account the agreed distribution in the MoU  identified a requirement for Epping 
Forest District to accommodate approximately 11,400 homes over the plan period 2011 -2033.  
Travellers  
2.45 Throug h the Local Plan t he Council will plan to 
meet the future needs of Travellers and 
Travelling Showpeople in accordance with 
national planning policy . The Council has 
asses sed the accommodati on needs of 
Travellers and Travelling Showpeo ple alongside 
the sett led populati on in order to develop a 
strategy that addresses future needs. Travelling 
is an i ntegral part of cultural identity for Gypsy 
and Traveller households and Gypsies and 
Travellers are recogn ised ethnic groups and are 
entitle d to the same access to housing as the 
settled community.  The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 25 
                             
 
 
2.46 The Local Plan  establish es how the Council will 
meet Traveller and Tr avelling Showpeople 
accommodation needs in the Dis trict until 2033 
including setting pitch requirements  for 
Travellers and Travel ling Showpeople based on 
local evidence. The most up -to-date local 
evidence has identified a need for 64 pitches to 
support the needs of the Gypsy and Traveller 
community and one  yard to support the needs 
of Travelling Showpeople over the period of the 
Local Plan (2011 -2033).  This does not include 
an allowance for those who have a need to live 
in a caravan whatever their race or origin who do not meet the definition of gypsies and 
travellers  set out  in the national planning policy 
but who are members of re cognised  ethnic 
groups with needs relevant to their ethnicity and culture that must be considered having 
regard to the statutory duties under the Equality 
Act 2010. In addition,  need is likely to fluctuate 
over the plan period. It is for these reasons , and  
to give flexibility  the plan provides for a higher 
number of pitches than for those meeting the 
planning definition. More information in respect 
of the development of the evidence base can be found in the Epping  Forest District Council 
Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople 
Assessment (September 201 7 baseline 2016) .  
This evidence demonstrates that very special 
circumstances apply such as to require 
allocations to be made within the Green Belt.   
2.47 In order to meet this level of need the Local Plan 
has al located a number of sites including 
provision with in the strategic sites identified in  
Policies SP 4 and SP 5.  Sites in other areas of the 
District are set out in the individual section s in 
Chapter 5.  
The Economy  
2.48 The Council has worked with its neighbouring 
authorities in order to understand the strategic 
employment and economic needs of the wider 
area.  The Functional Economic Market Area 
(FEMA) aligns with the Housing Market Area 
(HMA) and so this work has also i nvolved East 
Hertfordshire, Harlow and Uttlesford District Councils.  As with housing, work has been commissioned to better understand the level of employment land needed to support jobs growth.   
2.49 The latest FEMA assessment has factored in local knowledge regarding the current operation 
of the economy together with known jobs 
growth opportunities including the relocation of 
Public Health England and the establishment of 
an Enterprise Zone at Harlow, known growth at 
Stansted Airport and growth in service sec tor 
jobs as a result of future population increases.  
This has identified a need for some 51,000 jobs 
over the period 2011 –2033.  Factoring in job 
changes between 2011 -2016 the level from 
2016- 2033 is some 32,100 jobs.   
2.50 This equates to a requirement for a pproximately 
465 new jobs per annum  for the FEMA .  This 
was then translated into employment land floor space  requirements .  This has identified that 
between 2016 -2033 there is a need for between 
9-22 ha of new office space and 65 ha of new 
industrial space , across the area.  These figures 
take account of the fact that approximately half 
of the future accommodation needs will be 
provided through the regeneration of existing 
office and industrial sites.  
2.51 For Epping Forest District this provides a figure 
of so me 10,800 jobs from 2011 –  2033, with 
some 7,900 for the 2016 -2033 period.   This 
translates into between 2 -5ha of land for new 
office use and 14 ha for new industrial uses .   
2.52 The FEMA authorities are committed to working 
together to ensure that adequate provision  for 
employment uses  will be made in Local Plans in 
order to ensure that economic needs and 
aspirations are met.  The position will be kept 
under review in the future .  
Key Evidence  
• West Essex and East Hertfordshire Assessment of Employment Needs 
(Hardisty Jones Associates,  2017) ; 
• Employment Land Supply Assessment 
(Arup, 2017);  
• Employment Review (Hardisty Jones 
Associates, 2017);  
• Housing Implementation Strategy (Epping 
Forest District Council , December2017) ; The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
26 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
• Strategic Housing Market Assessment 
(ORS,  2015) ; 
• Strategic Housing Market Assessment 
Establishing the OAN ( ORS, 2017) ; 
• Strategic Housing Market Assessment 
Affordable Housing Update ( ORS,  2017) ; 
• Updating the Overall Housing Need: 
Based on 2014 -based projections for 
West Essex & East Herts  ( ORS, 2016) ; 
• Essex, Southend on Sea and Thurrock Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling 
Showpeople  Accommodation Assessment 
(ORS,  2017) ; 
• Epping Forest District Council:  Gypsy, 
Traveller and Travelling Showpeople 
Accommodation Assessment Need 
Summary Report ( ORS,  2017) ; 
• Harlow Strategic Site A ssessment 
(AECOM, 2016);  
• Local Plan Viability Study (Dixon Searle,  
2017);  
• Site Selection Report 2016 and 2017 
(Arup);  
• Authority Monitoring Reports (EFDC);  
• Memorandum of Understanding on the 
Distribution of Objectiv ely Assessed Need 
across the West Essex/East Hertfordshire 
Housing Market Area (March 2017) ; 
• Memorandum of Understanding on 
Highways and Transport Infrastructure for 
the West Essex/East Hertfordshire 
Housing Market Area (February 2017) ; 
and 
• Memorandum of Understanding on managing the impacts of growth within 
the West Essex/East Hertfordshire 
Housing Market Area on Epping Forest 
Special Area of Conservati on (February 
2017) . 
 Approach  
Housing: The Strategic Spatial Option  
2.53 In order to develop a robust strategic spatial 
approach to the distribution of housing across 
the HMA that is achievable and deliverable a 
range of technical assessments were 
undertaken to support the Co -operation for 
Sustainable Development Board in agree ing the 
Memorandum of Understanding .  This included 
strategic transport modelling, sustainability appraisal, habitats regulations assessment and 
strategic site assessment.  
2.54 The Spatial Option  and distribution to deliver 
approximately 51,100 net new homes wa s 
agreed by the Co -operation for Sustainable 
Development  Board as the most sustainable 
choice for the HMA in light of the evidence 
available.  The distribution to achieve this is set 
out in Table 2.1 below.  
Table 2.1 Housing Distribution2 
Local  authority  Net new  dwellings  
2011 -2033  
East Hertfordshire  District  Council  ~18,000  
Epping Forest  District Council  ~11,400  
Harlow District Council  ~9,200  
Uttlesford  District  Council  ~12,500  
Total  across the HMA  ~51,100  
…of which the area in and around 
Harlow * will provide  ~16,100  
 
2.55 The distribution was agreed through the signing 
of a Memorandum of Understanding in March 
2017.  
2.56 The work that underpinned the development of 
the MoU distribution focused on the housing 
projections set out in the SHMA 2015 which 
were lower than the most recent figure 
identified in the July 2017 update based on the 
assessment undertaken after the publication of 
the latest  population and household projections 
in 2016.  The number of net new homes 
                                                      
2 ‘in and around Harlow’ refers to development in 
Harlow town as well as around Harlow in adjoining 
Districts  The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 27 
                             
 
 
proposed in the MoU distribution equate s 
broadly  to the full objectively assessed housing 
need of approximately 51,700 new homes 
across the HMA as identified in the July 2017 SHMA update.   
2.57 The MoU distribution recognise s that Harlow 
represents the most sustainable location within the HMA at which to focus development given 
its role as a sub -regional centre for employment 
(esp ecially in technology); its Enterprise Zone 
status; the need to rejuvenate the town centre; 
the opportunity to capitalise on its transport 
connections (for example, good rail links to 
London, London Stansted Airport and 
Cambridge) and deliver north- south a nd east -
west sustainable transport corridors traversing 
the town; its important location  on the London 
Stansted Cambridge corridor; and, above all, the 
wider economic growth aspirations for the town.  
2.58 The Council is fully committed to meeting its contributi on to the Housing Market Area’s 
objectively assessed housing need which has 
been identified as a requirement for 11,400 net 
new homes over the Local Plan period  for 
Epping Forest District .  A key component of this 
is contributing to the provision of  a tota l of 
~16,100 dwellings identified in and around Harlow, of which ~3,900 are allocated in this 
Local Plan  on sites within Epping Forest District .  
2.59 The remaining housing requirement identified 
for Epping Forest District will be delivered across the rest of t he District on a range of sites.  
In allocating these sites there has been a need 
to recognise that the overall level of delivery in 
the early years of the Local Plan period  (2011-
16) has been  less than the 518 new homes per 
annum needed to meet the  housing 
requirement .   
2.60 In such cases national planning policy sets out 
an expectation that this undersupply is taken 
into account in future years.  It is recognised 
that in order to rectify this undersupply and 
provide for a five year supply of housing sites 
mov ing forward there are greater opportunities 
to achieve the speedy delivery of the new 
homes through the identification of smaller sites 
across the District.  These smaller sites  are less reliant on the provision of strategic 
infrastructure (for example, wi th respect to the 
delivery of highway improvements) and provide 
choice within the market.   
2.61 This approach has a further benefit in that it 
provides the opportunity for much needed 
homes to be delivered as early as possible 
rather than being dependent on a small number 
of strategic sites which will not begin delivering 
new homes until later in the Local Plan period.  
The Council has also sought to reflect the reality 
that some of these sites, both large and small, may not come forward as anticipated.    
2.62 The level of housing that the Council is planning 
to deliver through this Plan represents  a step 
change from both that identified through 
previous plans and strategies and previous rates 
of delivery achieved.  T he planned Garden 
Communities will make a signifi cant 
contribution over the plan period but will not supply much over the first five years of the Plan .   
Seeking to address the undersupply that has 
occurred in the first five years of the plan period 
would result in a potentially significant increase 
in the level of homes built  in the District .  This 
could not be supported by the necessary 
infrastructure and services and could have 
significant impacts on vulnerable environmental 
designations including the Epping Forest SAC 
and undermine the strategic objec tives of the 
Metropolitan Green Belt.   
2.63 There is a need to be realistic in terms of when 
landowners and developers have said that sites 
are capable of being delivered.  It is vital that 
these matters are taken into consideration in 
determining the approach to addressing the 
identified undersupply. The Council has 
therefore adopted a smoother and more realistic approach by addressing this over a 
longer period.  The detailed approach is set out 
in the Housing Trajectory set out in Appendix 5  
and the Housing I mplementation Strategy . 
2.64 The ~16 ,100 dwellings identified in and around 
Harlow comprise the following sites identifi ed in 
the Strategic Sites Ass essment as the preferred 
locations for development:  The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
28 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Table 2.2 Proposed sites in and around Harlow   
Epping Forest  
District  Latton Priory  ~ 1,0 50 
Water Lane Area  
 ~ 2,100 
East of Harlow  * ~ 750  
  
Total  ~ 3,900  
East 
Hertfordshire  
 Gilston  ~ 3,050  
Harlow  District  East of Harlow * ~ 2,600  
Total  in proposed  
sites  ~ 9,550  
In addi tion Harlow  District  will deliver  ~ 6,600 units  on sites 
not included  in the strategic sites assessment  
* The East of Harlow  area  is split between  Harlow  and 
Epping Forest  Districts . 
2.65 The commitments within Harlow District 
including completions/permissions,  urban 
brownfield and the redevelopment of the 
Princess Alexandra Hospital site provide for 
some 6,600 new homes. The Plan  allocate s sites 
around Harlow as identified through the outcome of this work with our Housing Market 
Area partners (including making provision for 
Travellers) to support the vision for the London 
Stansted Cambridge Corridor.  
2.66 The Local Plan allocates the remaining housing 
requirement identified for Epping Forest District 
by taking a sequential approach to where new 
homes will be provided.  In determining the 
appropriate sites the Council has taken account of the previous consultation responses which 
considered that new housing should be 
distributed across the District , together with the 
evidence on sites put forward and the p olicy 
and envir onmental constraints in the District. 
The approach to the allocation of sites has been 
to take each settlement and consider the most appropriate sites in accordance with the 
following order of priority:  
1 A sequential flood risk assessment –  
proposing land i n Flood Zone 2 and 3 only 
where need cannot be met in Flood Zone 1 ; 
2 Sites located on previously developed land 
within settlements ; 3 Sites located on open space within settlements where such selection would 
maintain adequate open space provision 
within the s ettlement ; 
4 Previously developed land within the Green 
Belt; 
5 Greenfield/Gr een Belt land on the edge of 
settlements : 
a. Of least value to the Green Belt if the 
land meets other suitable criteria for 
development.  
b. Of greater value to the Green Belt if the 
land meets other suitable criteria for 
development.  
c. Of most value to the Green Belt if the land meets other suitable criteria for 
development.  
6 Agricultural land:  
a. Of Grade 4 -5 if the land meets other 
suitable criteria for development.  
b. Of Grade 1 -3 if the land meets other 
suitable criteria for development.  
7 Enable small scale sites in smaller rural 
communities to come forward where there is 
a clear local need which supports the social 
and economic well -being of that community.  
2.67 The Council will resist the  net loss o f existing 
homes unless they are part of a wider scheme where there is an overall gain in the number of 
homes provided.  The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 29 
                             
 
 
Table 2.3  Housing land supply: 2011 -20333  
The components  of housing land supply over  
the period  2011 -2033 are as follows : 
Minimum n umber of homes required  to 
be built  2011 -2033: 518 x 22  years  ~11,400  
Homes  Built  (Completions) 2011- 2017  
up to 31 March  2017     1,330 
What is available in the future (supply)  
Sites  with planning permission up to  31 
March  2017  + 10% non -delivery rate      1,621  
Windfalls  35 x 1 1 years         385 
Total supply      3,336 
Requirement  met through Garden Town 
Communities around  Harlow  within 
EFDC      3,900 
Remaining  requirement  to be provided 
elsewhere  in the District     4,146  
2.68 The Council recognises that land is a finite 
resource, and that the District is subject to 
policy and environmental constraints. It is 
therefore critical that land for development is 
used in an efficient and effective way as set out 
in Policy  SP 2. Consequently, it is expect ed that 
all new development will maximise densities on 
housing sites, whilst recognising that different 
density levels will be appropriate for different 
sites in different locations as set out in Policy  SP 
3. 
Travellers  
2.69 The Plan  allocate s sufficie nt sites for the 
Traveller and Travelling Showpeople 
communities in order to meet the identified  
need for additi onal provision over the Local Plan 
period. Taking this approach will help to 
minimise the number of unauthorised sites 
within the District. Taking into account the 
Planning Policy Statement for Traveller sites 
published by DCLG in August 2015 the Council 
has taken a proactive and sequential approach 
in selecting sites:  
                                                      
3 Please note that the figures may  not add up due to 
rounding.  A 10% non- implementation rate has been applied 
to site with planning permission.  1 The creation of Garden Town Communities 
around Harlow recogni sing its strategic 
economic role and needs  
2 the sequential flood risk assessment –  
prioritising allocation of sites in Flood Zone 1 
and proposing land in Flood Zone 2 where 
need cannot be met in Flood Zone 1;  
3 sites with temporary permissions or 
unauthorised sites that may potentially be 
suitable for regularisation;  
4 intensification of existing traveller sites  
and/or sites which could be regularised 
(unauthorised sites or sites with temporary 
permission);  
5 extension of existing traveller sites  and/or 
sites which could be regularised (unauthorised sites or sites with temporary 
permission);  
6 new Traveller sites in non -Green Belt areas;  
7 new Traveller sites in Green Belt areas;  
8 where sufficient provision to meet identified 
need for additional pitches coul d not be 
found from the above sources, provision has 
been made by allocating Traveller pitches 
within Garden Communities around Harlow 
or on other  residential  allocations.  
Table 2.4 Traveller and Travelling Showpeople  
Requirement : 2011- 2033   
The components  of traveller  and travelling  
showpeople  requirement over the period 
2011 -2033 are as follows:  
 Number of pitches required 
2011- 2033 based on 2016  Gypsy  
and Traveller  Accommodation  
Assessment  and update  64 pitches and 1 
yard  
No of pitches completed  16 
Pitches given planning 
permission  2016 -2017  16 
Remaining requirement to be  
provided – not including known 
ethnic traveller households who 
do not meeting the planning 
definition  32 pitches and 1 
yard  
(identified  in 
Policy SP 5  and 
Chapter 5  of the 
Local Plan ) The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
30 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
2.70 The approach to t raveller site provision 
including size, number of pitches and location is 
set out in the Site Selection Report. The 
approach to accommodating Traveller needs is that sites of no more than five pitches provide 
the most appropriate approach for new sites. 
Intensification or extension of existing sites 
should not normally exceed 10 pitches subject 
to detailed consideration of the suitability of 
each site and site specific justification , where, 
for example it supports a known need arising 
from the site.  
The Economy  
2.71 The Council ’s approach to supporting the 
economy is to plan to provide  a marginally 
higher amount  of employment land than that  
identified  in the District  in the October 2017 
Functional Economic Market Area Assessm ent.  
The Council is keen to ensure  through this Plan 
that there is sufficient flexibility to respond to unforeseen demands and to provide for a range 
and choice of sites in terms of typology, 
location, mix and phasing.   
2.72 The sites allocated provide for this and are capable of accommodating a range of B C lass 
Uses, but with a focus on B1c/B2 and B8 
activities to reflect the location of the sites in 
relation to the strategic road network.  The sites 
also provide sufficient flexibility to 
accommodate a range of unit sizes, including for 
‘step -up’ accommodation to support developing 
companies that need room to expand.   
2.73 The spatial distribution of the sites has also sought to reflect the employment needs 
identified across the D istrict , particularly taking 
into account the need for additional space to 
serve employment markets in the south of the District, including at Loughton and Waltham 
Abbey.  Significant employment opportunities 
already exist at Harlow through the relocation of Public Health England  and the Enterprise 
Zone , and further small -scale employment uses 
will also be provided within the Garden Town Communities  to promote the sustainable 
growth of Harlow and r educe  out-commuting.  
2.74 It is important that Epping Forest District makes provision for employment in other areas where 
new homes are to be provided, where there is market appetite to develop and to manage the 
level of traffic growth generated in order to 
minimise pressure on the roads through Epping 
Forest.   Taking t his approach makes a positive 
contribution toward the delivery of the London 
Stansted  Cambridge Corridor Vision, the 
employment needs across the Functional 
Economic Market Area, and the needs of the 
District.   
2.75 The Council also recognises that a significan t 
proportion of new floorspace is capable of coming forward through the regeneration of 
existing employment sites.  Therefore in order 
to both protect existing stock wherever possible 
and provide certainty for future investors the  
Plan has allocate s exist ing employment sites 
where it has been appropriate to do so.  
Table 2.5 Employment Requirement s: 2011- 2033   
The components  of employment land 
requirement over the period 2011- 2033 are 
as follows:  
 Employment land (B uses) 
required 2016 -2033 for offices  2-5ha 
Employment land (B uses) 
required 2016 -2033 for offices  14ha  
Remaining requirement to be  
provided  16-19ha  
Infrastructure and Delivery  
2.76 When development occurs, it places additional 
demands on infrastructure, including water and 
energy supply, wastewater disposal, roads, 
education and healthcare as well as open space and green infrastructure. The delivery of key 
infrastructure will be vita l to support the 
number of homes and jobs required over the 
Plan period.  T he sequential approach proposed 
for their delivery seeks to make the best use of 
existing infrastructure as well as providing the 
best possible opportunity to provide additional 
infrastructure capacity. The provision of 
infrastructure together with the timing of its 
delivery is considered in more detail in Chapter 
6 of this Plan.  The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 31 
                             
 
 
Policy SP 2 Spatial Development Strategy 
2011 -2033  
A. Within the period 2011- 2033 the Local Plan will 
provi de fo r a minimum of 11,400 new homes 
allocated in accordance with the following 
sequential approach:  
(i) The creation of Garden Town Communities 
around Harlow recognising its strategic 
economic role and needs;  
(ii) A sequential flood risk assessment –  
proposing land in Flood Zone 2 and 3 only 
where need cannot be met in Flood Zone 1;  
(iii) Sites located on previously developed land 
within settlements;  
(iv) Sites located on open space within 
settlements where such selection would 
maintain adequate open space provision 
within  the settlement;  
(v) Previously developed land within the Green 
Belt;  
(vi) Greenfield/Green Belt land on the edge of 
settlements:  
- Of least value to the Green Belt if the 
land meets other suitable criteria for 
development.  
- Of greater value to the Green Belt if the 
land meets other suitable criteria for 
development.  
- Of most value to the Green Belt if the 
land meets other suitable criteria for 
development.  
(vii) Agricultural land:  
- Of Grade 4 -5 if the land meets other 
suitable criteria for development.  
- Of Grade 1 -3 if the la nd meets other 
suitable criteria for development.  
(viii) Enable small scale sites in smaller rural 
communities to come forward where there is 
a clear local need which supports the social  
and economic well -being of that community.  
B. The new homes will be d istributed  as follows:  
Settlement  Allocated Housing  
Sites around Harlow  ~ 3,900  
Epping  ~ 1,305  
Loughton  ~ 1,021  Waltham Abbey ~ 858  
Ongar  ~ 590  
Buckhurst Hill  ~ 87  
North Weald Bassett ~ 1,050  
Chigwell  ~ 376  
Theydon Bois  ~ 57  
Roydon  ~ 62  
Nazeing  ~ 122  
Thornwood  ~ 172  
Coopersale, Fyfield, 
High Ongar, Lower 
Sheering, Sheering and 
Stapleford Abbots  ~ 175 
Rural East  ~ 41  
 
C. The new homes will be delivered by:  
(i) permitting development proposal s within the 
defined settlement  boundaries where they 
comply with all other relevant policies of the 
Local Plan;  
(ii) the development of Garden Town 
Communities  around Harlow and at other 
settlements as allocated through  this Local 
Plan (as identified in Policy SP 5  and Chapter 
5); 
(iii) Permittin g rural exception sites in accordance 
with Policy H 3 and all other relevant policies 
of the Local Plan;  
(iv) the delivery of sites identified  in made 
Neighbourhood Plans;  
(v) making the best use of land by ensuring that 
development densities are appropriate to the 
location and size of the site in accordance 
with Policy SP 3 ; and  
(vi) resisting developments which would result in 
a net loss of homes, unless it can be 
demonstrated that the benefits of doing so 
will materially outweigh the harm.  
D. An additional 38 pitches and 1 yard will be 
provided through the allocation of sites in the 
Local Plan to accommodate the needs of 
Travellers as identified in Policy SP 5  and Chapter 
5. This provision will be delivered th rough the 
following sequential approac h: The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
32 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
(i) the regularisation of existing sites with 
temporary permissions or other unauthorised 
sites where appropriate;  
(ii) making the best use of existing traveller sites 
through intensification and extension, and 
the review of personal permissions where 
appropriat e; 
(iii) new sites in locations outside the Green Belt 
which are appropriately located in terms of 
access to healthcare, education and other 
services  
(iv) new Traveller sites in Green Belt areas which 
are appropriately located in terms of access 
to healthcare, educat ion and other services;  
(v) the provision of land as part of the 
development of the Garden Town 
Communities  around Harlow and other 
allocated sites in this Local Plan ; and  
(vi) permitting additional Traveller sites in 
accordance with Policy H 4.  
E. Within the period 2 011- 2033 the Local Plan will 
provide for employment needs by:  
(i) retaining and enhancing existing  
employment sites and premises where 
appropriate;  
(ii) allocating 23 hectares of new employment 
land at appropriate locations across the 
District as set out in Policy  E 1 to  provide a 
flexible supply of future sites to cater for 
needs , and to meet the economic needs of 
the wider sub -region, and complement 
Harlow Enterprise Zone ; and  
(iii) promoting new small -scale employment 
opportunities within mix ed-use 
developments, inclu ding at the Garden Town 
Communities.  
F. In addition, the Council will:  
(i) promote and support town centre  
development and regeneration;  
(ii) encourage town centres to complement 
other larger sub -regional and regional 
comparison retail destinations outside of the 
District;  
(iii) support growth in the food production and 
glasshouse industry;  
(iv) support growth in the tourism industry and 
visitor economy;  
(v) seek  to provide  suitable  training and skills  
development  for local  residents,  to provide  them  with  the skills  needed  to access future  
employment opportunities both  within  and 
outside  the District;  
(vi) seek  to increase  workforce participation  and 
encouraging older workers  to continue to 
work; and  
(vii) attract new businesses,  encourage  start -ups,  
and help  growing businesses.  
G. Development  proposals  will be required  to 
demonstrate that they  accord  with  infrastructure  
requirements  established  through the 
Infrastructure  Delivery  Plan  and all other  policies  
of the Plan . 
2.77 The identified housing supply to 2033 exceeds 
the requ irement. This serves  two functions. 
Firstly, it provides a contingency to allow for 
flexibility. Conting ency planning is nece ssary to 
allow for eventualitie s beyond the Council’s 
control, including the economic cycle and 
factors relati ng to specific sites or developers, 
which  could result in stalled sites. The Plan 
provides a range of sites in different location s 
which means that it is not reliant o n delivery at 
a single location. A breakdown of the housing supply is included at Appendix 5 . 
2.78 Secondly, as identified above , the C ouncil 
recognises  that recent household projections 
demonstrate a further upward trend i n housing 
need and the identific ation of additi onal sites 
demonstrates the Council’s commitment to positiv e planning.  
2.79 The Council’s positiv e approach may also 
require i t to use its compuls ory purchase 
powers under section 226 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990. That po wer gives 
the Council a positiv e tool to help to assemble 
land where this is necessary to implement proposals in the Local Plan o r where strong 
plan ning justifications at for the use of the 
power exist. For the circumstances in which 
those powers may be exercised, see the 
Department for Communitie s and Local 
Government’s ‘Compulsory purchase process 
and the Crichel Down Rules: guidance ’. 
2.80 The Council r ecognises the importance of 
delivering housing to meet the requirements set 
out within Policy SP 2, and ensuring that the 
Plan includes sufficient flexibility to respond to The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 33 
                             
 
 
unanticipated changes in circumstances 
including the unforeseen failure of site(s) to 
deliver as planned.  As a r esult, the Council is 
committed to monitoring and reviewing the 
Plan following adoption.  
2.81 The Council will monitor housing delivery 
against the housing trajectory (Appendix 5 and 
Housing Implementation Strategy) for  the 
District using the indicators specified in the 
Monitoring Framework set out in the Local Plan.  If the Authority Monitoring Report (AMR) 
demonstrates that annual housing delivery is 
less than 75% of the annualised requirement or 
the projected completion rate (whi chever is the 
lower) for three consecutive years, the Council 
will undertake a partial review of this Plan.  In 
undertaking this review, the Council will ensure 
that sufficient infrastructure capacity is available 
and that the potential allocation of addit ional 
housing sites will not prejudice delivery of the 
infrastructure required by the Plan.  
Place Shaping  
2.82 Place shaping is a holistic process that aims to 
bring together all the component parts of a 
successful place. It provides an opportunity to 
encourage  an integrated approach to 
development by focusing on, and creating 
better social, physical and economic 
environments.  
2.83 National planning policy emphasises the 
importance of high quality design and place 
shaping. It states that well designed places 
exhibit qualities that benefit users and the wider 
area. Development should ensure that new or 
changing places: are functional; support mixed 
uses and tenures; include successful public spaces; are adaptable and resilient; have a 
distinctive character; are attract ive; and 
encourage ease of movement.  
2.84 Allocations in the Local Plan (as identified in Policy SP 5  and Chapter 5)  need to be planned 
carefully to ensure that they become successful 
places. The Local Plan has an important role to 
play in the creation of susta inable communities 
at these locations. It is important that these 
areas work as places and are attractive, prosperous and encourage safe communities 
where people want to live, work or visit.  
Key Evidence  
• Creating Garden Cities and Suburbs Today (TCPA, 2012);  
• Landscape Character Assessment (Chris Blandford Associates , 2010 ); and 
• Settlement Edge Landscape Sensitivity 
Study (Chris Blandford Associates , 2010).  
Approach  
2.85 The Council’s approach to place shaping  seeks 
to achieve successful and desirable 
developmen ts. This p olicy sets out the 
framework and key principles that will guide the 
future development of allocations in the Local 
Plan (as identified in Policy SP 5  and Chapter 5).  
2.86 Given the importance and scale of the 
allocations, development proposals will be  
required to accord with a range of place  shaping 
principles, and where applicable, it will be 
necessary to demonstrate compliance through 
the production of Strategic M asterplans as 
required . 
2.87 The Council is committed to working with Harlow Council , Uttlesf ord District Council  and 
East Hertfordshire District Council, Hertfordshire 
County Council and Essex County Council, in 
partnership with relevant Local Enterprise 
Partnerships to bring forward transformational 
growth in and around Harlow. The Councils have  
a strong collective commitment to achieving 
Garden City principles in strategically planned 
development. The partners understand and 
recognise the need to promote high quality, 
cohesive growth, supporting the core ethos and 
objectives set out in the Town and Country 
Planning Association’s key guiding principles. 
Policy SP 4 seeks to ensure that these 
aspirations can be achieved.  
2.88 The appreciation of housing density is crucial to 
realising the optimum potential of sites. It is not 
appropriate to apply densit y ranges set out in 
Policy SP 3  mechanistically but to consider the 
density appropriate to the location taking account of relevant factors to optimise potential The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
34 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
including the local context, design, transport 
and social infrastructure.  
 
Policy SP 3 Place Shaping  
H. Strategic Masterplans and d evelopment proposals 
must reflect and demonstrate that the following 
place shaping principles have been  adhered to 
with respect to the scale of development 
proposed:  
(i) strong vision, leadership and community 
engagement;  
(ii) provide for the long -term stewardship of 
assets;  
(iii) provide mixed -tenure homes and a range of 
housing types and sizes;  
(iv) ensure a robust range of employment 
opportunities with a variety of jobs within 
easy commuting distance of homes;  
(v) provide high quality and i maginatively 
designed homes with gardens or access to 
usable and accessible amenity space, 
combining the very best of urban and rural  
living to promote healthy and active lifestyles 
and vibrant communities;  
(vi) ensure generous, well connected and 
biodivers e rich green space provision;  
(vii) extend, enhance and reinforce strategic 
green infrastructure and public open space;  
(viii) ensure that development enhances the 
natural environment;  
(ix) deliver strong local cultural, recreational, 
social (including health and educational 
where required) and shopping facilities to 
support day- to-day needs in walkable 
neighbourhoods;  
(x) ensure positive integration and connection 
with adjacent rural and urban communities 
thereby contributing  to the revitalisation of 
existing neighbourhoods;  
(xi) mainta in and enhance the important 
features, character and assets of existing 
settlements;  
(xii) conserve and positively enhance key 
landscapes, habitats and biodiversity;  
(xiii) provide for sustainable movement and access 
to local and strategic destinations  (including 
rail, bus and pedestrians/cycling); and 
(xiv) positively respond to sustainable water management.  
I. To ensure the best and most efficient use of land 
as a guide the Council will normally expect:  
(i) a greater d ensity of development at places 
with good public transport accessibility;  
(ii) densities above 50 dwellings per hectare in 
town s and large village centres , and along 
main transport routes and /or close to 
transport nodes;  
(iii) in the areas outside town and large village 
centres, new residential development should 
achieve den sities of between 30 and 50 
dwellings per hectare, and should enhance 
the distinctive character and identity of the 
area;  
(iv) lower density developments may be 
appropriate in other areas of the District. 
Some parts of the urban areas and some 
villages are part icularly sensitive to the 
impact of intensification and redevelopment 
because of the prevailing character of the 
area and the sensitive nature of the 
surrounding countryside or built form.  
 
Strategic Masterplans  
2.89 The Council requires a joined -up, collabora tive, 
cohesive  and proactive approach to be taken to 
the planning and implementation of key 
strategic sites across the District .   
2.90 The following Strategic Masterplans will be 
required to guide the development and 
implementation of the Garden Town 
Communiti es (as specified in Policies SP 4 and 
SP 5 below) : 
• East of Harlow  Masterplan ; 
• Latton Priory  Masterplan ; and  
• Water Lane A rea Masterplan.  
2.91 The following Strategic Masterplans will be produced to guide the development and 
implementation of other areas (as specified in 
the Places policies of the Plan  in Chapter 5 ) of 
significant growth and/or complexity elsewhere in the District:  
• South Epping Masterplan;  
• Jessel Green Masterplan;  
• Waltham Abbey North Masterplan;  The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 35 
                             
 
 
• North Weald Bassett Masterplan;  
• North Weald Airfield Masterplan;  and 
• Limes Farm Masterplan;  
2.92 Strategic Masterplan Areas are defined on the 
maps included in Chapter 5, the Policies Map, 
and shown in Appendix 6.  The precise nature 
and detail of each Strategic Masterplan will vary 
depending upon the context, including the 
complexity of allocated sites, scale of 
development proposed, constraints and 
infrastructure requirements.  For instance, 
Strategic Masterplans for s ites wholly in the 
ownership of the Council are likely to be of a 
more detailed nature.  Strategic Masterplans 
which cover areas of multiple land ownership 
and greater complexity are likely to provide a 
higher level overarching framework to ensure 
that pla nning and delivery of development and 
infrastructure is properly coordinate d across the 
Masterplan Area.   
2.93  2.94 .  The production of Strategic Masterplans will 
ensure that development proposals are ‘front -
loaded’ and where possible accelerated, 
recognising th e scale and complexity of 
delivering development and infrastructure at 
these locations  
2.95 Epping Forest District Council (and Harlow 
District Council for the Garden Town 
Communities) will oversee the production of 
Strategic Masterplans through the Harlow and 
Gilston Garden Town /Epping Forest District 
Developer Forums .  Planning applications and 
any other consenting mechanisms for sites located within a Masterplan area must be in 
general conformity with the Strategic 
Masterplans which have been formally endorse d by Epping Forest District Council ( and 
where appropriate Harlow District Council ).  
  
Figure 2. 1 Planning process for Strategic Masterplans  
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
36 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
2.94 Strategic Masterplans will be produced by the 
landowners/promoters of allocated sites, in 
partnership with the Council and relevant 
stakeholders (including adjacent lan downers, 
relevant town/parish councils, infrastructure 
providers and statutory consultees).  
2.95 In producing Strategic Masterplans, the Council 
requires ongoing widespread engagement to be 
undertaken with the local community (includin g 
Town and Parish Councils)  and stakeholders.   
2.96 This should include an early engagement event 
to inform option development, and public 
consultation on the draft Strategic Masterplan 
prior to finalisation.  Strategic Masterplans must 
be prepared in a form and manner which me ans 
that they are capable of adoption as 
Supplementary Planning Documents.  
2.97 Strategic Masterplans should be produced to 
accord with Policy SP 3 (Place  Shaping) and 
other policies of the Local Plan.  Specific 
requirements for the Garden Town Community 
Strategic Masterplans are set out in Policies SP 4 
and SP 5.  Specific requirements for the 
Strategic Masterplans in other areas of the 
District are set out  within relevant policies in 
Chapter  5 of the Plan.  
Design Codes  
2.98 The Councils will require Design Codes to be 
produced which accord with the general 
principles established by the endorsed Strategic 
Masterplans.  The Design Codes should be 
endorsed by the C ouncil and inform p lanning 
applications to be submitted for individual sites.   
Where appropriate Design Codes may be 
required on other sites in consultation with the 
Council.   
Concept Frameworks  
2.99 The Council recognises that in some cases the 
production of Concept Frameworks would 
provide a more proportionate and pragmatic 
approach, whilst still ensuring that a 
comprehensive and cohesive approach is taken 
to the planning and delivery of development 
and infrastructure.  Concept Frameworks will be 
required  for: 
• West Ongar; and  • South Nazeing;  
2.100  Concept Frameworks will be produced by the 
landowners/promoters of relevant allocated 
sites and shall be endorsed by the Council prior 
to the submission of any planning applications. 
Detailed design proposals must be review ed and 
informed by the Quality Review Panel.  Some 
Concept Framework Plans will relate to multiple 
allocation sites, whereby it is expected that 
these are undertaken jointly with all applicants 
of the site allocations subject to the Concept 
Framework Plan.  Details of the specific 
requirements of each Concept Framework Plan 
can be found within the site specific 
requirements  set out in Appendix 6.   
Quality Review Panel  
2.101  The production of Strategic Masterplans, 
Concept Framework s, Design Codes and where 
appropr iate other planning proposals  should be 
informed through review at key stages by the Harlow and Gilston Garden Town or the 
Council’s Quality Review Panel.   The Council will 
generally expect schemes of more than 50 
homes or 5,000 sq metres of commercial/oth er 
floorspace to be informed by review.  Other 
smaller schemes which are complex or 
contentious may also be appropriate for review.  
Planning Performance Agreements  
2.102  To promote efficient and effective joint working 
and to front load the planning process, the  use 
of Planning Performance Agreements will be 
strongly encouraged  for large scale 
development (schemes of more than 50 homes or 5,000 sq metres of commercial/other floorspace) , particularly for sites located within 
a Strategic Masterplan area.  This will  promote 
joint working between all parties, including statutory consultees, and will assist in focusing 
the issues that will need to be addressed prior 
to the submission of planning applications.  
 
 
 
 
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 37 
                             
 
 
Harlow and Gilston Garden Town  
2.103  Epping Forest District C ouncil, Harlow Council 
and East Hertfordshire District Council are 
working in partnership together with 
Hertfordshire County Council, Essex County 
Council, Hertfordshire Local Enterprise 
Partnership, South East Local Enterprise 
Partnership, land owners and promoters to 
bring forward transformational growth in the 
form of Harlow and Gilston Garden Town.  
2.104  On 2 January 2017 the Government announced 
its support for the Expression of Interest 
submitted to the locally –led Garden Towns 
prospectus on behalf of the Councils.  The 
Councils share a bold vision and set of 
objectives, recognising that areas in and around 
Harlow present a number of opportunities to 
deliver growth of considerable scale and 
significance. Such growth is key not only to 
meet growing pressures  of housing and 
infrastructure need locally, but also in delivering 
broader regeneration and change for Harlow.  
2.105  The Garden Town lies in the core area of the 
‘London Stansted Cambridge Corridor’ (LSCC) -  
one of the most important and fastest growing economic regions in the country.  
2.106  The Garden Town represents a major 
opportunity to accommodate around 16,000 
homes up to 2033 between the global centres of 
London and Cambridge. The Garden Town will 
provide a mix of development, including 
employment, schools and community facilities.  
2.107  Harlow and Gilston Garden Town comprises  
four new Garden Town Communities :  
• East of Harlow;  
• Latton Priory;  
• Water Lane A rea ; and  
• Gilston . 
2.108  Three of these Communities ( East Harlow, 
Latton Priory and Water Lane Area ) lie within or 
partially within Epping Forest District and are 
central to the spatial strategy for this Local Plan.  
Key Evidence  
• Harlow Strategic Site Assessment (AECOM, 2016);  • Harlow and Gilston Garden Town 
Expression of Interest (2016); and  
• Site Selection Report 2016 and 2017 (Arup);  
• West Essex and East Hertfordshire 
Assessment of Employment Needs 
(Hardisty Jones Associates,  2017); 
• Employment Review (Hardisty Jones 
Associates, 2017);  
• Epping Forest District Council:  Gypsy, 
Traveller and Travelling Showpeople 
Accommodation Assessment Need 
Summary Report ( ORS,  2017) ; 
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan (Arup, 
2017); and  
• Level 1 Strategic  Flood Risk Assessment 
(SFRA) Update (URS 2015)  
Approach  
2.109  The planning and delivery of the new Garden 
Town Communities will be framed by the 
objectives set out in the Town and Country 
Planning Association’s (TCPA) nine Garden City  
principles .  
2.110  The level of strategic growth proposed across 
the Garden Town Communities, and the holistic, 
comprehensive approach to planning and 
delivery will enable  the development proposals 
to achieve ‘Garden City ’ ambitions, whilst 
delivering development in an efficient and 
timely manner.  
2.111  The approach to delivery of the Garden Town 
means that the new Communities will not only 
provide a long -term supply of new homes , but 
will also deliver  a quality of development, 
environment, infrastructure, services and 
community that would not otherwise be 
possible . In line with the TCPA’s principles, the  
planned new development will enhance the 
natural environment and offer high- quality 
affordable housing and locally accessible work in 
beautiful, healthy and sociable communities.  
2.112  Alongside the new homes that will be provided, 
the Garden Town will deliver a range of new 
community facilities, employment opportunities, schools and healthcare facilities.  
Included within this provision has been made The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
38 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
for the relocation of the Princess Alexandra 
Hospi tal from its current site in Harlow. In order 
to facilitate the future relocation of the hospital, 
two potential sites have been identified within 
the Garden Town –  one in Epping Forest District 
(East of Harlow) and the other in East 
Hert fordshire  District  (Gilston).  
2.113  The Communities will benefit from access to 
sub-regional retail services at Harlow Town 
Centre and local employment provision helping 
to create a sustainable and self -supporting 
Garden Town.    
2.114  To facilitate the delivery of the new Garden Town Communities the Councils are preparing a  
Spatial Vision and Design Charter framework to provide an overarching spatial vision across the Garden Town a nd a design charter that will 
inform Strategic Masterplans. The design 
principles and parameters will reflect the TCPA ’s 
principles and draw on contemporary 
interpretations of a ‘ Garden Town ’, setting out 
key criteria and objectives for quality and 
character.   
2.115  The Spatial Vision and Design Charter identifies 
a clear set of high -level design principles, which 
incorporate and interpret the TCPA’s Garden 
City principles specifically for the Harlow and 
Gilston Garden Town and will set out how 
design principles will be applied.  The Spatial 
Vision and Design Charter will be implemented 
and secured through Strategic  Masteplans, 
Design Codes and planning applications.  
2.116  The Councils are also establishing a Quality Review Panel  to guide development proposals 
across the Garden Town , in order to help secure 
the exceptional development quality standards 
required.  The reco mmendations of the Panel 
will be a  key material planning consideration in 
the production of Strategic Masterplans, Design 
Codes and planning applications, in helping to 
ensure that the principles and requirements of 
the Garden Town are upheld.  
2.117  Additionally, the Councils are preparing a 
Sustainable Transport Corridor Study for the 
Garden Town.  The provision of s ustainable 
transport options  together with a significant 
modal shift from car to non -car use (including 
walking, cycling and public tran sport) are central to the successful growth of the Garden Town. 
The Councils share an ambition to enhance 
established transport corridors and to create 
new travel corridors , in order to help manage  
overall travel demand and to help integrate the 
new Garden  Town Communities into the 
existing built -up Harlow  area.  Provision of 
access to employment opportunities via non- car 
modes is critical to this.  The Councils aspire to 
see 60%  of journeys to and from the Garden 
Town Communities to be made by non -car 
modes .  
2.118  The planning and delivery of the Garden Town Communities  requir es a coordinated approach 
across  local authority boundaries , necessitating 
the involvement of a range of partners , 
including the site owners/promoters, local 
communities, infrastructure pro viders and other 
stakeholders.  A number of delivery models are 
being considered, and an appropriate tailored 
approach will be established for each of the 
Garden Town Communities.  This approach will 
help the Councils to secure the Garden Town  
place making objectives, whilst ensuring the 
coordinated  and timely delivery of development 
and infrastructure.  
2.119  Development proposals for sites within the 
Garden Town Communities will be required to 
be in general conformity with a Strategic 
Masterplan which has been fo rmally endorsed 
by Epping Forest District Council and , where 
appropriate , Harlow District Council. The 
Strategic Masterplans must be produced in 
accordance with the policy requirements 
stipulated within this Plan.  
2.120  Policy  SP 4 sets out  the overarching 
requi rements for the three Garden Town 
Communities located , or part located, within 
Epping Forest District.  A similar Garden Town policy is contained within Harlow’s Local Plan, 
which will help to ensure a consistent approach 
across the Garden Town, and partic ularly the 
East Harlow site which straddles the two 
administrative areas.  
 
  A414A414B183 Gilden Way
Epping RoadA1169 Southern WayA1025ThirdAvenue
Water Lane
Masterplan
Area
Latton Priory
Masterplan AreaEast of Harlow
Masterplan Area
Harlow
DistrictEast
Hertfordshire
District
ThornwoodLower
Sheering
Epping GreenHarlow
J7M11
M11Harlow TownHarlow Mill
RUR.E19SP 5.3
SP 5.1SP
5.2
Garden Town Communities 
around HarlowMap 2.1 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-SP-0024-Rev1
Scale: 1:45,000 @A4Date: December 2017¯
This legend shows only the key Local Plan policy designations. 
A full legend can be found in Apppendix 6: Site Specific Requirements for Site Allocations.Map 2.1 Garden Town Communities around Harlow
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.Legend
Masterplan Area
located in Harlow
District
Traveller site allocationIndicative access
road for Latton
PrioryGreen Belt Boundary Residential site allocation
Masterplan Area
Concept Framework
Plan AreaEmployment site allocation
Local Authority
boundaryThe Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
40 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Policy SP 4 Development & Delivery of 
Garden Communities in the Harlow and 
Gilston Garden Town  
A. The following three  Garden Town Communities 
are planned in the Harlow and Gilston Garden 
Town  within Epping Forest District : 
(i) Latton Priory ;  
(ii) Water Lane Area ; and   
(iii) East  of Harlow  
B. Development within the Garden Town 
Communities will be holistically and 
comprehensively planned with a distinct identity 
that responds directly to its context and is of 
sufficient scale to incorporate a range o f homes, 
employment, education and community facilities, 
green space and other uses to enable residents to 
meet the majority of their day -to-day needs.  
Delivery of each n ew Garden Town Community 
will be phased and underpinned by a 
comprehensive package of infrastructure as set 
out within the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  
C. The design, development and phased delivery of 
each Garden Town Community must accord with 
the followin g principles:  
(i) The public sector will work  pro-actively and 
collaboratively with the private sector to  
design, and bring forward the Garden Town 
Communities to: (a) secure a high -quality of 
place  making; (b) ensure  the timely delivery 
of both the on-site an d off- site 
infrastructure required to address the 
impact of these new communities; and (c) 
provide and fund a mechanism for future 
stewardship, management, maintenance 
and renewal of community infrastructure 
and assets;  
(ii) Community and stakeholder empowermen t 
will be embedded in the design and delivery 
of each Garden Town Community from the 
outset and  include  a long -term community 
engagement strategy .   
(iii) Inclusion of o pportunities for community-
led housing development ; 
(iv) Agreeing appropriate  and sustainable long -
term governance and stewardship 
arrangements for community assets 
including green space, the public realm 
areas and community and other relevant 
facilities  prior to the submission of outline planning applications. Such arrangements 
will be funded by the development  and 
include community representation to 
ensu re residents have a stake in  long term 
development, stewardship and 
management of their community;  
(v) A Strategic Masterplan will be developed for 
each of the Garden Town Communities 
setting  out the key development design and 
delivery principles and guide development 
proposals. Planning applications and any 
other consenting mechanisms for the 
Garden Town Communities will be required 
to be in general conformity with the 
Strategic Masterplans which have  been 
formally endorsed by Epping Forest District 
Council and where appropriate Harlow 
District Council;  
(vi) Be consistent with and adhere to the 
relevant Design Code (s) which has been 
formally endorsed by Epping Forest District 
Council and where appropriate H arlow 
District Council;  
(vii) Strategic Masterplans and detailed design 
proposals  must be  reviewed and informed 
by the Quality Review Panel;  
(viii) Promotion and execution of the highest 
quality of planning, design and 
management of the built and public realm 
so that the Garden Town Communities are 
characterised as distinctive places that 
capitalise  on local assets and establish 
environments that promote health, 
happiness and well -being. Proposals should 
adhere to the Harlow and Gilston Garden 
Town Spatial Vision and D esign Charter, and 
have regard to the original guiding 
principles established by Sir Frederick 
Gibberd’s masterplan for Harlow, including 
the Green Wedge network;  
(ix) Ensure that on- site and off- site 
infrastructure is provided in a timely 
manner , subject to vi ability considerations, 
ahead of or in tandem with the 
development it supports to mitigate any 
impacts of the new Garden Communities, 
meet the needs of residents and establish 
sustainable travel patterns;  
(x) Provide for balanced and inclusive 
communities thro ugh a mix of homes of 
different sizes, tenures and types .  Provision 
should be made for self - and custom -built 
homes and the needs of an ag eing The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 41 
                             
 
 
population;  
(xi) Provide and promote appropriate 
opportunities for small -scale employment 
generating uses;  
(xii) Ensure the  provision of integrated and 
sustainable transport systems for the 
Harlow and Gilston area that put walking, 
cycling and public transit networks and 
connections at the heart of growth in the 
area, to create a step change in modal shift 
through providing fo r and encouraging 
more sustainable travel patterns;  
(xiii) Contribute to the delivery of the Sustainable 
Transport Corridors and the establishment 
of an integrated, accessible and safe 
transport system which maximises the use 
of the sustainable transport modes of  
walking, cycling and the use of public and 
community transport in order to improve 
air quality and reduce emissions and 
promote healthy lifestyles.  Garden Town 
Communities must ensure the provision of 
high quality, safe and direct walking and 
cycling rou tes and linkages to and from 
Harlow within a permeable site layout with 
priority over vehicular traffic;  
(xiv) Create sociable, vibrant, healthy and 
walkable neighbourhoods with equality of 
access for all to local employment 
opportunities, a range of community 
services and facilities including health, 
education, retail, culture, community 
meeting spaces, multi -functional open 
space, the Green Wedge Network, sports 
and leisure facilities and to high quality 
digital infrastructure;  
(xv) Develop specific Garden Town Community 
parking approaches and standards 
recognising that car -ownership will need to 
be accommodated without impacting on 
the ‘quality of place , and sustainable 
transport objectives ’ whilst making the best 
use of land;  
(xvi) Create distinctive environments whi ch 
relate to the surrounding area ,  the natural 
and historic landscapes and systems, 
provide a multi -functional green -grid which 
creates significant networks of new green 
infrastructure and which provides a high 
degree of connectivity to existing corridors  
and networks and enhance biodiversity;  
(xvii) Integrate a sustainable approach to  design and construction that secure s net gains in 
local biodiversity and the  highest standards 
of energy efficiency and innovation in 
technology;  and 
(xviii)  Ensure that appropriate measures are put in 
place to equalise and apportion the cost of 
shared infrastructure and associated land 
contributions.  
2.121  In addition to the overarching requirements set 
out in Policy SP 4, Policy SP 5 sets out the more 
detailed on -site requirements for ea ch of the 
three Garden Town Communities that lie within 
Epping Forest District.  The requirements have 
been identified in close consultation with Harlow 
District Council and other local authorities within the Harlow and Gilston Garden Town in order to 
ensu re coordination and compatibility with other 
emerging Local Plans and work -streams.  
2.122  The Garden Communities will provide flagship development, and Epping Forest District will work 
jointly with Harlow District Council to resolve any 
cross -boundary issues in delivery.  The 
development also provide opportunities to 
promote high environmental standards in terms 
of energy efficiency, design and low -carbon 
technologies, and set an example for future major 
developments in Epping Forest District.  
2.123  All sites will prov ide a significant amount of multi -
functional green infrastructure,  serving  strategic 
and local purposes.  G reen infrastructure will be 
required to provide a high quality context for the 
development, where appropriate providing a 
buffer to the outer extent of development, and 
providing mitigation towards impacts arising from 
growth in relation to Epping Forest SAC. It will 
retain and improve habitats for wildlife, including 
the safeguarding of protected species in line with 
statutory requirements, and provide good 
recreational opportunities for local people. There 
will be connections for walking and cycling to other recreational opportunities in Harlow and 
Epping Forest District.  Plentiful local green 
infrastructure must be incorporated within the 
developmen t to reflect Garden Town  principles, 
and ensure the creation of high quality beautiful, 
healthy and sociable communities.  
2.124  Details of site specific infrastructure requirements 
are provided within the Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan.  The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
42 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Latton Priory  
2.125  Sites within  Latton Priory provide capacity for 
around 1,050 homes, alongside community 
facilities including Early Years facilities, a new two -
form entry primary school and appropriate 
contributions towards a secondary school 
(including the provision of land) to serve  the 
needs arising from new development.  
2.126  Approximately 1ha of B1  Use Class  employment 
land will be provided at Dorrington Farm.  This will 
provide opportunities for high quality 
employment uses to be incorporated within the 
Garden Town, helping to promote sustainability 
whilst also linking to Harlow Town Centre.  
2.127  In addition 0.5 ha for up to five traveller pitches 
will be provided.  
Water Lane Area  
2.128  Sites within the Water Lane Area provide capacity 
for around 2,100 homes,  alongside  community 
facilities including Early Years facilities, a new two -
form entry primary school and appropriate 
contributions towards a secondary school to serve  
the needs arising from new development .  In 
addition 0.5 ha for up to five traveller pitches will 
be provided  
East  of Harlow  
2.129  East  of Harlow is located across the administrative 
boundary between Harlow District Council and Epping Forest District Council.  The land within the 
Epping Forest District  provides capacity for 750 
homes.  Development is required to provide 
community facilities including Early Years 
facilities, a two -form entry primary school and 
appropriate contributions (including the provision 
of land)  towards a new secondary school to serve 
the needs arising from new development.   In 
addition  0.5 ha for up to five traveller pitches will 
be provided.  
2.130  The development of the site also provides  the 
opportunity to resolve flood risk issues, both on -
site and off -site, downstream and upstream.  
2.131  The site provides an opportunity to accommodate  
the reloc ation of the Princess Alexandra Hospital , 
subject to the com pletion of the further  technical 
assessment work.  In this context , the District 
Council will work cooperatively with all relevant 
stakeholders to ensure the future provision of high quality healthcare facilities and services to serve the wider area.   These facilities will respond 
effectively to planned and sustained growth. The 
replacement/relocation of P rincess Alexandra 
Hospital  is considered to  be an important part of  
this.  
2.132  Developers will  be required to make provision for 
on-site requirements in line with the provisions 
set out in Policy SP 5.  
Policy SP  5 Garden Town Communities  
A. The following sites will be allocated to suppo rt the 
delivery of the spatial development strategy set 
out in Po licy SP 2 and Policy SP 4.  
Allocation  
Reference  Location  Development 
to be delivered  
SP 5.1 Latton Priory  Approximately 
1,050 homes  
1ha of 
employment land 
0.5ha for up to 5 
Traveller pitches  
SP 5.2 Water Lane 
Area  Approximately 
2,100 homes  
0.5ha for up to 5 
Traveller pitches  
SP 5.3 East of Harlow  
 
 
 Approximately 
750 homes and 
potential 
relocation of 
Princess 
Alexandra 
Hospital  
0.5ha for up to 5 
Traveller pitches  
B. As well as the delivery of new homes sites SP 5 .1-
5.3 will be expected to make provision for 
appropriate small -scale employment, retail and 
community uses in accordance with other policies 
within the Plan.  The Garden Town  Communities 
must be planned and delivered as high quality, 
integrated, sustainable and distinctive 
developments supported by necessary 
infrastructure, services and facilities.  
C. Infrastructure requirements must be delivered at 
a rate and scale to meet the needs that arise from 
the proposed development, in accordance with 
the Infrastructure Delivery Plan. Development The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 43 
                             
 
 
identified  in this policy will be expected to make a 
contribution proportionate to its scale and impact 
for the delivery of improvements to Junction 7 
and other strategic infrastructure requirements.  
D. Development proposals in relation to sites SP 5 .1-
5.3 will be requ ired to be in general conformity 
with a Strategic Masterplan which has been 
endorsed by the Council.  
E. Development proposals for the Garden  Town  
Communities (and where applicable Strategic 
Masterplans) must re flect and demonstrate that 
the P lace Shaping and Garden Town principles set 
out in Policy SP 3 and SP 4 have been adhered to.  
Latton Priory  
F. Land allocated at Latton Priory  (SP 5.1) will be 
brought forward on a phased basis for a 
comprehensive high quality development to 
include:  
(i) At least 1,050 homes up to 2033;  
(ii) 1 hectare of employment land provided at 
Dorrington Farm;  
(iii) 0.5 hectares for up to 5 traveller pitches;  
(iv) Strategic 'green infrastructure' comprising 
natural/semi natural open space, walking and 
cycling routes, flood mitigation and wildlife 
space  and a new Green Belt defensible 
boundary to the South of the site;  
(v) Land within the Green Belt and Masterplan 
area  must be retained for public open space 
or for appropriate uses in the Green Belt;  
(vi) A sympathetic design which responds to the 
adjacent ancien t woodland and the 
Scheduled Monument ; 
(vii) A local centre;  
(viii) A two -form entry primary school;  
(ix) At least 10ha of land to accommodate a 
secondary school in addition to any necessary 
contributions;  
(x) Early Years Facilities;  
(xi) The provision of appropriate community and 
health facilities;  
(xii) Highway and transport improvements 
including to the north -south sustainable 
transport corridor, works to Southern Way 
and Second Avenue corridor, and upgrades to 
Junction 7 of the M11;  
(xiii) Satisfactory water supply and waste water 
network in frastructure for occupants; and  (xiv) Bus services and direct pedestrian and cycle 
links between housing and t he facilities that 
serve them.  
Water Lane Area  
G. Land allocated in the Water Lane Area  (SP 5.2) will 
be brought forward on a phased basis for a 
comprehen sive high quality development to 
include:  
(i) At least 2,100 homes up to 2033;  
(ii) 0.5 hectares for up to 5 traveller pitches;  
(iii) Strategic 'green infrastructure' comprising 
natural /semi natural open space, walking and 
cycling routes, flood mitigation and wildlife 
space and new G reen Belt defensible 
boundaries as indicated on the map;  
(iv) A local centre;  
(v) A two -form entry primary school;  
(vi) Contributions towards new secondary school 
provision within the Garden Town;  
(vii) Early Years Facilities;  
(viii) The provision of appropriate community and 
health facilities;  
(ix) Highway and transport improvements 
including works to Water Lane/A1169 
roundabout; A1025/Abercrombie Way signals 
and traffic calming along the A1169 Southern 
Way Corridor ; 
(x) Satisfactory water supply and waste water 
network i nfrastructure for occupants; and  
(xi) Bus services and direct pedestrian and cycle 
links between housing and t he facilities that 
serve them.  
East  of Harlow  
H. Land allocated at East of Harlow (SP 5.3) will be 
brought forward on a phased basis for a 
comprehensive high quality development to 
include:  
(i) At least 750 homes up to 2033;  
(ii) 0.5 hectares for up to 5 traveller pitches;  
(iii) Strategic 'green infrastructure' comprising 
natural/semi natural open space, walking and 
cycling routes, flood mitigation and wildlife 
space  and any compensatory BAP habitat to 
retain existing provision ; 
(iv) No built development will be permitted on 
land within Flood Zone 2 and 3 as indicated 
on the Environment Agency maps ; 
(v) A local centre;  The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
44 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
(vi) The provision of appropriate community and 
health facilities i ncluding approximately 14 
hectares of land for a health and well -being 
hospital campus ; 
(vii) A two -form entry primary school;  
(viii) At least 10ha of land to accommodate a new 
secondary school in addition to any necessary 
contributions;  
(ix) Early Years Facilities;  
(x) The pro vision of appropriate community and 
health facilities;  
(xi) Highway and transport improvements 
including linkages into off -road cycle and 
walking networks;  
(xii) The delivery of works to widen  the B183 
Gilden Way, a left turn slip road from M11 
Junction 7a link road approach to the East 
Harlow northern access road ahead of 
development commencing ; 
(xiii) Satisfactory water supply and waste water 
network infrastructure for occupants;  
(xiv) Bus services and direct pedestrian and cycle 
links between housing and t he facilities that 
serve them;  
(xv) The proposed National Cycle Network route 
1; and  
(xvi) Measures to ensure the protection of the 
functional flood plain and restriction of 
surface water run -off from the site into 
Pincey Brook to no more than existing rates .   
 
 
  C o n t a in s  O r d n a n c e  S u r v e y  &  R o y a l M a il D a t a
©  C r o w n  C o p y r ig h t  &  D a t a b a s e  R ig h t  2 0 1 6
E F D C  L ic e n c e  N o :  1 0 0 0 1 8 5 3 4  2 0 1 6
©  E n v ir o n m e n t  A g e n c y ,  ©  N a t u r a l E n g la n d  2 0 1 6e f d c - lo g o 2L a t t o n  P r io r y E p p i n g  F o r e s t  D i s t r i c t
L o c a l  P l a n
S u b m is s io n  V e r s io n
D e c e m b e r  2 0 1 7M a p  2 . 2
1 : 1 0 , 0 0 0 @  A 4D a t e :  D e c e m b e r  2 0 1 7L e g e n d
R e s id e n t ia l a n d  t r a v e lle r
s it e  a llo c a t io nG r e e n  B e lt  B o u n d a r y R e s id e n t ia l s it e  a llo c a t io n
L o c a l A u t h o r it y
b o u n d a r yT r a v e lle r  s it e  a llo c a t io nD is t r ic t  O p e n  L a n d M a s t e r p la n  A r e a
C o n c e p t  F r a m e w o r k
P la n  A r e aE m p lo y m e n t  s it e  a llo c a t io n
T h is  le g e n d  s h o w s  o n ly  t h e  k e y  L o c a l P la n  p o lic y  d e s ig n a t io n s .
A  f u ll le g e n d  c a n  b e  f o u n d  in  A p p p e n d ix  6 :  S it e  S p e c if ic  R e q u ir e m e n t s  f o r  S it e  A llo c a t io n s .T h e  L o c a l P la n  s h o u ld  b e  r e a d  a s  a  w h o le .
P r o p o s a ls  w ill b e  ju d g e d  a g a in s t  a ll r e le v a n t
p o lic ie s .
L a t t o n  P r i o r y
M a s t e r p l a n  A r e aR U R .E 1 9
S P  5 .1S o u t h e r n  W a yTyseaRoadTrottersRoad
ParingdonRoad
P a r n a ll R o a dCommonsideRoadPartridgeRoad
M a u n d s  H a t c h
R y e  H ill R o a d   M a p  2 . 2  L a t t o n  P r io r y
C o n t a in s  O r d n a n c e  S u r v e y  &  R o y a l M a il D a t a
©  C r o w n  C o p y r ig h t  &  D a t a b a s e  R ig h t  2 0 1 6
E F D C  L ic e n c e  N o :  1 0 0 0 1 8 5 3 4  2 0 1 6
©  E n v ir o n m e n t  A g e n c y ,  ©  N a t u r a l E n g la n d  2 0 1 6e f d c - lo g o 2W a t e r  L a n e E p p i n g  F o r e s t  D i s t r i c t
L o c a l  P l a n
S u b m is s io n  V e r s io n
D e c e m b e r  2 0 1 7M a p  2 . 3
1 : 1 0 , 0 0 0 @  A 4D a t e :  D e c e m b e r  2 0 1 7L e g e n d
R e s id e n t ia l a n d  t r a v e lle r
s it e  a llo c a t io nG r e e n  B e lt  B o u n d a r y R e s id e n t ia l s it e  a llo c a t io n
L o c a l A u t h o r it y
b o u n d a r yT r a v e lle r  s it e  a llo c a t io nD is t r ic t  O p e n  L a n d M a s t e r p la n  A r e a
C o n c e p t  F r a m e w o r k
P la n  A r e aE m p lo y m e n t  s it e  a llo c a t io n
T h is  le g e n d  s h o w s  o n ly  t h e  k e y  L o c a l P la n  p o lic y  d e s ig n a t io n s .
A  f u ll le g e n d  c a n  b e  f o u n d  in  A p p p e n d ix  6 :  S it e  S p e c if ic  R e q u ir e m e n t s  f o r  S it e  A llo c a t io n s .T h e  L o c a l P la n  s h o u ld  b e  r e a d  a s  a  w h o le .
P r o p o s a ls  w ill b e  ju d g e d  a g a in s t  a ll r e le v a n t
p o lic ie s .
W a t e r  L a n e
M a s t e r p l a n
A r e aS P  5 .2
EppingRoadThirdAvenue
W a t e r  L a n e
C o m m o n  R o a dT y le r s  R o a dSouthernWayKatherine'sWayPaycock
Road
ParsloeRoadWater
Lane   M a p  2 . 3  W a t e r  L a n e
C o n t a in s  O r d n a n c e  S u r v e y  &  R o y a l M a il D a t a
©  C r o w n  C o p y r ig h t  &  D a t a b a s e  R ig h t  2 0 1 6
E F D C  L ic e n c e  N o :  1 0 0 0 1 8 5 3 4  2 0 1 6
©  E n v ir o n m e n t  A g e n c y ,  ©  N a t u r a l E n g la n d  2 0 1 6e f d c - lo g o 2E a s t  o f  H a r lo w E p p i n g  F o r e s t  D i s t r i c t
L o c a l  P l a n
S u b m is s io n  V e r s io n
D e c e m b e r  2 0 1 7M a p  2 . 4
1 : 1 7 , 5 0 0 @  A 4D a t e :  D e c e m b e r  2 0 1 7L e g e n d
R e s id e n t ia l a n d  t r a v e lle r
s it e  a llo c a t io nG r e e n  B e lt  B o u n d a r y R e s id e n t ia l s it e  a llo c a t io n
L o c a l A u t h o r it y
b o u n d a r yT r a v e lle r  s it e  a llo c a t io nD is t r ic t  O p e n  L a n d M a s t e r p la n  A r e a
C o n c e p t  F r a m e w o r k
P la n  A r e aE m p lo y m e n t  s it e  a llo c a t io n
T h is  le g e n d  s h o w s  o n ly  t h e  k e y  L o c a l P la n  p o lic y  d e s ig n a t io n s .
A  f u ll le g e n d  c a n  b e  f o u n d  in  A p p p e n d ix  6 :  S it e  S p e c if ic  R e q u ir e m e n t s  f o r  S it e  A llo c a t io n s .T h e  L o c a l P la n  s h o u ld  b e  r e a d  a s  a  w h o le .
P r o p o s a ls  w ill b e  ju d g e d  a g a in s t  a ll r e le v a n t
p o lic ie s .
E a s t  o f  H a r l o w
M a s t e r p l a n  A r e a
M 1 1R U R .E 6S H R .R 2
S P  5 .3Old
Road
HighStreet
MatchingRoad GildenWay
London
RoadWayre
StreetM u lb e r r y  G r e e nTheStreet
P r io r y  A v e n u e
ChurchgateStreetSheeringRoad
H a r lo w  R o a d
HobbsCrossRoadM o o r  H a ll R o a dSheeringLowerRoad
ChalkLaneB a c k  L a n e
NewWayLane   M a p  2 . 4  E a s t  o f  H a r lo w
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
48 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Green Belt and District Open Land  
2.133  The Council recognises the important role of t he 
Green Belt in the District. The fundamental aim 
of Green Belt policy is to prevent urban sprawl 
by keeping land permanently open; the 
esse ntial characteristics of Green Belts are their  
openness and their permanence . The Green Belt 
in the District forms part of the Metropolitan 
Green Belt surrounding London. O ver 92% of 
the District is designated as Green Belt  which 
surrounds all of the large r settlements, washing 
over some of the smaller settlements.   
2.134  The general extent of the existing Green Belt 
will be maintained, but to achieve sustainable 
development patterns and meet development 
needs for the P lan period, some alterations to 
the detailed  boundaries around settlements 
have been necessary. This has been undertaken in line with the national planning guidance 
regar ding the definition of boundaries and 
purposes of the Green Belt. Green Belt serves 
five purposes:  
• to check the unrestricted spraw l of large 
built -up areas;  
• to prevent neighbouring towns merging 
into one another;  
• to assist in safeguarding the countryside 
from encroachment;  
• to preserve the setting and special 
character of historic towns; and  
• to assist in urban regeneration, by 
encouraging the recycling of derelict and other urban land.  
Key Evidence  
• Green Belt Review (LUC, 2016);  
• Settlemen t Capacity Study (Fregonese 
Associates, 2016);  and 
• Site Selection Report 2016 and 2017 
(Arup).  
Approach  
2.135  Natio nal planning policy requires that 
exceptional circumstances are demonstrated to 
justify any alteration to the Green Belt 
boundary.  There is no clear definition of what 
amounts to exceptional circumstances, but case law is clear that any justification must be 
responsive to local conditions and take into 
account a range of factors.  
2.136  The justification for altering the Green Belt 
boundaries in this P lan arise s from the local 
circumstances as they pertain to:  
• The extent of the Green Belt  and 
subsequent deficiency of land within the 
existing settlements  to accommodate the 
identified need ; 
• The requirement to deliver sustainable 
patterns of development;  and 
• The inability of neighbouring authorities 
to meet the need of the District given 
their circumstances as also containing 
extensive areas of Green Belt.  
2.137  These factors all give rise to the need to allocate 
sites for the identified growth across the District 
and support development  in sustainable 
locations  and to meet development needs 
where t hey arise.  
2.138  There have been no  alterations to Green Belt 
boundaries since adoption of the 1998 Local 
Plan . The alterations made at this time were 
relatively minor and related only to four specific 
locations. Proposed development sites within 
the 1998 Local  Plan were not removed from the 
Green Belt as part of the process of allocating 
them for development. In addition to this 
historic position of only making very limited 
changes to the Green Belt, Epping Forest District 
has previously been considered as an a rea of 
development restraint by higher tier plans (e.g. County Structure Plans and Regional Strategies) with relatively low development needs allocated 
as a result. As set out in paragraphs 2.40- 2.43 
the Council has worked in partnership with 
neighbouring authorities within the defined 
Housing Market Area to identify the Objectively 
Assessed Development Needs  for the Plan 
period. For Epping Forest District, the identified 
requirement  represents a considerable increase 
over previous development rates . It is clear 
from the evidence base for this plan that there 
is insufficient land outside o f the Green Belt to 
meet the fu ture development needs of the 
District within the plan period.  The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 49 
                             
 
 
2.139  This Local Plan  pursues a strategy as set out in 
Policy SP 2 which seeks to minimise the loss  of 
Green Belt land for development , seeking to 
allocate first sites within existing settlements 
and focusing development in the most 
sustainable locati ons.  
2.140  Successive studies have demonstrated that Harlow is a suitable locati on for growth , and 
that an element of this growth would need to  
be outside of the administrativ e boundaries of 
Harlow within  Epping Forest and East 
Hertfordshire Districts. There is further 
discussion of t he sites for Garden Town 
Communities around Harlow in Policy  SP 5. The 
delivery of the Garden Town Communities around Harlow  is dependent on the 
construction of key infrastructure, in cluding 
improvements to Junction 7 and a new motorway junction (Junction 7A) to the north of 
existing junction 7 of the M11.  
2.141  Beyond Harl ow, the identification of possible 
locations for development has followed the  
sequential approach as set out in SP 2 in which 
non-Green Belt land is prioritised for 
development over land within the Green Belt. The evidence base of sites from which the 
allocations have been drawn has included a 
comprehensive search within the settlements 
for land. (This includes t he Strategic Land 
Availability Assessment,  subsequent updates 
and additional sites bought forward by land owners, and from the Settlement Capacity Study 
(2016) ). During the production of this plan the 
Council has therefore  sought to ensure that 
potential opportunities to redevelop existing 
brownfield sites outside of the Green Belt were 
identified  wherever possible .  2.142  The selection of locations for d evelopment has 
been undertaken through the use of a Green 
Belt Review that identified the performance of 
parcels of land in relation to the purposes of the 
Green Belt. This information has been use d in 
addition to considerations relating to the 
characteris tics of sites such as their biodiversity 
and landscape value. The final choice of sites for 
release from the Green Belt has been informed 
by its suitability and its availability . The filtering 
and analysis that has led to the alterations to 
the Green Belt b oundar ies has been 
comprehensive. The Site Selection Report sets 
out the approach which seeks to protect the 
most high value Green Belt land wherever 
possible . The plan below shows the new Green 
Belt boundary for the District.  
  Buckhurst HillHarlow
Epping
Loughton
ChigwellLower
Sheering
Sheering
Roydon
Dobbs Weir
Fyfield
Nazeing
Epping 
GreenNorth
Weald
BassettThornwood
High Ongar
Coopersale Ongar
Waltham Abbey
Theydon Bois
Abridge
Stapleford Abbotts
Green Belt Boundary Alterations
in Epping Forest DistrictMap 2.5 Epping Forest District
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-SP-0000-Rev2
Scale: 1:150,000 @A4Date: December 2017Legend
Green Belt boundary
Green Belt boundary
alterations
Epping Forest District
boundary
Neighbouring Local
Authorities¯ Map 2.5  Green Belt Boundary Alterations
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 51 
                             
 
 
Anomalies  
2.143  In addition, evidence contained within the 
Green  Belt Review: Stage 2 identified  a number 
of areas in the District where development has 
already taken place within the Green Belt.  These  
have been reviewed to consider  whether it is 
appropriate for these developed areas to 
remain within the Green Belt, or if a more 
defensible boundary is appropriate in the long 
term.  The selection of sites in this Plan has also 
led to the identification of some anomalies and where appropriate the boundaries have been 
altered.   
Designation of District Open Land  
2.144  In some locations the alteration to the Green 
Belt boundary remo ves areas of land that are 
not proposed for change. This is because it 
would not make sense to create ‘holes’ in the 
Green Bel t. An alternate designation that will 
provide the same level of protection as the 
Green Belt designation to these areas that are 
broadly in open space, recreation and leisure 
uses. In accordance with the national planning 
policy a Local Green Space designa tion of 
“District Open Land” is proposed. In connecti on 
with the Green and Blue Infras tructure Stra tegy, 
opportunitie s will be sought to improve and 
enhance the newly defined District Open Land.   
The proposed areas are shown on the policies map.  
2.145  National p lanning policy sets out the approach 
to planning applications for development proposals within the Green Belt.  Policy SP 6 
outlines the strategic approach whilst Policy DM 
4 provides more detail . 
Policy SP 6  Green Belt and District Open 
Land  
A. Green Belt  
The general extent of the Green Belt is set out in 
Map 2.5. The  detailed boundaries and inset 
settlements are defined in Chapter 5  and shown 
on the policies map. The openness of the Green 
Belt will be protected from inappropriate 
development in accordanc e with national 
planning policy and Policy DM 4  
B. District Open Land  
The same level of protection will be applied to areas of District Open Land as is applied to Green 
Belt. The key characteristics of District Open Land 
are their openness, permanence,  local 
significance, wildlife value and/or public 
accessibility. It is not necessary for each of these 
characteristics to be present to be designated or 
retained as such.  
The Natural Environment, 
Landscape Character and Green 
and Blue  Infrastructure  
2.146  The District contains an abundant natural 
heritage at all scales - reflected  in the extensive 
landscapes of the Epping Forest and Lee Valley 
Regional Park down to the scale of individual 
Veteran Trees. The mosaic  of countryside, 
woodland, trees, green lanes, rivers and  water 
meadows , and both rural and urban open 
spaces are important culturally and for good 
health, whilst being valued for their modern and 
ancient landscapes, enjoyment, recreation and 
the plants and animals they support. These 
spaces include elements  such as allotments, 
cemeteries, ponds, streams, river tow paths and roadside verges.  
2.147  A key characteristic of the landscape in Epping 
Forest District is trees, as they are the key 
component of the ancient forests of Epping and 
Hainault, many woods and miles o f ancient 
hedgerow as well as the dominant asset in 
urban areas. Particular attention is therefore 
paid to the importance of trees within the Local 
Plan strategy.   
2.148  The Local Plan provides a positive strategy for 
the protection and enhancement of the natur al 
environment and recognises its role in adapting 
to climate change. National policy and legislation supports the implementation through 
measures including the development of linked,  
multifunctional spaces networks , and habitat 
and species protection  which seek to achieve 
net gains in biodiversity.   This is commonly 
known as ‘green and blue infrastructure’ (the 
blue referring to the water environment) whilst 
any component can be termed an ‘asset’.  
 
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
52 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Key Evidence  
• Landscape Character Assessment (Chris 
Blandford Associates, 2010);  
• Settlement Edge Landscape Sensitivity Study (Chris Blandford Associates, 2010);  
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan (Arup, 2017);  
• Open Space Strategy (4 Global 2017) ; and  
• Epping Forest Historic E nvironment 
Characterisation Study (Essex County 
Council 2015) . 
 Approach  
2.149  The continued improvement  of the District's 
green and blue assets into networks is a n 
important  part of the strategy of the Local Plan . 
and a key aspect of the Council's response to 
climat e change, providing opportunities to 
mitigate against the impacts of climate change 
and adapt to the changing cli mate.   
2.150  The Local Plan seeks to protect and improve 
upon the quality of the natural environment in 
the District, in tandem with providing for the 
necessary new  development, through the 
continue d development of green and blue 
networks that provide for multipurpose  open 
spaces and i mprovin g access to the natural 
environment for residents and visitors . The 
multi -functional nature of the network  includes 
the water environment of the District. Use of 
the District -wide network include s recreation, 
flood water storage, nature conservation 
transport by walking, cycling and horse riding, provision of shade in urban areas, use of  trees 
to alleviate air pollution, sust ainable drainage, 
food production and a host of other uses that 
do not constitut e buildings.  
2.151   The Council will  work with  new as well as 
existing,  initiatives such as the Living Landscapes 
of the Epping Forest, and the Lea Catchment Nature Improvement Area. These are 
partnerships for the improvement of habitat at 
landscape scale.  For example the Lea 
Catchment Nature Improvement Area initiative 
seeks to establish a joined up and resilient 
ecological network at a landsc ape scale through 
the Lea Valley.   2.152  The Council seeks to ensure that a ll 
development will contribute to future accessible 
networks of green and blue infrastructure as even the smalles t site can provide for 
vegetation, trees or green roofs or walls with 
care ful design. Larger sites can be designed to 
capitalise on the existing green and blue 
infrastructure assets by incorporati ng them into 
layouts and enriching provision , whilst 
improving links , and the quality of the living 
environment for occupants. Therefo re Policy  SP 
7 applies to all development.  
2.153  Further policies  are contained  in Chapter 4 
Development Management of this Plan .   These 
set out in more detail the Council’s 
requirements , see for example Policy DM 5 . 
 
Policy SP 7  The Natural Environment, 
Landsc ape Character and Green and Blue 
Infrastructure  
A. The Council will protect the natural environment, 
enhance its quality and extend access to it; this 
contributes to the health and wellbeing of its 
people and economic viability of the District. In 
considering proposals for development the 
Council aims to create a comprehensive network 
of green  and blue  corridors4 and places, 
appropriate to the sp ecific rural or urban setting . 
In so doing, it seeks to connect and enrich 
biodiversity through habi tat improvement and 
protection at all scales, including priority habitats 
and extend access to and maximise the recreation 
opportunities of, our countryside and urban open 
spaces.  
B. The countryside:  
(i) the Council will conserve and enhance the 
character and appearan ce of the countryside. 
Landscape character assessments will be used 
                                                      
4 green corridors and places are any natural areas that can 
comprise spaces and corridors, so for example a hedgerow 
can provide a green corridor for wildlife, a green lane a 
corridor for both wildlife and people, and either of these can 
join a park with a wood for example –  the park and wood 
being green places.  Blue corridors and places are water 
courses such as r ivers and streams and water habitats such 
as ponds, lakes, and marshes  
5 Countryside is defined as land beyond the built edge of 
settlements  
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 53 
                             
 
 
to assist in judgements on the suitability of 
new development;  
(ii) the Council will act itself, and in relation to 
development proposals, to develop a 
multifunctional countryside, which is 
productive, rich in biodiversity at all scales, 
with a well -connected green and blue 
infrastructure network that is accessible for 
quiet enjoyment, recreation and exercise.  
C. Towns and smaller settlements:  
(i) the Council will protect the green and blue 
infrastruct ure assets of the towns and smaller 
settlements and improve the quality of 
existing green space in towns and smaller 
settlements ; 
(ii) the Council will ensure that new development 
is designed to protect existing green and blue 
infrastructure, enhance networks, secure 
better provision where deficiencies have 
been identified and deliver new green and 
blue infrastructure to link to local or wider 
green and blue infrastructure networks ; and  
(iii) the Council will seek the provision of new 
quality green space appropriate t o the scale 
of the development.  
D. Green and Blue Infrastructure  
The District’s green and blue infrastructure network 
will be extended, maintained and enhanced through 
the remaining policies in this Plan including:  
(i) the location of development (Policy SP 2 and  
Chapter 5)  
(ii) protecting habitat and improving biodiversity 
(Policy DM 1)  
(iii) sustainable urban drainage systems (Policy 
DM 16)  
(iv) supporting sustainable transport choices 
(Policy T 1)  
(v) open space, sport and recreation provision 
(Policy DM 6)  
E. The Council will therefore expect all development 
proposals, where appropriate, to contribute 
towards the delivery of new green and blue 
infrastructure which develops and enhances a 
network of multi -functional green and blue 
assets5 throughout the District . This will be 
                                                      
5 Multifunctional green and blue assets – any corridor or 
place that has a number of purposes, for  example a pond 
can provide flood water storage, a place to row a boat and a 
wildlife haven.  proportionate to the scale of the proposed 
development and the rural or urban context. The 
Council will support development which 
contributes to the District’s exi sting green and 
blue infrastructure and where possible, enhances 
and protects networks. It will secure additional 
provision where deficiencies have been identified  
through the Infrastructure Delivery Plan and other 
appropriate evidence base documents . Where on -
site provision is not feasible then the use of 
CIL/s106 agreements will b e sought to contribute.    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
54 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
This page is intentionally left blank   
 
 
  
 
 
 
Chapter Three  
Housing, 
Economic and 
Transport 
Policies  
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
56 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Housing  
3.1 This section of the Local Plan  sets out the 
approach that the Council will expect applicants 
to adopt in relation to the mix and type of new 
homes to be provided on development sites 
within the District. It also sets the site 
thresholds above which proposals will need to 
make p rovision  for affordable housing  and how 
the Council will assess proposals for rural affordable housing which would normally be 
considered as being contrary to policy (known 
as rural exception sites).  
Housing Mix and Accommodation 
Types  
3.2 It is important to consider , as set out in national 
planning guidance , the  housing  needs of 
different sectors within the community. This is 
to ensure that the right size and type of new 
homes is provided across the District to meet 
the needs of existing and future residents and to 
ensure the creation of mixed and balanced 
communities. This includes those with specialist 
housing requirements or who have a desire to 
build their own homes.  
Key Evidence  
• Housing Implementation Strategy (Epping 
Forest District Council , 2017) ; 
• Strategic Hous ing Market Assessment 
(Opinion Research Services , 2015) ; 
• Strategic Housing Market Assessment 
Establishing the OAN ( ORS,  2017) ; and  
• Strategic Housing Market Assessment 
Affordable Housing Update ( ORS,  2017) ; 
Approach  
3.3 The Strategic Housing Market Assessment 
(SHMA)  2015 and updates are the latest 
published housing needs evidence which set out the quantum, type , and size  and tenure  of new 
market housing  homes  needed both across the 
SHMA area and within the District over the Plan 
period. However, there is also a need to 
consider the most appropriate location for new 
market housing , and the type and size of 
properties to be provided in different areas. This must take into account the desire for some to 
build their own homes and to address specialist 
housing needs w here the evidence exists to 
support this. The Council will seek to make the 
best use of land, and take account of the 
existing stock of homes within  the locality to 
achieve  the objective of mixed and balanced 
communities.  
3.4 It is important that a proportion of new homes 
can provide for the needs of those with, or who 
may develop, accessibility needs through the 
design of those homes. This reflects the 
evidence as set out in the SHMA and the 2017 
update that there is an existi ng need for 
accessible housing in the District  that will 
continue taking into account  the ageing profile 
of the District’s population over the period of 
the Local Plan. Improving housing standards to 
strengthen local communities and reduce the 
need for res idential care by enabling vulnerable 
people to remain in their homes, or be able to 
have the choice to be able to move into a new 
home, is important as part of improving the 
overall housing mix within the District. 
Consequently, the Council’s approach is t hat all 
new homes should be built to Category 2: 
Accessible and Adaptable Homes standards, in 
order to maximise choice in the type, size and 
location of new homes available.   
3.5 The needs of those with accessibility needs, including older people can be suppor ted by 
bungalow accommodation. Recent information 
contained in the Council’s Authority Monitoring 
Report shows that there has been a gradual 
erosion of the District’s existing stock of 
bungalows. The Council considers that 
bungalows can play an important r ole because 
of their potential ease of adaptation such that 
they can provide choice for people with 
accessibility needs, including the current and 
future needs of older people.  
3.6 Specialist accommodation for those with 
support needs, including for older people, will 
continue to play an important role in providing 
for those residents who currently, or will, need 
assistance.  Consequently, the loss of existing 
specialist accommodation will be resisted and 
new provision will normally be  supported where 
appropria tely located and designed.  The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 57 
                             
 
 
3.7 The Self Build and Custom Housebuilding Act 
2015 placed an obligation on local authorities to 
maintain a register of people and groups 
interested in building their own homes.  A detailed definition of self- build and custom 
housebuilding is set out in the Housing and 
Planning Act 2016.  The Council will work with 
landowners and developers to deliver its 
obligations with respect to self -build and 
custom housebuilding.  
3.8 The Council is also supportive of community- led 
housing.  Commun ity-led schemes are those 
that are driven by local communities, r ather 
than local authorities or  developers.  
 
Policy H 1 Housing Mix and Accommodation 
Types  
A. Development wil l be permitted where the mix of 
new homes : 
(i) includes a range of house type s and size s to 
address local need including for ‘down -sizing’;  
(ii) is appropriate to the size, location and 
characteristics of the site  and its 
surroundings ; 
(iii) takes into account the existing housing stock 
in the settlement or neighbourhood in order 
to avoid any over -concentration of a single 
type or size of  homes , or specialist 
accommodation, where this would 
undermine the achievement of mixed and 
balanced communities; and  
(iv) allows for community -led approaches s uch as 
co-housing and co-operatives where 
appropriate;  
(v) provides for all new homes to be accessible 
and adaptable as defined by the Building 
Regulations in effect at the time of the 
application.  
B. Planning applications will be required to  be 
supported by evid ence, proportionate to the 
nature and scale of development proposed, to 
justify the mix of new homes to be provided. Such 
evidence will also need to reflect latest housing 
needs  evidence published by the Council.  
C. Proposals for housing , requiring specialist  
accommodation, self -build/custom build housing, 
sites upon which caravans can be stationed, or 
locations for mooring houseboats, will be supported where:  
(i) they meet a proven identified need;  
(ii) the location is appropriate in terms of access 
to facilities, ser vices and public transport and;  
(iii) It can be demonstrated that the development 
is designed and managed to provide the most 
appropriate types and levels of support to the 
proposed occupier and adequately caters for 
the needs of support staff.  
D. The Council will require  all New Housing 
Development to include affordable housing in 
accordance with Policy H 2 (Affordable Housing).  
E. Where there is evidence of an identified unmet 
need in the local area and the location is 
appropriate in terms of access to existing or 
proposed facilities, services and public transport, 
larger scale new residential developments should 
incorporate specially designed housing/specialist 
accommodation for people  with support needs 
(including for older people  and housing with care ). 
F. The loss of bungalows and specialist 
accommodation will be resisted .  
G. The Council will support the development of self-
build homes on appropriately sized, serviced sites 
in the first instance or on appropriately sized sites 
that are capable of being ser viced. The provision 
of such will be encouraged as part of larger 
development scheme s.  
Affordable H ousing  
3.9 The evidence presented in the SHMA  and 
updates  demonstrates that the provision of 
affordable homes is a key issue for the District . 
The 2017 Affordable Housing update set s out 
that, having taken into account the number of affordable homes provided in the first five years 
of the plan period, the number of new 
affordable homes required for the period 2016 -
2033 in Epping Forest District was 2, 851 homes.  
This equates to some 178 homes per annum.   
3.10 The primary opportunity to address this issue is 
through on- site provision as part of market 
sector housing developments, taking into 
account the limited supply of land and to ensure 
the creati on of mixed  and balanced 
communities. In doing so there needs to be a 
balance between securing the maximum level of 
affordable housing on those sites whilst The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
58 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
ensuring that this does not impact on the ir 
viability and prevent the overall delivery of 
homes and infrastructure.  
3.11 In order to understand what  would be 
considered a proportiona te and reasonable level 
of affordable housing to be sought, without 
impacti ng on the overall delivery of housing, the 
Council has undertaken an assessment of 
viability  to inform this plan . 
3.12 The Housing and Planning Act 2016 introduced a  
general duty on local authorities to promote  the 
provision of Starter Homes and set out how these should be defined.  A large proportion of 
the operational detail still needs to be specified 
through the introduction of Regulations.  Subsequent to the Act gaining Royal Assent the Government published its Housing White Paper 
(2017).  This set out that the Government would 
commence the general dut y on local authorities 
to promote the supply of Starter Homes but that 
it would not implement a statutory Starter 
Home requirement at this point in time.  The 
Housing White Paper indicated that revisions to 
national planning guidance  would be made 
instead setting out a policy expectation that 
housing sites of 10 or more dwellings would deliver a minimum of 10% affordable home 
ownership products.   
3.13 Policy H  2 provides sufficient flexibility to 
accommodate any future changes in policy.  In 
addition the current evidence shows that there is a significant need for homes for affordable 
rent and such provision will be the Council’s 
priority . This would not preclude the 
opportunity to provide the indicative levels of 
affordable home ownership products set out in 
the Housing White Paper.  
Key Evidence  
• Local Plan Viability Study (Dixon Searle,  
2017);  
• Housing Implementation Strategy (Epping 
Forest District Council , 2017) ; 
• Strategic Housing Market Assessment 
(Opinion Research Services , 2015) ; 
• Strategic Housing Market Ass essment 
Establishing the OAN ( ORS,  2017) ; and  • Strategic Housing Market Assessment Affordable Housing Update ( ORS,  2017) . 
Approach  
3.14 The evidence suggests that the provision of 40% 
of affordable homes on sites of 11 or more 
homes (including self -contained units in 
specialist accommodation) would provide the 
most appropriate balance between achieving a 
meaningful proportion of affordable homes, as 
well as accommodating any CIL contributions, to 
support both the delivery of affordable homes 
and the necessary strategic infrastructure 
subject to individual site viability.   The Council 
recognises that the provision of affordable 
housing in accordance with Local Plan Policy H 2 
may render some development proposals unviable at the t ime of the application. Where 
the Council is satisfied that the independently verified viability and financial appraisal 
submitted to justify the provision of affordable 
housing below the level required by Policy H 2, 
where appropriate, the Council will ex pect 
additional affordable housing provision to be 
made if viability improves before full completion 
of the development permitted.  Larger -scale 
development proposals for n ew housing 
development to be delivered on a phased basis, 
the Council will requir e section 106 agreements 
to include mechanism for viability reviews and 
'clawback' clauses (or similar) to ensure the 
fullest possible compliance with Local Plan 
policy is achieved where the viability of the 
scheme improves before completion.     
3.15 In develo ping its approach to the delivery of 
affordable homes the Council needs to take into 
account the fact that not all development sites 
will contribute to the provision of affordable 
housing. This could be due to a number of 
factors including:  
• that the site i s too small;  
• that there are site -specific factors which 
mean that the provision of on -site 
affordable housing may not be desirable in 
terms of the form and location of 
development;  
• that site -specific complexities and costs 
would not generate sufficient ‘va lue’ to be The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 59 
                             
 
 
viable if the proportion of affordable 
housing sought were to be provided; or  
• some developments, such as those brought 
forward through the ‘Office to Residential’ 
prior approval process, are exempted by 
national legislation to make a contribution 
towards the provision of affordable housing.  
In addition there will continue to be a loss of 
existing affordable housing stock through ’Right 
to Buy’.  
3.16 The 2015 SHMA and updates provide  
information about the potential type and tenure of afforda ble homes to be provided across the 
District. This evidence indicates the need for the 
provision of 81% of new affordable homes to be for affordable rent and 19% to be for 
intermediate housing products.  This provides a 
useful starting point but, as with t he delivery of 
market housing, there is a need to consider the 
most appropriate location , type, size and tenure 
of properties to be provided in different areas. 
Different locations will have different 
characteristics, and different sizes of site will 
provi de varying opportunities for achieving a 
mix. There is also a need to make best use of 
land, and to take account of the existing stock of 
affordable housing within the locality in respect 
of the objective of achieving mixed and 
balanced communities. In rel ation to this latter 
point, it is important to ensure that affordable homes are designed to ensure  that they are 
visually integrated as part of any wider 
development i.e. that schemes are designed in 
such a way as to be ‘tenure blind’. Similarly, it is 
important that new homes provide for the 
needs of those with, or who may develop, accessibility needs  through the ir design .  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 Policy H 2 Affordable Housing  
A. On development sites which provide for 11 or 
more homes , or residential floorspace of more 
than 1,000 sq  m (combined gross internal area) , 
the Council will require 40% of those homes to be 
for affordable housing  provided on site . The mix 
of affordable homes will be required to reflect the 
latest available housing need.  All new homes will 
be required to meet accessible and adapta ble 
homes standards as defined by the Building 
Regu lations applicable at the time of the 
application.  
B. The management of the affordable housing 
provided will be undertaken by a Registered 
Provider which is a Preferred Partner of the 
Council unless otherwise agreed by the Council. 
Any relevant scheme will need to demon strate 
that the design, siting and phasing of affordable 
homes provides for its proper integration and 
timely provision as part of the wider 
development.  
C. The mix of units in respect of size will be 
determined on a site by site basis dependent on 
the o verall needs for the l ocal area and on the 
specific characteristics of the individual site.   
However, the Council will generally expect the mix 
of the affordable homes to reflect the mix of the 
market housing, in terms of the ratios of types, 
sizes and the  overall number of habitable rooms.  
D. Proposals that do not accord with the 
requirements of paragraph A (above) must be 
accompanied by a financial and viability appraisal 
(with supporting evidence), which is transparent 
and complies with relevant national or  local 
guidance applicable at the time.  
E. Where it has been demonstrated to the Council’s 
satisfaction that the provision of affordable 
housing in accordance with the above levels and 
tenure mix would render the scheme unviable, 
the Council will determine t he approach to be 
taken to achieving viability, where appropriate, 
having regard to the following available options:  
(i) reviewing the tenure mix;  
(ii) reviewing the extent of other site specific 
planning obligations; and  
(iii) reviewing the proportion of affordable 
housing.  
F. In exceptional circumstances, where the Council 
agrees that it would be inappropriate for the 
required affordable housing to be provided on -The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
60 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
site as part of the development, the  Council will 
accept a financial contribution to fund the 
provision of af fordable housing on another site in 
the District, provided that  the Council is satisfied 
that:  
(i) The financial contribution is at least 
equivalent to the increased development 
value if affordable housing was not provided 
on-site, subject to such a contributi on being 
viable; and  
(ii) A financial and viability appraisal has been 
provided (with supporting evidence) in 
accordance with paragraph D (above) which 
is transparent and complies with relevant 
national and local guidance  applicable at the 
time, properly  assessing the level of financial 
contribution to be provided.  
G. Where a viability and  financial appraisal  has been 
submitted in accordance with paragraph D 
(above) the Council will undertake an 
independent review  of that appraisal for which 
the applicant wi ll bear the cost.  
Rural Exception Sites  
3.17 A significant part of the District is rural in nature 
with a  large number of smaller settlements and 
communities which, in accordance with the 
proposed spatial  strategy , would not be 
appropriate for the allocation of larger scale 
developments, which would normally be  
expected to deliver a proportion of affordable homes. Nevertheless it is high ly likely that there 
will continue to be a need for affordable homes 
in those communiti es. 
Key Evidence  
• Local Plan Viability Study (Dixon Searle,  
2017);  and 
• Strategic Housing Market Assessment 
(Opinion Research Services , 2015) . 
Approach  
3.18 There is a need to provide the opportunity for 
those communities to be able to benefit from 
the provision of affordable homes on suitable 
small scale sites if a local need is clearly 
identifi ed and evidenced.   In accordance with 
national guidance,  there is also a nee d to 
provide some flexibility to enable the opportunity for some cross -subsidy t hrough the 
provisi on of a small proporti on of market 
housing should viability evidence clearly demonstrate th at such cross -subsidy is justified.  
 
Policy H 3 Rural Exceptions  
A. Planning permission may be granted for small -
scale affordable housing schemes  which are 
related  to smaller settlements , where planning 
permission for housing development will not 
normally be granted, where  the  Council is 
satisfied that:  
(i) there is a demonstrable social or economic 
need for affordable housing for local 
residents which cannot  be met in any other 
way and which can reasonably be expect ed to 
persist in the long term.  Planning application s 
will be expected to be supported by a local 
housing needs assessment;  
(ii) the development is well -related to the 
existing settlement and there is no significant 
detriment al impact to the character of the 
nearby settlement and  the surrounding 
countryside, or would cause significant harm 
to Green Belt objectives. Proposals involving 
extensions into the open countryside or the 
creation of ribbons or isol ated pockets of 
development are unlikely to be considered 
acceptable and should be avoided. There 
should be no significant material  grounds for 
objection  including on highways, 
infrastructure , environmental or amenity  
matters ; and  
(iii) suitabl e arrangements have been secured  to 
ensure that all of the affordable homes  built  
are available only for initial and subseque nt 
qualifying occupiers  whose total income is 
insufficient  to enable them to afford to rent 
or buy a dwelling of a sufficient size on the 
open market  in the specified parish.  
B. The management of the affordable housing 
provided will be undertaken by a Registered 
Provider which is a Preferred Partner of the 
Council unless otherwise agreed by the Council.  
C. For the purpose of this Policy ‘local resident’ is    
defined as:  
(i) Persons who have been permanently resident 
in the specified parish for at least two  years ; 
or  
(ii) Persons who are no l onger resident in the The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 61 
                             
 
 
specified parish but who ha ve been resident 
there for at least t hree years during the last 
five years ; or 
(iii) Persons who are in permanent employment 
in the specified parish and have been for a 
minimum of two years and are working at 
least an average of 24 hours per week ; or 
(iv) Persons who have close relatives ( i.e. parents, 
grandparents, children, brother or sister) 
living in the specified parish who have lived  
there for at  least five years.  
D. Should there be insufficient applic ants from the 
specified parish when the homes become 
available for occupation , then applicants from 
neighbouring parishes who comply with the 
eligibility criteria set out above will be considered.  
E. The Council will consider the provision of a small 
proporti on of market housing within the proposal 
site if it can be demonstrated through a  financial 
and viability appraisal (with supporting evidence), 
which is transparent and complies with relevant 
national or local guidance applicable at the time, 
that such housing is financially necessary to 
ensure the delivery of the affordable homes.  
F. Where a viability appraisal has been submitted in 
accordance with paragraph D (above) the Council 
will undertake an independent review of that 
appraisal  for which the applicant w ill bear the 
cost.  
Traveller Site Development  
3.19 As se t out in national planning guidance  
“Travellers” means “Gypsies and Travellers” and 
“Travelling Showpeople”. Therefore, when 
referring to Travellers in this Plan, the term 
incorporates Gypsies and Travellers, and 
Travelling Showpeople.  
3.20 There are distinct differences in the culture and 
way o f life of Gypsies and Travellers, and 
Travelling Showpeople. For this reason, Planning Policy for Traveller Sites  2015 provides two 
separate definitions.  
3.21 “Gypsies and Travellers” are defined as: persons of nomadic habit of life whatever their race or origin, including such persons who on grounds 
only of their own or their family’s or 
dependants’ educational or health needs or old 
age have ceased to travel temporarily, but 
excluding members of an organised group of travelling showpeople or circus people tra velling 
together as such.  
3.22 “Travelling Showpeople” are defined as: 
members of a group organised for the purposes of holding fairs, circuses or shows (whether or 
not travelling together as such). This includes 
such persons who on the grounds of their own 
or their family’s or dependants’ more localised 
pattern of trading, educational or health needs 
or old age have ceased to travel temporarily, 
but excludes Gypsies and Travellers as defined 
above.  
3.23 The Council is required to plan for the future 
needs of Travell ers in th e District up to 2033. 
Chapter 2  and Policy  SP 2 set out the context in 
relation to the future needs of Travellers in the District over the Plan period and the sequential 
approach to meeting those needs over this 
period. The proposed allocation of  sites to meet 
the identified need for Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople are set out in Policy  SP 2, SP 4  and 
Chapter  5 
3.24 National planning guidance  sets out a range of 
issues for local planning authorities to consider when assessing applications for Trav eller site 
development. It makes clear that local planning 
authorities should consider matters  including: 
the effective use of brownfield or derelict land; 
landscaping and the positive enhancement of 
the environment; promoting opportunities for 
healthy lif estyles; and avoiding isolation from 
the rest of the community. The Council should 
also consider any locally specific criteria to 
assess applications that may come forward on 
unallocated sites.  
3.25 Locally, the Traveller communities live mostly on 
privately ow ned sites containing a small number 
of pitches. There are some larger sites in the 
District but consultation with both t ravelling and 
settled communities has indicated a strong 
preference for smaller sites for Travellers in 
locations with a degree of sepa ration from 
settled communities.   
3.26 Travelling Show  people occupy a single site in 
the District allocated for intensification in this 
plan at Policy P 12.   
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
62 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Key Evidence  
• Essex, Southend on Sea and Thurrock 
Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople  
Accommodation Assessment ( ORS,  2017) ; 
and 
• Epping Forest District Council:  Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople 
Accommodation Assessment Need 
Summary Report ( ORS,  2017) . 
Approach  
3.27 The Council  will ensure that any proposals for 
Traveller sites located outside of the allocated 
sites are a ssessed in accordance with national 
guidance  to ensure that they are loc ated in 
suitable locations and meet the future needs of 
the Traveller community.  
3.28 The criteria in the Policy  responds to the need 
to ensure that site s for Travellers are accessible 
and that there is convenient access  to local 
services and facilities, specif ically educational,  
medical and welfare services. The available 
provision of local services, especially schools, to 
meet the needs of the occupiers  must also be 
reviewed and appropriately addressed.  
3.29 When considering applications for sites, the 
Council will take into account the suitability of 
the site and t he sustainability of the locati on, 
having regard to national guidance . 
3.30 Proposals for Traveller site development is 
inappropriate development in the Green B elt 
and will only be approved when very special circumstances have been  demonstrated in line 
with national guidance . 
3.31 The Council will resist the loss of ex isting 
Traveller sites, and particularly the conversion 
to permanent dwellings unless it can be clearly 
demonstrated that there is no genuine need or 
likely future need for Traveller sites in the 
locality and other planning policy requirements 
are met including those identified in national 
planni ng guidance.  
 
  Policy H 4 Traveller Site Development  
A. The Council will meet the identifi ed need for 
Travellers through the provision of plots and/or 
pitches as part of allocations as set out in Policies 
SP 2, SP 4  and Chapter 5.  
B. If applications for Traveller site development are 
received for sites other than those allocated in 
this Plan they will be  determined taking into 
account  the following considerations:  
(i) The impact on local amenity and the natural 
and historic environment;  
(ii) The relationship to lo cal services with 
capacity, including education establishments, 
health and welfare services, shops and 
community facilities;  
(iii) Access to the highway, public transport 
services and sustainable transport options;  
(iv) The provision of on -site facilities for parking, 
storage, play and residential amenity and 
appropriate essential services;  
(v) Whether the site is located outside areas of 
high flooding risk;  
(vi) The  compatibility of the proposed use with 
surrounding land uses including potential 
disturbance from vehicular mo vements, and 
on-site business activities;  
(vii) The impact on the physical and visual 
character of the area;  
(viii) The potential for successful integration 
between travelling and settled communities; 
and 
(ix) Any impact on the Green Belt.  
C. In accordance with Policy SP 4 , proposals for new 
sites  under part B of this policy should not exceed 
five pitches or 0.5 hectares, unless a specific 
justification is provided for a greater number of 
pitches up to a maximum of 10 pitches.  
D. Planning permission will not be granted for the 
replacement of lawful Traveller sites by 
permanent dwellings or other uses unless it can 
be clearly demonstrated to the satisfaction of the 
local planning authority that there is no genuine 
need or likely future need for Traveller sites in the 
locality and ot her planning policy requirements 
are met.  
 
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 63 
                             
 
 
The Economy and Town Centres  
3.32 This section of the Local Plan  sets out the future 
plan for the economy and town centres within 
Epping Forest District up until 2033.  
3.33 National policy requires the planning system to 
place a considerable emphasis on supporti ng 
economic growth. Local Plan policies for the 
economy and town centres should be based on 
adequate, up- to-date and relevant evidence and 
integrated with other policy elements, 
parti cularly housing. It further rein forces the 
requirement for cooperati on with partners and 
across boundaries in maintaining a robust 
evidence base to understand current needs and 
likely changes. Nati onal policy also sets the 
requirement for Local Plans to address barriers 
to investment, ho listica lly assess needs for land 
or floorspace as well as the sufficiency and 
suitability of existing and future land s upply. 
Local Planning Authoritie s should  also have 
specific  regard to the role and functi on of th eir 
town centres, assess locations of deprivati on 
and assess  the needs of the food production and 
tourism industries.  
3.34 In terms of town c entres, Local Plans should 
define a resilient network and hierarchy and the 
extent of shopping areas.  Plans should promote 
competitiv e town centres that provide  choice, a 
diverse offer and reflect individuality ; they 
should support existing , and create new, 
markets and allocate sites to meet a range of 
uses/needs, including edge of centre sites.  
3.35 National planning guidance  promotes the 
sustainable growth of all ty pes of businesses in 
rural areas, including conversion of, and new, 
buildings. It also promote s the development and 
diversific ation of agricultural and other land -
based businesses and t he supporting of 
sustainable rural tourism activities a s well as 
encouraging the retenti on and development of 
local services.  
3.36 The strategy for the economy and town centres 
is closely linked to the strateg ic policies of the 
Plan, particularly in relation to the quantum and locati on of future planned development. The 
Plan  incorporates policies to plan for future jo bs 
growth, and the identification of sites and areas to meet future land requirements and employment needs. In addition, policies  
establish the future town centre hierarchy and 
plan for the retail needs of the Di strict, both  in 
terms of the type of additional retail floorspace  
that will be required, and where this should be 
located. Further policies relate to the food 
producti on industry and glasshouses, and the 
visitor economy . 
Employment Sites  
3.37 Epping Forest Dist rict is an area of contrasts. 
More urban in the south abutting London but in 
stepping beyond the M25 the District becomes more rural in nature. The area has a number of 
smaller town and population centres with no 
single higher order conurbation. Unsurprisi ngly 
given its position, the District has very high 
levels of out -commuting with around half of 
working residents commuting into London. 
Consequently, the District is not a self -contained 
economy, but an integral part of a functional economic geography tha t extends well beyond 
its boundaries.  
3.38 The District  has key strengths in the 
construction, professional services, business services, health and care sectors and job growth 
is forecast in these sectors over the Local Plan 
period. Important also to the Distri ct’s economy 
is the long established horticultural and 
glasshouse industry in the Lea Valley, as well as 
seeking to capitalise on opportunities for growth in the visitor economy. The District is 
highly entrepreneurial with strong levels of self -
employment and business start -ups and the 
economy is dominated by small and medium 
enterprises (SMEs).   
3.39 Drawing on the District’s excellent strategic 
transport links, key employment locations 
include Loughton and Waltham Abbey with 
significant, albeit smaller, conce ntrations of 
employment space in North Weald Bassett and 
Nazeing.  
3.40 London is a clear economic driver with influence 
on the District but Harlow is also a major 
location for economic growth, particularly with 
its Enterprise Zone status. The Harlow 
Enterprise  Zone (serving all of West Essex) is 
seeking to create high quality, high technology The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
64 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
employment close to the District. Development 
and employment at North Weald Airfield 
features in the County Council and LEP’s plans 
for growth. Epping Forest District sits  within the 
London  Stansted  Cambridge Corridor’s plans 
which include promoting growth in sectors such 
as food and life sciences.  
3.41 The Council, along with the local authorities  in 
the functional economic market area (East 
Herts, Harlow and Uttlesford) , com missioned 
work in 2017 to assess the employment needs 
of West Essex and East Hertfordshire.  Two 
District level studies  have also been produced 
which have identified and analysed the supply 
of employment sites, opportunities for growth, 
and future needs for  employment space.  
3.42 The majority of existing employment sites 
within the District are in good or fair condition 
and are well occupied.  There is a strong market 
demand for employment space throughout the 
District whether it is clustered near to London 
Under ground linkages, within close proximity to 
the M25/M11 or within more rural locations 
within the District. There is a need for further 
start -up space as well ‘grow -on’ provision to 
enable existing businesses to grow and stay within the District. Economic growth locally is 
however challenged by the availability of 
suitable sites for employment, high land values 
and vulnerability to the loss of sites through 
Permitted Development.  
3.43 Evidence suggests the need for over 10,000 jobs 
to be generated over  the course of the Plan 
period.  To achieve this, it will be necessary to 
protect and enhance existing employment sites 
where appropriate, in addition to identifying at 
least 16 -19 hectares of land for B class uses.   
Key Evidence  
• West Essex and East Hertf ordshire 
Assessment of Employment Needs (Hardisty 
Jones Associates,  2017) ; 
• Employment Review (Hardisty Jones 
Associates , October 2017);  and 
• Employment Land Supply Assessment 
(Arup, 2017); and  
• Site Selection Report 2016 and 2017 (Arup).  Approach  
3.44 The Council ’s approach is to protect and 
enhance existi ng employment sit es (including 
through intensific ation), together with the 
allocati on of new sites. Such an approach w ill 
provide for the employment development 
needed to support sustainable long -term 
economic gr owth within the District an d the 
wider area whilst limiting the extent of land that 
will need to be released from the Green Belt . 
The Council supports  the development of the 
rural economy in the District.  
3.45 Given the limited supply of readily available 
emplo yment sites within current policy 
constraints , there is scope to consider the 
renewal or intensification of some existing 
employment sites, including those within the Council’s ownership, in order to maximise their 
potential.  
3.46 In order to retain sites in e mployment use and 
meet the identified need for employment, the 
Council will require robust evidence from 
applicants seeking to demonstrate that  there is 
no longer a reasonable prospect of the site’s 
continued use for employment purposes  before 
considering its release to other uses.  Differing 
requirements will need to be met depending 
upon the size, nature and location of the site or 
property. In general, it should be marketed 
effectively for a minimum of 12  months at a rate 
which is comparable to local market value for its existing use and it must be demonstrated that 
the continuous use of the site for such uses is no 
longer viable, taking into account the site’s 
existing and potential long- term market demand 
for such uses.  
3.47 The Council ’s Economic Development Team 
should also be engaged early in the process in 
order to maximise exposure of the 
employment/business opportunity that the site 
affords, to as wide a potential business audience 
as possible. Any such planning application must 
include details of valuations undertaken prior to 
placing the site on the market and a statement 
detailing why the site has not been taken up.  
3.48 Policy  E 1 sets out the  Council’s  approach in 
relation to meeting future employment needs.  
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 65 
                             
 
 
3.49 The Local Plan design ates 53 existing 
employment sites, equating to approximately 
109 hectares of land for future employment use.  
In addition, the following new employment 
allocations are made in order to provide 
sufficient land to meet future needs and ensure 
sufficient flex ibility.   Further details are provided 
in Policies SP 2, SP 5 , Chapter  5 and in Appendix 
6.  In addition, other small -scale employment 
uses are expected to be provided as part of the 
development mix within the new Garden 
Communities, and other appropriate locations, 
including Debden London Underground Station 
Car Park.  
Table 3.1 New employment site allocations  
Allocation 
reference  Site Name  Allocated 
use Indicative 
Developm
ent Area  
LOU.E2  Langston 
Road 
Industrial 
Estate  B2 1 ha  
NWB.E4  North 
Weald 
Airfield  B1/B2/B8  10 ha  
RUR.E19  Dorrington 
Farm  B1a/B1b  1 ha  
WAL.E6  Galley Hill 
Road 
Industrial 
Estate  B2/B8  1 ha  
WAL.E8  Land North 
of A121  B1c/B2/B
8 10 ha  
Total    23ha  Centre Hierarchy/Retail Policy  
3.50 The town centres of the District experience a 
signifi cant leakage of comparison retail spend, 
as many of the District’s residents choose to 
shop outside of the District for items like 
clothing, furniture and major home appliances. 
This is not surprising given the relativ ely small 
nature of the District’s town centres compared 
to surrounding areas within easy reach,  such as 
Harlow, Romford, Enfi eld, and Brentwood.  
3.51 The evidence base has considered the relative roles of settlements and town centres across 
the District, taking into account a range of 
factors including: sustainability; accessibility; 
town centre health check analysis; retail provisio n; employment provision; the historic 
environment; availability of services and Policy E 1 Employment Sites 
A. Existing Employment Sites  
(i) The Council will seek to retain and enhance 
existing employment sites and premises. 
Proposals for the redevelopment, renewal , 
intensification,  or extension of existing 
employment sites and premises for their 
existing use will be encouraged.  
(ii) The change of u se of existing employment 
sites or premises (whether designated or 
undesignated) to other uses will not normally 
be permitted unless the applicant can 
demonstrate through evidence, including 
marketing of the site, that there is no longer a 
reasonable prosp ect of the site being used for 
the existing employment use.  
(iii) Proposals which will result in loss of 
employment space will be expected to 
provide mitigation measures in the form of 
contributions to local employment training 
and small business growth program mes 
supported by the Council.  
B. New Employment Sites  
(i)  The Council will meet the identified need for 
employment sites through new allocations as 
set out in Policies SP 2, SP 5 and Chapter 5.  
C. The Council will support and encourage the 
development of flexible l ocal employment space 
to meet the employment and economic needs of 
the District.  The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
66 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
facilities; and population. This has enabled 
recommendations to be made in relation to the 
future town centre hierarchy and requirements.  
3.52 In preparing the Local Plan  the Counc il has to 
take into consideration the changing nature of 
town centres recognising the influence of the 
internet on trading, an increasing demand for 
services and the level of forecast growth across 
the Di strict. While population growth i s forecast, 
this do es not necessarily translate into a need 
for more shop and service floorspace, particularly given the competition from nearby 
centres and the impact of internet trading. 
Indeed an over provision of floorspace could be 
detrimental to the health of centres, which in a 
number of cases have seen some decline in  the 
level of retail provision. E qually under -provision 
will generate more journeys and potentially diminish the attractiveness of existing centres.  
3.53 Increasing the market share of retail 
expenditure is co nsidered to be an unrealistic 
prospect for the District, given established and 
more significant nearby retail offer, including Harlow, Romford an d Westfield Stratford City  
that the District can not and does not wish to 
compete with , together with greater use of the 
internet for making purchases. The evidence 
suggests that retaining a constant market share 
is more realistic, and this identifies a need for up 
to 59,700sq.m. of retail floorspace. When 
‘pipeline’ development is removed t here is a net 
need  of 39,700sq.m  retail floorspace . From this 
it has been assumed that approximately 40% 
will be provided in Harlow, recognising t he 
contribution this town makes to service the 
needs of the District.  
Key Evidence  
• Town Centres Review (Arup, 2016) ; 
• Epping Forest District Council Town Centres Study (Roger Tym and Partners, 2010);  and 
• Settlement Hierarchy Technical Paper 
(Epping Forest District Council, 2015) . 
Approach  
3.54 In light of the evidence , the Council’s approach 
is to introduce a simplifi ed town centre 
hierarchy which accords with the latest 
evidence. Growth in town centre uses will be focussed on the largest town centres at Epping and Loughton High Road, and the Council will 
seek to promote growth in centres across the 
District in order t o maintain their vitality and 
viability over the Plan period.  
3.55 Additionally, in accordance with the 
requirement of national policy, primary 
shopping areas, Primary Retail Frontages and 
Secondary Retail Frontages have been identified 
within each Town and Dis trict Centre.  
3.56 The Council will keep under review how to meet 
future floorspace requirements over the Plan 
period, including th e needs for out of centre 
sites, taking account of nearby retail offer 
including Broxbourne retail trends.  
 
Policy E 2 Centre Hier archy/Retail Policy  
A. The following Town and District Centre hierarchy 
applies in the District:  
(i) Town Centre:  
• Epping  
• Loughton High Road  
(ii) Small District Centre:  
• Waltham Abbey 
• Loughton Broadway  
• Ongar  
• Buckhurst Hill  
B. Proposals within defined Town and Small District 
Centres for retail, leisure, entertainment, offices, 
arts and culture, tourism and other main town 
centre uses, as defined by national planning 
guidance , will be supported where they will 
maintain and enhance the vitality and viability of 
the centres.  
C. Within defined Primary Retail Frontage ground 
floor units will be maintained in A1 Class Uses in 
accordance with Policies P 1 to P 5. Proposals that 
would not result in a reduction in the specified 
percentage of A1 Class Uses will be permitted for  
other main town centre uses where this would 
support the function, vitality or viability of the 
Town or District Centre and maintain an active 
daytime frontage.  
D. Within defined Secondary Retail Frontage ground 
floor units will be maintained in A1 Class Use s in 
accordance with Policies P 1 to P 5, but a wider 
range of main town centre uses may be supported The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 67 
                             
 
 
where they would maintain the diversity, viability 
and vitality of the Town or Small District Centre. 
Proposals for non -A1 Class Uses within Secondary 
Retail Frontages must encourage active shop 
fronts, attract a high footfall consistent with other 
main town centre uses and positively contribute 
to the function of the Town or Small District 
Centre.  
E. The scale and type of any development proposals 
should be p roportionate to the position of the 
relevant centre in the hierarchy.  
F. In Town and Small District Centres, the Council 
may permit residential development in 
appropriate locations and within Primary or 
Secondary Retail Frontages where it is above the 
ground floor and would not lead to a loss of main 
town centre uses, floorspace or frontage.  
G. The Council will not permit the change of use to 
any non-  retail use of corner shops, shops in small 
local parades or village shops, unless it can be 
demonstrated that:  
(i) there is no demand for a retail use; or  
(ii) the service provided is to be continued in 
another location in the village or locality; or  
(iii) the new use would meet an identified need 
for community facilities or services.  
H. Out of Centre development  
(i) All p roposals for main town centre uses 
outside of defined Town and Small District 
Centre s, including edge of centre/out of 
centre development, will be subject to 
sequential testing as require d by national 
planning guidance  and will only be permitted 
where:  
• There is  demonstrab le need for the 
development;  
• The proposal satisfies the sequential 
approach to site selection;  
• The proposa l would not put at risk or 
harm  proposals to safeguard the vitality 
and viability of any nearby town centre;  
• The proposal would not cause material 
harm to the vitality and viability of any 
nearby town centre;  and 
• The development would be readily 
accessible , or will be made so,  by a range 
of transport  options , including public 
transport, cycle and foot  
I. Relevant applications for main town centre use outside of defined  Town and Small District 
Centres will be required to undertake and provide 
an impact assessment in accordance with national 
planning guidance .  
Food Production and G lasshouses  
3.57 The District has long been home to a major part 
of the Lea Va lley glasshouse industry, now 
mainly focused in Roydon, Nazeing and 
Waltham Abbey. The District has historically 
provided a favourable location for the industry, 
with largely flat land, rich soil, ample water 
supply, and good proximity to London through 
road, rail and canal links. The industry 
experienced post -war growth, but has 
subsequently experienced rapid decline due in part to growing competition with other land  
uses, increased competition from other areas 
and technological improvements which means 
that the industry no longer requires high quality 
arable land.  
3.58 However, it continues to remain one of the 
main centres of the UK Glasshouse industry and 
whilst the land take has declined significantly , 
the production from the remaining sites has 
increased.  The industry continues to rely 
significantly on migrant/seasonal labour for 
most of the glasshouse and packhouse jobs. 
However, the cost of local accommodation is 
too great for many employees, so some growers 
have made provision on site –  a mix of 
permanent, temporary (caravan/mobile home), or building conversions, a number without 
permission.  
3.59 Glasshouse horticulture is an appropriate use in 
the Green Belt, but technological changes and 
competition pressures mean new glasshouses 
have to be much larger in a rea and taller, 
increasing their impact on the locality. Some 
growers are looking to expand significantly, 
others are stable with some relying on niche 
markets, and the rest are in long -term decline or 
are already derelict.  Packhouses are vital to the 
industry to enable the producers to provide 
supermarkets with graded and packaged 
products. They handle produce from the Lea 
Valley, UK and abroad and allow growers to 
enter into long -term contracts with the The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
68 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
supermarkets on the basis of guaranteed 
volume thro ughout the year.  
3.60 The Glasshouse sector makes a significant 
contribution to the local economy and 
employment. Looking to the future, and given 
operational matters of profit margins, costs and 
access to workers, growers are increasingly 
looking at investment  in increased 
mechanisation/robotics, although the likely impact of this over the Plan period is unclear.  
Modern operations often include energy 
efficient plant to assist in controlling costs as 
well as reducing greenhouse gas emissions.   
3.61 The glasshouse industry provides two areas of 
opportunity for future employment and 
economic growth. The first is the employment of local workers in the existing sector and the 
second is in the growth of the industry and new 
jobs that will be created. Following a period of 
difficult trading conditions the market 
opportunities for home grown products, 
together with concern about food security and 
the widening gap between what the nation 
produces and requires is leading to renewed 
aspiration and real opportunities for growt h in 
the sector. The industry appears to have good 
growth prospects, and food has been agreed as 
one of the sector priorities for the London  
Stansted  Cambridge Corridor.  
3.62 The Lea Valley Food Task Force seeks to create a 
producti on base by 2035 that exceed s 2014 
levels of p roduction by a minimum of 20%. The 
Task Force recommends that there is a need to 
develop robust employment and training 
provision and pathways to ensure that the 
industry has a skilled local workforce if possible . 
Accommodation  for Nursery Workers  
3.63 Tradition ally the glasshouse industry in the 
District depended on the labour of seasonal 
workers  who could be accommodated on 
nursery sites within temporary caravans for the 
duration of the season without the need for 
planning permission. T he modern glassho use 
industry however, allows for year round 
growing, and there is therefore no longer a 
‘season’.  3.64 Workers are now needed all year round and as 
for any other sector of employment, are 
therefore expected to live in houses or flats in nearby towns and villages rather than at their 
place of work. The nurseries in th e District are 
not in remote or inaccessible locations.  
3.65 However, this is traditionally a low wage industry and the gradual change from seasonal 
work to year round work together with  the strict 
application of Green Belt planning policy to 
prevent new residential development, has 
resulted in many workers living in inappropriate 
unsuitable and unauthorised temporary 
accommodation within nurseries, much of 
which is now immune from enforc ement action. 
The resulting poor living conditions of workers 
and reduction in the quality of the environment 
within nursery sites makes this a significant local 
problem, albeit one that is largely hidden from 
view.  
3.66 The provision of new long term residenti al 
accommodation for workers, whether built or in 
mobile homes is inappropriate development in 
the Green Belt . However  house prices and rents 
within the traditional growing areas in th e 
Green Belt so close to London, make permanent 
off site accommodation u nattainable for many 
individual workers. The conversion of existing 
buildings within the nursery site to provide 
accommodation is one potential answer but such buildings may not be available or suitable.  
Key Evidence  
• The Lea Valley Glasshouse Industry: 
Planning for the Future (Laurence Gould 
Partnership Ltd., 2012) ; and 
• Viability of the Horticultural Glasshouse Industry (Reading Agricultural Consultants, 
in association with Gerry Hayman and 
Hennock Industries 2003) . 
Approach  
3.67 An objective of this Local Pl an is to support the 
diversification of the agricultural economy 
including the expansion of the glasshouse 
horticulture industry, subject to appropriate 
environment al considerations. The Council 
recognises the benefits to food security that the 
industry br ings and seeks to be flexible to the The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 69 
                             
 
 
modern needs of the industry whilst addressing 
environmental impacts of the associated 
development. The Council  takes a criteria based 
approach to the location and  form of glasshouse 
development, including associated lo w carbon 
energy generation and packhouse facilities.  This 
provide s the industry with much needed 
flexibility in the face of increased competition 
from other locations and increased d emands 
from supermarkets. A criteria based approach 
will enable proposals  to be considered to ensure 
that proposals are suitable and appropriate. It 
address es the matter that some undeveloped 
land that was  designated for glasshouses  in 
previous local plans  no longer necessarily meet s 
the needs of the modern grower.  
3.68 The matter of water usage in this area of water 
stress is important and growers are expected to take water efficient measures in their operati ons, using water harvesti ng wherever 
possible as well as sourcing water supply from 
appropriate sources such as above ground 
reserv oirs. This is now common practice in 
modern operati ons.  
 
Policy E 3  Food Production and Glasshouses  
A. New or replacement glasshouses , any ancillary  
packhouse development , any ancillary  low carbon 
energy generation facilities and  Combine d Heat 
and Powe r (CHP) facilities  will be permitted 
subject to  the following criteria:  
(i) The scheme does not have a significant visual 
impact upon the character of the landscape 
particularly with regard to long- distance 
views;  
(ii) the planning  application includes full details 
of landscaping, including trees and other 
vegetation which will be retained or 
removed;  
(iii) the land is capable of being developed 
without major changes  to existing  
contouring;  
(iv) vehicular access from the site to the road 
network is adequate and uses roads capable 
of accommodating the vehicle movements 
likely to be generated by the development 
without detriment to highway safety, th e 
rural character of the roads, and residential 
amenity;  (v) adequate surface water and foul drainage 
capacity exists or can be provided as part of 
the development. The Council may require 
inclusion of suitable and adequately 
maintained sustainable drainage systems to 
control the quality or attenuate the  rate of 
surface water run -off; 
(vi) adequate quality and quantity of provision of 
water  is available or can be provided on -site, 
for all domestic and non -domestic purposes ; 
B. Within existing horticultural nurseries sites, 
residential accommodation for nursery workers 
will only be permitted where it can be 
demonstrated, to the Council’s satisfaction, that:  
(i) There is clear and robust evidence which 
shows that the lack of on -site 
accommodation is rendering existing use 
unviable . This include the possibility for 
converting/extending existing onsite 
structure to  provide for such 
accommodation ; 
(ii) There is no other alternative suitable 
accommodation  within a reasonable distance 
including purchasing/renting of existing 
residential property for use as a House in 
Multiple Occupation or hostel ; 
(iii) The quality, size and nat ure of the proposed 
structure is commensurate with the needs of 
the enterprise concerned ; 
(iv) Any permission for such accommodation will 
be strictly tied by either a planning condition 
and/or other forms of legal agreements e.g. 
an occupancy agreement to ensur e that the 
accommodation will only be occupied by 
horticultural workers employed by the 
relevant enterprise;  
(v) any relevant structure will be removed or 
demolished once the need for such 
accommodation ceased to continue and the 
site reinstate d to agricultural use ; and  
(vi) Where applicable, any permission will lead to 
the removal of long established, but 
inappropriate caravan accommodation within 
the site, where applicable.  
 
 
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
70 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
The Visitor Economy  
3.69 Tourism provides an important source of 
revenue and  employment for the Dist rict. 
Evidence suggests that in 2015 tourism provided 
for over 2,600 full time equivalent jobs in the 
District, which equated to approximately 8 % of 
overall employment in the District. The total 
value of the tourism industry for the  District 
equated to more than £200 million in 2015.  
3.70 Both Epping Forest (4.3 million visits each year) 
and the Lee Valley Regional Park (LVRP) provide 
green links into the area from London and offer 
a wealth of leisure and recreation activities. The 
District also boasts an enviable built heritage 
with for in stance, Waltham Abbey Church and 
Gardens, North Weald Airfield, Epping Ongar 
Railway, Greensted Church, the Royal 
Gunpowder Mills and the market towns of 
Ongar, Epping and Waltham Abbey.  The Lee 
Valley White Water Centre, constructed for the 
2012 Olympics , and just over the district border 
in Broxbourne near Waltham Abbey, could also 
be a catalyst in the medium to long -term to 
encourage sport and other tourism -related 
activities in the locality. There  is a comparatively 
low supply of visitor accommodation in relation 
to potential demand.  
Key Evidence  
• Epping Forest District Visitor 
Accommodation Needs Assessment (Hotel 
Solutions , 2017) ; 
• Economic Impact of Tou rism (Destination 
Research, 2015 ); and 
• Lee Valley Park Development Framework 
(Lee Valley Regiona l Park Authority, 2011).  
Approach  
3.71 The Council considers that there is potential to 
develop the tourism sector locally, drawing on 
the ‘green and unique’ character of the District 
whilst continuing to protect and enhance the 
quality of the District’s environm ent. There is 
commitment to support the sector through 
improving access to a wide range of existing 
attractions in the District.  
3.72 The local tourism market is currently dominated 
by day visitors, with 3.4 million day visitors compared to 172,500 staying visi tors, only 
around half of whom used paid accommodation 
(2015). The lack of visitor accommodation is a 
factor here, and increased provision an opportunity to grow these higher value staying 
visitor markets. The District currently has a 
limited stock of hote l and visitor 
accommodation, and a number of low quality 
hotels that have seen little recent investment. 
Key markets for accommodation in the District 
are business visitors and contract workers for 
hotels during the week; people attending 
weddings and fami ly events; people visiting 
friends and family; leisure tourists using the 
District as a base for visiting London; people 
taking part in outdoor sports and recreation, particularly in the Lee Valley Regional Park; and 
those escaping from London for a rural break. 
The Visitor Accommodation Needs Assessment 
notes that these are all markets that are set to 
grow over the Plan period.  
3.73 The types of visitor accommodation that would 
be suitable in the District encompass a wide range including, but not exclusively ho tels and 
inns, camping, caravan, activity holiday centres, 
holiday lodges, camping pod sites, wedding 
venues with accommodation and youth hostels . 
3.74 Lee Valley Regional Park’s proposals for Area 5 
(King George V reservoir and surrounding areas) within its P ark Development Framework seek to 
provide a range of short stay accommodation 
within the Park including hotel, hostel, holiday 
village, touring caravan, camping and short term 
mooring. The Council is working with Lee Valley 
Regional Park Authority and othe r key partners 
as part of the One Epping Forest Local Strategic 
Partnership on a tourism strategy.  
3.75 In order to retain visitor accommodation and to 
seek to meet the identified market need for 
various forms of accommodation, the Council 
will require applican ts seeking to discontinue a 
visitor accommodation use to provide robust 
evidence that there is no market interest in 
acquisition and investment to allow continued 
profitable operation of the business.   Differing 
requirements will need to be met depending 
upon the size, nature and location of the site or 
property. In general, evidence will be required 
that an accommodation business has been The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 71 
                             
 
 
effectively marketed through a reputable 
specialist agent, for a reasonable period of time 
(at least a year), and at a realistic price, 
compared to the prices that have been achieved for other similar accommodation businesses.  
3.76 The Council’s Economic Development Team 
should also be engaged early in the process in 
order to maximise exposure of the business 
opportunity that t he site affords, to as wide a 
potential business audience as possible. Any 
such planning application must include details of 
valuations undertaken prior to placing the site 
on the market and a statement detailing why 
the site has not been taken up.  
3.77 The need to continue to protect and enhance the quality of the District’s environment, whilst also taking the opportunity to make the most of 
the District’s assets is recognised. The visitor 
economy is central to achieving the objective to 
support tourism in the District through the 
promotion of, and improving access to, a wide 
range of existing attractions in the District 
including Epping Forest, the Lee Valley Regional 
Park, the Royal Gunpowder Mills site, the 
historic towns, village centres and countryside.  
3.78 Whilst tourism is a key sector of the local 
economy, its growth may also raise challenges for the environment and for local communities. 
High numbers of visitors can put pressure on 
some locations in terms of their tranquillity, 
appearance and by physical ero sion.  
3.79 Increased visitor traffic could result in increased 
congestion on certain routes, and car parking 
difficulties can affect the environment, as well 
as local peoples’ and visitors’ experiences of the 
area. It is therefore essential that growth in the 
tourism sector is based upon sustainable visitor 
attractions. Such attractions retain the 
economic and social advantages of tourism 
development while having minimal impact on 
the environment and the local community 
through reducing, or mitigating any undesi rable 
impacts on the natural, historic, cultural or 
social environment to balance the needs of the 
visitors with those of the destination.  
 
 Policy E 4 The Visitor Economy  
A. Opportunities for the sustainable development of 
the visitor economy will be supported where they 
are of a scale, type and appearance appropriate to 
the locality and provide local economic benefits, 
through the following measures:  
(i) support for the development of hig h quality 
visitor accommodation , in particular 
accommodation linked to outdoor sport and 
activity hubs in the Lee Valley Regional Park, 
and visitor accommodation of an appropriate 
scale and type that makes use of existing 
buildings and strengthens existing rural 
leisure businesses;  
(ii) support for the upgr ading of existing visitor 
attractions, visitor centres and development 
of appropriate new ones;  
(iii) the retention and improvement of existing 
visitor accommodation  and venues unless 
there is proof that there is no market interest 
in acquisition and investment  to allow 
conti nued profitable operation;  
(iv) encourag ing sustainable tourism in rural 
areas. This will include better linkages 
between the towns and rural surroundings; 
and opportunities for the enjoyment of the 
Lee Valley Regional Park and Epping Forest 
whil e recognising the importance of 
conserving and enhancing the cultural 
heritage of the area, as assets that form the 
basis of the tourist industry here;  
(v) support a year -round visitor economy while 
ensuring the facility remains for visitor use;  
(vi) support ing the improvement of sustainable 
transport opportunities for visitors and 
encourage the use of sustainable transport 
modes to reduce the impact of visitors on the 
highway network; and 
(vii) encouraging local food /produce and 
appropriate tourism development that 
suppo rts rural business and farm 
diversification.  
Transport  
3.80 This section of the Local Plan  sets out the 
Council’s a pproach to managing growth in car 
travel and its linked impacts including on the 
local economy and on the environment and 
communities. The polic ies seek to widen the The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
72 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
choice of travel opportunities using public 
transport, walking and cycling. The Council is 
also considering the development of residential 
car parking standards which are specific to Epping Forest District to reflect local 
information  on car ownership and the need to 
make best use of land. It also sets out how land 
will be safeguarded for future transport 
schemes and seeks to protect petrol filling 
stations  and car repairs/servicing sites , which 
are an important, but diminishing, local  facility.  
Sustainable Transport Corridors  
3.81 The District has a very varied character ranging 
from urban areas located on the edge of London 
through to rural areas. As a consequence there 
is very variable access to public transport, 
walking and cycling oppo rtunities even in some 
more urban areas.  
3.82 The District is bisected by the M11 and M25 
motorways which are key parts of the strategic 
road  network . Incidents on both of these roads 
very quickly can result in impacts on the 
operation of the local road network within the 
District. The reverse can also happen. The 
consequences of this include:  
• potential road safety issues, when the slip roads cannot clear resulting in stacking back 
onto the motorways;  
• impacts on journey time reliability for both 
residents  and businesses; and 
• slow moving traffic increasing impacts on air 
quality with resultant health consequences 
on both residents and the District’s 
environmental assets, such as the Epping 
Forest  Special Area of Conservation (SAC) . 
3.83 The District’s economy is  such that there are 
high levels of both in and out commuting which 
put pressure on the District’s road network (at 
all levels) at peak periods, and also impact on 
rail capacity (both national rail and London 
Underground networks). The London 
Underground C entral Line terminates at Epping, 
and there are a number of other Central Line 
stations within the District. This is both a benefit 
to District residents and businesses but also has 
a downside. Because there are price 
differentials between the cost of trav el on rail services and London Underground (the latter 
being cheaper), the London Underground 
stations are an attractor at peak hours for 
longer distance car trips by commuters. Not 
only does this impact on the Central Line’s 
capacity but also adds to peak  hour traffic 
congestion, and places pressure  for on -street 
parking on local roads.  
3.84 An initial analysis of traffic growth across the 
District Work has shown that even without 
development in the future, parts of the highway 
network will be operati ng over -capacity, in 
some cases by 2026 and in other ca ses by 2036. 
Whilst some junctions could be improved most physically cannot be improved or would have 
environmental consequences by doing so. For 
example, traffic congesti on and delays that 
occur on the routes s outh of Epping could only 
be resolved by using land which forms part of 
the Forest. Delays and queuing affect economic 
producti vity, increase air polluti on and can sever 
local communiti es. 
3.85 In 2008 road transport related CO
2 emissions 
produced per person per annum in Epping 
Forest was 1.66 tonnes. Whilst this is similar to 
the UK average, that average exceeds 
recognised UK air quality targets. Whilst traffi c is 
not the only source of polluti on it plays a major 
role, and has local impacts on key road routes through the District.  
3.86 The District, as in many othe r places, has an 
ageing population where the car will, over time , 
become less feasible as a method of travel. 
Whilst car ownership increased by 4.6% 
between 2001 and 2011 (as would to some 
extent be expected when taking into account an 
increase in the District’s households and 
populati on over the same period and an 
increase in the number of younger people 
staying in the family home than previously), 
there were also some 15% of households that 
do not have acc ess to a car.  
3.87 Epping Forest District faces a number of 
challenges including:  
• that for some communiti es public transport, 
walking and cycling are not realisti c options. 
Rural  bus services are becoming less  
commercially viable and therefore cannot The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 73 
                             
 
 
operate without receiving subsidy from 
Essex County Council, which is itself 
operati ng within an environment of 
significant financial challenges;  
• that levels of traffic using roads through the 
Epping Forest SAC and associated junction 
capacity issues within and adjacent to the 
Forest have a negative impact on its health 
as a result of, in part, air borne pollutants 
arising from vehicle emissions.  
• the recogni tion that the majority of new 
devel opments will still need to 
accommodate the car. Research undertaken nationally has been inconclusive as to 
whether reducing car parking in new developments has any effect on car ownership and this appears to be backed up 
by, albeit somewhat dated, post -occupancy 
research undertak en in relati on to new 
residential developments  that many 
households will still want to have access to 
a car. Environmental, road safety and 
community impacts occur if an appropriate 
balance is not adopted;  
• the size of modern cars has increased and 
this has  led to a need to increase the size of 
parking spaces in new development. This  
means that more land is needed to 
accommodate the same number of cars 
thus placing additional pressure on land 
when planning for the development needs of the District ; and  
• the l evel of car ownership across the District 
is varied ranging from 66.7% of homes in 
the Loughton Town Council area having no 
or 1 car through to 17.8% of homes in 
Theydon Garnon parish having no or 1 car.  
Key Evidence  
• Essex Highways Technical Note s (various ); 
• The Essex Transport Strategy: the Local Transport Plan for Essex 2011 -2026 (Essex 
County Council , 2011) ; and  
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan (Arup, 2017).  
Approach  
3.88 Recognising that there is a need to manage any 
future growth in car travel the Local Plan ha s taken into account the need to maximise the potential to widen sustainable transport choices 
and encourage reductions in car use wherever 
possible by: 
• considering existing and future sustainable 
transport opportunities as part of the 
criteria when identi fying sites for housing 
and employment;  
• ensuring the provision of facilities and 
services in new strategic developments to 
provide high levels of ‘self - containment’; 
and 
• securing the provision of, or financial support for, bus services, and walking and 
cycling facilities.  
3.89 Taking such an approach has a wider benefit in 
that it can also provide access to new transport 
opportunities for existing residents, thus 
reducing increases in background traffic growth, 
make a contribution to reducing car -related 
pollut ion levels and improve access to services 
for those who do not have a car or who are 
unable to drive.  
3.90 The provision of sustainable transport choices and securing modal shift away from reliance on 
the car is a key component in mitigating the 
future impacts of air -borne pollutants on the 
health of the Epping Forest SAC.  In addition, in 
order  to follow  the commitment by government 
and car manufacturers to cease sales o f petrol 
and diesel cars by 2040 to support improvements in air quality , the Council will 
require the provision of electric vehicle charging points in all new development which include 
vehicle parking spaces.  
3.91 The delivery of development around Harlow is a key part of the Council’s strategy for t he future 
delivery of new homes within the District, and 
to support the opportunities that Harlow’s 
Enterprise Zone offers to create new jobs, as 
part of its partnership approach with Harlow, 
Uttlesford, and East Hertfordshire Councils. A 
key part of the i nfrastructure needs to support 
this strategy is the provision of a new junction 
(J7a) on the M11 motorway , for which planning 
permission has recently been granted. The 
approach to delivering sustainable tra nsport 
choices helps to support the business case  The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
74 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
needed to support its funding by, amongst 
others, Highways England.  
3.92 As set out above there are issues around the 
provision of car parking in new development. 
The Council believes that there are 
opportunities to take a more locally focused 
approach to car p arking standards across the 
District. It is therefore proposing to develop 
specific residential car parking standa rds for 
Epping Forest District. These parking standards 
will be developed based on:  
• an understanding of differing levels of car 
ownership acro ss the District;  
• the different levels of current and future 
access to services and facilities across the 
District; and  
• making better use of land through widening 
the use of ‘unallocated’ car parking within 
larger developments and looking at the 
need for pr oviding on -site garage provision.  
Until such time as those standards are adopted, planning applications will use  Essex County 
Council’s adopted Parking Standards  as the 
starting point. Where practicable and within 400m of a railway station, the Council wil l seek 
reduced car parking, including car free, 
development . 
3.93 Some of the issues raised through consultation 
are not within the remit of the Local Plan to address. These include matters such as:  
• the differential pricing between rail and 
London Underground s ervices;  
• the issues arising from the down time of 
barriers at rail crossings; and  
• the impact of existing HGVs on the local 
road network.  
3.94 The Council recognises that these are important 
issues that need to be addressed wherever 
possible and will continue to  pursue these 
matters with partners including Essex County 
Council, Network Rail and the Train Operating 
Companies and Transport for London.  
 
 
 
 Policy T 1 Sustainable Transport Choices  
A. The Council will work in partnership with relevant 
stakeholders to promote a safe, efficient and 
convenient transport system which will:  
(i) build on the District’s strategic location, 
through improvements to strategic road and 
rail connections  and other public transport 
networks  to the wider area;  
(ii) promote transport choice, through 
improvements to public transport services 
and supporting infrastructure, and providing 
coherent and direct cycling and walking 
networks to provide a genuine alternative to 
the car and facilitate a modal shift;  
(iii) provide opportunities to improve access to 
the two T own and four  Small  District Centres 
and rail stations by all modes of transport and 
ensure good integration between transport 
modes;  
(iv) manage congestion , seek to reduce journey 
time and maintain consistency in journey 
times;  
(v) promote and im prove safety, security and 
healthy lifestyles; and  
(vi) improve the efficiency of the local highway 
network.  
B. Development should minimise the need to travel, 
promote opportunities for sustainable transport 
modes, improve accessibility to services and 
support the  transition to a low carbon future.  
C. Developm ent proposals will be permitted  where 
they : 
(i) integrate into existing transport networks;  
(ii) provide safe, suitable and convenient access 
for all potential users;  
(iii) provide  on-site layouts that are compatible 
for all po tential users with appropriate 
parking and servicing provision; and  
(iv) do not result in unacceptable increases in 
traffic generation or compromise highway 
safety.  
D. Development proposals that generate significant 
amounts of movement  must be supported by a 
Tran sport Statement or Transport Assessment 
and will normally be required to provide a Travel 
Plan. Development proposals which generate a 
significant number of heavy goods vehicle 
movements will be required to demonstrate by 
way of a Routing Management Plan t hat no The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 75 
                             
 
 
severe impacts are caused to the efficient and 
safe operation of the road network and no 
material harm caused to the living conditions of 
residents.  
E. Development will, where appropriate, ensure that 
transport infrastructure will be of a high quality,  
sustainable in desig n, construction and layout, 
and offer maximum flexibility in the choice of 
travel modes, including walking and cycling, and 
with accessibility for all potential users.  
F. Development will be permitted where it:  
(i) does not result in cumulati ve severe impact 
on the operation and safety of, or 
accessibility to , the local or strategic highway 
networks;  
(ii) mitigates impacts on the local or strategic 
highway networks  and London Underground 
station infrastructure within the District , 
arising from the development itself or the 
cumulative effects of development, through 
the provision of, or contributions towards, 
necessary transport improvements, including 
those secured by legal agreement , subject to 
viability considerations ; 
(iii) protects and , where appropri ate, enhances 
access to P ublic Rights of W ay; 
(iv) provides appropriate parking provision, in 
terms of amount, design and layout and cycle 
storage arrangements, in accordance with 
adopted Parking Standards  and which 
mitigates any impact on on -street parking 
provision within the locality .  Reduced car 
parking, including car free,  development in 
sustainable locations will be supported ; and 
(v) ensures that , where appropriate,  
development proposals provide a co-
ordinated and comprehensive scheme that 
does not prejudice the future provision of 
transpor t infrastructure on and through 
adjoining sites.  
G. In order to accommodate the use of low emission 
vehicles to support improvements in air quality 
within the District the provision of electric vehicle 
charging points  will be required within all new 
developments which make provision for car 
parking  for vehicles . 
 Safeguarding of R outes and 
Facilities  
3.95 The Council’s  approach is to support using 
sustainable transport choices to manage the 
impacts of traffic  growth. However, there will 
still be a need to make some improvements to 
the local and strategic highway network, 
includin g the provision of a new Junction 7a  to 
the M11 motorway , for which planning 
permission has now been granted. In addition, 
land may also be needed for improvements to 
train, bus, cycling and walkin g networks, to 
improve connectivity and/or capacity. It is 
important the Council ensures that such 
schemes are not prevented from being provided  
as a result of permitti ng development  on land 
required for their implementation .  
3.96 Monitoring undertaken by the Petrol Retailers 
Association (PRA) identified that 886 forecourts 
closed between 2008 and 2013, abou t 10 per 
cent of all those in the UK, with the loss of 
almost 6,000 jobs. The PRA has advised that 
more than a third of these were in rural areas, and it was of the view that this creates the risk 
of “fuel deserts” in isolated areas where people 
depend on their vehicles to get around. 
Concerns regarding closures have also been 
raised by Government following the 
commissioning of a report into the matter in 
2013.  
Key Evidence  
• Essex Highways Technical Notes (various) ; 
• The Essex Transport Strategy: the Local 
Transport Plan for Essex 2011 -2026 (Essex 
County Council , 2011) ; and  
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan (Arup, 2017).  
Approach  
3.97 A number of transport investment opportunities 
have already been identified within the District. 
The Council recognises that there is a n eed to 
ensure that the implementation of identified 
schemes and those  identified over the course of 
the Local Plan period, which are needed to 
support the delivery of future development, the 
success of the local and wider economy and on 
the well -being of r esidents should not be The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
76 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
fettered. Consequently, there is a need to 
ensure that land is protect ed from development 
which would hinder the successful delivery of 
such schemes.  
3.98 The Council will work with the relevant 
transport bodies, operators and landowners to 
secure the identification and delivery of 
transport infrastructure schemes.  
3.99 In order to protect petrol filling forecourts from 
change of use, the Council will require robust  
evidence from applicants seeking to 
demonstrate that there is no longer a 
reasonable prospect of the site’s continued use 
as a petrol filling forecourt. In general, it should 
be marketed effectively for a minimum of 12 
months at a rate which is comparable  to local 
market value for its existing use as a forecourt  
and it must be demonstrated that continuous 
use of the site for such uses is no longer viable.  
 
Policy T 2 Safeguarding of Routes and 
Facilities  
A. Land required for proposed transport schemes as 
identified in Plans and Programmes including 
Essex County Council’s Highways and Transport 
Investment Programmes, the Highways England 
Route Investment Strategies, Network Rail 
Investment Strategies and Trans port for London 
Investment Strategies will be protected from 
other developments which would prevent their 
proper implementation.  
B. Local f illing stations and car repair s facilities will 
be protected from redevelopment for alternative 
uses unless it can be de monstrated through 
evidence, that the current use on site is no longer 
viable  or necessary , and that the site has been 
effectively marketed at a rate which is 
comparable to local market value  of its existing 
use. 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Chapter Four  
Development 
Management 
Policies  
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
78 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Development Management Policies  
4.1 The following development management 
policies apply to the whole of the District unless 
specific locations are indicated within them. 
They cover four broad categories that interlink 
and all applications for development will be 
judged against the full suite. The categories are:  
• natural environment and green 
infrastructure;  
• historic environment;  
• design; and  
• environmental policies . 
Natural Environment  and Green 
Infrastructure  
4.2 Policy SP 7  sets the context for Policies DM 1 –  
DM 6 which reinforce the approach of this plan 
to provide a network of multifunctional green 
and blue infrastructure that :  
• avoids harm to existing trees, green infrastructure, precious habitat and species ; 
• strengthens the biodiversity assets of the 
District ;  
• addresses the impacts  of development on 
landscape character  and geodiversity ;  
• responds to the key assets of the Epping 
Forest and Lee Valley Regional Park ; and  
• provides for open spaces for people and 
other species to thrive.  
Habitat Protection and Improving 
Biodiversity  
4.3 The District is rich in biodiversity resources at an 
international, national and local scale of 
importance. In parti cular, ancient woodland, 
veteran trees and water habitats such as water 
meadow s and rivers are prevalent in the 
District. These include a Special Area of 
Conservation designated for its habitat features 
and a Special Protection Area designated  for its 
support of important bird species (both of which 
are European sites), national Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest , Local Nature Reserves and 
Local Wildlife Sites. National and international legislation requires that these are protected to 
differing degrees. National policy requires the 
Council to take a positive approach to achieving 
net gains in biodiversity thus improving the 
quality and extent of land assets that are of 
biodiversity value  whilst the NERC Act 2006 
places a duty on the Council to have regard to 
the purpose of conserving biodiversity.   The 
biodiversity designations in the District are 
contained on the policies map but this does not 
include protected species and habitat that may 
be located outside of these areas.  
4.4 The types of designated ecological assets in the 
District are as follows and their definitions are 
contained within Appendix 1 . 
4.5 International:  
• Special Areas of Conservation (SAC) ; 
• Special Protection Areas (SPA) ; and  
• Ramsar Sites . 
4.6 National :  
• Sites of Special Scientific Interest ; and  
• National Nature Reserves . 
4.7 Local :  
• Local Nature Reserves ; and  
• Local Wildlife Sites . 
4.8 The Council values the high degree of 
biodiversity in the District and takes its 
responsibilities seriously in regard to its 
protection. The fragment ation of habitats is 
particularly damaging to realising the aim of 
achieving net gains in biodiversity and linking habitats is important in this respect. In part due 
to its proximity to London, the pressure from 
infill development in the metropolitan area of 
London and into Essex makes protection of 
biodiversity assets within the District all the 
more important. Some fragile ecosystems in the 
District suffer both from visitor pressure  and air 
pollution from traffic.  The impact of climate 
change on biodiver sity is a key consideration 
and means that species need space to move as 
conditions alter.  
 
 
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 79 
                             
 
 
Key Evidence  
• Habitats Regulation Assessment (AECOM, 
2017);  
• Essex Biodiversity Action plan 2010- 2020 , 
Essex Wildlife Trust 2011;  and 
• Local Wildlife Sites (Lo WS) Review EECOS 
for EFDC 2010.  
Approach  
4.9 Given that development must seek to achieve 
net gains in biodiversity, t he strategy and 
policies of the plan seek to emphasise that 
development must be coupled with the active 
protection of existing and creation of new 
habitat. This includes physically linking habitat 
sites where appropriate and protecting sites that are functionally linked to others -  for 
example where there are pockets of habitat 
supporting a species such as stands of trees 
used by woodland birds. It includes  measures 
such as protecting species, sites,  hedgerows and 
protected trees and the restor ation and 
enhancement  of the wide variety of habitat in 
the District. It  includes measures to improve and 
protect rivers  and their banks , ponds and 
wetland such as de -culverting and providing 
buffer zones around features .  
4.10 In order to comply with national and 
international legislation and policy it is 
necessary to recognise that under certain 
circumstances , the harm caused by a 
development to biodiversity can and should be mitigated against and/or compensated for, and 
as a last resort offset. M easures include the 
provision of new habitats, relocation of species and development details to encourage or discourage species movement , for example the  
retention of waterways as dark corridors to 
support bats feeding, the introduction of toad 
crossings ,or cat-proof fencing.  
4.11 In order to understand the impact of 
development proposals on protected species 
and habitat s, and potentially valuable habitat 
for p rotected species  it may be necessary to 
require detailed ecological survey information 
and an impact assessment to enable the Council 
to judge the proposal and how effective 
measures to mitigate or compensate any harm might be. This will depend on the leve l of 
existing data  available .  The starting point for 
when a Preliminary Ecological Assessment is 
required is set out in Epping Forest District 
Council’s Local List of Validation Requirements .   
4.12 In respect of hedgerows an assessment against the criteria of the Hedgerow Regulations 1997 
will be required and where deemed to be 
‘Important’ under the Hedgerow Regulations , 
development proposals must demonstrate how 
adverse impacts will be avoided , and where 
mitigation is required , this must be on site.  
4.13 The use of biodiversity accounting in the assessment of development proposals is 
advocated  by the Council. A valuable 
Government Biodiversity metric is  used in the 
Biodiversity Impact Assessment Calculat or 
(BIAC). This Government biodiversity metric 
quantifiably demonstrates whether a net gain in 
ecological units has been achieved in regard to a 
proposed development  and how compensatory 
measures on and off site can ensure a net gain .  
It can be applied to all habitats  and can 
therefore assist in meeting the requirements to 
achieve net gains in biodiversity. The Council 
recommends the use of this tool to provide 
information regarding development proposals 
whilst recognising that the use of the tool does 
not override the protection afforded by law to 
many sites and species in the District.  
4.14 The Council will take a precautionary approach 
where insufficient information is provided 
regarding the ecological status of the site, 
management and mitigation measures. Mitigation and compensation must conform to 
the requirements of relevant legislation and 
Government Standing Advice.   
4.15 The design and layout of development should 
enable net gains to t he biodiversity of the 
District.  
 
Policy DM 1  Habitat Protection and 
Improving B iodiversity  
A. All development should seek to deliver net 
biodiversity gain  in addition to protecting existing 
habitat and species . Development proposals 
should seek to integrate biodiversity through their 
design and layout, including, where appropriate, The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
80 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
through the provision of connections between 
physical and functional networks.  
B. Development proposals must protect and 
enhance natur al habitats , areas and corridors for  
biodiversity  and should not negatively impact 
upon areas of international or national 
designation.  The creation of new corridors for 
biodiversity will be supported in appropriate 
locations.  The provision of buffers to protect  
sensitive habitats including those of wetlands and 
ponds will be required where necessary .  
C. Development proposals which are likely to have a 
negative impact on a locally designated site  (Local 
Wildlife Site  and Local Nature Reserve ) will only 
be pe rmitted where the benefits of the proposed 
development clearly outweigh the value of the 
ecological feature adversely affected and there 
are no appropriate alternatives.  
D. In exceptional circumstances where the negative  
impacts of development on natural habi tat and 
biodiversity are unavoidable, the negative  impacts 
must be proportionately addressed in accordance 
with the hierarchy of:  
(i) mitigation;  
(ii) compensation in the form of habitat; and 
finally  
(iii) offsetting within the locality.  
E. The details of any necessary e nhancing, mitigating 
or compensatory measures should accompany the 
planning application  as appropriate . When 
appropriate, conditions will be put in place to 
require that monitoring is undertaken (by a 
suitably qualified ecological professional), and to 
mak e sure that any mitigation, compensation and 
offsetting is effective.  
F. The loss, deterioration or fragmentation of 
irreplaceable habitats, such as veteran trees and 
ancient woodland, will  not be permitted  by the 
Council, unless the need for, and benefits of , the 
development in that location can be 
demonstrated to clearly outweigh the loss.  
G. Where there are grounds to believe that a 
Protected Species, Priority Species , Priority 
Habitat  or other valuable habitat  may be affected 
by proposed development, applicants must 
provide a full survey and site assessment to 
establish the extent of potential impact.  This 
evidence should inform appropriately designed 
plans and mitigation measures.  
H. Ecological impacts of a propo sed development will be quantified by using the Biodiversity Impact 
Assessment Calculator (BIAC)  where appropriate .  
Development proposals must demonstrate a net 
gain in ecological units.  
I. Ecological information must be supplied in 
accordance with BS 42020 2013  for all relevant 
planning applications . 
Epping Forest SAC and the Lee 
Valley SPA  
4.16 The Epping Forest and Le e Valley form 
significant areas of land in the District that are 
valuable for many reasons. They are the two 
sites that contain land subject to international 
protection for its biodiversity value. The Epping 
Forest contains a Special Area of Conservation 
(SAC) identified primarily for its habitat value in 
respect of beech tree s and wet and dry heaths . 
The Lee Valley Regional Park contains a Specia l 
Protection Area (SPA) and is a Ramsar 
Convention on Wetlands Site  both of which 
designations relate to its importance as a bird 
habitat. Known as ‘European Sites’ they are 
afforded protection in that detailed assessments 
(Habitats Regulation Assessments)  are required 
of any development plans and proposals likely 
to give rise to that have a likely significant 
impact effect on the integrity of the sites. These 
sites form a critical part of the biodiversity 
asset s and green and blue infrastructure of the 
District.  
4.17 The Council has a duty as the ‘competent 
authority’ under the Habitats Regulations to 
protect the Epping Forest SAC and the Le e 
Valley SPA/Ramsar sites from the effects of 
development . This can be achieved using many 
measures but an important approach is one of mitigation through, for example, access 
management strategies, habitat management, 
provision of new Natural Green Space and 
sustainable transport choices .  
Key Evidence  
• Habitats Regulation Assessment (AECOM, 
2017);  
• Open Space Strategy (4 Global 2017) ; The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 81 
                             
 
 
• Epping Forest -  the next 10 years ( City of 
London  Corporation, 2015) ; 
• Lee Valley Park Development 
Framework  (Lee Valley Regional Park 
Authority , 2011) ; and  
• Memorandum of Understanding ‘Managing 
the impacts of growth within the West 
Essex/East Hertfordshire HMA on Epping 
Forest Special Area of Conservation ’ (2017) . 
Approach  
4.18 The Epping Forest (the Forest) and the Lea 
Valley are critical assets within the District for 
their contributions  to biodiversity and 
recreation. The Forest in particular experiences 
considerable pressure on its habitats from 
visitors from both within and outside of the 
District and road traffic pollution as well as air 
pollution from London. The Forest is owned and 
managed by the City of London Corporation and is adjoined by buffer lands purchased by the 
Corporation to protect its boundaries from 
encroachment by urban development. These 
buffers can also act to relieve recr eational 
pressure on the Forest. The potential impact of 
development on the Forest can arise from 
development some distance from the Forest 
itself, particularly in terms of the impact of air 
pollution from traffic generated on its sensitive 
ecosystems and from additional recreational 
pressure s. 
4.19 The Council takes its responsibilities seriously with regard to the protection of these sites and 
will ensure that Habitats Regulation 
Assessments of development proposals likely to affect these sites are undertaken. This 
responsibility also applies to European sites that 
are outside the boundary of the District but may 
be affected by development within the District.  
4.20 The Habitats Regulations Assessment concluded that, as a result of the management regimes in place, there would be no likely significant ef fect 
on the Lee Valley SPA/Ramsar sites from 
recreational pressures arising from new 
development.  Furthermore, air quality 
modelling demonstrated that changes in 
atmospheric pollution would not lead to a likely 
significant effect on these sites either alo ne or in combination with other projects and plans.  
The Forest is currently assessed as b eing of 
‘unfavourable status’. Concerns exist in relation 
to both increasing recreational use and air -
borne pollutants, including from traffic.  This 
latter point rel ates to an underlying traffic/air 
quality issue as a result of existing substantial 
baseline traffic flows.  Standard impact 
assessment methodologies show that the Local 
Plans being developed within the West 
Essex/East Hertfordshire Housing Market Area 
wou ld not result in an adverse effect due to an 
expected improvement in air quality through 
the introduction of new technologies, and 
contributions to any retardation of that 
improvement is extremely small.  However, 
addressing the underlying issue is a matte r of 
good stewardship.  
4.21 In recognition of this stewardship role the West Essex/East Hertfordshire Housing Market Area 
authorities have signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding (March 2017) with the City of 
London Corporation and Natural England.   
Paragraph 2.4  of the MoU sets out that its 
purpose is to ensure that the parties named, 
work in partnership to fulfil the following 
requirements:  
• To collect and analyse data and evidence 
related to the impacts of proposed 
development and growth under the Local 
Plans to  provide sufficient and robust 
evidence on which to base a strategy for the 
protection of Epping Forest SAC.  
• To commit to prepare a joint strategy, 
based on relevant available data and 
evidence and to an agreed timetable; and  
• The joint strategy will addr ess both the 
requirement to avoid, or effectively 
mitigate, adverse impacts on the integrity of 
the SAC from Local Plan -led development, 
(where required, and more broadly deliver 
the requirement to prevent deterioration of 
the SAC features and aid in their  
improvement/restoration).   
4.22 The MoU parties are now actively working together through an oversight Board and working groups to fulfil these requirements.  The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
82 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
4.23 In addition to the above the Council, through 
this Local Plan, recognises the need to provide 
confide nce that new development does not 
result in any likely significant effects on the 
Forest and the Lee Valley SPA/Ramsar sites.  
Policy T 1 (Sustainable Transport Choices) and 
Policy DM 22 (Air Quality) provide the 
mechanisms by which the Council will seek t o 
address the underlying issue of traffic/air quality 
issues in relation to the Forest, and provide for 
monitoring.  In addition Policy DM 2 provides 
the mechanisms for managing future 
recreational pressures on the Forest in 
particular.   The Council’s appr oach is to facilitate 
the development of a green infrastructure network.  T hrough improv ed links to other 
green spaces, and to the quality of those green 
spaces and links, the human pressure on these 
assets is intended to be more widely spread, 
with the ai m of being less harmful to 
biodiversity.   
4.24 In pursuit of protecting the vulnerable habitat of 
Epping Forest the Council seeks to provide 
alternative spaces and corridors that can relieve 
the recreational pressure on the Forest. It 
recognises that additional  development in the 
District is likely to give rise to further visitor pressure on the Forest that needs to be 
mitigated. This can be achieved by  increasing 
public access to land that is not in the Forest, 
and altering the character of existing open spaces and the links between open spaces. 
These linkages are intended to improve access 
for walkers, dog walkers, cyclists and horse 
riders, as well as provide space, including 
additional space for wildlife and plant species .  
4.25 However, it is recognised that some housing 
sites will not be of a sufficient scale to make 
provision for a meaningful proportion of natural 
green space.  Where those sites are within the 
‘sphere of influence’ of the Forest (as 
determined by an up- to-date Visitor Survey, the 
most recent of which was undertaken in 
October/November 2017) the Council will seek 
contributions to support the development and 
implementation of an access management 
strategy by the City of London Corporation.   
 4.26 The suitability of natural green space and corridors will be dependent on a range of 
factors including location and the potential of 
the land to increase recreational opportunities 
and biodiversity value  
 
Policy DM 2 Epping Forest SAC and the Lee 
Valley SPA  
A. The Council will expect all relevant development 
proposals to assist in the conservation and 
enhancement of the biodiversity, character, 
appearance and landscape setting of the Epping 
Forest Special  Area of Conser vation (SAC) and the 
Lee Valley Special Protection Area (SPA).  
B. New residential development likely to have a 
significant effect, either alone or in combination 
with other development  in these areas , will be 
required to demonstrate that adequate measures 
are put in place to avoid or mitigate any potential 
adverse effects.   
C. All outline or detailed planning applications for 
new homes within the settlements of Loughton, 
Epping, Waltham Abbey, North Weald Bassett, 
Theydon Bois , Coopersale, Thornwood, Buckhurst 
Hill, Chigwell and Chigwell Row will be required to 
make a financial contribution to access 
management and monitoring of visitors to the 
Epping Forest SAC, in accordance with Visitor 
Survey Information which demonstrates this is 
needed.  
D. To mitigate against potential or identified adverse 
effects of additional development  in the District , 
in particular from strategic developments, on the 
Epping Forest SAC, and Lee Valley SPA the Council 
will ensure the provision of a meaningful 
proportion of Natural Green Spa ce or access to 
Natural G reen Space. This could involve:  
(i) providing new green spaces; or  
(ii) improving access to green space; or  
(iii) improving the naturalne ss of existing green 
spaces; or  
(iv) improving connectivity between green spaces 
where this would not contribute to a material 
increase in recreational pressure on 
designated sites.  
E. Planning applications on sites within 400m of the 
Epping Forest SAC will be required to submit a site 
level Habitats Regulations Assessment setting out 
how any urbanisation effects (inclu ding from fly The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 83 
                             
 
 
tipping, the introduction of non -native plant 
species and incidental arson) will be mitigated 
against.  
Landscape Character , Ancient 
Landscapes and G eodiversity  
4.27 The predominant land use, by area, of the 
District is agriculture and the countryside 
provides the setting of its hamlets, villages and 
towns in addition to providing part of the 
setting for London. The mosaic patchwork of 
countryside, ancient woodland, hedgerow s and 
trees (including many veteran trees) is a 
distinctive characte ristic of the landscape, as are 
the river valleys. Therefore the matter of 
landscape character forms an important 
consideration in planning for the District’s 
future development, and the Council seeks to 
maintain a careful balance between managing 
change t o the landscape character and 
providing much needed new development.  In 
this regard the manner in which the edges of settlements , and ridges, are treated in 
development is particularly important, as is, the 
protection of, and where feasible, the 
enhancemen t of long distance views.  
Key Evidence  
• Epping Forest District Council Landscape 
Character Assessment (Chris Blandford 
Associates, 2010);  
• Epping Forest District Council Settlement 
Edge Landscape Sensitivity Study (Chris 
Blandford Associates, 2010);  and 
• Epping Forest District Historic 
Characterisation Study (Essex County 
Council, 2015).  
Approach  
4.28 The District sits on a plateau, immediately north 
of the basin in which G reater London is largely 
contained. The plateau is cut by the 2 main river 
systems, the L ea/Stort and the Roding. Soils 
have been influenced by glaciation and erosion, 
but are generally London clay, with boulder clay 
and gravels.  The District contains some 
geological features of interest a nd particular 
factors shaping the current landscape inc lude the relatively low rainfall, London clay  geological 
formations , together with the effects of past 
glaciation on the topography, creating the 
gently sloping landform, with its wooded ridges, 
crowned by the forests of Epping and Hainault.  
4.29 The gently undulating landscapes of south west 
Essex are a significant contribution to landscape 
character in the District. The topography of the 
District gives rise to some long distance views, 
both to countryside and London. Given its 
location, climate and topography  the main 
factor shaping the District’s landscape character outside the urban areas is the presence or absence of trees, as influenced by farming 
practice.  These ridges and valleys; ancient 
landscapes;  the hedgerow and woodland 
patchwork; urban open space s giving character 
to some settlements; veteran and protected 
trees including avenues  and lanes ; and roadside 
trees form the particular characteristics of the 
setting for development in the District.  
4.30 Pressures on the landscape from development 
mirror thos e outlined under Policy DM 1 . Whilst 
the long term impacts of climate change on the landscape, particularly trees, is uncertain -  some 
species will suffer and others benefit. The need 
to ensure the preservation of existing tree s and 
provide space for the n ext generation of large 
trees is critical to the future landscape as well as 
providing for shade in a changing climate, and 
the species they support.  
4.31 The future development pattern of the District 
must recognise its setting, and respond to the 
particular l andscape characteristics which vary 
in their sensitivity to change. Individual 
developments should be designed in a manner 
that minimises their impact on the landscape 
through careful design, materials and 
landscaping  and pay attention to long distance 
views. In addition, each individual development 
should actively seek to contribute to the immediate and wider landscape (as appropriate) 
by considerate and careful landscaping of 
proposals. This includes the provision of 
permeable areas of planting for the pu rposes of 
reducing flood risk. The landscape sensitivity 
studies and Historic Environment 
Characterisation Study, undertaken on behalf of 
the Council, provide key evidence in this respect The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
84 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
against which to measure the impact of 
proposed development and its design. The 
Policy applies equally to sites within built up 
areas and those on the edge of settlement s. 
 
Policy DM 3 Landscape Character , Ancient 
Landscapes and Geodiversity  
A. Development proposals will be permitted where 
applicants are able to demonstrate that the proposal 
will not, directly, indirectly or cumulatively, cause 
significant harm to landscape character, the nature 
and physical appearance of ancient landscapes, or 
geological sites of importance.  
Proposals should:  
(i) be sensitive to their setting in  the landscape, and 
its local distinctiveness and characteristics;  
(ii) use techniques to minimise impact on, or enhance 
the appearance of, the landscape by:  
• taking into account existing landscape 
features from the outset;  
• careful landscaping of the site;  
• ensu ring the sensitive use of design, layout, 
materials and external finishes; and 
• having regard to protecting, and where 
possible, enhancing long views to distant 
landmarks and landscapes of interest.  
Green B elt and Development  
4.32 Over 92% of t he District is designated as 
Metropolitan Green Belt .  Green Belt policy 
relates to the function and purposes of the 
Green Belt and not the intrinsic value of the 
land to which it relates such as  its relative value 
for agriculture or biodiversity. Policy SP 5 Green 
Belt a nd District Open Land provides the 
strategic approach  regarding the Green Belt 
within the District . The impact of development 
on the purposes of the Green Belt can be 
significant and therefore must be carefully 
controlled.  
Key Evidence  
• Green Belt Review (LUC, 2016)  
Approach  
4.33 National policy  on Green Belt is clear as to the 
purposes of Green Belt against which applications for development are weighed. The 
weighing exercise is undertaken t o establish the 
suitability of the proposals  in re spect of any 
harm th at may occur to th e purposes of the 
Green Belt.   Policy DM 4 identities that whilst a 
great deal of development in the Green Belt is not considered appropriate there are certain circumstances under which some development 
is permissible.  
4.34 Within the context of national planning policy  
the Council does not consider that it would be in compliance with national policy to define 
specific rules for development in the Green Belt beyond those contained in Policy DM 4. In 
respect of extensions to existing buildings and 
replacement of existing buildings it is therefore 
not intended to define “disproportionate” or 
“materially larger” since they would depend on 
the characteristics of the site locality, and 
existing buildings themselves  in relation to the 
specific propos als.  For the purposes of Policy 
DM 4, "limited infilling" means the development 
of a small gap in an otherwise continuous built -
up frontage, or the small -scale redevelopment 
of existing properties within such a frontage. It also includes infilling of smal l gaps within built 
development. Limited infilling should be 
appropriate to the scale of the locality and not 
have an adverse impact on the character of the 
countryside or the local environment.  
4.35 Similarly it is not intended to specify very special 
circumst ances  as this will need to be clearly 
demonstrated by the applicant based on site specific considerations . Very special 
circumstances will not exist unless the potential 
harm to the Green Belt by reason of 
inappropriateness, and any other harm, is 
clearly outweighed by other considerations . 
 
DM 4 Green Belt  
A. The purposes of the Green Belt are to:  
(i) Check the unrestricted sprawl of large built 
up areas;  
(ii) Prevent neighbouring towns from merging 
into one another;  
(iii) Safeguard the countryside from 
encroachment;  
(iv) Preserve the setting and special character of The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 85 
                             
 
 
historic towns; and  
(v) Assist urban regeneration by encouraging the 
recycling of derelict and other urban land.  
B. Within the Green Belt planning permission will 
not be granted for inappropriate development, 
except in very special circumstances, in 
accordance with national policy.  
C. The construction of new buildings is inappropriate 
development in the Green Belt. Exceptions to this 
are: 
(i) Buildings for the purposes of  agriculture and   
forestry;  
(ii) Provision of appropriat e facilities for outdoor 
sport, outdoor recreation and for cemeteries, 
as long as any development preserves the 
openness of the Green Belt and does not 
conflict with the purposes of including land 
within it;  
(iii) The extension or alteration of a building 
provid ed that it does not result in 
disproportionate additions over and above 
the size of the original building;  
(iv) The replacement of a building, provided the 
building is of the same use and not materially 
larger than the one it replaces;  
(v) Limited infilling in smaller settlements  and 
limited affordable housing  related to smaller 
settlements, in accordance with Policy H 3; 
and 
(vi) Limited infilling or the partial or complete 
redevelopment of previously developed land, 
which would not have a greater impact on 
the open ness of the Green Belt and the 
purpose of including land within it than the 
existing development.  
D. Certain other forms of development may also be 
appropriate in the Green Belt provided they 
preserve the openness of the Green Belt and do 
not conflict with th e purposes of including land in 
the Green Belt. These are:  
(i) Mineral extraction;  
(ii) Engineering operations;  
(iii) Local transport infrastructure that can 
demonstrate a requirement for a Green Belt 
location;  
(iv) The re -use of buildings provided that the 
buildings are of a  permanent and substantial 
construction; and 
 (v) Development brought forward under a 
Community Right to Build Order.  
Green  and Blue  Infrastructure: 
Design of Development  
4.36 A strategy for the natural environment and 
green  and blue  infrastructure is a key plank of 
the overall development strategy of this Local 
Plan.  Green and blue infrastructure performs  
many roles including adapting to and mitigating against the impacts of climate change  - for 
example : in providing shade during higher 
temperatures ; space for species migration ; 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions ; and 
providing flood mitigation.  In addition invasive 
non-native  species of plants can cause damage 
to habitats and features and the management of these is an important aspect of protecting th e 
current and future assets.  
4.37 Policy  SP 7 sets the context for green and blue 
infrastructure  requirements of development in 
the District . The detailed requirements relating 
to that policy are contained in Policy DM 5 and 
supporting text  which provide  furth er guidance 
with respect to specific development proposals.  
Key Evidence  
• Landscape Character Assessment (Chris 
Blandford Associates, 2010);  
• Settlement Edge Landscape Sensitivity 
Study (Chris Blandford Associates, 2010);  
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan (Arup, 2017);  
• Open Space Strategy (4 Global 2017) ;  
• Epping Forest Historic Environment 
Characterisation Study (Essex County 
Council 2015) ; and  
• 50 favourite trees (EFDC website) . 
Approach  
4.38 The Council sees green and blue infrastructure 
as a critical part of the future of the District . The 
Local Plan seeks to effectiv ely protect , link 
(where appropriate) and enhance: wildlife sites, 
including Local Wildlife Sites; Priority Species 
and Habitats; veteran trees; anci ent woodland; 
hedgerows and fie ld boundaries; unmetalled 
lanes; ancient paths and walks; green lanes and The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
86 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
bridleways; watercourses ; ponds ; wetlands; 
protected t rees; meadow lands; playing fields; 
Epping Forest buffer lands; farmland (for food 
producti on); access to and biodiversity value of 
agricultura l land; allotments; cemeteries; parks; 
urban green space; and ecological corridors, 
including those between the Lea Valley and 
Epping Forest.  
4.39 The expectation is that new development will consist of high quality design that carefully incorporates  and links multifunctional spaces 
(for example for wildlife, recreation, and 
sustainable drainage). The landscaping of 
development is expected to be a key element of 
mitigation against the effects of climate change 
and the management of flood risk.   
4.40 The de velopment p attern for a significant 
amount of new development during the Plan period  will be on the edges of settlements on 
greenfield land that was previously protected 
from development by Green Belt policy. There is 
therefore a parti cular emphasis needed to 
ensure that existi ng green and blue 
infrastructure assets are respected and used to best effect in new development. In additi on, the 
connection between existi ng and new 
development, accessible space and habitats 
should not be broken, and new spaces and links 
crea ted within de velopments that perform 
effective functions for recreation and other 
purposes. It should be clear that the design of 
development has carefully incorporated the 
context of green  and blue  infrastructure and 
provides access to the countryside , water 
features  and urban green spaces as appropriate.  
4.41 Most development in the District should be 
capable of providing for some landscap e 
features suitable to the site and it is critical that 
native species are used in planting schemes as 
well as ensuring, wh ere applicable, that 
biosecurity measures for non -native  invasive 
species are included in schemes.  
4.42 Trees are of particular importance in the District 
and are a key element of the green 
infrastructure strategy. The Council particularly 
seeks to increase th e tree cover in the District, 
and aim where possible to allow for space for 
the next generation of large trees. Therefore in providing new trees the Council expects 
applicants to include a suitable proportion of 
larger slower growing and longer living tree s in 
order to avoid only shorter life, fast growing 
species being planted during the Plan period.  
4.43 The Council’s Local List of Validation 
Requirements sets out ‘thresholds’ and types of 
planning application where information that 
should be submitted. This i ncludes Preliminary 
Ecological Assessment, Hedgerow Surveys, 
Arboricultural Implication Assessments and Method Statements.  
 
Policy DM 5 Green  and Blue  Infrastructure  
A. Development proposals must demonstrate that 
they have been designed to:  
(i) retain and where possible enhance existing 
green infrastructure, including trees, 
hedgerows, woods and meadows, green 
lanes, wetlands, ponds and watercourses;  
(ii) use native species  where appropriate  and 
take account of the need for biosecurity 
including contr ol of non -native invasive 
species , and ensure all planting stock is 
supplied free of pest s or disease, and uses 
non-invasive species; ; 
(iii) incorporate appropriate provision of  new 
green assets or space;  
(iv) enhance connectivity and integration by 
providing pedestr ian/cycle access to existing 
and proposed Green Infrastructure networks 
and established routes, including footpaths, 
cycleways and bridleways/Public Rights of 
Way;  and 
(v) enhance the public realm through the 
provision and/or retention of trees and/or 
designat ed and undesignated open spaces 
within built up areas.  
B. Development proposals must be accompanied by 
sufficient evidence to demonstrate that:  
(i) the retention and protection of trees 
(including veteran trees), landscape features 
or habitat s will be successfull y implemented 
in accordance with relevant guidance and 
best practice;  
(ii) the provision of new trees, new landscape 
and water features or habitat 
creation/improvement will be implemented 
in accordance with relevant guidance and The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 87 
                             
 
 
best practice; and  
(iii) as a whole th e proposals for Green and Blue 
Infrastructure are appropriate and adequate, 
taking into account the nature and scale of 
the development, its setting, context and 
intended use.  
C. In the Garden Town Communities,  a full concept 
plan of proposed green and blue infrastructure 
that incorporates existing features on the site and 
its links to the wider landscape and townscape 
will be required for submission with the 
application. Further requirements may be 
outlined within Strategic Masterplans in 
accordan ce with poli cies SP 3 and DM 9.  
Designated and Undesignated 
Open Spaces  
4.44 Open space provision is critical to the physical 
and mental health of our communities, as well 
as important to our experience of the character 
of settlements and the landscape in the District. 
The population growth expected over the Plan 
period will add to demand for space for all 
forms of recreation.  Provision needs to be 
suitable for  all, and especially older  users; those 
with limited mobility ; those on low incomes  and 
children. In particular  the Council wishes to 
provid e communities with opportunities to 
improve their lifestyle and maintain their health.  
4.45 Such open space in the District varies in 
character , quality and usage from children’s 
playgrounds, through sports pitches to natural 
space that can be used for a variety of 
recreational purposes. New development in the 
District should provide the amount and type of 
open space appropriate to its size  or contribute 
to improvements of existing spaces as 
appropriate to the circumstances . Where 
development may, in exceptional 
circumstances, involve the use of open space for 
buildings this must be carefully controlled.  
Key Evidence  
• Open Space Strategy (4 Global , 2017) ; and 
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan (Arup, 2017).  Approach  
4.46 National planning policy  defines open space as 
all open space of public value, including not just 
land, but also areas of water (such as rivers, 
canals, lakes and reservoirs) which offer 
important op portunities for sport and 
recreation and can act as a visual amenity. 
These spaces can be opportunities for sports 
and recreation , to play, walk close to home, 
meet for social gatherings , and can present 
opportunities to view local wildlife. The quality 
of the spaces in the District varies but they need 
to be conserved as appropriate, enhanced and 
where possible connected, in line with the 
strategy for green infrastructure.   
4.47 Providing new public ly accessible open space in 
new development is a critical part of 
maintaining healthy places to live and providing 
the contrast between built areas and outdoor 
spaces that meet our social and psychological 
needs.  The Council will take into account the 
individual characteristics of sites when assessing 
what level of op en space provision is 
appropriate .  
4.48 Local evidence in the form of Epping Forest 
District Council Open Space  Strategy 2017,  
explains  the quantity and type of open spaces in 
the District, access to them and their quality.  
The types of spaces included in the study are:  
• Amenity Greenspace;  
• Public Parks and Gardens ; 
• Provision for Children and Young People ; 
• Natural, and Semi Natural Greenspace ; 
• Allotments ; and  
• Cemeteries and Churchyards.  
4.49 The study indicates  a variation in the provision 
of different forms of open space across the 
District  as measured against national standards .  
In some cases a deficit  in the amount of one 
type of open space might  offset surplus in 
another  for some users  - for example,  whilst 
there is a deficit in the amount of land given 
over to p arks and gardens there is a large 
surplus of na tural and semi natural space due to  
the presence of the Epping Forest and Lee 
Valley Regional Park.  However, the Council The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
88 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
recognises that the different forms of open 
space are likely to meet the needs of differing 
sections of the community and locally accessible space , close to home,  is important. Of  significant 
concern is the deficit in the amount of, and 
access to , play facilities for children and young 
people.   
4.50 The way in which an open space is managed has 
a significant impact on how much it is used, and 
its value for recreation, health and biodiversity.  Many of our existing open spaces are managed 
by Parish and Town Councils and the District 
Council seeks to p rovide guidance in this respect 
based on the ev idence contained in the Epping 
Forest District Council Open Space Strategy.  
4.51 The Council seeks to protect and improve the 
quantity of certain open spaces  in line with the 
evidence base regarding needs.  However, in 
exceptional circumstances development of part of an open space  may be considered 
appropriate. In such circumstances this would 
be set alongside improvements in quality to the 
remaining space, or to existing open space in 
the locality, and should be clearly set out in any 
justification  for proposals . 
4.52 Communities are able to seek to designate, and 
thus protect, Local Green Space which is 
especially meaningful to a community, local in 
character and not extensive in size.  
4.53 The Infrastructure Delivery Plan contains the priorities and measures int ended to improve 
upon the quantity, quality and access to the 
range of open spaces in the plan. The Council 
will use the national standards for different 
types of spaces as a start poi nt for negotiation 
on development proposals .  These act  as a guide 
to de velopment requirements, and the 
expenditure of any financial contributions aimed 
at quality improvements to open space .  
4.54 The standards for quality of spaces are included 
in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.   
 
  
 
 
  Policy DM 6 Designated and Undesignated 
Open S paces  
A. Where appropriate development proposals will be  
required  to provide open space, or links to open 
space in accordance with the guidance contained 
within the Infrastructure Delivery Plan and Open 
Space Strategy . Nationally adopted space 
standard s will be used as a start ing point for 
provision.   
B. Development on open spaces will only be 
permitted if it does not result in a net loss of 
usable public open space  or reasonable access to 
alternative open space within a settlement . 
Existing open space should not be built upon 
unless : 
(i) an assessment has been undertaken showing 
the land to be surplus to requirements ; or 
(ii) development would not have a detrimental 
impact upon the accessibility to open space ; 
or  
(iii) the loss would be replaced by equivalent or 
better provision in terms of quantity or 
quality in a suitable location; or  
(iv) the development is for alternative sports and 
recreational provision, the needs for which 
clearly outweigh the loss.  
C. In circumstances where partial loss of the s pace is 
considered justified, the predominantly open 
nature of the remainder of the site should be 
maintained and enhanced together with the visual 
amenity and its function as appropriate for active 
play and recreation.  
Historic Environment  
4.55 The historic environment is a critical part of the 
District’s character and t he policies in this 
section set out the Council ’s approach to its 
conservation and enhancement.   
Heritage Assets  
4.56 Epping Forest District benefits from a rich and 
varied historic environment  some of which is 
afforded national protection by law, and other 
locally protected through planning policy. The 
heritage assets span thousands of years from 
the Early Iron Age to the 20th Century.  
4.57 The relati onship  is well recognised between the 
historic envi ronment and landscape which The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 89 
                             
 
 
retains historic and ancient features in many 
places, and provides the setti ng of towns and 
villag es. The Council seeks to positiv ely conserve 
and enhance this through the Local Plan by having clear respect for the District’s heritage 
assets.  
Key Evidence  
• Epping Forest District Council Heritage Asset 
Review  (DPP,  2012) ; 
• Epping Forest District Historic Characterisation Study (Essex County 
Council 2015) ; 
• Epping Forest District Council Parish Lists of 
Buildings of Local Architectural or Historic 
Interest ( EFDC  website);  and 
• Epping Forest District Council Conservation 
Area Character Apprais als Programme 
(EFDC Website) . 
Approach  
4.58 The Council is required to take a positive 
approach to the conservation and enjoyment of 
the his toric environment of the District . This 
includes taking into account the desirability of 
sustaining and enhancing the significance of 
heritage assets and putting them to viable uses 
consistent with their conservation.  It is also 
important that the concept  of conservation is 
not devalued through, for example, the 
designation of conservation areas that lack 
special interest.  National planning policy  sets 
out that, as heritage assets are irreplaceable, 
any harm or loss should require clear and 
convincing jus tification.  For example, 
substantial harm to designated heritage assets 
should be exceptional, or in the case of those 
which are of the highest significance, highly 
exceptional, unless it can be demonstrated that substantial harm or loss is necessary to achieve 
substantial public benefits that outweigh that 
harm or loss  
4.59 The types of historic asset to which this Policy  
applies are ‘designated’ assets: i.e. Listed Buildings, Registered Parks and Gardens, 
Scheduled Monuments and Conservation Areas; 
and ‘non d esignated’ assets such as locally listed 
buildings  and structures (such as monuments and memorials)  and non-designated 
archaeological remains (although, depending 
upon their significance, the latter should be 
treated as though they are designated under national planning policy ).  The Council will 
undertake periodic reviews of its designated 
and non- designated heritage assets and 
introduce additional levels of protection, such as 
through the use of Article 4 Directions and areas 
of Special Advertisement Cont rol, where 
justified.  
4.60 A heritage statement is required for any application  that may affect heritage assets (b oth 
designated and non– designated). The statement 
should:  
• include a description of the significance of 
any heritage asset affected, including the 
contribution made by its setting;  
• provide an evaluation of the impact the 
development may have on this significance; 
and 
• demonstrate how the significance of the 
heritage asset has informed the design of 
the proposed development.  
4.61 Further information  (and links to guidance ) is 
set out in the Council’s Local List of Validation 
Requirements. Outline planning applications will 
not be accepted for development proposals 
within conservation areas.  In addition, where 
the principle of demolition has been 
establish ed, consent to demolish will be given 
only when acceptable plans for development 
have been agreed and a legal contract for the 
redevelopment of the site has been entered into 
and full detailed recording of the building 
including plans and photographs may be 
required depending upon its merit.   Where 
there is any harm or loss to significance the 
applicant will be required to record and 
disseminate detailed information about the 
asset gained from desk based and on site 
investigations and provide this to the Co uncil, 
the Essex  Historic Environment Record and 
Historic England.  
4.62 Applications for proposals in respect of heritage 
assets will be expected to demonstrate that 
they have paid good attention to matters, 
where relevant, including detailing, streetscape, The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
90 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
roofscape, landscape, scale, height, density, 
massing, layout, elevation, design, plot and site 
frontage sizes, materials and external finishes.  
In addition the Council will encourage proposals 
which seek their conservation, regeneration, 
maintenance, repair or enhancement, of Listed 
Buildings, and which improve access for people 
with disabilities who visit or work there. In such 
cases it must be fully justified and demonstrated 
that any harm to their significance is necessary 
to achieve substantial public benefits.  
4.63 Where proposals affect heritage assets of 
archaeological interest, preference will be given 
to preservation and management in situ.  
However, where loss of the asset is justified in 
accordance with national policy, the Council will 
require:  
• an archaeological evaluation demonstrating 
that the remains have been properly 
assessed and the implications of 
development understood, and any impacts 
of development minimised through design; 
and 
• where in situ preservation proves impossible that a full investigat ion, 
recording and an appropriate level of 
publication by a competent archaeological 
organisation has been undertaken prior to 
the commencement of development.  
4.64 As set out in national planning policy , in certain 
exceptional circumstances, development may 
be allowed to take place that would not 
normally be granted permission if it provide s 
significant improvements to a heritage asset which could  not otherwise be obtained, and 
which secure s its long term future or use for the 
public benefit.   This is known as ‘enabling 
development’. I n such cases, the Council will 
expect the applicant to obtain relevant specialist advice, including from Historic England, and to 
provide the Council with unequivocal evidence 
(including financial details) as to how the 
proposal wi ll secure the future conservation of a 
heritage asset, and why the development is 
necessary.  
 
 Policy DM 7 Heritage Assets  
Historic Environment  
A. The historic environment will be conserved and 
enhanced in a manner appropriate to its 
significance. Development proposals should seek 
to conserve and enhance the character, 
appearance and function of heritage assets and 
their settings, and respect the significance of the 
historic environment.  
B. Heritage assets are an irreplaceable resource and 
works which would cause harm to the significance 
of a heritage asset (whether designated or non -
designated) or its setting, will not be permitted 
without a clear justification to show that the 
public benefits of the proposal considerably 
outweigh any harm to the signi ficance or special 
interest of the heritage asset in question.  
Local Heritage Assets  
C. Development proposals that affect local heritage 
assets detailed on the Local List will be expected 
to demonstrate how they retain the significance, 
appearance, character and setting of the local 
heritage asset.  
D. There is a general presumption in favour of 
retaining local listed heritage assets and where 
this is not possible, recording of the heritage asset 
should be undertaken and submitted alongside 
development proposal s. 
Heritage at Risk  
4.65 A significant part of the enhancement of 
heritage assets is their care and maintenance 
which is the responsibility of the owner of the 
asset. Many owners of heritage assets in the 
District take pride in the assets and are 
responsible own ers.  However, the Council’s 
Heritage Asset Review identified a 
concentration of buildings at risk in four 
particular conservation areas namely Abridge, Royal Gunpowder Mills, Roydon and Waltham 
Abbey, together with some locally listed 
buildings at risk. T hese are not the only heritage 
assets at risk in the District as a result of neglect 
or inappropriate development. Policy is required 
to encourage some owners of heritage assets to 
maintain them and respect them for future 
generations to enjoy.  
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 91 
                             
 
 
Key Eviden ce 
• Epping Forest District Council Heritage Asset 
Review (DPP, 2012)  
Approach  
4.66 A positive approach to the protection and 
enhancement of heritage assets requires that 
they are maintained to a high standard. This is 
the responsibility of the owner. The simple fact 
of a heritage asset being in a poor condition is 
not a reason for allowing redevelopment or 
development that could cause harm to the 
significance of the asset. Owners are 
encouraged to maintain heritage assets to a 
high standard in order to preserve t heir 
significance.  
4.67 The Council seeks to support owners to secure 
the future of the heritage assets currently at 
risk, and at risk in the future, in a way that 
respects the significance of the heritage asset 
and enhances that significance.  
 
Policy DM 8 Heritage at Risk  
A. The Council will expect property owners/partners 
to work proactively with the authority in bringing 
forward proposals for the conservation and 
enhancement of Heritage Assets at Risk or under 
threat within the District to secure their futu re 
and seek a viable use consistent with their 
heritage value and significance.  
Design  
4.68 The following policies relate to the design of 
proposed development in the District. National 
planning policy  encourages the securing of good 
design and its importance is increasingly 
recognised by the development industry. In the 
past there has been a tendency to view design 
solely as a visual concern –  in these policies the 
Council is seeking to consider the social and 
environmental elements  of design, such as the 
pote ntial  of a high quality public realm to 
contribute to public health, quality of life and the sustainability agenda.  
4.69 National policy expects that the Council includes 
design policy that sets out the quality of development expected for the area and recognise s the local context both in terms of the 
locality, and the immediate site and its surrounds.  
Approach  
4.70 High quality design should ensure that new 
development is visually attractiv e, responsive to 
local character, hel ps to promote healthy 
communities and cre ates buildings which are  
durable, adaptable, and function well within the 
surrounding area to create a safe and accessible 
environment. Good design should enable and 
encourage people to live healthy lifestyles, 
reduce the risk of crime, create accessible 
environments which are inclusive for all sectors 
of soc iety, and increase opportunitie s for social 
interacti on. Secured by Design provides 
guidance on how to include security into a 
development.  
4.71 The Council is keen to ensure that the next 
generation of development in the District is  of a 
quality deserving of its location and meets the 
needs of occup iers and users in an effective and 
sustainable manner. The environmental impact 
of development is of significant concern and 
ensuring sustainable construction is a clear aim 
of this Local Plan. A clear contribution to the 
townscape and landscape of the District is 
sought through high quality design. The design 
of development which impacts on the historic 
assets of the District is particularly important 
and the Council seeks to pay particular attention to them.  
4.72 The Council seeks development that follows the principles of sustainable construction and 
encourages developers to deliver schemes that 
meet the performance set by appropriate 
standards e.g. Passive  House  and BREEAM UK 
New Construction 2014. Development should 
give rise to minimal environmental impact with 
respect to its energy use, water use, waste and 
transport as well as providing for green 
infrastructure and healthy environments for 
users.  
4.73 The quality of am enity for the occupiers of 
buildings and users of  open spaces is 
increasingly the subject of concern, parti cularly 
in settle ments where densiti es are higher. In 
order to assess development proposals, the The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
92 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Council will have regard to the BRE guidelines 
produced in 2011 (BRE209)  which although not 
mandatory are heavily relied upon as they advise on the approach and evaluati on of 
impact in daylight and sunlight matters. An 
assessment should accompany proposals where 
the proposed de velopment has the potential to  
negativ ely impact existi ng levels of daylight or 
sunlight on adjoining properti es or within the 
development site itself.  
4.74 New developments should be designed to 
protect the privacy of both new and existing  
occupiers . Separation distance s, the provisi on of  
screening between elevations as  well as the 
angle of orientation will be assessed  as part of 
any planning application.  
Strategic Development  
4.75 Development proposals  will be required to 
accord with the place -shaping principles set out 
within Policy  SP 3, and it will be necessary to 
demonstrate compliance with these principles 
through the production of Strategic 
Masterplans , Design Codes and Concept 
Frameworks where indicated .  Chapters 2 and 5 
provide further details.  
 
Policy DM 9 High Quality D esign  
A. All new development must achieve a high 
specification of design and contribute to the 
distinctive character and amenity of the local 
area. The Council will require all development 
proposals to be design -led and:  
(i) relate positively to their  context;  
(ii) make a po sitive contribution to a place;  
(iii) where appropriate, incorporate sustainable 
design and construction principles that 
consider adaptation and mitigation 
approaches to address climate change ;  
(iv) are planned, where appropriate, to minimise 
vulnerability to clim ate change impacts and 
which will not exacerbate vulnerability in 
other areas; and  
(v) incorporate design measures to reduce social 
exclusion, the risk of crime, and the fear of 
crime.  
Strategic Sites  
B. The Council will require Strategic Masterplans to be prepar ed and developed for the Garden  
Town Communities  set out in SP 5  and other 
relevant allocated sites  as set out in Chapter 5. 
Strategic Masterplans  will be produced by the 
applicant, in partnership with the Council , and the 
local community, and be capable of being 
adopted by the Council  as Supplementary 
Planning Documents.  Design Codes will be 
required to be produced and agreed with the 
Council  to support the implementation of the 
Strategic Masterplans .  All relevant applications 
will be required to conform with the agreed 
Strategic Masterp lans and  Design  Codes.   
C. The Council will require  the use of the established 
Quality  Review Panel  for larger or contentious 
sites at appropriate stages , to be agreed with the 
Council, to inform detailed design proposals for  
major developments.   
Design Standards  
D. Development proposals must relate positively to 
their locality, having regard to:  
(i) building heights;  
(ii) the form, scale and massing prevailing around 
the site;  
(iii) the framework of routes and spaces 
connecting locally and more widely;  
(iv) the rhythm of any neighbouring or local 
regular plot and building widths and,  where 
appropriate, following existing building lines;  
(v) the need to provide active frontages to the 
public realm; and  
(vi) distinctiv e local architectural styles, detailing 
and materials . 
Landscaping  
E. Development proposals must demonstrate h ow 
the landscaping and planting has been  integrated 
into the development as a whole. The Council will 
expect development proposals to respond to:  
(i) levels, slopes and fall in  the ground;  
(ii) trees on and close to the site;  
(iii) natural boundary features;  
(iv) the biodiversity of the site and its 
surroundings ; and  
(v) the need to maximise the use of permeable 
surfaces.  
Public Realm  
F. Where appropriate development p roposals must 
contribute positiv ely to the public  realm and to The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 93 
                             
 
 
public spaces to which it is physi cally or 
functionally connected.  
Connectivity and Permeability  
G. Where appropriate, d evelopment proposals must 
maximise connectivity within, and through, the 
development and to the surrounding areas 
including the provision of high quality and safe 
pedestrian and cycle routes.  
Privacy and A menity  
H. Development proposals must take account of the 
privacy and amenity of the development’s users 
and neighbours. The Council will expect proposals  
to: 
(i) provide adequate sunlight, daylight and open 
aspects to all parts of the development and 
adjacent buildings and land (including any 
private amenity) space ; 
(ii) avoid overlooking and loss of privacy 
detrimental to the living conditions of 
neighbouring residents and the resident s of 
the proposed development;  
(iii) not result in an over -bearing or overly 
enclosed form of development which 
materially impacts on either the outlook of 
occupiers of neighbouring properties or the 
residents of the proposed development; and  
(iv) address issues of vibration, noise, fumes, 
odour, light pollutio n, air quality and 
microclimatic  conditions likely to a rise from  
any use or activitie s as a result of the 
development  or from neighbouring uses or 
activities . 
I. All development proposals must demonstrate that 
they are in general conformity with the design 
principles set out in other relevant Local 
Development Documents, Design Guides, 
Neighbourhood Plans or Village Design 
Statements (VDSs) adopted or endorsed by the 
Council.  Housing Design and Q uality  
4.76 The majo rity of the development coming 
forward over the Plan period will be residential 
in nature. A core principle of planning is to 
always seek to secure high quality design and a 
good standard of amenity for all existing and future occupants of land and buildings. National 
policy expects a high quality of design that 
meets the needs of the diversity of people i.e. is 
‘inclusive’. It notes that design policies should 
concentrate on guiding the overall scale, 
density, massing, height, landscape, layout 
materials a nd access of new development in 
relation to neighbouring buildings and the local area. The consideration of design goes beyond 
appearance, and should address the 
connections between people and places, 
creating safe and accessible environments.  
Approach  
4.77 The Council seeks to ensure that it is not 
possible to identify the tenure of a residential 
development from its external appearance since 
there can be significant differences in the 
appearance and quality of materials used 
between owner occupied and rented housing. 
This approach is very important to creating 
inclusive and attractive residential 
environments.  
4.78 The design of the development impacts 
significantly on living conditions for occupiers 
and in particular the size and design of internal 
and external spa ce are important. An analysis of 
recent applications for development highlights 
that there is pressure in the District for 
accommodation to be approved that does not 
meet the national space standards. There is 
therefore a need to ensure that all developmen t 
meets at least t he minimum space standards. 
The Council  expects that opportunities are 
taken to improve the external environment of 
residential developments where existing quality 
is poor and to provide suitable public open 
space with developments, as appropriate, refer 
to DM 6.  
 
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
94 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Policy DM 10 Housing Design and Q uality  
A. All new housing development is required to meet 
or exceed the minimum internal space standards 
set out in National Prescribed Space Standards 
and open space standards.  
B. Ground floor family housing must provide access 
to private garden/amenity space, and family 
housing on upper floors should have access to a 
balcony and/or terrace, subject to acceptable 
amenity, privacy and design considerations, or to 
shared communal amen ity space and children’s 
play space.   
C. Where appropriate development proposals 
should seek to include enhanced provision of 
green infrastructure, including the quantity and  quality  of landscaped areas, tree provision and 
the provision of additional open space as required 
by Policy DM 5 and DM 6.  
D. Mixed tenure residential development proposals 
must be designed to be ‘tenure blind’ to ensure 
homes across tenures are indistinguishable f rom 
one another in terms of quality of design, space 
standards and building materials.  
Residential Extensions  
E. Extensions or alterations to residential buildings 
will be required to respect and/or complement 
the form, setting, period, detailing of the origi nal 
buildings. Matching or complementary materials 
should be used.  
 
 
 
Figure 4.1 Current N ational  Prescribed Space S tandards (March 2015)  
Number of 
bedrooms  (b) Number of 
bed spaces 
(persons)  1 storey  
dwellings  
(sq.m)  2 storey  
dwellings  
(sq.m)  3 storey  
dwellings  
(sq.m)  Built -in 
storage  (sq.m)  
 
 
1b 1p 39 (37)*   1.0 
2p 50 58  1.5 
2b 3p 61 70   
2.0 4p 70 79  
3b 4p 74 84 90 
2.5 5p 86 93 99 
6p 95 102 108 
4b 5p 90 97 103 
 
3.0 6p 99 106 112 
7p 108 115 121 
8p 117 124 130 
 
5b 6p 103 110 116  
3.5 7p 112 119 125 
8p 121 128 134 
6b 7p 116 
 123 
 129  
4.0 8p 125 132 138 
*Footnote:  Where a 1 bedroom (1 person bed space) has a shower room instead of a bathroom, t he floor area may 
be reduced from 39m2 to 37m2 as shown bracketed  
 
 
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 95 
                             
 
 
Waste Recycling F acilities on New 
Development  
4.79 Nati onal policy requires that attention is paid to 
minimisi ng waste as part of sustainable 
development and policies should make 
provision for the infrastructure for waste 
management.  
Approach  
4.80 The Council is committed to reducing waste and 
the Local Plan will seek to encourage the reuse, 
recycling and composting of waste material as a 
priority over disposal. Provision for the dispos al 
of waste including separation for recycling is integral to the convenience afforded to occupiers and users, as well as having the 
potential to create poor design details if 
considered as an afterthought. The Council expects these facilities to be integr ated into 
design so that they operate effectively and do not look out of place.  
4.81 The management of waste in flatted properties 
poses particular challenges which need to be 
factored into the design of a building at a very 
early stage. Where flatted development 
includes basement parking provision, the 
Council expects the options for basement 
servicing of waste management and collection 
to have been investigated. This avoids 
compromising the quality and provision of 
amenity space, forecourts or active ground fl oor 
frontages.  
 
Policy DM 11 Waste Recycling Facilities in 
New D evelopment  
A. All development which generates waste will be 
required to make on -site provision for general 
waste, the separation of recyclable materials and 
organic material for composting. The on -site 
provision must:  
(i) ensure adequate dedicated internal and 
external storage space to manage the volume 
of waste arising from the site;  
(ii) provide accessible and safe access to on -site 
storage facilities, both for occupiers and 
collection operatives includ ing vehicles;  and (iii) be located and screened to avoid nuisance 
and adverse impact on visual and other 
amenity to occupiers and neighbouring uses; 
and for mixed use development, suitably 
separate household and commercial waste.  
B. Proposals for new flatted residential development 
will be required to make provision for:  
(i) Adequate temporary storage space within 
each flat, allowing for separate storage of 
recyclable materials;  and 
(ii) Adequate communal storage for waste, 
including separate storage for recyclables 
pending its collection.  
Subterranean, Basement 
Development and L ightwells  
4.82 Development of basements and subterranean 
rooms below gardens, particularly in established 
residential areas, has become an increasingly 
popular way of gaining additional space in 
homes. L ike many other authorities in areas 
experiencing high property values, Epping 
Forest District has experienced an increase in 
the number of applications for basement development in recent years.  
Approach  
4.83 It is important that basement development is 
carried out in a way that does not harm the 
amenity of neighbours, compromise the structural stability of adjoining properties, 
increase flood risk or damage the character of 
the area or natural environments in line with 
national planning policy.  
4.84 The Council will also seek to control the overall 
size of basement development to protect the 
character and amenity of the area, the quality of 
gardens and vegetation and to minimise the 
impacts of construction on neighbouring 
properties. A basement that is no deeper than 
one full storey below ground level is often the 
most appropriate way to extend a building 
below ground. Criterion Bi) below states that 
basements should not comprise more than 1 
storey. The Council considers a single storey for 
a basement to be approximate ly 3 to 4 metres 
in height.  The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
96 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
4.85 Some development falls within the scope of 
permitted development. However, where 
control can be exercised the Council will seek to 
manage adverse impacts. Where appropriate, applicants will need to submit specific 
information as  part of the planning application 
to demonstrate that these  impacts  can be 
addressed. The information should be contained 
in a Basement Impact Assessment to be 
submitted as part of the planning application.  
4.86 The introduction of lightwells  where they are 
not an established and positive feature of the streetscape can harm the character or 
appearance of an area. Where external visible 
elements are allowed they need to be located 
and sensitively designed to avoid light pollution 
to neighbours and harm to the existing 
character and appearance of the building, 
streetsca pe and gardens in the vicinity.  
 
Policy DM 12 Subterranean, Basement 
Development and L ightwells  
A. Subterranean developments, basements, or 
extensions to existing basements, will only be 
permitted where it can be demonstrated that the 
proposal:  
(i) will not adversely affect the structural 
stability of the  host building, neighbouring 
buildings and other infrastructure, including 
the adjoining highway, having regard to local 
geological conditions;  
(ii) does not increase flood risk to the property 
and adjacent properties from any source;  
(iii) avoids harm to the appearance or setting of 
the property or the established character of 
the surrounding area;  
(iv) will not adversely impact the amenity of 
adjoini ng properties by reason of noise or 
increased levels of internal or external 
activity; and  
(v) will not adversely impact the local natural 
and historic environment;  
B. The siting, location, scale and design of basements 
must have minimal impact on, and be subordi nate 
to, the host building and property. Basement 
development should:  
(i) not comprise of more than one storey;  and 
(ii) not exceed 50% of each area of garden within the curtilage of the property;  
C. And during the construction phase:  
(i) will not cause harm to pedestrian , cycle, 
vehicular and road safety, adversely affect 
bus or other transport operations, 
significantly increase traffic congesti on, nor 
place unreasonable inconvenience on the day 
to day life of those living, working or visiti ng 
nearby;  
(ii) will minimise constr uction impacts such as 
noise, vibration and dust for the duration of 
the works; and  
(iii) ensure  compliance with the Construction 
Management Statement submitted (see 
Policy DM 21)  
D. The Council will not permit subterranean 
developments or basements which include 
habitable rooms or other sensitive uses in areas 
prone to flooding and where there is no 
satisfactory means of escape from flooding.  
E. In determining applications for light wells, the 
Council will protect:  
(i) the architectural character of the building; 
and 
(ii) the character and appearance of the 
surrounding area.  
F. In determining proposals for basements and other 
underground development the Council will 
require an assessment of the scheme’s impact on 
drainage, flooding, groundwater conditions and 
structural stability in the form of a Basement 
Impact Assessment and where appropriate a 
Basement Construction Management Statement.  
G. Within the G reen Belt basement developments 
may be considered acceptable provided they do 
not have a greater impact on the openness of the 
Green  Belt, either themselves or cumulatively 
with other developments.  
Advertisements 
4.87 Poorly s ited or badly designed advertise ments 
and signs, including projecti ng signs, and 
illumination, particularly flashing illumination 
can have a detrimental effect on the character 
and appearance of areas and may rais e issues of 
public safety. National policy recognises this and 
makes provisi on for the control of 
advertise ments . The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 97 
                             
 
 
Approach  
4.88 The term ‘ advertisement ’ covers a very wide 
range of advertisements and signs. Some 
advertisements are not regulated by the Council 
and others benefit from “deemed consent”, 
which means permission is not needed; this will 
depend on the size, position and illumination of 
the advert. Other advertisements will always 
need consent. For more information refer to the 
Control of Advertisements Regulations.  
4.89 When deciding applications for advertisements 
the Council can have regard to considerations of 
amenity and public safety, as well as the Control 
of Advertisements Regulations. Policy  DM 13 
sets t he criteria by which amenity and public 
safety will be assessed in Epping Forest District 
in relation to advertisements. The design, colour, materials and positioning of all 
advertisements and signs should respect the 
character and style of the existing building and be appropriate within the street scene.  
4.90 Historic buildings and structures can be 
particularly sensitive to the change in amenity 
caused by some advertisements that include 
illumination. The Heritage Asset Review found 
that some areas would benefit from Special 
Advertisement Control. Therefore the Council 
seeks to carefully control adverts affecting 
heritage assets including conservation areas, 
individual historic buildings and buildings that 
are locally listed.  Internally illuminated box 
fascia s igns will be resisted.  Externally 
illuminated fascia signs will normally be preferred.  
4.91 Estate agents’ boards have deemed consent 
rights for their display and thus do not need 
approval from the Council to be displayed for a 
limited ti me period. The urban parts of the 
District and t he frequency of sales and lettings 
can lead to a proliferation of estate agents boards, which are not always removed within 
the required ti mesc ale. This results in a build- up 
of boards, b oth legal and illegal, detraction from 
building façades and causing an untidy and 
cluttered street scene. In such situati ons the 
Council will seek the removal of deemed 
consent rights from the Secretary of State for 
this type of adverti ng.  
Policy DM 13  Advertisements  
A. Where advertisement consent is required, such 
consent will be permitted if the proposal respects 
the interests of public safety and amenity, and 
meets the following criteria:  
(i) the design, materials and location of the 
advertisement respects the scale and 
character of the building on which it is 
displayed and the surrounding area;  
(ii) the proposal s would  not result in a cluttered 
street scene, excessive signage, or 
proliferation of signs advertising a single site 
or enterprise;  
(iii) any illuminat ion will be considered in relation 
to impact on v isual amenity, potential light 
pollution, road safety and functional need;   
(iv) Internally illuminated signs will not be 
permitted where harm is caused to heritage 
assets including listed building s and 
conservation areas ; and  
(v) illuminated signs will not be perm itted in 
residential areas.  
Shopfronts and On Street D ining  
4.92 There is a need for a policy to ensure that 
proposals for new shopfronts are of a high 
quality and relate well to the scale and 
character of the original bui lding and 
surrounding area. Attractiv e shopfronts make a 
positiv e contributi on to local distinctiv eness and 
enhance the vitality of the shopping frontage as 
well as the wider town centre.  
Key Evidence  
• Town Centres Review (Arup, 2016).  
Approach  
4.93 The Counc il considers that the distinctiv e 
charac ter of shopping areas should be 
maintained by retaining or designing high 
quality shopfronts that refer to the architecture 
of the host building, neighbouring units and 
general scale and rhythm of the shop front 
widths in the area. New shopfronts should 
contribute positiv ely towards  a cohesive 
streetscape and attractiv eness of the shopping 
parade. Materials, detailing,  craft smanship and The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
98 | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
finishes are equally important in achieving high 
quality shopfront design especially as they are 
viewed close up.  
4.94 Shopfron ts with poor quality materials, 
internally illuminated box fascias  and intrusive 
signage add to visual clutter and detract from 
the appearance of the streetscape.  Projecting 
shutter boxes have a negative impact on 
shopfronts, while solid shutters generally create 
a bleak, unattractive and hostile environment in 
the evenings.  Their significant detrimental 
impact in this regard also inhibits passive 
surveillance and encourages graffiti.  Therefore 
in most cases permission is unlikely to be 
granted for the installation of any form of roller 
shuttering on the outside of a building.  If a 
shutter box is unavoidable, it should normally 
be located internally behind the shop window.  
4.95 On street dining faciliti es can add to the 
vibrancy of town centres. However thes e should 
not disrupt normal pedestrian movement or 
other high street ac tivities. Where possible, 
such faciliti es should integrate with the public 
realm of the surrounding area. The Council may consider limiting the hours of use through the use of planning conditi ons.   Where such 
facilities fall within the Public Highway a licence 
will need to be obtained from the local highway 
authority.  
 
Policy DM 14 Shopfronts and On Street 
Dining  
Shopfronts  
A. The Council requires shopfronts, including their 
signs, security shutters and canopies, to be 
designed to a high standard and contribute to a 
safe and attractive environment. In particular:  
(i) The Council will seek the retention of 
traditional shopfronts contributing to the 
visual, architectural or historic qualit y of the 
local townscape;  
(ii) Replacement shopfronts should relate to the 
host building and conserve original materials 
and features as far as possible;  
(iii) The alteration or replacement of an existing 
shopfront or the development of a new 
shopfront must allow for  easy access by all 
members of the community; and  (iv) Security shutters must be open mesh and, 
wherever possible, be located internally.  
On Street D ining  
B. Proposals for on -street/forecourt dining must 
demonstrate the suitability of the proposed 
location having regard to the proximity of 
residential development and should:  
(i) be integral and functionally related to the 
business; and 
(ii) provide sufficient space to not obstruct the 
pavement space  and not create a permanent 
enclosure . 
Environmental Policies  
4.96 The final set of development management 
policies address a wide range of matters relating  
to the  wider site environment pert aining to 
individual d evelopments. It includes additional 
requirements to those contained in the design policy  section of the Plan . Many of the measures 
address the use of natural resources and 
mitigate against the impacts of climate change  
as well as assisting places  to adapt  to the 
changing climate.  
Managing and R educi ng Flood R isk 
4.97 Parts of the District currently experience 
flooding from a range  of sources  and climate 
change is projected to increase the risk of 
flooding and number of flooding incidents over 
the plan period. It is critical to manage fl ood risk 
in order to minimise harm to people and 
property.  Key factors in reducing the risk of 
flood damage include identifying flood risk from 
all sources including Critical Drainage Areas 
which are particularly suscep tible to surface 
water flooding.  Delivering flood mitigation 
schemes and improving drainage infrastructure 
then alleviate the risk.  The location and desi gn 
of buildings and their settings are key factors in 
reducing the risk of flood damage.  
Key Evidence  
• Level 1 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment  
Update (URS , 2015) ; 
• Essex Local Flood Risk Management 
Strategy (Essex County Council , 2013) ; The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 99 
                             
 
 
• Loughton, Buckhurst Hill and Theydon Bois 
Surface Water Management Plan (URS , 
2015) ; and  
• Epping Forest District Council’s Flood Risk 
Assessment Zones (URS , 2015) . 
Approach  
4.98 Locations within the District have experienced 
flooding that has caused damage to property. 
Avoiding development in areas at risk of all 
types of flooding is the most effective way to minimise flood risk over the Plan period, 
coupled with careful provision of flood 
mitigation measures where water run -off from 
buildings and the land can be managed.  
4.99 The Epping Forest District Council Strategic 
Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) Level 1 Update 
2015 contains a great deal of detail on the 
matter of flood risk. The forms of flooding 
experienced in the District are: ‘fluvial’ from 
rivers and other wa tercourses; ‘pluvial’ from 
rain i.e. surface water flooding resulting from 
rain; and ‘groundwater’ flooding which is the 
emergence of water from the ground away from 
river channels  
4.100  The SFRA identified surface water run off as the 
greatest risk to  the Distr ict with regard to 
flooding due to the underlying geology and the 
presence of water cours es in the area . The 
corridors of the River Lea and River Roding, 
including their main tributaries Cobbins and 
Cripsey Brooks  contain the majority of the flood 
risk zon es in the Distri ct – i.e. areas at risk from 
flooding by rivers. In parti cular the rapid onset, 
flash flooding of the smaller watercourse system 
is an ongoing concern.  
4.101  The approach of directing development  to areas 
where the risk of flooding is lowest,  taking 
account of climate change and the vulnerability 
of types of development to flood ing, is known 
as ‘sequential testing’. If necessary an 
‘exceptions test’ is applied to the location of 
development to establish whether there is a 
way to locate and desig n the development 
within a flood risk area by exception and 
requires the proposed development to 
demonstrate: wider sustainability benefits to 
the community that outweigh the flood risk; and that it will be safe for its lifetime without increasing flood ri sk elsewhere.  
4.102  Some uses are more vulnerabl e to flood risk 
than others e.g. caravans and basement dwellings are ‘highly vulnerable’ whilst marinas 
are ‘water compatible’. National planning policy 
guidance  explains these distinctions and suitable 
approaches .  
4.103  National planning policy explains that for the 
exception test to be passed: within the site the 
most vulnerable development is located in areas 
of lowest flood risk unless there are overriding 
reasons to prefer a different location; 
development is appro priately flood resistant 
and resilient, including safe access and escape routes where required, and that any residual risk can be safely managed, including by 
emergency planning; and it gives priority to 
sustainable drainage systems.  
4.104  For areas of river flo oding the SFRA notes that 
these are principally in flood risk zones 2 and 3, 
but can also contain areas of flood risk 1 where there are Critical Drainage Areas (as notified by 
the Environment Agency).  
4.105  The EFDC Flood Risk Assessment Zones (FRAZ’s) 
have been  defined by EFDC as ‘ catchments of 
ordinary watercourses identified as key areas 
where surface water run off  is contributing to 
Main Rivers or areas of known historic flooding ’. 
Within FRAZ’s p articular attention should be 
applied to surface water management, with the 
aim of reducing the cumulative impact of 
development throughout the District.  
4.106  A Surface Water Management Plan outlines the 
predicted risk and preferred surface water management strategy for areas under study. 
They identify local Critical Drai nage Areas 
(CDAs) and site specific measures that could 
help reduce the risk of surface water flooding in 
these areas. The Council currently has in place 
one Surface Water Management Plan (SWMP) 
for Loughton, Buckhurst Hill and Theydon Bois. 
Further SWMP s may be produced for other 
areas.  
4.107  Because flood risk can arise from development 
in a different location to the development itself, 
both existing and new development need to be 
consi dered in terms of associated flood  risks. The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
100  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
This means opportunities should be  taken via 
measures in new development where it is 
possible to assist communities that are currently 
at risk of flooding.  
4.108  In addition, there can be opportunities  to 
reduce fl ood risk overall and reduce  the causes 
and impacts of flooding , for instanc e through 
the layout and form of development including 
green infrastructure , by safeguarding land for 
flood risk management and designing off -site 
works required to protect and support development. It is important to ensure that 
there is no ne t loss of flood  storage.   
4.109  Policy  DM 15 follows the sequential approach 
and current national po licy - it applies to all 
operations that are defined as development in 
Section 55 of the Town and Country Planning 
Act 1990 hence includes engi neering operations 
such as ground works, conversions of bui ldings 
and extensions to existing buildings . The Policy  
will be applied across the District, taking into 
account all sources of flooding.  
4.110  Flood risk should be assessed at the site level as 
this enables an understanding of the risk of 
flooding on-site and the impact of fl ooding 
elsewhere.  
4.111  The valuable informati on on Critical Drainage 
Areas and the EFDC Flood Risk Assessment 
Zones will be used to support decisi on making 
on planning applications. The Council seeks to 
improve drainage, hence reduce flood risk, 
within the Critical Drainage Areas and the FRAZ s 
and ensure that site specific fl ood risks are 
properly assessed. It  is also import ant to ensure 
that the cumulative impact of flood risk from 
development is reduced throughout the Di strict.  
4.112  The Counci l will use its standard conditions on 
approvals for development t o secure the 
relevant information required for assessments – 
these vary in accordance to the size of the 
development for proposals in these areas.  
 
  
 
 
 Policy DM 15 Managing and Reducing Flood 
Risk 
A. The Council will require  all development 
proposals to demonstrate that they avoid and 
reduce the risk of all forms of flooding to future 
occupants and do not increase the risk of flooding 
elsewhere;  
B. The Local Plan allocations are directed towards 
Flood Zone 1 or to areas wi th the lowest 
probability of flooding .  Any proposals for new 
development (except water compatible uses) 
within Flood Zone 2 and 3a wi ll be required to 
provide sufficien t evidence for t he Council to 
assess whether the requirements of the 
Sequenti al Test and Excepti on Test, have been 
satisfied. 
C. Proposals within F lood Zones 2 and 3a must be 
informed by a site specific Flood Risk Assessment 
(FRA) taking account of all potential sources of 
flooding and climate change allowances and 
should:  
(i) demonstrate the application of a sequential 
approach for the development of individual 
sites to ensure  that the  highest vulnerability 
of land uses are located in areas of the site 
that are at lowest risk of  flooding;  
(ii) preserve overland flood and flow routes and 
ensure there is no net loss of flood storage;  
(iii) ensure that there is no adverse effect on the 
operational functions of any existing flood 
defence infrastructure;  
(iv) provide adequate flood st orage and 
compensation on site;  
(v) where appropriate, set out the mitigation 
measures that will be incorporated on site to 
manage residual flood risk including finished 
floor levels to accord with Environment 
Agency’s Standing Advice;  and 
(vi) naturalise water courses where  
opportunities arise, in line with Policy DM 17 
(Watercourses and Flood Defences).  
D. All proposals for new development will be 
required to:  
(i) manage and reduce surface water run -off, in 
line with Policy DM 16 (Sustainable Drainage 
Systems);   
(ii) manage water and waste water discharges, in 
line with Policy DM 18 (On -site Management 
of Waste Water and Water Supply);   The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 101 
                             
 
 
(iii) ensure safe access and egress for future users 
of the development and an appropriate 
emergency ev acuation plan where 
appropriate; and  
(iv) include measures to as sist existing 
communities at risk of flooding where 
feasible.  
E. All proposals for development within a Critical 
Drainage Area (CDA) or an EFDC Flood Risk 
Assessment Zone (FRAZ) will be required to 
provide a site specific flood risk assessment 
consisting of: an assessment of the risks involved, 
focussing predominantly on surface water and 
ordinary watercourses; details of any mitigation 
measures on -site where required (e.g. increased 
thresholds); and a drainage strate gy incorporating 
the use of SuDS  (Policy DM 16) to mitigate any 
impacts of site.  
F. With the exception of water compatible uses and 
essential infrastructure, subject to passing the 
Exception Test, development in areas designated 
in Epping Forest District’s Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment or as determi ned by specific Flood 
Risk Assessment as being within Flood Zone 3b 
will not be permitted.  
G. Proposals for developments within identified 
Critical Drainage Areas  could, based on the 
outcome of the site specific flood risk assessment, 
be subject to a s ection 106 contribution or CIL 
funding for the delivery of appropriate flood 
alleviation schemes.   
Sustainable Drainage Systems  
4.113  Avoiding development in areas at risk of all 
types of flooding is the most effectiv e way to 
minimise fl ood risk over the Plan p eriod. This 
needs to be coupl ed with careful provision of 
flood mitigation measures where run off can be 
managed. Nati onal policy gives priority to 
sustainable drainage systems which manage run 
off. 
Key Evidence  
• Level 1 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment  
Upd ate (URS , 2015) ; 
• Essex Local Flood Risk Management Strategy (Essex County Council , 2013) ; and  • Loughton, Buckhurst Hill and Theydon Bois Surface Water Management Plan (URS , 
2015) . 
Approach  
4.114  The Strategic Flood Risk Asses sment Level 1 
Update 2015 (SFRA ) ident ifies surface water 
run-off as the greatest risk to the District with 
regard to fl ooding. The Council currently has in 
place one Surface Water Management Plan for 
Loughton, Buckhurst Hill and Theydon Bois 
(2016).  
4.115  Surface Water run -off is the excess water t hat 
flows off the land as a result of  rainfall that is 
unable to filt er through the soil. Surface water 
flooding occurs when high intensity or 
prolonged r ainfall generates run -off which flows 
over the surface of the ground and ponds in low 
lying areas. It can be especially problematic 
when the ground is saturated or when t he 
drainage network has insufficie nt capacity to 
cope with the additional flo w. Climate change is 
projected to increase the frequency and 
intensity of heavy rainfall events, placing greate r 
pressure on traditi onal drainage systems.  
4.116  All development has the potential  to increa se 
the risk of surface water flooding. Sustainable 
Drainage Systems (SuDS) are an important tool 
in managing surface water flood risk. SuDS 
mimic natural drainage system s and retain 
water at or near a site when rain falls. They can also be of added benefi t by enhancing 
biodiversity and amenity through design 
treatments and incorporate tree s and other 
vegetation  that also assist in mitigation against 
flooding. The Council seeks to manage surface 
water run off as close to the source as possible 
and will apply  a hierarchy of drainage solutions 
as outlined in Policy  DM 16, prioritising 
sustainable soluti ons. Proposals should seek to 
maximise the value of SuDS by making use of their features, such as trees, green space and 
clean water at the surface, to improve the value 
of landscapes and to strengthen the sense of 
place.  
4.117  There are numerous types of SuDS  including 
swales, ponds, green walls and brown, blue and green roofs. ‘Green roofs’ are a design feature 
that is planted whilst ‘brown roofs’ are The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
102  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
composed of soil allowed to colonise with plants 
naturally and ‘blue roofs’ are themselves water 
features. All of these design elements slow the 
rate of run -off of rainwater fr om land or 
buildings. In addition, paying attention to 
designing permeable surfaces in development 
assists with drainage (see also Policy DM 9).  
4.118  Applicants will be expected to demons trate that 
the SuDS will function effectiv ely over the 
lifespan of the development,  by ensuring 
adequate arrangements for their mana gement 
and maintenance. Attention should be paid to the most up to date Technical Guidance from 
Government ; Briti sh Water and the 
Environment Agency and Essex County Council.  
 
Policy DM 16 Sustainable Drainage Systems  
A. All proposals for new development must seek to 
manage surface water as close to its source as 
possible in line with the following drainage 
hierarchy:  
(i) store rainwater for later use;  
(ii) use infiltration techniques, such as porous 
surfaces in n on-clay areas. Porous surfaces 
are suitable in areas of clay but must be 
adequately tanked with an outfall.  Epping 
Forest District is predominantly clay so any 
infiltration proposals must be subject to and 
pass the relevant percolation tests;  
(iii) attenuate ra inwater in ponds or open water 
features for controlled release;  
(iv) attenuate rainwater by storing in tanks or 
sealed water features for controlled release.  
B. Other methods must also reflect the stringent 
drainage hierarchy contained within the current 
CIRIA1 SuDS Manual  (2015) , which provides 
further detailed guidance over and above Building 
Regulations : 
(i) controlled discharge of rainwater direct to a 
watercourse/surface water body;  
(ii) controlled discharge rainwater to a surface 
water sewer/drain;  
(iii) controlled discharge rainwater to the 
combined sewer.  
C. The Council will encourage the use of green, 
                                                      
1 Construction Industry Research and Information 
Association  brown and blue roofs.  
D. The Council will require Sustainable Drainage 
Systems (SuDS) to be sensitively incorporated into 
new development by way of site layout and 
design, having regard to the following 
requirements:  
(i) all major development proposals will be 
required to reduce surface water flows to the 
1 in 1 greenfield run -off rate and provide 
storage for all events up to and including the 
1 in 100 year critical storm event includi ng an 
allowance for climate change, and include at 
least one source control SuD S measure 
resulting in a ne t improvement in water 
quant ity and quality discharging to a sewer;  
(ii) all brownfield development proposals should 
aim to achieve t he 1 in 1  greenfield run -off 
rate and, at a minimum , achieve a 50 per cent 
reduction in existing site run -off rates for all 
events, including an allowance for climate 
change, SuDS measure s resulting in a net 
improvement in water quanti ty and quality 
discharging to a sewer;   
(iii) all ‘minor’ and ‘other’ development proposals 
should aim t o achieve the 1 in 1 greenfield 
run off rate where possible, including an 
allowance for climate change, or a rate as 
otherwise agreed with the Council ; and  
(iv) for all development where the greenfield run-
off rate c annot be achieved,  justification must 
be provided to demonstrate that the run- off 
rate has been reduced as much as possible.  
E. Where Sustainable Drainage Systems are 
implemented they will be expected to:  
(i) meet the requirements set out  in national 
standards, and meet the Council’s standards 
if they exceed national guidance;  
(ii) incorporate measures identified in Surface 
Water Management Plans;  
(iii) be designed to maximise biodiversity and 
local amenity benefits  and where 
appropriate, ensure that SuDS  techniques 
provide for clean and safe water at the 
surface;  
(iv) improve water quality; and 
(v) full details of the means of achieving future 
management and maintenance of the SuDS 
scheme to ensure that it will function 
effectiv ely over the lifespan of the 
develop ment will be required, including The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 103 
                             
 
 
responsibilities and funding.  
F. The Council will giv e consideration to adopting 
SuDS . Contributions in the form of commuted 
sums or CIL will be sought for maintenance  if 
adopted by the Council.  
G. Where SuDS cannot be implemente d due to site 
constraints (such as land contamination ) robust 
justification  must be provided  along with 
proposed alternativ e approaches to surface water 
management.  
H. Where particular sites and the wider catchment 
have identified existing flood issues, the 
implementation of good practice on Natural Flood 
Management must be explored.  
Protecting and Enhancing 
Watercourses and Flood D efences 
4.119  National policy notes that opportuniti es offered 
by new development should be used to reduce 
the causes and impacts of flooding. Historical 
development has included changes to natural 
watercourses that do not n ecessarily assist in 
modern flood management  or support building 
in resilience to climate change . In addition, new 
development must not reduce the quality of an 
adjacent water course ,and should provide 
enhancements wherever there is an opportunity.   
Key Evidence  
• Level 1 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment  
Update (URS , 2015) ; and  
• Essex Local Flood Risk Management 
Strategy (Essex County Council , 2013) . 
Approach  
4.120  In order to manage the risk of flooding to 
propertie s close to a watercourse,  buffers of 
open land should be applied between the water 
course and new buildings.  
4.121  The most effective way to reduce fl ood risk is to 
enable the watercourses to operate naturally, 
however in urban areas these have been 
redirected,  and culverted over the years whilst 
areas of land that may have been u sed for water 
storage during flood have been developed. Such changes can now contribute to the risk of 
flooding. The Environment Agency adv ises that in order to manage flood risk where there are 
opportunities to re -naturalise water c ourses, 
and provide land for flood storage, these should be taken. In addition such measures can be used to actively encourage the creation , restoration 
and enhancement of habitats. All d evelopment 
proposals should therefore account for these matt ers in design wherever possible .  
4.122  The canal system in the District is navigable and used for leisure purposes. There is no intent to interfere with the navigability of the canal 
system implied in this policy.  
4.123   It is not possible in all circumstances to 
naturalise existing watercourses. Wh ere it is not 
possible to re -naturalise water courses then 
development must pay parti cular  attenti on to 
ensuring that the existing built defences such as 
walls and culverts serving the development are 
fit to last, and will be maintained throughout 
the lifeti me of the development.  
4.124  The Council will seek contributions to protection 
and enhancement of watercourses and flood 
defences through s 106/ CIL where appropriate 
in addition to work required on site.  
 
Policy DM 17 Protecting and Enhancing 
Watercourses and Flood Defences  
A. New development must be set back at a distance 
of at least 8 metres from a main river2 and an 
ordinary watercourse3, or at an appropriate width 
as agreed by the Council and/or the Environment 
Agency, in order to provide a  naturalised an d 
undeveloped buffer zone, free of built 
development,  other than for site access and other 
essential infrastructure connections.  Buffer zones 
should be designed for the benefit of biodiversity 
and should be undisturbed by lighting. Planning 
applications must include a long term scheme to 
protect and enhance the conservation value of 
the watercourse and ensure access for flood 
defence maintenance, in line with the 
requirements of the Water Framework Directive 
and the Thames River Basin Management Plan.  
                                                      
2 the main rivers and their associated tributaries are the 
River Lea, River Lee Navigation and Stort Navigation River 
Roding, Nazeing Brook, Cobbins Brook and Cripsey Brook  
3 the ordinary watercourses are those that are not Main 
Rivers.  The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
104  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
B. All major development will be required to , and 
minor development will be expected to  
(i) investigate and secure the implementation of 
environmental enhancements to open4 
sections of the river or watercourse if 
appropriate; and  
(ii) investigate  and secure the implementation of 
measures to restore culverted sections of the 
river or watercourse, if appropriate.   
C. Where de -culverting or other river enhancements 
are shown to be unfeasible, the Council will seek a 
financial contribution to restore ano ther section 
of the same watercourse.  
D. Proposals must not adversely affect the natural 
functioning of main rivers and ordinary 
watercourses, including through culverting.  
E. Where appropriate the Council will require 
planning applications to include a conditio n 
survey of existing watercourse infrastructure to 
demonstrate that it will adequately function for 
the lifetime of the development  and, if necessary, 
the proposal must make provision for repairs or 
improvements.  
F. Development on or adjacent to a watercourse  
must not result in the deterioration of the water 
quality of that watercourse . Development must 
not impact on the stability of the banks of a 
watercourse or river.  
On-site Management and Reuse of 
Waste Water and Water S upply  
4.125  There is a clear need to ens ure that surface 
water  and foul water drain age and treatment 
occur effectiv ely for the protecti on of human 
health and the wider environment. In order for 
development to functi on effectiv ely it should 
not cause any pollution to water bodies or 
controlled wa ters including ground water.  The 
pressure of existing water supplies is of concern 
to residents in some parts of the District. The 
bulk of a policy response to these matters is 
bounded by national policy and the respective 
responsibilities of water supplie rs and 
regulators.  
 
                                                      
4 Open in this context means any length of watercourse that 
is not culverted.  Key Evidence  
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan (Arup, 2017)  
Approach  
4.126  Nati onal policy sets out that L ocal Authorities 
should adopt proactive strategies in regard to 
climate change resilience and take full account 
of water supply and demand considerations. 
They should include Local Plan policies to deliver 
the provision of infrastructure including waste 
management, water supply and wastewater.  
4.127  The EU Water Framework Directive established 
a framework for the protection and 
improvement of river s and lakes, estuaries, 
coastal waters and groundwater. As set out 
development must not result in the 
deterioration of the water quality status of a 
waterbody and must not prevent the future attainment of ‘Good Ecological Status’, or ’Good 
Ecological Poten tial’ if the watercourse is 
artificial or heavily modified.  
4.128  In addition the chemical quality of the 
watercourse is important as it has the potential 
to affect the biological quality. The ecological 
potential or status of the water bodies in the 
District v aries although most of these water 
bodies do not fall under the ambit of the Water 
Framework Directive. The Thames River Basin 
Management Plan is designed to implement the 
Directive. It seeks by 2027 at the latest that all 
relevant water bodies in the area  should be of 
‘good ecological status’.  
4.129  During the Plan period the Council seeks to take any measures that are within its powers to 
improve the quality of these water bodies and is 
in discussion with the Environment Agency and 
the statutory water undertak er (Thames Utilities 
Ltd) to establish how to influence these beyond dealing with any historical misconnection 
problems from properties. Sustainable drainage 
systems are considered to be able to contribute 
to improvements in water quality given their 
poten tial to ‘filter’ run off water. All new 
development must avoid any detriment to 
water quality.  
4.130  The Environment Agency has identified 
Groundwater Source Protection Zones for 2 ,000 
groundwater sources used for public drinking The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 105 
                             
 
 
water supply nationally. The zones show the 
potential for contaminant migration to the 
water source/resource from any activities that 
might cause pollution in the area. The closer the activity the greater the risk. The groundwater 
source catchments are divided into zones that 
relate to t he travel time of water from any point 
below the water table to the source.  The Lee 
Valley contains some areas of Groundwater 
Source Protection Zones in the Inner Zone 1 (50 
day travel time) and Outer Zone 2 (400 day 
travel time) and Total Catchment Zone 3. The 
Environment Agency use the zones in 
conjunction with the Groundwater Protection 
Policy to set up pollution prevention measures 
in areas which are at higher risk and to monitor the activities of potential polluters nearby. 
Although not considered in national source 
protection zones, the Le e Valley within the 
District is especially sensitive to groundwater 
contamination, as a whole, due to the history of 
gravel extraction and landfilling. There are also 
significant numbers of private water supplies in 
the area which require protection.  
4.131  The Council expects developers to work with the 
water companies to ensure that their proposals 
can be suitably serviced with water supply and 
make considerate use of water saving measures 
such as grey water systems and ra in water 
harvesting (please see also Policy  DM 9). In 
addition to ensure the suitable arrangements 
for foul water drainage and treatment from 
their developments and respect for the 
Groundwater Source Protection Zones and the 
environment in general.  
4.132  This wi ll also apply to operators of commercial 
developments to ensure that contaminated 
surface water is properly treated in order to 
protect drainage systems, watercourses and the 
environment in general. For example, from 
car/lorry washes  and hardstanding.  
4.133  In the majority of cases the Council does not 
have the power to refuse planning permission in relation to connections to the public sewer 
whilst the statutory undertakers’ role is to 
provide connections to the public sewer and 
their abilit y to refuse to make connections is 
limited. Therefore, planning applications should 
be referred to the statutory undertaker for assessment. The applicant will be expected to 
provide proof of the adequacy of the proposals 
in respect of water supply and foul drainage via 
corres pondence from the statutory undertaker.  
The Council will use standard conditions to manage this aspect of the development.  
 
Policy DM 18 On Site Management and 
Reuse of Waste Water and Water Supply  
A. The Council will expect planning applications to 
set out  how they will ensure that there is 
adequate surface water, foul drainage and 
treatment capacity to serve their development 
and demonstrate that it does not impact on the 
adequacy of existing development in this regard. 
All proposals for new development wi ll be 
required to:  
(i) ensure the separation of surface and foul 
water systems; and  
(ii) implement sustainable drainage systems, in 
line with Policy DM 16.  
B. Where the local public sewer network does not 
have adequate capacity to serve the existing and 
proposed development , proposals will be 
required to demonstrate that it provides for 
suitable alternative arrangements for storing, 
treating and discharging foul water . Should there 
be capacity issues resulting from development 
that can be addressed through upgrade s of the 
sewerage network , developers will are required to 
demonstrate how these will be delivered in 
advance of the occupation of development.  
C. The Council will  expect new development to 
connect to mains foul drainage , and will restrict 
the use of non -mains drainage for foul water 
disposal, particularly in Groundwater Source 
Protection Zones, in line with Environment Agency 
guidance. The location of and likely impact on the 
private water supplies within the District must 
also be taken into account. Where n on-mains 
drainage is proposed for the disposal of foul 
water, a foul drainage assessment will be required 
to ensure the most sustainable drainage option 
will be implemented.  
D. All proposals for new development will be 
required to:  
(i) ensure that there is adequa te water supply 
infrastructure capacity both on and off -site to 
serve the development with wholesome The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
106  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
water of sufficient quantity, flow rate and 
pressure, without adversely impacting on 
existing users; and  
(ii) make provision for the installation and 
management  of measures for the efficient 
use of mains water and where possible with 
direct connection to the mains public water 
supply.  Please also refer to Policy DM 19.  
Sustainable Water U se 
4.134  It is important to manage the water resources 
that serve the District a s it is in an area of 
serious stress on water resources which could 
culminate in potentially significant impacts on 
the water environment.  Consequently the use of 
water efficiency measures in buildings is 
appropriate  and justifiable . 
Key Evidence  
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan (Arup, 2017)  
Approach  
4.135  The District, served by Thames Water and 
Affinity Water for mains water potable water 
supplies and a number of private water 
companies, is classed as being in an area of 
‘serious water stress’ (Environment  Agency 
Water Stressed Areas Classification 2013). In 
such areas it is recommended that there is 
implementation of water efficiency standards in order to manage demand on the water 
environment.  
4.136  The average UK consumption of water is 150 
litres per person p er day (in the home).  As set 
out in government guidance the Council has the 
option to set additional technical requirements in the Local Plan on exceeding the minimum 
standard (125 litres per person per day) 
required by Building Regulations in respect of 
water efficiency. The tighter Building 
Regulations optional requirement expected by 
the Council is 110 litres per person per day 
(roughly 30% less than average consumption).  
4.137  Given the significant pressure on the water 
supply in the District , conditions wil l be required 
on planning permissions to ensure the standard 
is met. There are many routes to achieving the 
standard such as the use of grey water systems and rainwater harvesting together with water 
efficient fittings and appliances.  
4.138  With respect to non -residential  development 
the Council considers it reasonable to require a similar percentage reduction in water 
consumption as that for residential uses 
recognising that some commercial uses need more water for operational processes.  
4.139  The Code for Sustai nable Homes provides a 
useful be nchmark to assist in water efficiency 
measures and the  BREEAM 2014 for New 
Construction is the rel evant standard for non - 
domestic new build property. Whilst the Council 
recognises that it cannot impose the BREEAM 
standard t he policy  below sets out the Council 
expectation of a reduction in water usage in 
non-residential buildings  commensurate with 
that achieved by the optional requirement for 
residential development.  
4.140  Water efficiency of non -residential  buildings can 
be demons trated with reference to the BREEAM 
manual metrics.  
 
Policy DM 19 Sustainable W ater Use 
A. Development will need to demonstrate that:  
(i) Water saving measures and equipment is 
incorporated in all new development  
(ii) New homes (including replacement 
dwellings) meet a water efficiency standard 
of 110 litres or less per person per day;  and 
(iii) New non -residential development of 1 ,000 
sq.m gross floor area or more aims to achieve 
at least a 30% improvement over baseline 
building consumpti on 
B. The above applies unless it can be clearly 
demonstrated that it would not be feasible on 
technical or viability grounds.  
C. Where new national standards exceed those set 
out above, the national standards will take 
precedence.  The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 107 
                             
 
 
Low Carbon and Renewable E nergy  
4.141  National policy  provides that l ocal authorities 
should adopt proactiv e strategies with regard to 
climate chan ge resilience and have a positiv e 
strategy to promote energy from low carbon 
and renewable energy. It notes that local authoriti es should recognise the r esponsibility 
of all comm unitie s to contribute to energy 
generation from renewable or low carbon sources.  
Key Evidence  
• Epping Forest District Council Carbon 
Reduction and Renewable Energy 
Assessment (Atkins , 2013)  
Approach  
4.142  National planning policy notes that local 
authorities should include Local Plan policies to 
deliver the provision of energy infrastructure 
including heat. Low carbon and renewable 
energy measures take a variety of forms 
including commercial ‘farms’ that whilst 
intrusive generate energy on a large scale, 
indiv idual installations for individual properties 
(micro generation) and schemes that include a 
number of properties (district heating schemes). 
Some householder installations are permitted 
development not requiring planning permission.  
4.143  The Council wishes to e ncourage new 
development that designs from the outset an environment of zero or low carbon energy use 
rather than retrofits installations to standard 
traditional designs. The retrofitting of 
renewable energy installations on existing 
development is considered acceptable in 
principle.  
4.144  The Council recognises the need for energy 
generation to support development and seeks 
the generation of low carbon and renewable 
energy. The Council also recognises the findings 
of the Carbon Reduction and Renewable Energy 
Assessment in its conclusions that the potential 
in the District for large scale renewable energy 
production is hampered by the policy 
designation of the Green Belt. National Policy 
does not rule such development out but notes that elements of many renewable energy projects will comprise inappropriate 
development. In such cases the demonstration 
of very special circumstances would be required for proposals to proceed ( NPPF paragraph 91). 
In any case careful consideration of the impact 
of proposals on the openn ess of the Green Belt 
is needed. More positively, the Assessment 
concluded that small scale renewable energy 
schemes of all kinds can be accommodated in 
the District and incorporation in the design of 
development on larger sites is feasible and 
viable as w ould be installations on individual 
buildings.  
4.145  Decentralised heating is supported by national policy as a form of renewable or low carbon 
decentralised energy supply, and a means of 
meeting requirements of the Climate Change 
Act on carbon emission reductio n. Decentralised 
or community energy schemes can be 
connected into larger District wide schemes.  
4.146  A key characteristic of district heating schemes 
are that an ‘anchor’ high demand energy user is 
needed to support the viability of the scheme. 
The Councils Ca rbon Reduction and Renewable 
Energy Assessment 2013 found the potential for 
combined heat and power (CHP) networks in 
the glasshouse industry to be significant in 
terms of carbon savings –  if powered by 
traditional energy sources this is heavily reliant 
upon the fuel markets and there are viability 
concerns. However, if it is practical to provide 
through renewable energy sources then there is 
potential.  
4.147  It is possible that future redevelopment or 
extension of industrial areas may give rise to the 
suitable conditions for district heating schemes, 
or purely support site wide communal energy 
systems that may be connected to district 
heating networks at a later date. A small 
number of gas fired combined heat and power 
plants exist in the District.  
4.148  Large scale re sidential development is a clear 
candidate for the use of communal energy 
schemes that may later be connected to wider 
district networks.  
4.149  The proposed Policy  seeks to support 
appropriate low carbon and renewable The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
108  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
technologies including district heati ng networks 
as part of a package of measures to assist in 
delivering more energy efficient development.  
All major development should incorporate site wide communal energy systems that serve all 
energy demands from within the development 
and should have the abili ty to connect to district 
heating networks where possible.  
 
Policy DM 20 Low Carbon and Renewable 
Energy  
A. The incorporation of low carbon and renewable 
energy measures in new and existing 
development will be encouraged with regard to 
both standalone instal lations and micro 
renewables integrated into development.  
B. Low carbon and renewable energy technologies 
will be permitted provided that:  
(i) they do not have any adverse impact on the 
integrity of any European sites, wildlife sites, 
protected species or habitats or the openness 
of the Green Belt;  
(ii) a positive assessment is provided 
demonstrating how any impacts on the 
environment and heritage assets, including 
cumulative landscape, noise, visual, air 
quality and emissions, and traffic generation 
impacts can  be avoided or mitigated through 
careful consideration of location, scale and 
design;  and 
(iii) the benefits of the proposal are clear with 
regard to the amount of heat or electricity 
generated and consequential reduction in 
greenhouse gases, and the local indiv idual or 
community benefit . 
C. The use of combined heat and power (CHP), 
and/or combined cooling, heat and power (CCHP) 
and district heating will be encouraged in new 
developments.  
D. Strategic Masterplans will be required to 
demonstrate how the potential to inc orporate 
infrastructure for district heating can be provided, 
and will be expected to connect to any existing 
suitable systems (including systems that will be in 
place at the time of construction), unless it is 
demonstrated that this would render 
development unviable or that alternative 
technologies are available that provide the same 
or similar benefits and opportunities.  E. Where a district heating scheme is proposed the 
Council will expect the scheme to demonstrate 
that the proposed heating and cooling sys tems 
(CHP/CCHP) have been selected considering the 
heat hierarchy in line with the following order of 
preference:  
(i) connection with existing CHP/CCHP 
distribution networks;  
(ii) site wide CHP/CCHP fuelled by renewable  
energy sources ; 
(iii) communal CHP/CCHP fuelled by renewable 
energy sources;  and 
(iv) gas fired CHP/CCHP.  
Local Environmental Impacts, 
Pollution and Land Contamination  
4.150  National policy supports the planning system to 
prevent both new and existing development 
from contributing to environmental damage and 
puttin g people and the environment at risk, or 
subjecting them to the adverse effects from 
unacceptable levels of soil, air, water, light or 
noise pollution or land instability. These factors 
impact significantly on living conditions and 
include the potential di sruption from the 
demolition and redevelopment of buildings. 
National planning policy  also notes that 
planning should remediate and mitigate 
despoiled, degraded, derelict, contaminated and 
unstable land where appropriate.  
Key Evidence  
• EFDC Contaminated Lan d Strategy (EFDC, 
2000) . 
Approach  
4.151  The aim in plan making should be to minimise 
pollution and other adverse effects on the local 
and natural environment and subsequently 
humans and other species. The prevention of 
unacceptable risks from pollution and land 
instability should be accounted for in 
consideration of the location of development 
and the impact on health and the environment taken into account. Some engineering 
operations and ground works can cause 
pollution such as the movement of significant 
amount s of soil, or fill with inert waste to re-  The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 109 
                             
 
 
contour land. Therefore all types of 
development fall within this policy.  
4.152  National policy notes that where a site is 
affected by contamination or land instability it is 
the responsibility of the developer or lando wner 
to ensure that a safe development is secured. 
However, planning policy and decision making is 
required to ensure that any site is suitable for its 
use taking account of ground conditions and 
land stability including from former activities and pollutio n from former uses. Such assurance 
can be taken from site investigation information 
prepared by a competent person. National 
planning policy defines the competent person to 
prepare site investigation information as being 
“a person with a recognised relevan t 
qualification, sufficient experience in dealing 
with the type(s) of pollution or land instability, 
and membership of a relevant professional organisation.”  
4.153  Contamination of land in the District largely arises from previous industrial activity, waste 
disposal, accidental spillages and transportation. 
Many processes are now controlled under 
legislation but historically this was not the case and hence we are left with a legacy of 
contaminated land and surface/ground waters 
that potentially may need to be  addressed. 
(Refer EFDC Contaminated Land Strategy 2000).  
4.154  The construction process, whether accompanied 
by demolition or other ground preparation, can cause a significant degree of noise, dust and 
vibration within the locality. Some types of 
development su ch as basement development 
are particularly extreme examples of such 
disruption. The Council seeks to minimise these 
impacts and the use of Construction 
Management Statements, agreed with the 
Council, include matters such as hours of 
operation on site. In addition, the reuse of 
materials on site reduces waste, as well as the 
amount of materials removed from site and 
contributes to an overall reduction in the use of materials reducing the carbon footprint of 
development.  
4.155  The following Policy  seeks to ensure that these 
factors are effectively considered and managed in assessing the suitability of development, acquiring evidence to support decisions made 
on planning applications, and requiring 
management statements setting out the process 
and rules for the reduction of nuisance in the 
demolition and construction process.  
 
Policy DM 21 Local Environmental I mpacts, 
Pollution and Land C ontamination  
A. The Council will require that the residual local 
environmental impacts of all development 
proposals after mitigation do not lead to 
unacceptable  impa cts on the health, safety, 
wellbeing and amenity of existing and new users 
or occupiers of the development site, or the 
surrounding land. These potential impacts can 
include, but are not limited to, air and water 
(surface an d groundwater) pollution, dust, noise, 
vibration, light pollution, odours, and fumes as 
well as land contamination.  
B. The Council will:  
(i) resist development that leads to 
unacceptable local environmental impacts, 
including, but not limited to, air pollution, 
noise and vibration, light pollution, odours, 
dust and land and water contamination;  
(ii) require that activities likely to generate 
pollution are located away from sensitive 
uses and receptors where possible, practical 
and economically feasible;  
(iii) require develop ment proposals to mitigate 
and reduce to a minimum any adverse local 
environmental impacts and activities that 
may have wider cumulative effects;  
(iv) where there are unacceptable risks of 
contamination or land instability, require 
these to be properly and full y addressed 
through remediation. If remediation 
measures are not suitable then planning 
permission wil l be refused; and 
(v) where necessary, apply planning conditions 
to reduce local environmental impacts on 
adjacent land uses to acceptable levels.  
Land Contam ination  
C. The Council will expect  the remediation of 
contaminated land through development. 
Potential contamination risks will need to be 
properly considered and adequately mitigated 
before development proceeds. To deliver this the 
Council will require devel opment proposals on The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
110  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
contaminated land:  
(i) to be informed by a desktop study and   
preliminary risk assessment, including an 
assessment of the site’s history, potential 
contamination sources, pathways and 
receptors;  
(ii) where necessary to undertake a site  
investigation and detailed risk assessment in 
line with current best practice guidance, 
including where appropriate physical 
investigations, chemical testing and 
assessments of ground gas risks and risks to 
groundwater;  
(iii) where necessary to provide a remedia tion    
strategy that sets out how any identified risks 
from the assessments above are going to be 
addressed. If remediation measures are not 
suitable then planning permission will be 
refused;  
(iv) where necessary to provide a long term 
maintenance and monitori ng regi me for the 
mitigation of any on going risk and identify the 
perso n/s responsible for the regime;  
(v) where necessary to provide a validation 
report once remediation has taken place, 
including evidence that demonstrate s that 
risks from contamination have been 
controlled effectively;  and  
(vi) to ensure that all above assessments and 
investigations  are carried out by a competent 
person.  
Construction and D emolition  
D. The Council will seek to manage and limit 
environmental disturbances during construction 
and demoli tion as well as during excavations and 
construction of subterranean developments. To 
deliver this the Council requires the submission of 
Construction Management Statements for the 
following types of  developments:  
(i) all major developments;  
(ii) any basement develo pments;  
(iii) developments of sites in confined locatio ns or 
near sensitive receptors;  and 
(iv) if substantial demolition /excavation works 
are proposed.  
 
E. In addition the Council supports the use of 
sustainable design and construction techniques, 
including where appro priate the local or on -site sourcing of building materials enabling reuse and 
recycling on site.  
Air Quality  
4.156  The 2008 Ambient Air Quality Directive sets 
legally binding limits for concentrations in 
outdoor air of major air pollutants that impact 
public health such as particulate matter (PM10 
and PM2.5) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2). As well 
as having direct effects, these pollutants can combine in the atmosphere to form ozone, a 
harmful air pollutant (and potent greenhouse 
gas) which can be transported grea t distances 
by weather systems.  
4.157  The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs  carries out an annual national 
assessment of air quality using modelling and 
monitoring to determine compliance with 
European Union Air Quality Limit Values. It is 
important that the potential impact of new 
development on air quality is taken into account 
in planning where the national assessment 
indicates that relevant limits have been 
exceeded or are near the limit.  
4.158  The local air quality management (LAQM) regime requires ever y district  to regularly 
review and assess air quality in their area. These 
reviews identify whether national objectives 
have been, or will be, achieved at relevant 
locations, by an applicabl e date.  
4.159  If national objectives are not met, or at risk of 
not being met, the local authority concerned 
must declare an air quality management area 
and prepare an air quality action plan. This 
identifies measures that will be introduced in 
pursuit of the objectives and can have 
implications for planning. Air qu ality can also 
affect biodiversity and may therefore impact on 
our international obligations under the Habitats 
Directive.  
4.160  As set out in the supporting text to Policy DM 2 
the health of the Epping Forest SAC is sensitive 
to, amongst other things, air -borne  pollutants, 
including those generate d as a result of traffic .  
In addition t he Council was required to declare 
an Air Quality Management Area (AQMA) in the 
area of Bell Common, Epping in 2010.  This is  
still being monitored as nitrogen dioxide levels The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 111 
                             
 
 
are still elevated and the Council is required to 
reduce them by 202 0.  
Key Evidence  
• Habitats Regulations Assessment  (AECOM, 
2017) ; and 
• Memorandum of Understanding on 
managing the impacts of growth within the 
West Essex/East Hertfordshire Housing 
Market Area on Epping Forest Special Area 
of Conservation (2017).  
The Approach  
4.161  Local Plans can affect air quality in a number of 
ways, including through what development is 
proposed and where, and the encouragement 
given to sustainable transport. Therefore in plan 
maki ng, it is important to take into account air 
quality management areas and other areas 
where there could be specific requirements or 
limitations on new development because of air 
quality.  
4.162  The approach to the location of development in the Local Plan has included the consideration of 
the sustainability of sites in respect to 
accessibility, or potential accessibility to 
facilities, services and jobs, by means other than 
the car.  The reduction in levels of car use can 
have a significant positive effect on the air 
quality in an area, as can the provision of infrastructure which supports the use of new 
technologies, such as electric vehicles.  This 
approach is taken forward through Policy SP 2 
(Spatial Distribution) and Policy T 1 (Sustainable 
Transport Choices).   As set out within the 
Memorandum of Understanding the Council is 
working with the City of London Corporation, 
Natural England and other Housing Market Area 
authorities to address both the requirement to 
avoid, or effectively mitigate, adverse impacts 
on the integrity of the SAC from Local Plan -led 
development and the requirement to prevent 
deterioration of the SAC features.  
4.163  In addition to the above policies it is important that the effects from development, both 
individually and cumulatively, are assessed 
where they have a potential effect on the health 
of people and biodiversity within the District, and that appropriate mitigation and monitoring measures are secured.  As traffic is a major 
contributing factor to effects of humans and 
habitats , all new dev elopment which requires 
the submission of a Transport Assessment or Transport Statement (as set out in the Council’s 
Local  Validation Checklist) will be required to 
submit an assessment of air quality impacts 
which may arise as a result of the development .  
This is in addition to other developments which 
will require the submission of such assessment 
where the proposal has the potential to impact 
on air quality.  
 
DM 22 Air Quality  
A. The Council will seek to ensure that the District is 
protected from the impacts of air pollution. 
Potential air pollution risks will need to be 
properly considered and adequate mitigation 
included in the design of new development to 
ensure neither future, nor existing residents , 
workers, visitors,  or enviro nmental receptors 
including the Epping Forest SAC are adversely 
impacted as a result of the development . 
B. Mitigation measures required will be determined 
by the scale of development, its location, the 
potential to cause air pollution, and the presence 
of se nsitive receptors in the locality.  
C. Larger proposals  or those that have potential to 
produce air pollution, will be required to 
undertake  an air quality assessment that identifies 
the potential impact of the development , 
together with , where appropriate,  contributions 
towards air quality monitoring. Assessments shall 
identify mitigation that will address any 
deterioration in air quality as a result of the 
development, having taken into account other 
permitted developments, and these measures 
shall be inco rporated into the development 
proposals. This will include an assessment of 
emissions (including from traffic generation) and 
calculation of the cost of the development to the 
environment. All assessments for air quality shall 
be undertaken by competent pe rsons.  
 
  The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
112  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
This page is intentionally left blank   
 5. 1  
 
 
 
Chapter Five  
Places  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
114  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Introduction  
5.1 This section sets out the visi on and policies for 
settlements, Town and Small District Centres 
within the District. The District’s settlements are 
listed in Table  5.1, in line with t he Settlement 
Hierarchy Technical Paper (2015) . The Town 
Centres are as identified in  the Town Centre 
Review (2016).  
Table  5.1: Settlements in Epping Forest District  
Category  Settlement  
Town Ongar,  Epping,  Loughton/Loughton 
Broadway, Waltham  Abbey 
Large Village  Buckhurst Hill, Chigwell, North Weald  
Basse tt, Theydon  Bois  
Small Village  Abridge,  Chigwell  Row, Coopersale, 
Fyfield, High Ongar, Nazeing, 
“Matching” (incorporati ng Matching 
Green, Matching Tye and Matching),  
Roydon,  Lower Sheering, Sheering, 
Stap leford  Abbott s, Thornwood  
5.2 This section does not consider  the strategic  sites 
around Harlow, which are  set out  in Policy  SP 3. 
A number of the District’s settlements are in the process of developing Neighbourhood Plans. 
The Council will support the prepara tion and 
production of Neighbourhood Plans as set out in Policy  D 6. 
Overview of the Site Selection 
Process  
5.3 The National Planning Policy Framework states 
that a Local Plan must allocate sufficient land in 
appropriate locations to ensure supply for the 
Plan  period. This includes sites for residential 
development, Traveller Accommodation  and 
employment land (B Use  Class ). 
5.4 The Council has selected its allocated sites in 
line with the two  site selection  methodologies  
(residential and employment , and traveller).  
Sites identifie d for allocation have been select ed 
following a rigorous  applicati on of the relevant 
site selection methodolog y, and represent those 
sites the Council considers to be suitable, available and achievable within the Plan period 
based on the be st available informati on. 
Town  and District Centre s  
5.5 The Council has identified two Town Centres 
and four Small District Centres within the 
District . The Local Plan sets out the defined 
Town Centre boundaries, Primary Shopping 
Areas,  and Primary and Second ary Retail 
Frontage s. 
5.6 The District’s town centre hierarchy,  in 
accordance with Policy  E 2 is set out in Table 
5.2. 
Table 5.2 Town Centre hierarchy  
Category  Settlement  
Town  Centre  Epping,  Loughton  High  Road  
Small District  
Centre  Buckhurst Hill, Ongar,  Loughton  
Broadway, Waltham Abbey  
Key Evidence  
5.7 Key evidence which informed the Council’s 
approach to settlements in the District are:  
• Settlement Hierarchy Technical Paper (EFDC , 2015);  
• Site Selection Report (Arup, 2017);  
• Town Centres Review (Arup, September 
2016);  
• Green Belt Review (Land Use Consultants, 2016);  
• Employment Land Supply Assessment 
(Arup, 2017);  
• Employment Review (Hardisty Jones 
Associates, 2017);  
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan ( Arup,  2017) ; 
and 
• Epping Forest District Council:  Gypsy, 
Traveller an d Travelling Showpeople 
Accommodation Assessment Need 
Summary Report ( ORS,  2017) .The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 115 
                             
 
 
Epping  
5.8 Epping has one of the District’s two Town 
Centres , and benefits  from a range of assets and 
social infrastructure . The town has an  attractive 
setting within the open c ountryside which lies 
within the  Green Belt.  
5.9 The Green Belt plays an important role in 
maintaining separation and reducing 
coalescence between neighbouring settlements, 
most notably Theydon Bois, Waltham Abbey, 
Upshire and North Weald Bassett.  
5.10 Epping  has an important civic function within 
the District and is the location of the Epping 
Forest District Council ’s Civic Offices. There are 
also a number of em ployment opportunities 
located with in the settlement, including several 
professional services firms.  
5.11 A ke y strength of the Town Centre’s retail offer 
is its diversity, with a mix of convenience and comparison retail, made up of both 
independent and national retailers.  The Town 
Centre includes a sign ificant development 
opportunity at St. John ’s, as set out in the St 
John’s Road D esign and Development B rief. This 
will provide increased retail and leisure capacity 
within the settlement and  contribute towards 
its continued vibrancy.  
 
Vision for Epping  
Epping will continue to thrive as one of the main 
centres in t he District, providing excellent community 
facilities, services and transport connectivity. The 
settlement will continue to benefit from a strong 
range of existing facilities  and social infrastructure . 
Future residential development will m ake a strong 
cont ribution to supporting  Epping’s existing se rvices . 
The existing character of this historic market town will 
be protected, and heritage  assets will be enhanced 
wherever possible. A new vibrant community will be 
delivered at the south of the town.  This will integrate 
fully and complement the existing community.  
Linkages to Epping’s surrounding landscape and highly 
performing Green Belt will be maximised, and housing 
will be located and designed in a manner that limits 
the potential for harm to this important asset.  Public 
open space, footpaths and linkages across the town 
will be improved.  In particular , new connections will be delivered between the town’s existing open spaces 
and planned development . 
Epping will continue to have a mix of independent and 
natio nal retailers.  New commercial and employment 
uses will be encouraged where they support local 
business and start -up enterprises in order to ensure 
that the town retains a strong employment base.  
The tourism offer of the town will be promoted and 
expanded.  
The impact of further development  on Epping Forest , 
in terms of air quality and further recreational 
pressure will be minimised . Mitigation measures will 
be implemented where necessary.  
Residential Sites  
5.12 Policy  SP 2 sets out the number of homes to be 
provided i n Epping over the Plan period. The 
provision of approximately 1,305 dwellings has 
been informed by the aspiration for Epping to support an appropriate level of growth to 
continue in its role as one of the main towns 
within the District.  
5.13 The Council has considered the possible spatial 
options to accommodate new homes at Epping 
and concluded that that the most appropriate  
spatial option s are: 
• Intensification within the existing 
settlement  
Focussing development within the 
existing settlement boundary wi ll ensure 
growth occurs in the most sustainable 
locations within the settlement, such as 
on previously developed land, thereby 
minimising potential harm to the wider 
landscape around the settlement.  This 
approach will also be less harmful to the 
Green Belt . 
• Expansion of the settlement to the south   
This strategic option is the least sensitive 
to change in landscape terms and 
maximises opportunities to focus 
development in close proximity to Epping 
London Underground Station. The 
majority of this strategic o ption lies within 
Flood Zone 1 and any potential harm to 
the Green Belt and the settlement’s 
heritage can be suitably mitigated The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
116  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
through the incorporation of sensitive 
design  measures . 
5.14 Following an assessment of the suitability, 
availability and achievabili ty of residential sites 
located within these spatial options, the Council 
has identified 1 1 sites for allocation to meet the 
identified housing requirement, as set out in 
Policy P  1. 
5.15 Proposals for residential development will be 
expected to ac cord  with site specific 
requirements  as set out in Appendix 6 . 
5.16 Sites EPP.R1 and EPP.R2 have together been 
identified as a  location where development 
should be brought forward in accorda nce with a 
Strategic Mast erplan endorsed by the Council.  
Sites for Trav eller Accommodation  
5.17 Policy SP 2 sets out the Council’s approach to 
Traveller Sites within the D istrict.  There are no 
allocations for Traveller Accommodation  in 
Epping.  
Employment Sites  
5.18 Policy E 1 sets out the Council’s approach to 
identifying sites for employment uses (B Use 
Class).  
5.19 There are four existing Employment Sites  that 
have been identified in Epping for designation in 
the Local Plan:  
• EPP.E1 – Land at Eppingdene  (1.11ha)  
• EPP.E2 – Land at Coopersale Hall  (1.80ha) 
• EPP.E3 – Falconry Court (0.5 0ha) 
• EPP.E4 – Bower Hill Industrial Estate  
(1.73ha)  
Infrastructure Requirements  
5.20 The supporting text to Policy  SP 2 confirms the 
importance of identifying and delivering key 
infrastructure to support residential , traveller  
and employment growth across the Distric t. The 
full infrastructure needs for Epping are  set out 
in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  
Town Centre  
5.21 Policy  E 2 identifies Epping as a Town Centre. 
This reflects the Council’s aspiration for the 
centre to remain a successful destination, 
maintaining an d enhancing its existing retail offer along with other leisure and 
entertainment amenities.  
5.22 In accordance with Policy  E 2, the Counci l has 
designate d specific Primary and Secondary retail 
frontage areas . 
5.23 Reflec ting the National Planning Policy 
Frame work, the Council will also support the 
weekly market that currently takes place within 
the Town . 
 
Policy P 1 Epping  
A. Proposals for development on allocated sites 
should accord with the site specific requirements 
set out in Appendix 6 . 
Residential Sites  
B. In accordance with Policy SP 2 the following sites 
are allocated for residential development:   
(i) EPP.R 1 Land South of Epping, West –  
Approximately 450 homes  
(ii) EPP.R 2 Land South of Epping, East –  
Approximately 500 homes  
(iii) EPP.R3 Epping London Underground Ca r 
Park – Approximately 89 homes  
(iv) EPP.R4 Land at St John s Road –  
Approximately 34 homes  
(v) EPP.R5 Epping Sports Centre – 
Approximately 43 homes  
(vi) EPP.R6 Cottis Lane Car park –  Approximately 
47 homes  
(vii) EPP.R7 Bakers Lane Car Park –  
Approximately 31 homes  
(viii) EPP.R8 Land and pa rt of Civic O ffices – 
Approximately 44 homes  
(ix) EPP.R9 Land at Bower Vale – Approximately 
50 homes  
(x) EPP.R10 Land to rear of High  Street – 
Approximately 6 homes  
(xi) EPP.R11 Epping Library –  Approximately 11 
homes  
Employment Sites   
C. In accordance with Policy E 1 the following 
existing sites are designated for employment 
uses:  
(i) EPP.E1 Land at Eppingdene  
(ii) EPP.E2 Land at Coopersale Hall  
(iii) EPP.E3 Falconry Court  The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 117 
                             
 
 
(iv) EPP.E4 Bower Hill Industrial Estate  
Infrastructure Requirements  
D. Infrastructure requirements  must be delivered at 
a rate and scale to meet the needs that arise from 
the proposed development, in accordance with 
the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  Specifically , 
development proposals in Epping will be expected 
to contribute proportionately towards the 
following infrastructu re items:  
(i) New primary school;  
(ii) Appropriate provision of health facilities ; 
(iii) Highways and junction upgrades;  
(iv) Upgrades to Lindsey Street electricity sub-
station;  
(v) Necessary  upgrades to existing waste water 
infrastructure; and  
(vi) Appropriate provision of green 
infrastructure and open space throughout 
the settlement.  
E. Development proposals must  contribute 
proportionately towards the delivery of those 
infrastructure items set out above and in the 
Infrastructure Delivery P lan, unless subsequent 
iterations of the Infrast ructure Delivery Plan  or 
discussions with providers determine that these 
requirements have changed.  
Town  Centre Uses 
F. In accordance with Policy E 2, in Epping Town  
Centre,  at least 70% of the ground floor Primary 
Retail  Frontage  and at least 20% of the grou nd 
floor Secondary Retail  Frontage  will be 
maintained in A1 use.  
Air Pollution  
G. The development of the allocated sites within 
Epping ha ve the potential to produce air pollution 
that could impact upon  air quality in the District, 
including Epping Forest. In  accordance with Policy 
DM 2 and Policy DM 22, all proposals on sites 
which require a Transport Assessment/Transport 
Statement will be required to undertake an air 
quality assessment that identifies the potential 
impact of the development, together with 
contributions towards air quality monitoring .  
Recreational Pressure  
H. Due to t heir proximity to Epping Forest, 
development of the allocated sites within Epping 
will be required to make a contribution to the 
access management and monitoring of visitors to 
the Forest in accordance with Policy DM 2.  Flood Risk  
I. In accordance with Policy DM 15, development on 
residential allocations must be located wholly 
within Flood Zone 1.  
South Epping Masterplan Area  
J. Development proposals  in relation to sites EPP.R1 
and EPP.R 2 must comply  with a Strategic 
Masterplan  for the South Epping Area which has 
been formally endorsed by the Council.  
K. In addition to the requirements  set out above , the 
Strategic Masterplan should make provision for:  
(i) a minimum of 950 homes ; 
(ii) a new neighbourhood centre to include 
community facilities, employment and retail 
use; 
(iii) a new primary school and early year s 
childcare provision (which could be 
accommodated through the relocation of 
Ivy Chimneys Primary School) ; 
(iv) appropriate provision of health facilities,  
exploring the potential for a  new health hub 
to include an integrated GP surgery, 
pharmacy and any other necessary health 
services;  
(v) new road access and internal road layout to 
support a bus corridor ; 
(vi) a new vehicular , pedestrian and cycling  
bridge over the  railway line ; 
(vii) car clubs/car sharing or pooling 
arrangements, visitor parking and blue 
badge holders ; 
(viii) minimising the impact upon the setting of 
the Grade II li sted Gardners Farm and Grade 
II listed Farm Buildings ; 
(ix) minimising the impact upon the BAP Priorit y 
Habitat within the site and nearby Local 
Wildlife Site;  
(x) incorporation of an appropriate buffer to 
protect the amenity of future residents with 
regards to noise and air quality from  the 
M25 and an appropriate buffer from the 
High Voltage  Transmission Cabl es and land 
impacted by the BPA Oil Pipeline 
constraints;  
(xi) careful design to avoid or reduce impacts on 
the ancient woodland which may include  
providing a buffer zone of semi -natural 
habitat between built development and the 
Ancient Woodlan d; The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
118  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
(xii) the continued protection of those trees 
benefitting from a Tree Preservation Order;  
(xiii) the strengthening and/or creation of new 
Green Belt boundaries to the east and west 
of the site ; 
(xiv) the integration, retention and 
improvements to the existing watercourse 
and Public Rights of W ay, including the 
retention of the existing pedestrian 
footbridge over the M25 , and enhanced 
linkages to Epping station ; 
(xv) adequate levels of high quality public open 
space , including the replacement of Brook 
Road Informal Rec reation Ground; and  
(xvi) contribute towards air quality monitoring 
within the Epping Forest . 
L. The Masterplan and subsequent applications  
should be considered and informed by the Quality 
Review Panel.  EPP.R9
EPP.E4EPP.E1EPP.R4EPP.E3
EPP.E2EppingEPP.R10
EPP.R3EPP.R5EPP.R8
EPP.R7EPP.R6
EPP.R11
EPP.R2EPP.R1
South Epping
Masterplan
AreaEpping Ongar
Heritage RailwaySt John's Road
Brook RoadLower
Swaines
Station RoadHemnall Street
Ivy Chimneys RoadLindsey Street
Stonards Hill
Stewards
GreenRoadBower
HillCentre
DriveBuryLane
High StreetEpping
J6 / J27M25
M25
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
Site Allocations in
EppingMap 5.1 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-SP-0005-Rev2
Scale: 1:13,000 @ A4Date: December 2017¯
Legend
Residential and traveller
site allocationGreen Belt BoundaryResidential site allocation
Local Authority
boundaryTraveller site allocationMasterplan Area
Concept Framework
Plan AreaEmployment site allocation
This legend shows only the key Local Plan policy designations. 
A full legend can be found in Apppendix 6: Site Specific Requirements for Site Allocations. Map 5.1  Site Allocations in Epping
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.District Open LandCottis Lane
Hemnall StreetStationRoadStJohn'sRoadHighStreet
Town Centre Boundary, 
Primary Shopping Area, and Primary and Secondary 
Frontages in EppingMap 5.2 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-DP-00105-Rev2
Scale: 1:4,000 @A4Date: December 2017Legend¯
Primary Shopping AreaTown / Small District Centre
Boundary
Primary FrontageMap 5.2   Town Centre Boundary, 
Primary Shopping Area, 
and Primary and Secondary 
Frontages in Epping
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.Secondary FrontageProposed
Secondary Frontage
Green Belt BoundaryThe Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 121 
                             
 
 
Loughton  
5.24 Loughton has one of the Distr ict’s two Town 
Centres . The settlement boasts  good transport 
connectivity  as a direct result of its two London 
Underground Stations and over 20 different bus 
services.  
5.25 The settlement is host to the District’s only 
further education college and the Universi ty of 
Essex, Loughton Campus.  This provides a 
number of opportunities for Loughton, including 
the potential to create an ‘education hub’.  
5.26 Loughton has a significant retail offer, benefitting from a Town Centre, Small District 
Centre at Loughton Broadway, and out of town 
retail centre at Langston Road  (Epping Forest 
Shopping Park) . Loughton Town Centre is 
characterised by a diverse retail offer, with a large proportion of national retailers compared 
to other centres in Epping Forest District. Loughton High R oad provides some comparison 
retail alongside a range of other retail and non -
retail uses. The District Centre is characterised by a local and independent retail offer, with a 
small number of national retailers . 
5.27 Loughton Broadway is a Small District Centre  
that provides a range of retail facilities to meet 
local needs.  
5.28 The new Epping Forest Shopping Park at 
Langston Road represents a significant positive 
opportunity for Loughton, providing a broader 
retail offer with larger scale comparison shopping opportunities than currently offered 
elsewhere in Epping Forest District.  
 
Vision for Loughton  
Loughton will continue to be one of Epping Forest 
District’s major towns, providing a retail, employment 
and education hub that maximises its good public 
transport con nectivity and proximity t o Epping Forest 
and the forest -edge environment. The needs of 
Loughton residents will be met through an appropriate 
mix of housing in sustainable locations. Future 
development should maintain separation from 
neighbouring Theydon Bo is, Buckhurst Hill and 
Chigwell . 
The main centre of Loughton High Road will be 
strengthened and future development will  support the Centre’s  continued role as a successful retail centre 
within the D istrict.  Loughton Broadway will be the 
focus of further en hancement and the new Epping 
Forest Shopping Park  will provide a complementary 
retail offer. Employment will continue to be supported 
through both out -of-centre sites such as Langston 
Road, and smaller scale employment provision within 
the settlement centr e. 
The impact of further development on Epping Forest, 
both in terms of air quality and also in terms of further 
recreational pressure will be minimised and mitigation 
measures will have been implemented where 
necessary.  
Residential Sites  
5.29 Policy  SP 2 sets out the number of homes the 
Council will plan for in Loughton over the Plan 
period. The provision of approximately 1, 021 
homes has been informed by the aspiration for 
Loughton to continue to be  a major town, 
providing retail, education and employment in 
the District, supported by appropriate 
residential expansion to support the two 
successful retail centres, and out -of-centre 
Epping Forest Shopping Park . 
5.30 The Council has considered the possible spatial 
options to accommodate new homes at 
Loughton and concluded that there is one 
appropriate  spatial option which comprises 
intensification within the existing settlement. 
This option  provides opportunities to focus 
development in  the most sustainable locations, 
use previously developed land within the 
settlement  and minimise any harm to the wider 
landscape around the settlement, including Epping Forest . 
5.31 Following an assessment of the suitability, 
availability and achievability of Residential Sites  
located within this spatial option, the Council 
has identified 18 sites for potential allocation to 
meet the identified housing requirement, as set 
out in Policy P  2. 
5.32 Proposals for residential development will be 
expected to accord with site specific 
requirements as set out in Appendix 6.  
5.33 The allocation site LOU.R5 will r equire a 
Strategic Masterplan to be produced to ensure that development proposals are ‘front -loaded’, The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
122  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
recognising the scale and complexity of 
delivering communities . 
Sites for Traveller Accommodation  
5.34 Policy SP 2 sets out the Council’s approach to 
Travelle r Sites within the district.  There are no 
allocations  for traveller at Loughton . 
Employment Sites  
5.35 Policy E 1 sets out the Council’s preferred 
approach to identifying sites for employment (B 
use class) uses . 
5.36 There are two existing Employment Sites  that 
have been identified in Loughton for 
designation in the Local Plan:  
• LOU.E1 – Oakwood Hill Industrial Estate 
(6.1ha)  
• LOU.E3 – Buckingham Court (0.62ha)  
5.37 There is also an existing employment site that is 
allocated for a further 4,000sqm expansion of 
B2 class use  (general industrial):  
• LOU.E2 – Langston Road Industrial Estate  
(30.06ha)  
Infrastructure Requirements   
5.38 Policy  SP 2 confi rms the importance of 
identif ying and delivering key infras tructure to 
support residential , traveller  and employment 
growth across the D istrict. The infrastructure 
needs for Loughton are  set out in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan. 
Town  Centre  and Small District Centre  
5.39 Policy  E 2 identifies Loughton High Road as a 
Town Centre, Loughton Broadway as a Small 
District Centre . In addition Loughton also 
benefits from Epping Forest Shopping Park  as an 
out-of-town Retail Park . This reflects the 
Council’s aspiration for the se centre s to remain  
successful, supporting and strengthening the  
existing range of services and facilities.  
5.40 In accordance with Policy E 2, the Council has designated specific retail Primary and Secondary retail frontage s. 
 
 
  
Policy P 2 Loughton  
A. Proposals for development on allocated sites 
should accord with the site specific requirements 
set out in Appendix 6.  
Residen tial Sites  
B. In accordance with Policy SP 2 the following sites 
are allocated for residential development:  
(i) LOU.R1 Loughton London Underground car 
park – Approximately 165 homes  
(ii) LOU.R2 Debden London Underground car 
park  – Approximately 192 homes  
(iii) LOU.R3 Land a t Vere Road –  Approximately 9 
homes  
(iv) LOU.R4 Borders Lane playing fields –  
Approximately 217 homes  
(v) LOU.R5 Land at Jessel Green –  
Approximately 154 homes  
(vi) LOU.R6 Royal Oak P ublic House – 
Approximately 10 homes  
(vii) LOU.R7 Loughton Library –  Approximately 20 
homes  
(viii) LOU.R8 Land W est of High Road –  
Approximately 29 homes  
(ix) LOU.R9 Land at former Epping Forest College 
site – Approximately 111 homes  
(x) LOU.R10 Land at Station Road –  
Approximately 12 homes  
(xi) LOU.R11 Land west of Roding Road –  
Approximately 9 homes  
(xii) LOU.R12 Land at 63 Wellfields –  
Approximately 10 homes  
(xiii) LOU.R13 Land at 70 Wellfields –  
Approximately 6 homes  
(xiv) LOU.R14 Land at Alderton Hill –  
Approximately 33 homes  
(xv) LOU.R15 Land at Traps Hill – Approximately 
6 homes  
(xvi) LOU.R16 St Thomas More RC Church –  
Approximately 18 homes  
(xvii) LOU.R17 Land to the rear of High Road –  
Approximately 12 homes  
(xviii)  LOU.R18 Land at High Bee ch Road –  
Approximately 8 homes  
 
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 123 
                             
 
 
Employment Sites   
C. In accordance with Policy E 1 the following 
existing sites are designated for employment 
uses:  
(i) LOU.E1 – Oakw ood Hill Industrial Estate  
(ii) LOU.E3 – Buckingham Court  
D. In accordance with Policy SP 2 and Policy E 1 the 
following site is designated for employment uses 
with a further allocated expansion for B Use Class 
employment uses:  
(i) LOU.E2 – Langston Road Industrial Es tate 
Infrastructure Requirements  
E. Infrastructure  requirements  must be delivered at 
a rate and scale to meet the needs that arise from 
the proposed development, in accordance with 
the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  Specifically , 
development in Loughton  will be expected to 
contribute proportionately towards the following 
infrastructure items:  
(i) Expansion of s econdary  school s in the local 
area ; 
(ii) Appropriate provision of health facilities ; 
(iii) Highways and junction upgrades;  
(iv) Potential upgrades to existing water 
infra structure; and  
(v) Improvements to  open space throughout 
the settlement.  
F. The Council will only permit planning applications 
that contribute  towards the delivery of those 
infrastructure items set out above and in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan , unless subsequent 
iterations of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan  or 
discussions with providers determine that these 
items are no longer required.  
Town Centre U ses 
G. In accordance with Policy E 2, in Loughton High 
Road Town Centre, at least 70% of the ground 
floor Primary Retail Frontage and at least 35% of 
the ground floor Secondary Retail Frontage will be 
maintained in A1 use.  
Small District Centre Uses  
H. In accordance with Policy E 2, in Loughton 
Broadway Small District Centre, at least 60% of 
the ground floor Primary Reta il Frontage will be  
maintained in A1 use.  
Air Pollution  
I. The development of the allocated sites within 
Loughton have the potential to produce air pollution that could impact upon air quality in the 
District, including Epping Forest. In accordance 
with Poli cy DM 2 and Policy DM 22, all proposals 
on sites which require a Transport 
Assessment/Transport Statement will be required 
to undertake an air quality assessment that 
identifies the potential impact of the 
development, together with contributions  
towards air quality monitoring.  
Recreational Pressure  
J. Due to their proximity to Epping Forest 
development of the allocated sites within 
Loughton will be required to make a contribution 
to the access management and monitoring of 
visitors to the Forest in accordance with Policy 
DM 2.  
Flood Risk  
K. In accordance with Policy DM 15, development on 
residential allocations must be located wholly 
within Flood Zone 1.  
Jessel Green Masterplan  
L. Development proposals in relation to site LOU.R5 
must comply  with a Strategic Masterp lan that has 
been formally endorsed by the Council.   
M. In addition to the requirements set out above , the 
Jessel Green Masterplan must make provision for : 
(i) a minimum of 154 homes;  
(ii) approximately half  the site as enhanced 
public open space ; 
(iii) car clubs/car sharin g or pooling 
arrangements, visitor parking and blue 
badge holders ; 
(iv) improved vehicular  access into the site, and, 
new and improved pedestrian and cycle   
linkages with the surrounding area and 
nearby London Underground stations ; 
(v) be consistent and adhere to t he approach to 
design set out in Policy SP 3;  
(vi) a new Local Centre;  
(vii) the v arying levels throughout the site , taking 
the landscape into account;  
(viii) mitigat ing surface water flooding issues at 
the south of the site ; and  
N. The Masterplan and subsequent applications 
should be considered and informed by the Quality 
Review Panel.  LOU.R11
LOU.R1LOU.R12
LOU.R13
LOU.R14LOU.R15LOU.R16
LOU.R7LOU.R6
LOU.R10LOU.R8LOU.R9
LOU.R2LOU.R3
LOU.R4LOU.R5
LOU.R17
LOU.R18 LOU.E2LOU.E3
LOU.E1
LoughtonDebdenJessel Green
Masterplan Area
Jessel Drive
Chigwell LaneThe BroadwayPyrlesLaneRectory Lane
Willingale RoadHillyfields
Valley HillHigh RoadChurch HillGolding'sHill
Wellfields
Spareleaze
Hill
Alderton HillEpping New Road
Loughton
J5
M11
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
Site Allocations in
LoughtonMap 5.3 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-SP-0008-Rev2
Scale: 1:20,000 @ A4Date: December 2017¯
Legend
Residential and traveller
site allocationGreen Belt BoundaryResidential site allocation
Local Authority
boundaryTraveller site allocationMasterplan Area
Concept Framework
Plan AreaEmployment site allocation
This legend shows only the key Local Plan policy designations. 
A full legend can be found in Apppendix 6: Site Specific Requirements for Site Allocations. Map 5.3  Site Allocations in Loughton
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.District Open LandForest RoadTraps Hill
High RoadChurch Hill
Station Road
Old Station Road
Loughton
Town Centre Boundary, 
Primary Shopping Area, and Primary and Secondary 
Frontages in Loughton High RoadMap 5.4 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-DP-00104-Rev2
Scale: 1:6,000 @A4Date: December 2017Legend¯
Primary Shopping AreaTown / Small District Centre
Boundary
Primary FrontageMap 5.4   Town Centre Boundary, 
Primary Shopping Area, 
and Primary and Secondary 
Frontages in Loughton High Road
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.Secondary FrontageProposed
Secondary Frontage
Green Belt BoundaryWillingale Road
Rectory LaneVere Road
The Broadway
ChigwellLane
Debden
Small District Centre Boundary, 
Primary Shopping Area, and Primary and Secondary 
Frontages in Loughton BroadwayMap 5.5 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-DP-00102-Rev2
Scale: 1:2,000 @A4Date: December 2017Legend¯
Primary Shopping AreaTown / Small District Centre
Boundary
Primary FrontageMap 5.5   Small District Centre Boundary, 
Primary Shopping Area, 
and Primary and Secondary 
Frontages in Loughton Broadway
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.Secondary FrontageProposed
Secondary Frontage
Green Belt BoundaryThe Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 127 
                             
 
 
Waltham Abbey  
5.41 Waltham Abbey, located in the west of the 
District,  has a strong historic character with a 
number of heritage assets located in and around 
the main settlement.  Of particular note, 
Waltham Abbey Church and Gardens, Royal  
Gunpowder Mills and the adjacent Lee Valley 
Regional Park strongly contribute towards the 
character of the settlement.  
5.42 The Small District Centre is focused on the 
pedestrianised Sun Street and Market Square, 
which comprises a large number of cafes and 
restaurants, but which also has a small 
comparison retail offer.  
5.43 The settlement benefits from its close proximity 
to the Lee Valley Regional Park (LVRP), which 
presents a number of recreational opportunities  
for residents.  
 
Vision for Waltham Abbey  
Waltham A bbey will be a revitalised  Small  District 
Centre, with a thriving daytime and night -time 
economy. A mix of new housing will play a strong role 
in the town’s regeneration, providing the population 
to support a healthy town centre economy, whilst also 
enabli ng the required community and social 
infrastructure, supporting a fully sustainable 
community.  
The town will seek to develop across the P lan period, 
and will maximise retail, employment, and tourism 
based opportunities.  In particular the town will bui ld 
upon Waltham Abbey’s existing assets, including 
Waltham Abbey Church and Gardens, Royal 
Gunpowder Mills and adjacent Lee Valley Regional 
Park, developing a niche identity based primarily on 
tourism, built heritage and outdoor  leisure activities.  
New opp ortunities for enhanced provision of open 
spaces and leisure and amenity activities for residents 
will be taken and complement existing high value 
open spaces such as Town Mead.  Walking and cycling 
access from the town to these spaces will be 
maintained an d improved and improvements to 
sustainable transport infrastructure  will be made.  
The Town will support a diverse population of young 
people, families and the elderly, reducing inequality 
through provision of high quality new residential 
development in the most sustainable locations. 
Waltham Abbey will create local business and employment opportunities that underpin the local 
economy, particularly in the leisure industry.  
Residential Sites  
5.44 Policy  SP 2 sets out the number of homes the 
Council will plan for in Waltham Abbey over the Plan period. The provision of approximately 858 
homes has been informed by the aspiration for 
Waltham Abbey to provide a level of housing 
which supports regeneration of the settlement 
and improvements to the retention of Town 
Cent re services , community and social 
infrastructure.  
5.45 The Council has considered the  possible spatial 
options to accommodate new homes at 
Waltham Abbey and concluded that  the most 
appropriate  spatial options are:  
• Intensification within the existing 
settlement  
Focussing development within the existing settlement boundary will be less 
harmful to the Green Belt. This strategic 
option will maximise opportunities to 
focus development in the most 
sustainable locations within the 
settlement, uses previously developed 
land, and minimises any harm to the 
wider la ndscape around the settlement.  
• Expansion of the settlement to the nor th 
This strategic option provides opportunities 
to support development within close 
proximity to existing town centre services 
whilst minimisin g harm to the Green Belt . 
5.46 Following an assessment of the suitability, 
availability and achievability of Residential Sites  
located within these spatial options, the Council 
has identified seven sites for allocation to meet 
the identified housing requirement , as set out in 
Policy P  3. 
5.47 Proposals for residential development will be 
expected to accord  with site specific 
requirements  as set out in Appendix 6 . 
5.48 Development  proposals should ensure that 
vulnerability to Surface Water flooding as well 
as the potential  consequences for surrounding 
sites is suitability  mitigated.  The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
128  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
5.49 The allocation sites WAL.R1, WAL.R2, WAL.R3, 
and WAL.T1 and WAL.E7 will require a Strategic 
Masterplan to be produced to ensure that 
development proposals are ‘front -loaded’, 
recognising the scale and complexity of 
delivering the allocations . 
Sites for Traveller Accommodation  
5.50 Policy SP 2 sets out the Council’s approach to 
Traveller Sites within the district. One site has 
been allocated  for Traveller Accommodation  in 
Waltham Abbey:  
• WAL.T1  Land  to the rear of Lea Valley 
Nursery, Crooked Mile – up to 5 pitches  
Employment Sites  
5.51 Policy E 1 sets out the Council’s preferred 
approach to identifying sites for employment (B 
Class Use) uses.  
5.52 There are six existing Employment Sites  that 
have been identif ied in Waltham Abbey for 
designation in the Local Plan:  
• WAL.E1 – Howard Business Park (0.54ha)  
• WAL.E2 – Land at Breeches Farm  (3.27ha)  
• WAL.E 3 – Land at Woodgreen Road (0.62ha)  
• WAL.E 4 – Cartersfield Road / Brooker Road 
Industrial Estate  (8.69ha)  
• WAL.E 5 – Meridian Business Park and 
Sainsbury’s Distribution Centre  (23.65ha)  
• WAL.E 7 – Providence Nursery at Avey Lane 
(0.5ha)  
5.53 There is also an existing employment site that is 
allocated for a further 5,120sqm of B2/B8 class 
use (general indus trial/storage and 
wareho using):  
• WAL.E 6 – Galley Hill Road Industrial Estate 
(3.89ha)  
5.54 A further  allocation site for 40,000sqm of 
B1c/B2/B8 class uses (business use/general 
industrial/storage and warehousing)  has also 
been made:  
• WAL.E 8 – Land north of A121  (27.84 ) Infrastructur e Requirements  
5.55 The supporting text to Policy  P 3 confirms the 
importance of identifying and delivering key 
infrastructure to support residential and 
employment growth across the District. The 
infrastructure needs for Waltham Abbey are set 
out in Policy P 3 and the Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan.  
Small District Centre  
5.56 Policy E 2 identifies Waltham Abbey as a Small 
District Centre . This reflects the Council’s 
aspiration for the centre to become revitalised 
with a maintained and enhanced historic 
charac ter and local feel.  
5.57 In accordance with Policy E 2, the Council has designated specific Primary and Secondary retail 
frontage s. 
Policy P 3 Waltham Abbey  
A. Proposals for development on allocated sites 
should accord with the site specific requirem ents 
set out in Appendix 6.  
Residential Sites  
B. In accordance with Policy SP 2 the following sites 
are allocated for residential development:  
(i) WAL.R1 Land west of Galley Hill Road – 295 
homes  
(ii) WAL.R2  Lea Valley Nursery, Crooked Mile –  
Approximat ely 315 homes  
(iii) WAL .R3 Land adjoining Parklands –  
Approximately 130  homes  
(iv) WAL.R4 Fi re Station, Sewardstone Road –  
Approximately 16 homes  
(v) WAL.R5 Waltham Abbey  Community Centre, 
Saxon Way –  Approximately 67 homes and 
re-provision of a community centre  
(vi) WAL.R6  Waltham Abb ey Swimming Pool, 
Roundhills – Approximately 27 homes  
(vii) WAL.R7 Pine Tr ee Nursery, Avey Lane –  
Approximately 8 homes  
Employment Sites  
C. In accordance with Policy E 1 the following 
existing sites are designated for employment 
uses:  
(i) WAL.E1 – Howard Bu siness Park  
(ii) WAL.E2 – Land at Breeches Farm  The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 129 
                             
 
 
(iii) WAL.E 3 – Land at Woodgreen Road  
(iv) WAL.E 4 – Cartersfield Road/Brooker Road 
Industrial Estate  
(v) WAL.E 5 – Meridian Business Park and 
Distribution Centre  
(vi) WAL.E 7 – Providence Nursery, Avey Lane  
D. In accordance with Policy SP  2 and Policy E 1 the 
following sites are allocated for B Use Class 
employment uses:  
(i) WAL.E 6 – Galley Hill Road Industrial Estate  
(ii) WAL.E 8 – Land north of A 121 
Traveller Sites 
E. In accordance with Policy SP 2  the following site in 
allocated for Traveller Accommodation : 
(i) WAL.T1* Land to the rear of Lea Valley 
Nursery, Crooked Mile – up to 5 pitches  
Infrastructure Requirements  
F. Infrastructure requirements  must be delivered  at 
a rate and scale to meet the needs that arise from 
the proposed development, in accordance with 
the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  Specifically , 
development in Waltham Abbey will be expected 
to contribute proportionately towards the 
following infrastructure items:  
(i) Expansion of two primary schools within 
Waltham Abbey Forecast Planning Group;  
(ii) Appr opriate provision of health facilities ; 
(iii) Highways and junction upgrades;  
(iv) Potential upgrades to existing water 
infrastructure; and  
(v) Improvements and provision of open space 
throughout the settlement.  
G. The Council will seek the potential  relocation and 
expansio n of a secondary school in the local area 
in order to meet future needs arising from 
development.  
H. The Council will only permit planning applications 
that contribute  towards the delivery of those 
infrastructure items set out above and in the 
Infrastructure  Delivery Plan , unless subsequent 
iterations of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan  or 
discussions with providers determine that these 
items are no longer required . 
Small District Centre U ses 
I. In accordance with Policy E 2, in Waltham Abbey 
Small District Cent re, at least 45% of the ground 
floor Primary Retail Frontage and at least 25% of 
the ground floor Secondary Retail Frontage will be maintained in A1 use.  
Air Pollution  
J. The development of the allocated sites within 
Waltham Abbey have the potential to produc e air 
pollution that could impact upon air quality in the 
District, including Epping Forest. In accordance 
with Policy DM 2 and Policy DM 22, all proposals 
on sites which require a Transport 
Assessment/Transport Statement will be required 
to undertake an air quality assessment that 
identifies the potential impact of the 
development, together with contributions 
towards air quality monitoring.  
Recreational Pressure  
K. Due to their proximity to Epping Forest , 
development of the allocated sites within 
Waltham Abbe y will be required to make a 
contribution to the access management and 
monitoring of visitors to the Forest in accordance 
with Policy DM 2.  
Flood Risk  
L. In accordance with Policy DM 15, development on 
residential or traveller allocations must be located 
who lly within Flood Zone 1.  
Waltham Abbey North Masterplan  
M. Development proposals in relation to sites 
WAL.R1, WAL.R2, WAL.R3,  WAL.T1 and WAL.E7  
must comply  with a Strategic Masterplan t hat has 
been formally endorsed by the Council.  
N. In addition to the require ments set out above the 
Strategic Masterplan should make provision for : 
(i) a minimum of 610 homes ; 
(ii) effective integration with the Town Centre, 
supporting regeneration;  
(iii) up to 5 pitches for Traveller 
Accommodation ; 
(iv) a new local centre and community facility ; 
(v) Expansion of a Secondary School in the local 
area ;  
(vi) new road links between Crooked Mile and 
Galley Hill and an internal road layout to 
support a bus corridor ; 
(vii) the potential need to upgrade/widen the 
existing Galley Hill Road and Crooked Mile, 
in order to ensure a safe access point and 
sufficient capacity for the development they 
serve ; 
(viii) car clubs/car sharing or pooling 
arrangements, visitor parking and blue The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
130  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
badge holders ; 
(ix) the strengthening and/or creation of new 
Green Belt boundaries to the north and east 
of th e site ; 
(x) the integration, retention and improvements 
to the existing watercourses and public 
rights of way ; 
(xi) new pedestrian and cycle links through the 
site to the Lee Valley Regional Park, the 
existing allotments to the north, and 
towards Waltham Abbey Dist rict Centre ; 
(xii) adequate levels of public open space ; and  
(xiii) ensure that vulnerability to Surface Water 
flooding as well as the potential 
consequences for surrounding sites is 
suitably mitigated  through appropriate 
surface water drainage.  
O. The Masterplan and subs equent applications 
should be considered and informed by the Quality 
Review Panel.  
P. In accordance with Part F the Masterplan should 
explore and support the  possible  relocation and 
expansion of the King Harold Secondary School to 
an appropriate si te within t his Masterplan Area.  WAL.R1
WAL.R2
WAL.R3
WAL.R5
WAL.R6WAL.R4
WAL.R7
WAL.E7WAL.E5WAL.E3
WAL.E4WAL.E1WAL.E2
WAL.E8WAL.E6WAL.T1Waltham Abbey
North
Masterplan Area
Sun StreetGalley
HillRoad
RoundhillsAbbeyview
Farm Hill Road
Honey LaneSewardstoneRoadSewardstoneRoadCrookedM
ile
Honey LaneUpshire Road
Meridian
Way
MeridianWayWaltham Abbey
J26
M25
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
Site Allocations in
Waltham AbbeyMap 5.6 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-SP-0017-Rev2
Scale: 1:20,000 @ A4Date: December 2017¯
Legend
Residential and traveller
site allocationGreen Belt BoundaryResidential site allocation
Local Authority
boundaryTraveller site allocationMasterplan Area
Concept Framework
Plan AreaEmployment site allocation
This legend shows only the key Local Plan policy designations. 
A full legend can be found in Apppendix 6: Site Specific Requirements for Site Allocations. Map 5.6  Site Allocations in Waltham Abbey
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.District Open LandHighbridge
Street
Sewardstone Road
Quaker LaneAbbeyview
Crooked Mile
Sun Street
Small District Centre Boundary, 
Primary Shopping Area, and Primary and Secondary 
Frontages in Waltham AbbeyMap 5.7 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-DP-00106-Rev2
Scale: 1:4,000 @A4Date: December 2017Legend¯
Primary Shopping AreaTown / Small District Centre
Boundary
Primary FrontageMap 5.7   Small District Centre Boundary, 
Primary Shopping Area, 
and Primary and Secondary 
Frontages in Waltham Abbey
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.Secondary FrontageProposed
Secondary Frontage
Green Belt BoundaryThe Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 133 
                             
 
 
Ongar  
5.58 Located in the e ast of the district,  Ongar  is a 
District Centre of medieval origin that boasts a 
retail and service  offer benefiting the local 
community and those in other settlements 
further afield.  
5.59 The set tlement is surrounded by Green Belt 
which divides Ongar into the three primary 
areas  namely  Ongar, Shelley and Marden Ash.  
This creates  breaks in the  existing develop ment  
and gives Ongar a distinctive  settlement 
pattern.  
5.60 The town  benefits from a number of local 
heritage assets including Ongar Castle and the High Street Conservation Area . 
 
Vision for Ongar  
Ongar will continue to thrive as a settlement, and its 
existing local and independent character will be 
retained and strengthened.  Development in Ongar w ill 
contribute towards the settlement’s self- sufficiency 
aspirations, particularly through the provision of 
additional local services and infrastructure. This will 
include measures that support alternative, sustainable 
modes of travel to reduce congestion and reliance on 
car-based transport modes   
As a District Centre, Ongar will provide services and 
amenities for a wide catchment of residents and 
visitors.  Development will seek to diversify the 
employment offer of the Town by encouraging 
appropriate town c entre uses.  Ongar will capitalise 
upon its heritage and leisure assets, such as the Epping 
Ongar Heritage Railway and connection to the Essex 
Way, with the protection and enhancement of the 
settl ement’s historic environment.  
Residential Sites  
5.61 Policy  SP 2 sets out the number of  homes the 
Council will plan for in Ongar over the Plan 
period. The provision of approximately 590 
homes has been informed by the aspiration for Ongar to remain self -sustaining, to ensure that 
sufficien t homes are built to support exi sting 
services and to maximise the opportunities 
provided by the new secondary academy and 
capacity in the two primary schools.  5.62 The Council has considered the possible spatial 
options to accommodate new homes at Ongar 
and concluded that the most appropriat e spatial 
option s are : 
• Intensification within the existing 
settlement  
Focussing development within the 
existing settlement boundary will be less 
harmful to the Green Belt. This strategic 
option will maximise opportunities to 
focus development in the most 
sustainable locations within the 
settlement, use previously developed 
land, and minimise harm to the wider 
landscape around the settlement.  
• Expansion of the settlement to the north  
This strategic option provides opportunities to promote development in susta inable 
locations within the settlement, in close 
proximity to the new secondary academy 
and the existing primary school and health 
facility. While part of the strategic option is 
sensitive in Green Belt terms , the option as 
a whole is less harmful to the G reen Belt 
relative to other strategic options. It  is 
considered that the  opportunities created 
by locating development  sustainably within  
this strategic option would outweigh potential Green Belt and landscape harm, 
both of which can be limited through 
incor poration of suitable mitigation.  
• Expansion of the settlement to the west  
This strategic option provides opportunities to promote development in sustainable 
locations within the settlement, in close 
proximity to the new secondary academy 
and the existing primary school and health 
facility. While part of the strategic option is 
sensitive in Green Belt terms the option as a 
whole is less harmful to the Green Belt relative to the other strategic options 
iden tified for this settlement. I t is 
considered that the particular opportunities 
for sustainably locating development 
presented by this strategic option would 
outweigh potential Green Belt and 
landscape harm, both of which can be The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
134  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
limited through incorpora tion of suitable 
mitigation.  
• Expansion of the settlemen t to the south  
Although a greater distance from existing 
town centre amenities, public transport and community facilities, this strategic option 
provides opportunities for settlement 
expansion which would minimise harm to the Green Belt and largely avoid harm to 
the wider landscape around the settlement.
 
5.63 Following an assessment of the suitability, 
availability and achievability of Residential Sites  
located within these spatial options, the Co uncil 
has identified ten  sites for potential allocation 
to meet th e identified housing requirement, as 
set out in Policy P  4. 
5.64 Proposals for residential development will be 
expected to accord with site specific 
requirements as set out in Appendix 6.  
5.65 The allocation sites ONG.R1  and ONG.R 2 will be 
required to be in accordance with Concept Framework Plans , as defined in Policy SP 3,  to 
ensure that a comprehensive and cohesive 
approach is taken to the planning and delivery 
of high quality development.  
Sites for Traveller Accommodation   
5.66 Policy SP 2 sets out the Council’s approach to 
Traveller  Sites within the District.  There are no 
allocations for Traveller Accommodation  in 
Ongar . 
Employment Sites  
5.67 Policy E 1 sets out the Council’s approach to 
identifying sites for employment (B Use Clas s) 
uses. This is to support the redevelopment, 
renewal or extension of existing premises for 
their designated use while identifying new 
Employment Sites  as necessary to meet the 
identified ne ed as set out in Policy SP 2.  
5.68 There is one existing employment si te that ha s 
been identified in Ongar for designation in the 
Local Plan:  
• ONG.E1 – Essex Technology and Innovation 
Centre (0.28 ha) 
 Infrastructure Requirements  
5.69 The supporting text to Policy SP 2 confirms the 
importance of identifying and delivering key 
infras tructure to support residential, travellers 
and employment growth across the District. The 
infrastructure needs for Ongar are set out in 
Policy P  4 and the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  
Small District Centre  
5.70 Policy E 2 identifies Ongar  as a Small District 
Centre. This reflects the Council’s aspiration for 
the centre to continue to meet local retail needs 
during the day and into the evening.  
5.71 In accordance with Policy  E 2, the Council has 
designate d specific retail frontage s. 
 
Policy P 4 Ongar  
A. Proposal s for development on allocated sites 
should accord with the site specific requirements 
set out in Appendix 6.  
Residential Sites  
B. In accordance with Policy SP 2 the following sites 
are allocated for residential development:  
(i) ONG.R1 Land west of Ongar –  
Approx imately 99 homes  
(ii) ONG.R2 Land at Bowes Field –  
Approximately 135 homes  
(iii) ONG R3 -  Land southwest of Fyfield Road–  
Approximately 27 homes  
(iv) ONG.R4 Land North of Chelmsford Road –  
Approximately 163 homes  
(v) ONG.R5 – Land at Greensted Road –  
Approximately 107 homes  
(vi) ONG.R.6 Land between Stanford Rivers 
Road and Brentwood Road –  Approximately 
33 homes  
(vii) ONG.R.7 Land South of Hunters Chase and 
West of Brentwood Road –  Approximately 
17 homes  
(viii) ONG.R.8 The Stag Pub –  Approximately 9 
homes  
Employment Sites  
C. There are no new employment site allocations in 
Ongar. In accordance with Policy E 1 the following 
existing site is designated for employment use:  
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 135 
                             
 
 
(i) ONG.E1 – Essex Technology and Innovation 
Centre  
Infrastructure Requirements  
D. Infrastructure r equirements  must be delivered at 
a rate and scale to meet the needs that arise from 
the proposed development, in accordance with 
the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  Specifically , 
development in Ongar  will be expected to 
contribute proportionately towards the following 
infrastructure items:  
(i) Expansion of one of the p rimary school s; 
(ii) Highways and junction upgrades;  
(iii) Potential u pgrades to existing waste water 
infrastructure; and  
(iv) The delivery /improvement  of open space 
throughout the settlement.  
E. The Council will only permit planning applications 
that contribute  towards the delivery of those 
infrastructure items set out above and in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan , unless subsequent 
iterations of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan  or 
discussions with providers determine that these 
items are no longer required.  
Small District Centre U ses 
F. In accordance with Policy E 2, in Ongar District  
Centre, at least 50% of the ground floor Primary 
Retail Frontage and at least 45% of the ground 
floor Secondary  Retail Frontage will be 
maintained in A1 use.  
Air Pollution  
G. The development of the allocated sites within 
Ongar have the potential to produce a ir pollution 
that could impact upon air quality in the District, 
including Epping Forest. In accordance with Policy 
DM 2 and Policy DM 22, all proposals on sites 
which require a Transport Assessment/Transport 
Statement will be required to undertake an air 
quality assessment that identifies the potential 
impact of the development, together with 
contributions towards air quality monitoring.  
Flood Risk  
H. In accordance with Policy DM 15, development on 
residential allocations must be located wholly 
within Flood Zone 1.  
West Ongar Concept Framework  
I. In order to ensure that a comprehensive and 
cohesive approach is taken to the planning and 
delivery of certain sites and associated 
infrastructure, development proposals in relation to sites ONG.R1 and ONG.R2  will be r equired to 
be in accordance with a Concept Framework Plan , 
as defined in Policy SP 3.  
J. The Concept Framework Plans relate to a number 
of site allocations.  These should be  undertaken 
jointly between  all applicants of the site 
allocations subject to the Conce pt Framework 
Plan. Details of the specific requirements of the 
Concept Framework Plans can be found within the 
site specific requirements set out in Appendix 6 . 
K. These will be produced by the applicants of the 
site allocations and shall be endorsed  by the 
Council prior to the submission of any planning 
applications. The Concept Framework Plan and 
the development proposals for each site located 
within it should be considered and informed by 
the Quality Review Panel.  
  ONG.R3
ONG.R6ONG.R5
ONG.R7ONG.R8ONG.R1 ONG.R2ONG.E1
ONG.R4
OngarWest Ongar
Concept Framework
Plan AreaHigh Ongar Road
TheBoroughEppingOngarHeritageRailway
Stanford
RiversRoadMoretonRoad Fyfield Road
BrentwoodRoadGreenstedRoadEppingRoadChelmsford Road
HighStreet
Brentwood
DistrictOngar
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
Site Allocations in
OngarMap 5.8 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-SP-0003-Rev2
Scale: 1:12,000 @ A4Date: December 2017¯
Legend
Residential and traveller
site allocationGreen Belt BoundaryResidential site allocation
Local Authority
boundaryTraveller site allocationMasterplan Area
Concept Framework
Plan AreaEmployment site allocation
This legend shows only the key Local Plan policy designations. 
A full legend can be found in Apppendix 6: Site Specific Requirements for Site Allocations. Map 5.8  Site Allocations in Ongar
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.District Open LandCastleStreet
StanleyPlaceHigh
Street
Small District Centre Boundary, 
Primary Shopping Area, and Primary and Secondary 
Frontages in OngarMap 5.9 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-DP-00101-Rev2
Scale: 1:3,000 @A4Date: December 2017Legend¯
Primary Shopping AreaTown / Small District Centre
Boundary
Primary FrontageMap 5.9   Small District Centre Boundary, 
Primary Shopping Area, 
and Primary and Secondary 
Frontages in Ongar
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.Secondary FrontageProposed
Secondary Frontage
Green Belt BoundaryThe Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
138  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Buckhurst H ill 
5.72 Buckhurst Hill  is located in the south of the 
District, within close proximity to Loughton. The 
settlement has good transport connectivity and 
is connected via the Central Line to the London 
Underground network.  
5.73 The settlement benefits from a Small Dis trict 
Centre that has a range of retailers, with a 
number of retail units currently in use by 
independent fashion and beauty- related 
businesses.  
5.74 There are a number of professional services 
firms based in Buckhurst Hill, which represent 
an opportunity that could be supported through 
the Local Plan.  
 
Vision for Buckhurst Hill  
Buckhurst Hill will maintain its unique identity and 
separation from Loughton . It will provide services and 
amenities to meet the needs of its community, while 
seeking to boost connecti vity between the station, 
Queens Road and the wider settlement.  
The Village will provide  varied employment including 
professional services employment  as part of a 
successful and prosperous high street . New 
opportunities for wider employment uses will be 
maximised.  
A focus on improving sustainable transport 
connections will seek to  maximise the good public 
transport accessibility.  
Residential Sites  
5.75 Policy  SP 2 sets out the number of homes the 
Council will plan for in Buckhurst Hill over the Plan period. The  provision of approximately 87 
homes has been informed by the aspiration for 
Buckhurst Hill to continue to support successful 
retail and professional services employment 
while retaining its local feel.  
5.76 The Council has considered the possible spatial 
option s to accommodate new homes at 
Buckhurst Hill and concluded that there is one 
appropriate  spatial option which comprises 
intensification within the existing settlement. This option provides opportunities to focus 
development in the most sustainable location s within the settlement, and use  previously 
developed land.  
5.77 Following an assessment of the suitability, 
availability and achievability of Residential Sites  
located within this spatial option, the Council 
has identified three sites for potential allocation 
to meet the identified housing requirement, as 
identified in Policy P  5  
5.78 Proposals for residential development will be 
expected to accord with site specific 
requirements as set out in Appendix 6.  
Sites for Traveller Accommodation  
5.79 Policy SP 2  sets out the C ouncil’s approach to 
Traveller Sites within the D istrict . There are no 
allocations for Traveller Accommodation  in 
Buckhurst Hill . 
Employment Sites  
5.80 Policy E 1 sets out the Council’s approach to 
identifying sites for employment (B use class) 
uses. There are no existing or allocated 
Employment Sites  in Buckhurst Hill identified in 
the Plan . 
Infrastructure Requirements  
5.81 The supporting text to Policy  SP 2 confirms the 
importance of identifying and delivering key 
infrastructure to support residential and 
employmen t growth across the District. The 
infrastructure needs for Buckhurst Hill are set 
out in Policy P 5 and the Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan.  
Small District Centre  
5.82 Policy E 2 identifies Buckhurst Hill as a Small 
District Centre. This reflects the Council’s 
aspiration to afford the highest level of 
protection for A1 retail uses.  
5.83 In accordance with Policy E 2, the Council has 
designated specific retail frontage s.  The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 139 
                             
 
 
Policy P 5 Buckhurst Hill  
A. Proposals for development on allocated sites 
should accord with the  site specific requirements 
set out in Appendix 6.  
Residential Sites  
B. In accordance with Policy SP 2 the following sites 
are allocated for residential  development:  
(i) BUCK.R1 Land at Powell Road – 
Approximately 31 homes  
(ii) BUCK.R2 Queens Road car park –  
Approxima tely 4 1 homes  
(iii) BUCK.R3 Stores at Lower Queens Road –  
Approximately 15 homes and retail 
floorspace  
Infrastructure Requirements  
C. Infrastructu re requirements  must be delivered at 
a rate and scale to meet the needs that arise from 
the proposed development, in ac cordance with 
the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  Specifically , 
development in Buckhurst Hill will be expected to 
contribute proportionately towards the following 
infrastructure items:  
(i) Highways and junction upgrades;  
(ii) The improvement and provision of open 
space throughout the settlement.  
D. The Council will only permit planning applications 
that contribute  towards the delivery of those 
infrastructure items set out above and in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan , unless subsequent 
iterations of the Infrastructure D elivery Plan  or 
discussions with providers determine that these 
items are no longer required.  
Small District Centre U ses 
E. In accordance with Policy E 2, in Buckhurst Hill 
District Centre, at least 65% of the ground floor 
Primary Retail Frontage and at least  40% of the 
ground floor Secondary Retail Frontage will be 
maintained in A1 use.  
Air Pollution  
F. The development of the allocated sites within 
Buckhurst Hill have the potential to produce air 
pollution that could impact upon air quality in the 
District, incl uding Epping Forest. In accordance 
with Policy DM 2 and Policy DM 22, all proposals 
on sites which require a Transport 
Assessment/Transport Statement will be required 
to undertake an air quality assessment that 
identifies the potential impact of the 
develo pment, together with contributions  towards air quality monitoring . 
Recreational Pressure  
G. Due to their proximity to Epping Forest , 
development of the allocated sites within 
Buckhurst Hill will be required to make a 
contribution to the access management and 
monitoring of visitors to the Forest in accordance 
with Policy DM 2.  
Flood Risk  
H. In accordance with Policy DM 15, development on 
residential allocations must be located wholly 
within Flood Zone 1.  
  Roding ValleyBUCK.R1
BUCK.R2BUCK.R3Buckhurst
HillRoebuckLane
Lower
QueensRoadQueens Road
Princes Road
Buckhurst
WayHighRoad
London Borough
of RedbridgeBuckhurst
Hill
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
Site Allocations in
Buckhurst HillMap 5.10 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-SP-0001-Rev2
Scale: 1:8,000 @ A4Date: December 2017¯
Legend
Residential and traveller
site allocationGreen Belt BoundaryResidential site allocation
Local Authority
boundaryTraveller site allocationMasterplan Area
Concept Framework
Plan AreaEmployment site allocation
This legend shows only the key Local Plan policy designations. 
A full legend can be found in Apppendix 6: Site Specific Requirements for Site Allocations. Map 5.10  Site Allocations in Buckhurst Hill
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.District Open LandPrince's RoadPalmerston Road
Queen's RoadBuckhurst
Hill
Small District Centre Boundary, 
Primary Shopping Area, and Primary and Secondary 
Frontages in Buckhurst HillMap 5.11 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-DP-00103-Rev2
Scale: 1:2,000 @A4Date: December 2017Legend¯
Primary Shopping AreaTown / Small District Centre
Boundary
Primary FrontageMap 5.11   Small District Centre Boundary, 
Primary Shopping Area, 
and Primary and Secondary 
Frontages in Buckhurst Hill
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.Secondary FrontageProposed
Secondary Frontage
Green Belt BoundaryThe Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
142  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
North Weald Bassett  
5.84 North Weald Ba ssett is located in centre of the 
District, to the north east of Epping.  The village 
has a proud military history, mainly 
characterised through links to aviation at North 
Weald  Airfield  to the west.  
5.85 The settlement is surrounded by Green Belt on 
all sides, and views across the Ongar Redoubt 
Hill are an asset to the character of the local 
area . 
5.86 The Council has produced a number of studies 
to consider the future of North  Weald  Airfield. 
In 2014 the findings from these studies were 
integrated into a wider maste rplan for the 
village which presents a long term vision and aspirations for the village. The proposals 
presented within the North Weald Bassett 
Masterplanning Study (‘the Study’) were subject 
to public consultation and reported to Cabinet in October 2014. The content of the North 
Weald Bassett masterplan has informed the 
proposals contained within this sub- section.  For 
the purpose of this Plan when reference is made 
to ‘North Weald Bassett’ it refers to the 
settlement of North Weald Bassett, recognising 
that the Parish encompasses North Weald 
Bassett Village, Thornwood and Hastingwood.  
Vision for North Weald Bassett  
5.87 The 2014 Masterplan Study includes a section 
on the vision for the  settlement, which 
summarises the valued characteristics of the 
settlement and potenti al opportunities  that 
should be maximised through the masterplan: 
“North Weald Bassett has a number of great 
assets including, but not limited to, the 
settlement’s relationship with the surrounding green open space, stand- out historic buildings, a 
range of  housing types which can support a 
mixed community and the heritage and current 
economic role of the North Weald Airfield. 
However, the settlement could also benefit from 
investment to strengthen the existing 
commercial centre and establish North Weald 
Bassett as a sustainable place in its own right 
with an active community life.”  
5.88 The Council has  refined the statements made in 
the Study to create a vision statement for the settlement. The following vision incorporates 
the findings of the Masterplanning study as well 
as those identified through further stakeholder 
engagement and evidence base documents:  
 
Vision for North Weald Bassett  
North Weald Bassett will become more self -sufficient, 
enabling the settlement to realise a long -term future 
as a larger provi der of employment, housing and 
services within Epping Forest District. The distinct local 
character of the settlement , surrounded by greatly 
valued green open space,  will be retained by 
maintaining key landscape areas to the south and 
promoting its rich mi litary heritage.  
Future development will be located to the northern 
side of the village, in line with the vision set out in the 
2014 masterplan .  
Aviation related uses , comp lemented by a mix of 
employment and leisure uses will be sought to boost 
the commercial offer and sustainability of the Airfield.  
The needs of North Weald Bassett residents will be 
met through improved health, education, leisure and  
community facilities, alongside a strengthened range 
of shops  and services that are complemented by 
enha nced sustainable and public transport provision.  
Residential Sites  
5.89 Policy  SP 2 sets out the estimated number of 
homes the Council will plan for in North Weald 
Bassett over the Plan period.  The provision of 
approximately 1,050 homes has been informed 
by the aspirations set out in the North Weald 
Bassett Masterplan  and subsequent 
consultation , which identifies the potential for 
the village to accommodate between 500 and 1,600 homes.  
5.90 The Council has identifie d five sites for 
allocat ion to meet the identified housing 
requirement, as identified in Policy P 6.  
5.91 Proposals for residential development will be 
expected to accord with site specific 
requirements as set out in Appendix 6.  
5.92 The allocat ed sites NWB.R1, NWB.R2, NWB.R3, 
NWB.R4 and NWB.R5 will require a Strate gic 
Masterplan  to be produced.  
 
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 143 
                             
 
 
Sites for Traveller Accommodation  
5.93 Policy SP 2 sets out the Council’s approach to 
Traveller Sites within the D istrict. One site ha s 
been allocated for Traveller Accommodation  in 
North Weald Bassett:  
• NWB.T1 Land west of Tylers Green – up to 5 
pitches  
Employment Sites   
5.94 Policy E 1 sets out the Council’s preferred 
approach to identifying sites for employment (B 
Class ) uses.  
5.95 There are three existing Employment Sites  that 
have been identified in North Weald Bassett for 
designati on in the Local Plan:  
• NWB.E1 – New House Farm at Vicarage 
Lane (0.63ha)  
• NWB.E2 – Tylers Green Industrial Area  
(1.1ha)  
• NWB.E3 – Weald Hall Farm and Commercial 
Centre (3.07 ha) 
5.96 There is also an existing employment site that is 
allocated for a further 40,000sq m of B1/B2/B8 
class use (business use/general 
industrial/storage and warehousing):  
• NWB.E4 – North Weald Airfield  (40.8ha)  
5.97 This site will require a Strategic Masterplan to be produced.  
Infrastructure Requirements  
5.98 The supporting text to Policy  SP 2 confirms the 
importance of identifying and delivering key 
infrastructure to support residential and 
employment growth across the District. The 
infrastructure needs for North Weald Bassett 
are set out in Policy P 6 and the Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan.  
Village  Centre  
5.99 The North Weald Bassett Masterplan identifie d 
the delivery of an improved centre and new 
smaller second centre at Tylers Green to 
support the proposed residential and 
employment development in the village. The 
Council will require new retail provision to  be 
incorporated into planning proposals  which 
support the delivery of the North Weald Bassett Masterplan.  Any new retail development should 
accord with the requirements of Policy  E 2. 
P 6 North Weald Bassett  
A. Proposals for development on allocated sites 
should accord with the site specific 
requirements set out in Appendix 6.  
Residential Sites  
B. In accordance with Policy SP 2 the following 
sites are  allocated :  
(i) NWB.R1 Land at Bluemans – 
Approximately 223  homes  
(ii) NWB.R2 Land at Tylers Farm –  
Approximately 2 1 hom es  
(iii) NWB.R3 Land south of Vicarage Lane –  
Approximately 728  homes  
(iv) NWB.R4 Land at Chase Farm –  
Approximately 27 homes  
(v) NWB.R5 Land at The Acorns , Chase 
Farm  – Approximately 51 homes  
Employment Sites  
C. In accordance with Policy E 1 the following 
existing sites a re designated for employment 
uses:  
(i) NWB.E1 – New House Farm, Vicarage 
Lane  
(ii) NWB.E2 – Tylers Green Industrial Estate  
(iii) NWB.E3 – Weald Hall Farm and 
Commercial Centre  
D. In accordance with Policy SP 2 and Policy E 1 
the following site is designated for 
employment u ses with a further allocated 
expansion for B Use Class employment uses:  
(i) NWB.E4 – North Weald Airfield  
Traveller Sites  
E. In accordance with Policy SP 2 the following 
sites are allocated for Traveller 
Accommodation : 
(i) NWB.T1 Land west of Tylers Green –  up 
to 5 p itches  
Infrastructure Requirements  
F. Infrastructure r equirements  must be delivered 
at a rate and scale to meet the needs that 
arise from the proposed development, in 
accordance with the  Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan . Specifically , development in North 
Weald B assett  will be expected to contribute 
proportionately towards the following The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
144  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
infrastr ucture items:  
(i) A new primary school;  
(ii) Appropriate provision of health 
facilities ; 
(iii) Highways and junction upgrades;  
(iv) Local upgrades to the existing waste 
water network and drain age 
infrastructure;  
(v) Potential upgrades to existing water , gas  
and telecommunications infrastructure; 
and 
(vi) The improvement and provision of  open 
space throughout the settlement.  
G. The Council will only permit planning 
applications that contribute  towards the 
delivery of those infrastructure items set out 
above and in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan , 
unless subsequent iterations of the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan  or discussions 
with providers determine that these items are 
no longer required.  
Air Pollution  
H. The development of the allocated sites within 
North Weald Bassett have the potential to 
produce air pollution that could impact upon 
air quality in the District, including Epping 
Forest. In accordance with Policy DM 2 and 
Policy DM 22, all proposals on sites which 
require a Transport Assessment/Transport 
Statement will be required to undertake an air 
quality assessment that identifies the 
potential impact of the development, together 
with contributions towards air quality 
monitoring.  
Recreational Pressure  
I. Due to their proximity to Epping Forest 
development of the allocated sites within 
North Weald Bassett will be required to make 
a contribution to the access management and 
monitoring of visitors to the Forest in 
accordance with Policy DM 2.  
Flood Risk  
J. In acco rdance with Policy DM 15, 
development on residential or traveller 
allocations must be located wholly within 
Flood Zone 1.  
North Weald Bassett Masterplan  Area  
K. Development proposals in relation to sites 
NWB.R1, NMB.R2, NWB.R3, NWB.R4 and NWB.R5 , NWB.T1  must comply  with a 
Strategic Masterplan for the North Weald 
Bassett Area which has been formally 
endorsed by the Council.   
L. In addition to the requirements set out above , 
the Strategic Masterplan must make provision 
for: 
(i) a minimum of 1,050 homes  and 5 
Traveller pitches ; 
(ii) local centre  including, retail, 
community, and appropriate provision 
of health facilities ; 
(iii) address ing surface water flooding ; 
(iv) new primary school ; 
(v) adequate levels of public open space to 
be provided on the site;  
(vi) careful design that mitigates any 
potential impact upon the Grade II 
Listed Buildings at Bluemans 
Farm/ Tyler’s Farm house ; 
(vii) new and improved Public Rights of Way  
and cycle  linkages with the surrounding 
area ; 
(viii) careful design and layout to ensure that 
where sensitive land uses are proposed 
near t he intermediate High Pressure Gas 
Pipeline they accord with the 
requirements set out in the HSE's Land 
Use Planning Methodology ; 
(ix) the need to upgrade/widen the existing 
Vicarage Lane West access in order to 
ensure a safe access point which has 
sufficient ca pacity for the development 
it serves ; and  
(x) the continued protection of those trees 
benefitting from a Tree Preservation 
Order, and other identified veteran 
trees . 
M. The Masterplan and subsequent applications 
should be considered and informed by the 
Quality Re view Panel.  
North Weald Airfield Masterplan  
N. Development proposals at North Weald 
Airfield must co mply with a Masterplan for 
the North Weald Airfield . 
O. In addition to the requirements set out in 
parts A -K, the Strategic Masterplan must  make 
provision for : 
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 145 
                             
 
 
(i) a Leisure Centre and other community 
uses  to the east  of the main runway ; 
(ii) retention and expansion of aviation uses  
to the west of the main  runway;  
(iii) provision for c.10ha of additional 
employment land of B1 , B2, B8  uses to 
the east ; and 
(iv) a new access from Epping  Road to 
service the west of the site.  
P. The Masterplan and subsequent applications 
should be considered and informed by the 
Quality Review Panel.  NWB.R5
NWB.R2
NWB.R4
NWB.R3NWB.R1
NWB.T1NWB.E2 NWB.E3NWB.E1
NWB.E4
North WealdNorth Weald
Bassett
Masterplan Area
North Weald
Airfield
Masterplan AreaVicarage Lane West
Epping Ongar
Heritage RailwayHigh Road
Epping RoadChurchLaneA414
Merlin
Way
North Weald
Bassett
M11
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
Site Allocations in
North Weald BassettMap 5.12 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-SP-0011-Rev2
Scale: 1:16,000 @ A4Date: December 2017¯
Legend
Residential and traveller
site allocationGreen Belt BoundaryResidential site allocation
Local Authority
boundaryTraveller site allocationMasterplan Area
Concept Framework
Plan AreaEmployment site allocation
This legend shows only the key Local Plan policy designations. 
A full legend can be found in Apppendix 6: Site Specific Requirements for Site Allocations. Map 5.12  Site Allocations in North Weald Bassett
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.District Open LandThe Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 147 
                             
 
 
Chigwell  
5.100  Chig well, located to the south of the D istrict, 
comprises three relatively distinct areas: the  
original historic village and retail area of Brook 
Parade, the Grange Hill and Limes Farm area, 
and Chigwell Row. The settlement has a rural 
and historic character, and is surrounded by Green Belt.  
5.101  Chigwell Parish Council is currently preparing  a 
Neighbo urhood Plan  for the parish area.  
 
Vision for Chigwell  
Chigwell will provide a range of services and 
infrastructure to support new and existing 
communities through the allocation of small and 
medium sites  to meet local housing needs. Key 
priorities for inf rastructure in the Village are 
sustainable transport, health care and e ducation.  
The distinctive communities of Chigwell Village, 
Grange Hill and Chigwell Row will be celebrated, whilst 
opportunities will be explored through the 
redevelopment of The Limes Estate to develop 
Chigwell as an integrated village.  
A focus on brownfield sites and sustainable Green Belt 
release will ensure the existing visual identity of the 
settlement is maintained while providing future 
homes.  In particular the important gap betwe en 
Chigwell Row at the north and Hainault at the south 
will be protected.  Care will be taken to maintain the 
gap between Chigwell and Woodford to the west, 
whilst the gap with Loughton and Debden will also be 
retained.  
Future development will pr eserve and enhance the 
rural and historic character of the Village , and new 
development will support new and di verse 
employment opportunities.  
Residential Sites  
5.102  Policy  SP 2 sets out the likely number of homes 
the Council will plan for in Chigwell over the 
Plan perio d. The provision of approximately 376 
homes has been informed by the aspirati on for 
Chigwell to support predominantly small scale development to meet a wide variety of local 
housing needs, while retaining and enhancing  
the character of the distinctive comm unitie s 
which make up the settlement.  5.103  The Council has considered the possible spatial 
option to accommodate new homes at Chigwell 
and concluded that the most appropriate  spatial 
options are:  
• Intensification within the existing 
settlement   
Focussing develop ment within the 
existing settlement boundary will be less harmful to the Green Belt. This strategic 
option will maximise opportunities to 
focus development in the most 
sustainable locations within the 
settlement, uses previously developed 
land, and minimis es any harm to the 
wider landscape around the settlement . 
• Expansion of the settlement to the north east   
This strategic option provides a natural 
extension to the settlement, promoting 
settlement rounding, and is the least 
harmful to the Green Belt relativ e to the 
other strategic options. Whilst this 
strategic option is sensitive to change in 
landscape terms, this harm can be 
mitigated or avoided through the careful 
sitin g of development and design.  
• Intensific ation of Chigwell Ro w settlement  
This strategic option lies predominantly 
within the existing settlement boundary 
and would be less harmful to the Green 
Belt relative to other strategic options 
identified around the settlement. This 
strategic option is also less sensitive to 
change in landscape terms.  
5.104  Following an assessment of the suitability, 
availability and achievability of Residential Sites  
located within these spatial opti ons, the Council 
has identified twelve sites for allocati on to meet 
the identified housing requirement, as set out in Policy P  7. 
5.105  Proposals for residential development will be 
expected to comply with site specific requirements  as set out in Policy P  7. 
5.106  The allocation CHIG.R7 will require a Masterplan 
to be produced to enable the regeneration of 
the site and to ensure that developme nt The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
148  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
proposals are ‘front -loaded’, recognising the 
scale and comple xity of delivering c ommunities.  
Sites for Traveller Accommodation  
5.107  Policy SP 2 sets out the Council’s approach to 
Traveller Sites within the D istrict . There are no 
allocations for Traveller Accommodation  in 
Chigwell . 
Employment Sites  
5.108  Policy E 1 sets out the Council’s approach to 
identifying sites for employment (B use class) 
uses. This is to support the redevelopment, 
renewal or extension of existing premises for 
their designated use while identifying new Employment Sites  as necessary to meet the 
identified need as set out in Policy SP 2.  
5.109  There are no existing Employment Site 
designations or new  Employment Site  
allocations  in Chigwell  identified in the Local 
Plan.  
Infrastructure Requirements  
5.110  The support ing text to Policy  SP 2 c onfirms the 
importance of identifying and delivering key 
infras tructure to support residential  and 
employment growth across the District. The 
infrastructure needs for Chigwell will be set out 
in th e Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  
 
Policy P 7 Chigwell  
A. Propo sals for development on allocated sites 
should accord with the site specific 
requirements set out in Appendix 6.  
Residential Sites  
B. In accordance with Policy SP 2 the following 
sites are allocated for residential 
development:  
(i) CHIG.R1 Land adjacent to The Pa ddock – 
Approximately 12 homes  
(ii) CHIG.R2 Woodview –  Approximately 2 3 
homes  
(iii) CHIG.R3 Land at Manor Road –  
Approximately 11 homes  
(iv) CHIG.R4 Land between Froghall Lane 
and railway line –  Approximately 105 
specialist homes  
(v) CHIG.R5 Land at Chigwell Nurseries – Appro ximately 65 homes  
(vi) CHIG.R6 The Limes Estate – 
Approximately 100 homes  
(vii) CHIG.R7 Land at Chigwell Convent  – 
Approximately 28 homes  
(viii) CHIG.R8 Land at Fencepiece Road –  
Approximately 6 homes  
(ix) CHIG.R9 Land at Grange Court  – 
Approximately 8 homes  
(x) CHIG.R10 The Maypole  – Approximately 
11 homes  
(xi) CHIG.R1 1 Land at Hainault Road –  
Approximately 7 homes  
Infrastructure Requirements  
C. Infrastructure r equirements  must be delivered 
at a rate and scale to meet the needs that 
arise from the proposed development, in 
accordance with t he Infrastructure Delivery 
Development in Chigwell will be expected to 
contribute proportionately towards the 
following infrastructure items:  
(i) Secondary school expansion ; 
(ii) Highways and junction upgrades;  
(iii) Potential upgrades to existing waste 
water infrastruct ure; and  
(iv) Improvement of open space throughout 
the settlement.  
D. The Council will only permit planning 
applications that contribute  towards the 
delivery of those infrastructure items set out 
above and in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan , 
unless subsequent ite rations of the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan  or discussions 
with providers determine that these items are 
no longer required.  
Air Pollution  
E. The development of the allocated sites within 
Chigwell  have the potential to produce air 
pollution that could impact  air quality in the 
District, including Epping Forest. In accordance 
with Policy DM 2 and Policy DM 22, all 
proposals on sites which require a Transport 
Assessment/Transport Statement will be 
required to undertake an air quality 
assessment that identifies the potential 
impact of the development, together with 
contributions towards air quality monitoring.  
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 149 
                             
 
 
Flood Risk  
F. In accordance with Policy DM 15, 
development on residential allocations must 
be located wholly within Flood Zone 1.  
Limes Farm Masterplan  
G. Development proposals for CHIG.R 6 must 
comply  with a  Strategic Masterplan that has 
been formally endorsed by the Council.  
H. The Strategic Masterplan shall be 
regeneration -led and the development 
brought forward towards the end of the Plan 
period. The Strategic Masterplan should be 
undertaken as a comprehensive 
redevelopment scheme which is delivered in 
phases  in order to retain  the same level of 
housing provision for existing residents . 
I. In addition to the requirements set out above , 
the Strategic Masterplan must make provision 
for: 
(i) a minimum of 100 additional homes  
delivered in the plan- period ; 
(ii) Community facilities and local service 
and retai l uses ;  
(iii) ensuring high quality design which 
considers  appropriate layout, height, 
scale, massing, and materials;  
(iv) improved vehicular  access into the site , 
and, new and improved Pu blic Rights of 
Way, and pedestrian  and cycle  linkages 
with  the surrounding area and nearby 
London Underground stations ; 
(v) reduced  levels of  car parking in 
accordance with Policy T  1; 
(vi) car clubs/car sharing or pooling 
arrangements, visitor parking and blue 
badge holders ; and  
(vii) adequate  provision of high quality  
public open space  
J. Proposals must be reviewed and  should be 
considered and informed by the Quality 
Review Panel.  
 
  CHIG.R11CHIG.R10
CHIG.R6CHIG.R7
CHIG.R8CHIG.R9
CHIG.R5CHIG.R4
CHIG.R3CHIG.R2CHIG.R1
FairlopHainaultGrange HillChigwell
Limes Farm
Masterplan AreaAbridge RoadForestLaneRomford RoadHigh RoadChigwellLaneGravelLane
Vicarage Lane
Manor RoadLambourne Road
FencepieceRoadHainault Road
Manford Way
London Borough
of RedbridgeChigwellM11
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
Site Allocations in
ChigwellMap 5.13 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-SP-0002-Rev2
Scale: 1:20,000 @ A4Date: December 2017¯
Legend
Residential and traveller
site allocationGreen Belt BoundaryResidential site allocation
Local Authority
boundaryTraveller site allocationMasterplan Area
Concept Framework
Plan AreaEmployment site allocation
This legend shows only the key Local Plan policy designations. 
A full legend can be found in Apppendix 6: Site Specific Requirements for Site Allocations. Map 5.13  Site Allocations in Chigwell
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.District Open LandThe Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 151 
                             
 
 
Theydon Bois  
5.111  Lying to t he north of Loughton and south west 
of Epping, Theydon Bois is a village with a strong 
rural feel.  
5.112  The settlement benefits from an attractive 
parade of shops offering local convenience 
retail, whilst a station on the London 
Underground network provides a direct link 
with London.  
5.113  The village operates a unique ‘dark skies’ policy 
(i.e. no street lighting), which has traditionally 
been supported by the majority of residents . 
 
Vision for Theydon Bois  
Theydon Bois will continue to maintain its local feel 
and character and preserve its rural setting, adjacent 
to Epping Forest, while providing a mix of housing, key 
local services and high quality independent retail 
Theydon Bois will also enhance its leisure facilities and 
social infrastructure to support existing and future 
residents . 
Residential Sites  
5.114  Policy  SP 2 sets out the number of homes the 
Council will plan for in Theydon Bois over the 
Plan period. The provision of approximately 57 
homes has been informed by the aspiration for 
Theydon Bois to maintain its l ocal feel and 
character . 
5.115  The Council considered the possible spatial options to accommodate new homes at 
Theydon Bois and concluded that there is on e 
appropriate  spatial option which comprises 
intensification within the existing settlement with a small exp ansion to the north. This option 
provides opportunities to focus development in 
the most sustainable locations within the 
settlement, to use previously developed land, 
and will minimise any harm to the wider 
landscape  and Green Belt  around the 
settlement. The small northern expansion 
provides a natural extension to the settlement and is the least harmful to the Green Belt.  
5.116  Following an assessment of the suitability, 
availability and achievability of Residential Sites  
located within th is spatial option, the  Council 
has identified three sites for potential allocation to meet the identified housing requirement, as 
set out in Policy P  8. 
5.117  Proposals for residential development will be 
expected to accord with site specific 
requirements as set out in Appendix 6.  
Sites for Traveller Accommodation  
5.118  Policy SP 2 sets out the Council’s approach to 
Traveller Sites within the D istrict.  There are no 
allocations for Traveller Accommodation  in 
Theydon Bois . 
Employment Sites  
5.119  Policy E 1 sets out the Council’s preferred 
approach t o identifying sites for employment (B 
use class) uses.  
5.120  There are no existing Employment Site designations or new Employment Site allocations in Theydon Bois identified in the 
Local Plan . 
 Infrastructure Requirements  
5.121  The supporting text to Policy  SP 2 co nfirms the 
importance of identifying  and delivering key 
infra structure to support residential  and 
employment growth across the District. The 
infrastructure needs for Theydon Bois will be set 
out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
152  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Policy P 8 Theydon Bois  
A. Proposals for development on alloc ated sites 
should accord with the site specific requirements 
set out in Appendix 6.  
Residential Sites  
B. In accordance with Policy SP 2 the following sites 
are allocated for residential development:  
(i) THYB.R1 Land at Forest Drive –  
Approximately 39 homes  
(ii) THYB.R 2 Theydon Bois London 
Underground Station car park –  
Approximately 12 homes  
(iii) THYB.R3 Land at Coppice Row –  
Approximately 6 homes  
Infrastructure Requirements  
C. Infrastructure r equirements  must be delivered at 
a rate and scale to meet the needs that arise from 
the proposed development, in accordance with 
the Infrastructure Delivery Plan. Specifically , 
development in Theydon Bois will be expected to 
contribute proportionately towards the following 
infrastructure items:  
(i) Highways and junction upgrades;  
(ii) Local upgra des to the existing waste water 
network and drainage infrastructure;  and 
(iii) The improvement  of open space throughout 
the settlement.  
D. The Council will only permit planning applications 
that contribute  towards the delivery of those 
infrastructure items set out above and in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan , unless subsequent 
iterations of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan  or 
discussions with providers determine that these 
items are no longer required.  
Air Pollution  
E. The development of the allocated sites within 
Theydon Bois  have the potential to produce air 
pollution that could impact upon air quality in the 
District, including Epping Forest. In accordance 
with Policy DM 2 and Policy DM 22, all proposals 
on sites which require a Transport 
Assessment/Transport State ment will be required 
to undertake an air quality assessment that 
identifies the potential impact of the 
development, together with contributions 
towards air quality monitoring.  
Recreational Pressure  
F. Due to t heir proximity to Epping Forest, development of  the above allocated sites within 
Theydon Bois will be required to make a 
contribution to the access management and 
monitoring of visitors to the Forest in accordance 
with Policy DM 2.  
Flood Risk  
G. In accordance with Policy DM 15, development on 
residential  allocations must be located wholly 
within Flood Zone 1.  
  THYB.R2THYB.R3THYB.R1
Theydon Bois
Loughton LaneAbridge RoadMorgan Crescent
Forest
Drive
Orchard Drive
Theydon
Park
RoadCoppiceRow
Theydon Bois
M11M25
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
Site Allocations in
Theydon BoisMap 5.14 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-SP-0015-Rev2
Scale: 1:10,000 @ A4Date: December 2017¯
Legend
Residential and traveller
site allocationGreen Belt BoundaryResidential site allocation
Local Authority
boundaryTraveller site allocationMasterplan Area
Concept Framework
Plan AreaEmployment site allocation
This legend shows only the key Local Plan policy designations. 
A full legend can be found in Apppendix 6: Site Specific Requirements for Site Allocations. Map 5.1 4  Site Allocations in Theydon Bois
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.District Open LandThe Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
154  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Roydon  
5.122  Roydon is a village in the north west of the 
District with a distinctive character and heritage, 
including a number of list ed buildings and a 
Conservation Area in the centre of t he 
settle ment.  
5.123  The village is served by a mainline railway 
station, bringing connectivity to wider areas, 
including London.  In addition, it is located within 
close proximity to the Lee Valley Regional Park 
which provides a range of opportunities for 
reside nts. 
 
Vision for Roydon  
Roydon will continue to serve the convenience needs 
of the local community. It will maintain its rural and 
local character , with sensitive design aimed at 
preserving the historic character of the Village. Site 
allocations will focu s on maintaining the existing 
settlement pattern and ensure the continued 
preservation of important Green Belt , preventing 
coalescence between Roydon and Harlow Town.  
The village will build upon its key strengths, suc h as 
the mainline railway station, as w ell as other assets 
such as the historic church, Marina Village and 
surrounding Lee Valley Regional Park . Links to the Lee 
Valley Regional Park will be improved , with impacts o f 
recreational pressure minimised.  The glasshouse 
industry w ill be supported and will continue to thrive 
by adapti ng to future challenges.  
Residential Sites  
5.124  Policy SP 2 sets out the estimated likely number 
of homes the Council will plan for in Roydon  
over the Plan period. The provision of 
approximately 62 homes has been informed by 
the aspiration for Roydon to maintain its 
existing character and local feel.  
5.125  The Council has considered the possible spatial options to accommodate new homes at Roydon 
and concluded that there is one suitable spatial 
option which comprises intensification w ithin 
the existing settlement  with small expansions to 
the south, east and west. This option provides natural extensions to the settlement and would 
be less harmful to the Green Belt relative to the 
other strategic options in the settlement.  This 
strategic option would maximise opportunities to focus development in the most sustainable 
locations within the settlement, which are in 
close proximity to existing village centre 
amenities, public transport services (including Roydon railway station) and community 
facilities, and to use previously developed land 
within the settlement. This strategic option 
minimises harm by limiting the scale of outward 
growth into the wider landscape and it will be 
possible to further limit harm to the landscape 
by incorporating s ensitive design which 
responds to the characteristics of the landscape . 
5.126  Following an assessment of the suitability, availability and achievability of Residential Sites  
located within this spatial option, the Council 
has identified four sites for potential allocation 
to meet the identified hous ing requirement, as 
set out in Policy P  9. 
5.127  Proposals for residential development will be expected to accord with site specific 
requirements as set out in Appendix 6.  
Sites for Traveller Accommodation   
5.128  Policy SP 2 sets  out the Council’s approach to 
traveller sites within the district.  There are no 
allocations for Traveller Accommodation  in 
Roydon . 
Employment Sites  
5.129  Policy E 1 sets out the Council’s preferred 
approach to identifying sites for employment (B 
Class Use) uses.  This is to support the 
redevelopment, renewal or extension of existing 
premises for their designated while identifying 
new Employment Sites  as necessary to meet the 
identified need as set out in Policy SP 2.  
5.130  There are no existing or employment site for 
allocation  in Roydon identified in the Local Plan.  
Infrastructure Requirements  
5.131  The supporting text to Policy  SP 2 confirms the 
importance of identifying and delivering key 
infrastructure to support residential and 
employment growth across the District. The 
infrastructure needs for Roydon will be set out 
in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  
 
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 155 
                             
 
 
Policy P 9 Roydon  
A. Proposals for development on allocated sites 
should accord with the site specific requirements 
set out in Appendix 6.  
Residential Sites  
B. In accordance w ith Policy SP 2 the following sites 
are allocated for residential development:  
(i) ROYD.R1 The Old Coal Yard –  Approximately 
7 homes  
(ii) ROYD.R2 Land at Kingsmead School –  
Approximately 21 homes  
(iii) ROYD.R3 Land at Epping Road –  
Approximately 14 homes  
(iv) ROYD.R4 Land at Parklands Nursery –  
Approximately 20 homes  
Infrastructure Requirements  
C. Infrastructure requirements  must be delivered at 
a rate and scale to meet the needs that arise from 
the proposed development, in accordance with 
the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  Specif ically, 
development in Roydon will be expected to 
contribute proportionately towards the following 
infrastructure items:  
(i) Highways and junction upgrades;  
(ii) Local utilities upgrades;  and 
(iii) The improvement  of open space throughout 
the settlement.  
D. The Council will  only permit planning applications 
that contribute  towards the delivery of those 
infrastructure items set out above and in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan , unless subsequent 
iterations of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan  or 
discussions with providers dete rmine that these 
items are no longer required.  
Flood Risk  
E. In accordance with Policy DM 15, development on 
residential or traveller allocations must be located 
wholly within Flood Zone 1.  
  ROYD.R4ROYD.R2ROYD.R1
ROYD.R3Roydon
Hansells MeadEppingRoadHighStreet
Harlow RoadEast
Hertfordshire
District
Roydon
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
Site Allocations in
RoydonMap 5.15 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-SP-0012-Rev2
Scale: 1:8,000 @ A4Date: December 2017¯
Legend
Residential and traveller
site allocationGreen Belt BoundaryResidential site allocation
Local Authority
boundaryTraveller site allocationMasterplan Area
Concept Framework
Plan AreaEmployment site allocation
This legend shows only the key Local Plan policy designations. 
A full legend can be found in Apppendix 6: Site Specific Requirements for Site Allocations. Map 5.1 5  Site Allocations in Roydon
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.District Open LandThe Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 157 
                             
 
 
Nazeing  
5.132  Nazeing is a village with a strong rural chara cter 
to the north west of the District.  The settlement 
benefits from a historic core, protected through 
its conservation area status.  
5.133  The village has strong links with the surrounding glasshouse industry, the future of which is 
important to the settlement.  
 
Vision for Nazeing  
Nazeing will maintain its rural character  through 
sustainable infill, minimising Green Belt and landscape 
impact while reinforcing the settlement pattern  with a 
new community centre acting as a focal point for the 
settlement. The vill age will continue to support a 
thriving agricultural and horticultural economic base 
supported by the glasshouse industry.  Opportunities 
will be sought  to improve the highway network in 
order to ease congestion. Links to the Lee Valley 
Regional Park will b e improved.  
Residential Sites  
5.134  Policy  SP 2 sets out the estimated likely number 
of homes the Council will plan for in Nazeing 
over the Plan period. The provision of 
approximately 122 homes has been informed by 
the aspiration for Nazeing to function as a sm all 
centre which is able to support the needs of the 
local community.  
5.135  The Council considered the possible spatial 
options to accommodate new homes at Nazeing 
and concluded that the  most appropriate  spatial 
options  are: 
• Expansion of the settlement to the so uth 
This strategic options will cause less harm to 
the Green Belt than other strategic options 
and is located close to existing community 
facilities and village centre amenities.  
• North -eastern expansion   
This strategic option is less harmful to the Green B elt than other strategic options.  
5.136  Following an assessment of the suitability, 
availability and achievability of Residential Sites  
located within these spatial options, the Council 
has identified four  sites for  potential allocation 
to meet the identified ho using requirement, as 
illustrated in Policy P  10. 5.137  Proposals for residential development will be 
expected to accord with site specific 
requirements as set out in Appendix 6.  
5.138  The allocation sites NAZE.R1, NAZE.R3 and 
NAME.R4 will be required to be in accorda nce 
with a Concept Framework Plan , as defined in 
Policy SP 3,  to ensure that a comprehensive and 
cohesive approach is taken to the planning and 
delivery of high quality development.  
Sites for Traveller Accommodation  
5.139  Policy SP 2 sets out the Council’s appro ach to 
Trave ller Sites within the D istrict.  There are no 
allocations for Traveller Accommodation  in 
Nazeing . 
Employment Sites  
5.140  Policy E 1 sets out the Council’s preferred 
approach to identifying sites for  employment (B 
Class Use) uses.  
5.141  There are s even exist ing Employment Sites  that 
have been identified in Nazeing for designation 
in the Local Plan:  
• NAZE.E1 – The Old Waterworks (2.15ha)  
• NAZE.E2 – Land west of Sedge Green 
(0.84ha)  
• NAZE.E3 – Bridge Works and Glassworks, 
Nazeing New Road (2.13ha)  
• NAZE.E4 – Hillgr ove Business Park (3.85ha)  
• NAZE.E5 – Birchwood Industrial Estate 
(2.88ha)  
• NAZE.E6 – Millbrook Business Park (0.68ha)  
• NAZE.E7 – Land at Winston Farm  (0.63ha)  
5.142  In accordance with Policy E 3, the Council will support the local glasshouse industry and 
encourag e the local consumption of produce 
grown within the District.  
Infrastructure Requirements  
5.143  The supporting text to Policy  SP 2 confirms the 
importance of identifying and delivering key 
infrastructure to support residential and 
employment growth across the Di strict. The 
infrastructure needs for Nazeing will be set out 
in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  
 
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
158  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Policy P 10 Nazeing  
A. Proposals for development on allocated sites 
should accord with site specific requirements set 
out in Appendix 6 . 
Residential Sites  
B. In accordance with Policy SP 2 the following sites 
are allocated for residential development:  
(i) NAZE.R1 Land at Perry Hill –  Approximately 
33 homes  
(ii) NAZE.R2 The Fencing Centre, Pecks Hi ll – 
Approximately 29 homes  
(iii) NAZE.R3 Lan d to the rear o f Pound Close –  
Approximately 39 homes  
(iv) NAZE .R4 Land at St Leonards Farm –  
Approximately 21 homes  
Employment Sites  
C. There are no new employment site allocations in 
Nazeing. In accordance with Policy E 1 the 
following existing sites are designated for 
employm ent uses:  
(i) NAZE.E1 – The Old Waterworks  
(ii) NAZE.E2 – Land west of Sedge Green  
(iii) NAZE.E3 – Bridge Works and Glassworks, 
Nazeing New Road  
(iv) NAZE.E4 – Hillgrove Business Park  
(v) NAZE.E5 – Birchwood Industrial Estate  
(vi) NAZE.E6 – Millbrook Business Park  
(vii) NAZE.E7 – Land at Wi nston Farm  
Infrastructure Requirements  
D. Infrastructure r equirements  must be delivered at 
a rate and scale to meet the needs that arise from 
the proposed development, in accordance with 
the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  Specifically , 
development in Nazeing will be expected to 
contribute proportionately towards the following 
infrastructure items:  
(i) Primary school  expansion ; 
(ii) Highways and junction upgrades;  
(iii) Local utilities upgrades;  and 
(iv) The improvement of open space throughout 
the settlement.  
E. The Council will onl y permit planning applications 
that contribute  towards the delivery of those 
infrastructure items set out above and in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan , unless subsequent 
iterations of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan  or 
discussions with providers determin e that these items are no longer required.  
Air Pollution  
F. The development of the allocated sites within 
Nazeing have the potential to produce air 
pollution that could impact upon air qua lity in the 
District, including Epping Forest. In accord ance 
with Policy DM 2 and Policy DM 22, all proposals 
on sites which req uire a Transport 
Assessment/Transport Statement will be required 
to undertake an air quality assessment that 
identifies the pote ntial impact of the 
development, together with contributions 
towards air quality monitoring.  
Flood Risk  
G. In accordance with Policy DM 15, development on 
residential allocations must be located wholly 
within Flood Zone 1.  
South Nazeing Concept Framework  
H. In order to ensure that a comprehensive and 
cohesive  approach is taken to the planning and 
delivery of certain sites and associated 
infrastructure, development proposals in relation 
to sites NAZE.R1, NA ZE.R3 and NA ZE.R4 will be 
required to be in accordance with a Concept 
Framework , as defined in Policy SP 3.  
I. Some Concept Framework Plans will relate to 
multiple allocation sites, whereby t hese should be 
undertaken jointly between all applicants of the 
site allocations subject to the Concept Framework 
Plan . Details of the specific requirements of each 
Concept Fr amework Plan can be found within the 
site specific requirements  set out in Appendix 6 . 
J. These will be produced by the applicants of the 
site allocations and shall be endorsed by the 
Council prior to the s ubmission of any planning 
applications. The Concept Frame work Plan and 
the development proposals for each site located 
within it should be considered and informed by 
the Quality Review Panel.  
  NAZE.E2
NAZE.R1
NAZE.R4NAZE.R2
NAZE.R3NAZE.E3
NAZE.E4NAZE.E6
NAZE.E7NAZE.E5
NAZE.E1
South Nazeing 
Concept Framework 
Plan AreaStLeonard's
Road
Waltham RoadSedge Green
North
Street
NazeingRoadBroxbourne
District
Nazeing
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
Site Allocations in
NazeingMap 5.16 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-SP-0009-Rev2
Scale: 1:19,000 @ A4Date: December 2017¯
Legend
Residential and traveller
site allocationGreen Belt BoundaryResidential site allocation
Local Authority
boundaryTraveller site allocationMasterplan Area
Concept Framework
Plan AreaEmployment site allocation
This legend shows only the key Local Plan policy designations. 
A full legend can be found in Apppendix 6: Site Specific Requirements for Site Allocations. Map 5.1 6  Site Allocations in Nazeing
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.District Open LandThe Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
160  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Thornwood  
5.144  Thornwood is a villag e to the north east of 
Epping.  The village has  an established 
residential core of housing and some valued 
assets such as the village hall and allotments.  
 
Vision for Thornwood  
Thornwood will become  a more self- sustaining  village 
with improved provision of services, transport 
infrastructure and amenities to cater for the existing 
and future community and reducing reliance on other 
settlements. Well -designed development will 
contribute towards the creation of a central focal 
point for the village . 
Residential Sites  
5.145  Policy  SP 2 sets out the number of homes the 
Council will plan for in Thornwood over the Plan 
period. The provision of approximately 1 72 
homes has been informed by the aspiration to 
provide homes at Thornwood which help to 
meet local needs and support the settlement 
becoming more self- sufficient . 
5.146  The Council considered th e possible spatial 
options to accommodate new homes at 
Thornwood. No spatial options were identified 
given the small scale of this settlement. The 
suitability of identified sites was therefore 
assessed on a case by case basis.  
5.147  Following an assessment of th e suitability, 
availability and achievability of Residential Sites , 
the Council has identified three  sites for 
potential allocation to meet the identified 
housing requirement, as set out in Policy P  11. 
5.148  Proposals for residential development will be 
expected to accord with site specific 
requirements as set out in Appendix 6.  
Sites for Traveller Accommodation  
5.149  Policy SP 2 sets  out the Council’s approach to 
traveller sites within the district.  There are no 
allocations for Traveller Accommodation  in 
Thornwood .  Employment Sites  
5.150  Policy E 1 sets out the Council’s approach to 
identifying sites for employment (B Class) uses. 
This is to support the redevelopment, renewal 
or extension of existing premises for their 
designated use while identifying new 
Employment Sites  as necessary to meet the 
identified need as set out in Polic y SP 2.  
5.151  There are four existing Employment Sites  that 
have been identified in Thornwood for 
designation in the Local Plan:  
• THOR.E1 – Camfaud Concrete Pumps 
(1.35ha)  
• THOR.E2 – Land at Esgors Farm (2ha)  
• THOR.E3 – Woodside Industrial Estate  
(1.99ha)   
• THOR.E4 – Weald Hall Lane Industrial Area 
(1.09ha)  
Infrastructure Requirements  
5.152  The supporting text to Policy  SP 2 confi rms the 
importance of identifying and delivering key 
infra structure to support residential  and 
employment growth across the District. The 
infrastructure needs for Thornwood are set out 
in Policy P 11 and the Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan . 
Policy P 11 Thornwood  
A. Proposals for development on allocated sites 
should accord with the site specif ic requirements 
set out in Appendix 6.  
Residential Sites  
B. In accordance with Policy SP 2 , the following sites 
are allocated for residential development : 
(i) THOR.R1 Land at Tudor House –  
Approximately 124 homes  
(ii) THOR.R2 Land east of High Road –  
Approximately 48 homes  
Employment Sites  
C. There are no new employment site allocations in 
Thornwood. In accordance with Policy E 1 the 
following existing sites are designated for 
employment uses:  
(i) THOR.E1 – Camfaud Concrete Pumps  
(ii) THOR.E2 – Land at Esgors Farm  
(iii) THOR.E3 – Woodsi de Industrial Estate  The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 161 
                             
 
 
(iv) THOR.E4 – Weald Hall Lane Industrial Area 
Infrastructure Requirements  
D. Infrastructure r equirements  must be delivered at 
a rate and scale to meet the needs that arise from 
the proposed development, in accordance with 
the Infrastructure D elivery Plan.  Specifically , 
development in Thornwood will be expected to 
contribute proportionately towards the following 
infrastructure items:  
(i) Highways and junction upgrades;  
(ii) Local utilities upgrades;  
(iii) The improvement  of open space throughout 
the settle ment; and 
(iv) Community uses . 
E. The Council will only permit planning applications 
that contribute  towards the delivery of those 
infrastructure items set out above and in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan , unless subsequent 
iterations of the Infrastructure Deliver y Plan  or 
discussions with providers determine that these 
items are no longer required.  
Air Pollution  
F. The development of the allocated sites within 
Thornwood have the potential to produce air 
pollution that could impact upon air quality in the 
District, i ncluding Epping Forest. In accordance 
with Policy DM 2 and Policy DM 22, all proposals 
on sites which require a Transport 
Assessment/Transport Statement will be required 
to undertake an air quality assessment that 
identifies the potential impact of the 
development, together with contributions  
towards air quality monitoring.  
Recreational Pressure  
G. Due to their proximity to Epping Forest 
development of the above allocated sites within 
Thornwood will be required to make a 
contribution to the access management and 
monitoring of visitors to the Forest in accordance 
with Policy DM 2.  
Flood Risk  
H. In accordance with Policy DM 15, development on 
residential or traveller allocations must be located 
wholly within Flood Zone 1.  
  THOR.E4
THOR.E3THOR.E1THOR.E2
THOR.R1
THOR.R2Brookside
HighRoad
Weald Hall LaneThornwoodM11
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
Site Allocations in
ThornwoodMap 5.17 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-SP-0016-Rev2
Scale: 1:8,000 @ A4Date: December 2017¯
Legend
Residential and traveller
site allocationGreen Belt BoundaryResidential site allocation
Local Authority
boundaryTraveller site allocationMasterplan Area
Concept Framework
Plan AreaEmployment site allocation
This legend shows only the key Local Plan policy designations. 
A full legend can be found in Apppendix 6: Site Specific Requirements for Site Allocations. Map 5.1 7  Site Allocations in Thornwood
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.District Open LandThe Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 163 
                             
 
 
Coopersale, Fyfield, High O ngar, 
Lower Sheering, Moreton, Sheering  
and Stapleford Abbots   
5.153  In addition to the eleven  settlements presented 
in the preceding sections, the re are  site 
allocations in Coopersale, Fyfield, High Ongar, 
Lower Sheering, Moreton, Sheering and 
Stapleford Abbotts.   Each of these settlement s 
are inset from the Green Belt, with the 
exception of Moreton . However, Moreton  has 
been included within this chapter due to the fact that the allocation functionally relates to the rest of the settlement.  
Residential Sites  
5.154  Policy SP 2 sets out the number of homes the 
Council will plan for in Coopersale, Fyfield, High 
Ongar, Lower Sheering, Moreton, Sheering and 
Stapleford Abbotts over the Plan period which is 
as follows:  
• Coopersale approximately 6  homes;  
• Fyfield approximately 14 homes;  
• High Ongar approximately 10 homes;  
• Lower Sheering approximately 14 homes;  
• Sheering approximately 84 homes; and 
• Stapleford Abbotts approximately 47 
homes . 
5.155  The Council considered the possible spatial 
options to accommodate new homes at each of 
these s ettlements.  
• Coopersale  
Intensification  - This option provides an 
opportunity to maximise existing urban 
brownfield land around the centre of the 
settlement.  
• Fyfield  
Intensification  - This option provides an 
opportunity to maximise existing 
brownfield land and focuses development  
on lower performing Green Belt land 
immediately adjacent to the settlement.High Ongar  
Infill  - This option provides opportunities 
to promote infill and settlement rounding 
by focusing development in lower performing Green Belt sit es immediately 
adjacent to the settlement.  
• Lower Sheering  
Limited expansion  - This option focuses 
development on lower performing Green 
Belt land in the most sustainable location 
immediately adjacent to the settlement.  
• Sheering  
Intensification with limited  expansion  - 
This option provides opportunities to 
promote infill and settlement rounding by 
focusing development on lower performing Green Belt sites immediately 
adjacent to the settlement.  
• Stapleford  Abbotts  
Intensification  - This option provides 
opportu nities to maximise existing 
brownfield land and promote infill by focusing development on lower 
performing Green Belt land immediately 
adjacent to the settlement  
5.156  Following an assessment of the suitability, 
availability and achievability of Residential Site s, 
the Council has identified ten sites for potential 
allocation to meet the identified housing 
requirement, as set out in Policy P 12.  
5.157  Proposals for residential development will be 
expected to accord with site specific 
requirements set out in Appendix 6.  
Sites for Traveller Accommodation  
5.158  Policy SP 2 sets  out the Council’s approach to 
Traveller Sites within the D istrict. One site ha s 
been allocated for Travelling Show people  
accommodation  at Lakeview Moreton:  
•  MORE .T1 (Lakeview, Moreton) –  1 yard  
Employmen t Sites  
5.159  Policy E 1 sets out the Council’s approach to 
identifying sites for employment (B Class) uses. 
This is to support the redevelopment, renewal 
or extension of existing premises for their The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
164  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
designated use while identifying new 
Employment Sites  as necessary to meet the 
identified need as set out in Policy SP 2.  
5.160  There are three existing Employment Sites  that 
have been identified for designation in the Local 
Plan:  
• HONG.E1 – Nash Hall Industrial Estate, High 
Ongar  (2ha) 
• LSHR.E1 – Land at The Maltings, Lower 
Sheering  (2.04ha)  
• STAP.E1 – Land at High Willows, Stapleford 
Abbotts  (0.6ha)  
Infrastructure Requirements  
5.161  The supporting text to Policy  SP 2 confirms the 
importance of identifying and delivering key 
infrastructure to support residential and 
employment growt h across the District. The 
infrastructure needs for Coopersale, Fyfield, 
High Ongar, Lower Sheering, Moreton, Sheering 
and Stapleford Abbotts will be set out  in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan. 
 
Policy P 12 Coopersale, Fyfield, High Ongar, 
Lower Sheering,  Moreton, Sheering and 
Stapleford Abbotts  
A. Proposals for development on allocated sites 
should accord with the site specific requirements 
set out in Appendix 6.  
Residential Sites  
B. In accordance with Policy SP 2 the following sites 
are allocated for resident ial development:  
(i) COOP.R1 Land at Parklands -  Approximately 
6 homes  (Coopersale) ; 
(ii) FYF.R1 Land at Gypsy Mead -  Approximately 
14 homes  (Fyfield) ; 
(iii) HONG.R1 Land at Mill Lane  - Approximately 
10 homes  (High Ongar) ; 
(iv) LSHR.R1 L and at Lower Shee ring - 
Approximately 14 homes  (Lower Sheering) ; 
(v) SHR.R1 Land at Daubneys Farm -  
Approximately 10 homes, SHR.R2 Land to 
the East of the M11 -  Approximately 62 
homes and SHR.R3 Land north of Primley 
Lane - Approximately 12 homes  (Sheering) ; 
and 
(vi) STAP.R1 Land at Oakfield Road - Approximately 33 homes; STAP.R2 L and to 
rear of Mountford and Bishops Brow, Oak 
Hill Road -  Approximately 8 homes; STAP.R3 
Land at The Drive - Approximately 6 homes  
(Stapleford Abbotts) . 
Travelling showpeople sites  
C. In accordance with Policy SP 3 the following site is 
allocated for T ravelling Showpeople 
Accommodation:  
(i) MORE.T1 (Lakeview, Moreton) –  1 yard  
Employment Sites  
D. There are no new employment site allocations in 
Coopersale, Fyfield, High Ongar, Lower Sheering, 
Moreton, Sheering or Stapleford Abbotts. In 
accordance with Policy E 1 the following existing 
sites are designated for employment uses:  
(i) High Ongar –  HONG.E1 Nash Hall Industrial 
Estate  
(ii) Lower Sheering –  LSHR.E1 Land at The 
Maltings  
(iii) Stapleford Abbotts –  STAP.E1 Land  at High 
Willows  
Infrastructure Requi rements  
E. Infrastructure r equirements  must be delivered at 
a rate and scale to meet the needs that arise from 
the proposed development, in accordance with 
the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  Specifically , 
development in these settlements will be 
expected to c ontribute proportionately towards 
the following infrastructure items:  
(i) Highways and junction upgrades;  
(ii) Local utilities upgrades;  and 
(iii) The improvement  of open space throughout 
the settlements.  
F. The Council will only permit planning applications 
that contribute  towards the delivery of those 
infrastructure items set out above and in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan , unless subsequent 
iterations of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan  or 
discussions with providers determine that these 
items are no longer required.  
Air Pollution  
G. The development of the allocated sites within 
Coopersale, Fyfield, H igh Ongar, Lower Sheering , 
Sheering and Stapleford Abbots  have the 
potential to produce air pollution that could 
impact upon air quality in the District, i ncluding 
Epping Forest. In accordance with Policy DM 2 and 
Policy DM 22, all proposals on sites which require The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 165 
                             
 
 
a Transport Assessment/Transport Statement will 
be required to undertake an air quality 
assessment that identifies the potential impact of 
the dev elopment, together with contributions  
towards air quality monitoring . 
Flood Risk  
H. In accordance with Policy DM 15, development on 
residential or traveller allocations must be located 
wholly within Flood Zone 1.  
  COOP.R1Parklands
Institute Road
Epping Ongar
Heritage Railway
Coopersale
CommonEpping Road
Coopersale
M11
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
Site Allocations in
CoopersaleMap 5.18 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-SP-0004-Rev2
Scale: 1:5,000 @ A4Date: December 2017¯
Legend
Residential and traveller
site allocationGreen Belt BoundaryResidential site allocation
Local Authority
boundaryTraveller site allocationMasterplan Area
Concept Framework
Plan AreaEmployment site allocation
This legend shows only the key Local Plan policy designations. 
A full legend can be found in Apppendix 6: Site Specific Requirements for Site Allocations. Map 5.18  Site Allocations in Coopersale
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.District Open LandFYF.R1
MoretonRoadOngar Road
Fyfield
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
Site Allocations in
FyfieldMap 5.19 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-SP-0006-Rev2
Scale: 1:5,000 @ A4Date: December 2017¯
Legend
Residential and traveller
site allocationGreen Belt BoundaryResidential site allocation
Local Authority
boundaryTraveller site allocationMasterplan Area
Concept Framework
Plan AreaEmployment site allocation
This legend shows only the key Local Plan policy designations. 
A full legend can be found in Apppendix 6: Site Specific Requirements for Site Allocations. Map 5.1 9  Site Allocations in Fyfield
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.District Open LandHONG.R1HONG.E1Chelmsford Road
Mill
LaneTheStreet
High Ongar
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
Site Allocations in
High OngarMap 5.20 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-SP-0007-Rev2
Scale: 1:5,000 @ A4Date: December 2017¯
Legend
Residential and traveller
site allocationGreen Belt BoundaryResidential site allocation
Local Authority
boundaryTraveller site allocationMasterplan Area
Concept Framework
Plan AreaEmployment site allocation
This legend shows only the key Local Plan policy designations. 
A full legend can be found in Apppendix 6: Site Specific Requirements for Site Allocations. Map 5. 20  Site Allocations in High Ongar
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.District Open LandLSHR.E1LSHR.R1Sawbridgeworth
Station Road
Sheering
MillLaneSheering
LowerRoadEast
Hertfordshire
District
Lower
Sheering
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
Site Allocations in
Lower SheeringMap 5.21 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-SP-0010-Rev2
Scale: 1:6,000 @ A4Date: December 2017¯
Legend
Residential and traveller
site allocationGreen Belt BoundaryResidential site allocation
Local Authority
boundaryTraveller site allocationMasterplan Area
Concept Framework
Plan AreaEmployment site allocation
This legend shows only the key Local Plan policy designations. 
A full legend can be found in Apppendix 6: Site Specific Requirements for Site Allocations. Map 5.2 1  Site Allocations in Lower Sheering
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.District Open LandMORE.T1Harlow
Road
ChurchRoadMoreton
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
Site Allocations in
MoretonMap 5.22 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-SP-0018-Rev2
Scale: 1:6,000 @ A4Date: December 2017¯
Legend
Residential and traveller
site allocationGreen Belt BoundaryResidential site allocation
Local Authority
boundaryTraveller site allocationMasterplan Area
Concept Framework
Plan AreaEmployment site allocation
This legend shows only the key Local Plan policy designations. 
A full legend can be found in Apppendix 6: Site Specific Requirements for Site Allocations. Map 5.2 2  Site Allocations in Moreton
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.District Open LandSHR.R1
SHR.R2SHR.R3
TheStreetSheeringM11
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
Site Allocations in
SheeringMap 5.23 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-SP-0013-Rev2
Scale: 1:6,000 @ A4Date: December 2017¯
Legend
Residential and traveller
site allocationGreen Belt BoundaryResidential site allocation
Local Authority
boundaryTraveller site allocationMasterplan Area
Concept Framework
Plan AreaEmployment site allocation
This legend shows only the key Local Plan policy designations. 
A full legend can be found in Apppendix 6: Site Specific Requirements for Site Allocations. Map 5.2 3  Site Allocations in Sheering
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.District Open LandSTAP .E1
STAP .R1STAP .R2STAP .R3
Tysea
Hill
Oak Hill RoadBrentwood
District
London Borough
of HaveringStapleford
Abbotts
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
Site Allocations in
Stapleford AbbottsMap 5.24 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-SP-0014-Rev2
Scale: 1:11,000 @ A4Date: December 2017¯
Legend
Residential and traveller
site allocationGreen Belt BoundaryResidential site allocation
Local Authority
boundaryTraveller site allocationMasterplan Area
Concept Framework
Plan AreaEmployment site allocation
This legend shows only the key Local Plan policy designations. 
A full legend can be found in Apppendix 6: Site Specific Requirements for Site Allocations. Map 5.2 4  Site Allocations in Stapleford Abbotts
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.District Open LandThe Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 173 
                             
 
 
Rural Sites in the E ast of the D istrict  
Residential Sites  
5.162  There are a number of small rural villages across 
the District.  
5.163  Policy SP 2 sets out the number of homes the 
Council will plan for over the Plan period  in the 
rural parts of the e ast of the District to meet 
Local needs.  
5.164  Following an asse ssment of the suitability, 
availability and achievability of Residential Sites , 
the Council has identified two  sites  within the 
eastern part of the D istrict ’s rural area  for 
potential allocation to meet the identified 
hous ing requirement, as set out in Poli cy P 13.  
5.165  Proposals for residential development will be 
expected to comply with site specific requirements as set out in Appendix 6.  
Sites fro Traveller Accomodation  
5.166  Policy SP 2 sets out the Council’s approach to 
Traveller Sites within the D istrict. One site ha s 
been allocated : 
• RUR.T4 Land at Valley View, Curtis Mill Lane  
Employment Sites   
5.167  Policy E 1 sets out the Council’s prefer red 
approach to identifying sites for employment (B 
Class) uses. This is to support the 
redevelopment, renewal or extension of existing 
premises for their designated use while 
identifying new Employment Sites  as necessary 
to meet the identified need as set  out in Policy 
SP 2.  
5.168  There are t wenty  existing rural Employment 
Sites  in the eastern part of the District that have 
been identified for designation in the Local Plan:  
• RUR.E1 – Brickfield House, Thornwood  
(0.37ha)  
• RUR.E2 – Land at Kingstons Farm, 
Matchin g (1.68ha)  
• RUR.E3 – Matching Airfield South  (2.81ha)  
• RUR.E4 – Land at London Road, Stanford 
Rivers  (4.64ha)  
• RUR.E6 – Land at Housham Hall Farm, 
Matching (1.92ha)  • RUR.E7 – Land at Searles Farm, Foster 
Street  (1.53ha)  
• RUR.E8 – Fosters Croft, Foster Street  
(0.43ha)  
• RUR.E9 – Horseshoe Farm, London Road  
(0.96ha)  
• RUR.E10 – Land at Little Hyde Hall Farm, 
Sheering  (0.92ha)  
• RUR.E11 – Land at Quickbury Farm, 
Sheering  (1.52ha)  
• RUR.E12 – New House Farm, Little Laver 
Road  (1.05ha)  
• RUR.E14 – Matching Airfield North  
(1.34ha)  
• RUR.E15 – Land at Rolls Farm Barns, 
Hastingwood Road  (2.91ha)  
• RUR.E18 – Land at Dunmow Road, Fyfield 
(0.21ha)  
• RUR.E19 – Dorrington Farm (1.85ha)  
• RUR.E20 – Land at Stewarts Farm, 
Stanford Rivers  (0.6ha)  
• RUR.E21 – Land at Paslow Hall Farm, High 
Ongar  (1.66ha)  
• RUR.E22 – Hastingwood Business Centre, 
Hastingwood  (0.29ha ) 
• RUR.E23 – Hobbs Cross Business Centre, 
Theydon Garnon (1.76ha)   
• RUR.E24 – Land at Holts Farm, Threshers 
Bush  (0.27ha)  
5.169  There is also an existing E mployment Site that is 
allocated for a furth er 5,120sqm of B2/B8 class 
use (general industrial/storage and 
warehousing):  
• RUR.E19 – Dorrington Farm, Rye Hill Road  
(1.85ha)  
Infrastructure Requirements   
5.170  The supporting text to Policy SP 2 confirms the 
importance of identifying and delivering key infras tructure to support residential and 
employment growth across the District. The 
infrastructure needs for the more rural parts of 
the District will be set out in the Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan.  
 The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
174  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Policy P 13 Rural  Sites in the  East of the 
District  
A. Proposals  for development on allocated sites 
should accord with the site specific requirements 
set out in Appendix 6.  
Residential Sites  
B. In accordance with Policy SP 2 the following sites 
are allocated for residential development:  
(i) RUR.R1 Avenue Home, Latton Common –  
Approximately 11 homes  
(ii) RUR.R2 Nor ton Heath Riding Centre –  
Approximately 30 homes  
Employment Sites   
C. In accordance with Policy E 1 the following 
existing sites are designated for employment 
uses:   
(i) RUR.E1 – Brickfield House, Thornwood  
(ii) RUR.E2 – Land at King stons Farm, Matching  
(iii) RUR.E3 – Matching Airfield South  
(iv) RUR.E4 – Land at London Road, Stanford 
Rivers  
(v) RUR.E6 – Land at Housham Hall Farm, 
Matching 
(vi) RUR.E7 – Land at Searles Farm, Foster 
Street  
(vii) RUR.E8 – Fosters Croft, Foster Street  
(viii) RUR.E9 – Horseshoe Farm, Lon don Road  
(ix) RUR.E10 – Land at Little Hyde Hall Farm, 
Sheering  
(x) RUR.E11 – Land at Quickbury Farm, 
Sheering  
(xi) RUR.E12 – New House Farm, Little Laver 
Road  
(xii) RUR.E14 – Matching Airfield North  
(xiii) RUR.E15 – Land at Rolls Farm Barns, 
Hastingwood Road  
(xiv) RUR.E18 – Land at Dunmo w Road, Fyfield  
(xv) RUR.E19 - Dorrington Farm  (see Policy SP 5 
and allocation SP 4.1)  
(xvi) RUR.E20 – Land at Stewarts Farm  
(xvii) RUR.E21 – Land at Paslow Hall Farm, King 
Street, High Ongar  
(xviii)  RUR.E22 – Hastingwood Business Centre, 
Hastingwood  
(xix) RUR.E23 – Hobbs Cross Business Centre, 
Theydon Garnon (xx) RUR.E24 – Land at Holts Farm, Threshers 
Bush  
D. In accordance with Policy SP 2 and Policy E 1 the 
following site is designated for employment uses 
with a further allocated expansion for B Use Class 
employment uses:   
(i) RUR.E19 – Dorrington  Farm, Rye Hill Road  
(see Policy SP 5 and allocation SP 4.1)  
Traveller sites  
E. In accordance with Policy SP 3 the following site is 
allocated for Traveller Accommodation :  
(i) RUR.T4 Land at Valley View, Curtis Mill Lane 
– up to 1 pitch  
Infrastructure Requiremen ts 
F. Infrastructure r equirements  must be delivered at 
a rate and scale to meet the needs that arise from 
the proposed development, in accordance with 
the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  Specifically, 
development on these allocations  will be 
expected to contrib ute proportionately towards 
the following infrastructure items:  
(i) Highways and junction upgrades;  and 
(ii) Local utilities upgrades;  
G. The Council will only permit planning applications 
that contribute  towards the delivery of those 
infrastructure items set out abov e and in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan , unless subsequent 
iterations of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan  or 
discussions with providers determine that these 
items are no longer required.  
Air Pollution  
H. The developmen t of the allocat ed sites  in the 
eastern part of the District have the potential to 
produce air pollution that could impact upon air 
quality in the District, including Epping Forest. In 
accordance with Policy DM 2 and Policy DM 22, all 
proposals on sites which require a Transport 
Assessment/Transport Statement will be required 
to undertake an air quality assessment that 
identifies the potential impact of the 
development, together with contributions 
towards air quality monitoring.  
Flood Risk  
I. In accordance with Policy DM 15, development on 
residen tial or traveller allocations must be located 
wholly within Flood Zone 1.  
 A414
B181B184A414
A113A1060
Brentwood
DistrictUttlesford
District
Harlow
District
Theydon BoisEppingThornwoodNorth Weald
Bassett
OngarHigh
OngarFyfield
CoopersaleLower
SheeringSheering
Willingale
Moreton
AbridgeHarlow
J6 / J27J7
M11M11
M11M11
M11M25
M25RUR.E20RUR.E22RUR.E7RUR.E6
RUR.E21RUR.E18 RUR.E15RUR.E10
RUR.E1
RUR.E23RUR.E2
RUR.E3
RUR.E4RUR.E8
RUR.E12RUR.E24
RUR.E9RUR.E11
RUR.E14
RUR.R1
RUR.T4RUR.E19
RUR.R2
EppingHarlow Mill
Theydon Bois
Rural Site Allocations -
East of DistrictMap 5.25 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-SP-0023-Rev1
Scale: 1:80,000 @A4Date: December 2017¯
This legend shows only the key Local Plan policy designations. 
A full legend can be found in Apppendix 6: Site Specific Requirements for Site Allocations.Map 5.25  Rural Site Allocations - East of District
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.Rural traveller site
allocationRural residential site
allocation
Rural employment site
allocationLegend
Green Belt boundary
Local Authority
boundaryThe Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
176  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Rural S ites in the West of the 
District  
Residential Sites  
5.171  There are a number of small rural villages across 
the District.  
5.172  Policy SP 2 sets out the number of homes the 
Council will plan for over the Plan period  in the 
rural parts of the west of the District to meet 
local needs.  
5.173  The Council has considered the possible spatial 
options to accommodate new homes within the 
more rural parts of the District . No allocations 
for residential development are proposed within 
the western part of the D istrict ’s rural area. 
Sites for Traveller Accommodation  
5.174  Policy SP 2 sets out the Council’s approach to 
Traveller Sites within the D istrict. Four sites 
have been allocated for T raveller  
Accommodation : 
• RUR.T1 Land at Sons Nursery, Hamlet Hill  
• RUR.T2 Land at Ashview, Hamlet Hill  
• RUR.T3 Land at James Mead, Waltham 
Road  
• RUR.T5 Land at Stoneshot View  
Employment Sites   
5.175  Policy E 1 sets out the Council’s preferred 
approach to identifying sites for employment ( B 
Class) uses. This is to support the 
redevelopment, renewal or extension of existing 
premises for their designated use while 
identifying new Employment Sites  as necessary 
to meet the identified need as set out in Policy 
SP 2.  
5.176  There are two  existing Emplo yment Sites  that 
have been identified for designation in the Local Plan :  
• RUR.E5 – Land at Hayleys Manor, Epping 
Upland (2.07ha)  
• RUR.E13 – Warlies Park House, Horseshoe 
Hill (0.56ha)  
 
 Infrastructure Requirements   
5.177  The supporting text to Policy SP 2 confirm s the 
importance of identifying and delivering key 
infrastructure to support residential and 
employment growth across the District. The infrastructure needs for the more rural parts of 
the District will be set out  in the Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan.  
Polic y P 14 Rural Sites in the West of the 
District  
A. Proposals for development on allocated sites 
should accord with the site specific requirements 
set out in Appendix 6.  
Employment Sites   
B. There are no new employment site allocations in 
the rural locations in t he west of the District. In 
accordance with Policy E 1 the following existing 
sites are designated for employment uses:  
(i) RUR.E5 – Land at Hayleys Manor, Epping 
Upland  
(ii) RUR.E13 – Warlies Park House, Horseshoe 
Hill 
Traveller sites  
C. In accordance with Policy SP  3 the following site s 
are allocated for Traveller Accommodation :  
(i) RUR.T1 Land at Sons Nursery, Hamlet Hill –  
up to 2 pitches  
(ii) RUR.T2 Land at Ashview, Hamlet Hill –  up to 
1 pitch  
(iii) RUR.T3 Land at James Mead, Waltham Road 
– up to 4 pitches  
(iv) RUR.T5 Land at Stonesh ot View  – up to 5  
pitch es 
Infrastructure Requirements  
D. Infrastructure requirements  must be delivered at 
a rate and scale to meet the needs that arise from 
the proposed development, in accordance with 
the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  Specifically , 
development on these allocations will be 
expected to contribute proportionately towards 
the following infrastructure items:  
(i) Highways and junction upgrades;  
(ii) Local utilities upgrades;  
E. The Council will only permit planning applications 
that contribute  towards the del ivery of those 
infrastructure items set out above and in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan , unless subsequent The Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 177 
                             
 
 
iterations of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan  or 
discussions with providers determine that these 
items are no longer required.  
Flood Risk  
F. In acco rdance with Policy DM 15, development on 
residential or traveller allocations must be located 
wholly within Flood Zone 1.  
 
  Harlow
DistrictBroxbourne
District
Waltham AbbeyNazeing
Epping Green
J26M25
M25M25RUR.E5
RUR.E13RUR.T3RUR.T2RUR.T1
RUR.T5
EppingBroxbourne
Theydon Bois
Rural Site Allocations -
West of DistrictMap 5.26 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-SP-0024-Rev1
Scale: 1:45,000 @A4Date: December 2017¯
This legend shows only the key Local Plan policy designations. 
A full legend can be found in Apppendix 6: Site Specific Requirements for Site Allocations.Map 5.26  Rural Site Allocations - West of District
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.Rural traveller site
allocationRural residential site
allocation
Rural employment site
allocationLegend
Green Belt boundary
Local Authority
boundaryThe Local Plan should be read as a whole. Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 179 
                             
 
 
Rural Sites in the South of the D istrict  
5.178  There are a number of small rural villages in the 
south  of the District.  
Empl oyment Sites   
5.179  Policy E 1 sets out the Council’s preferred 
approach to identifying sites for employment (B 
Class) uses. This is to support the 
redevelopment, renewal or extension of existing 
premises for their designated use while 
identifying new Employment  Sites  as necessary 
to meet the identified need as set out in Policy 
SP 2.  
5.180  There are two  existing Employment Sites  that 
have been identified for designation in the Local 
Plan :  
• RUR.E16 – Taylors Farm, Gravel Lane 
(0.63ha)  
• RUR.E17 – Brookside Garage, Grave l Lane  
(0.34ha)  
Infrastructure Requirements   
5.181  The supporting text to Policy SP 2 confirms the 
importance of identifying and delivering key infrastructure to support residential and 
employment growth across the District. The 
infrastructure needs for the more rural parts of 
the District will be set out  in the Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan. 
Policy P 15 Rural sites in the south  of the 
District  
Employment Sites   
A. In accordance with Policy E 1 the following 
existing sites are designated for employment 
uses:  
(i) RUR.E16 – Taylors Farm, Gravel Lane  
(ii) RUR.E17 – Brookside Garage, Gravel Lane  
 
 
  London Borough
of RedbridgeLoughtonTheydon Bois
Buckhurst
HillChigwellAbridge
J5M11
M11RUR.E16RUR.E17
Grange HillRoding ValleyChigwellBuckhurst
HillLoughtonDebdenTheydon Bois
Rural Site Allocations - 
South of DistrictMap 5.27 Epping Forest District 
Local Plan
Submission Version
December 2017Drawing No.
EFDC-SP-0025-Rev1
Scale: 1:30,000 @A4Date: December 2017¯
This legend shows only the key Local Plan policy designations. 
A full legend can be found in Apppendix 6: Site Specific Requirements for Site Allocations. Map 5.27  Rural Site Allocations - South of District
Contains Ordnance Survey & Royal Mail Data
© Crown Copyright & Database Right 2016
EFDC Licence No: 100018534 2016
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.
Proposals will be judged against all relevant 
policies.Rural traveller site
allocationRural residential site
allocation
Rural employment site
allocationLegend
Green Belt boundary
Local Authority
boundary 
  
 
 
 
Chapter Six  
Infrastructure 
and Delivery  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
182  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Introduction  
6.1 This chapter of the Local Plan  sets out the 
means by which the Council will implement the 
policies of the Plan .  As set out in this chapter, 
the Council will seek to  make full use of its 
powers as Local Planning Authority as well as 
through joint working with public and private 
sector partners and, where relevant, its role as 
landowner.  
6.2 The main focus of this chapter is the 
mechanisms by which the Council will ensure 
that the  infrastr ucture required to underpin the 
Plan will be delivered.   It also sets out the role of 
Neighbourhood Plans in delivering the vision set 
out in this document and the process for 
monitoring and future review of this Plan.  
6.3 This chapter should be read in paral lel with the 
District’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan which sets out the key infrastructure requirements  to 
support the proposed growth for the District as 
identified in this Plan.   Accordingly, Policies D 1 
to D  5 set out the  policies by which the Council 
will seek to ensure that investment in infrastructure keeps pace with growth.  
Delivery of Infrastructure  
6.4 In order to deliver sustainable and balanced 
growth as  outlined in this Plan, significant 
investment in infrastructure is required to  meet 
the needs o f residents and businesses. This 
encompasses a wide range of provision 
including transport, utilities, flood and surface 
water management measures, open space and 
social and community infrastructure ( including 
education, health care facilities, leisure and  
other community facilities ). 
6.5 The Council has compiled an Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan (IDP) that sets out the 
infrastructure required to support growth over 
the Plan period. The IDP identif ies: 
• The organisation responsible for delivering 
each infrastructure item;  
• The period over which the relevant 
investment will be required (including trigger 
points in relation to the planned phasing of 
housing and employment development); and • The cost of each item and how it is to be funded.  
6.6 This ensure s that new development is served by 
the necessary infr astructur e, delivered in a 
predictable, timely and effectiv e fashion. The  
IDP has been  developed in consultati on and co -
operation with infrastructure providers and 
other partner organisati ons and has also giv en 
consideration to wider impacts upon the viability and therefore the deliverability of 
development  within the D istrict . 
6.7 The Council will ensure, through the 
implementation policy D 1 (and other policies 
within the plan)  that the  necessary  
infrastructure identified in the IDP is delivered 
and phased appropriately.  
Approach  
6.8 The Council will work with relevant partner 
organisations and infrastructure providers to ensure that the current and future  
infrastructure needs of the District are properly considered and planned for.  
6.9 New development will be required to make best 
use of existing infrastructure and where 
necessary, provide or contribute towards the provision of additional services, facilities and 
infrastructure at a rate and scale which meets 
the needs a nd requirements that are expected 
to arise from that development.  
6.10 Proposals will be required to clearly 
demonstrate that infrastructure can be provided and phased to support the needs of the 
development. Proposals will need to take into 
account the relevan t business plans and 
programmes produced by infrastructure and 
service providers to demonstrate how provision 
will be brought forward to ensure development 
is appropriately phased in relation to planned 
infrastructure improvements. In assessing 
infrastruct ure and service requirements, the 
Council will have regard to the cumulative 
impact of developments in the locality and 
across the District.  
6.11 Whilst funding may be available from Central 
Government and other sources for strategic 
infrastructure including ut ilities and road  
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 183 
                             
 
 
improvements, a significant amount of new or 
enhanced infrastructure will need to be 
provided directly by developers as part  of new 
developments, or funded through financial 
payments by developers.  
6.12 The Schedule set out in the Infrastr ucture  
Delivery Plan identif ies the Infrastructure 
Delivery stakeholde r responsible for delivery of 
each item of infrastructure and where developer funding is likely to be required. The Council will secure such contributions through 
planning obligations , conditions , and s278 
Highways agreements (where appropriate).  
6.13 Some infrastructure , for example improvements 
to the  highways network , is likely to be strategic 
in nature and will support and enable the 
development of a number of sites. In such 
instances, it is likely that contributions will need 
to be pooled and combined with other funding 
sources.  
6.14 In order to realise the aspirations of the Harlow and Gilston Garden Town, and acknowledging 
the importance of development in this location 
being bro ught forward in a holistic, planned 
manner, d evelopment proposals within the  
Garden Town Communities  (as identified by 
Policy  SP 2 ) will be expected to contribute 
equitably and proportionally towards delivering 
their collective  infrastructure requirements . In 
developing proposals, developers should be 
mindful of the requirements set out in the IDP.  
6.15 The provision of many items of infrastructure 
across the D istrict is the responsibility of Essex 
County Council under its statutory duties.  In 
addition to the District Council’s IDP,  developers 
will also be expected to refer to the C ounty 
Council ’s Developers’ Guide to Infrastructure 
Contributions .   
6.16 The Council will consider introducing a 
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) and will 
implement this for areas and /or development 
types where a viable charging schedule would best mitigate the impacts of growth.  If implemented, s ection 106 will  continue to be  
the appropriate mechanism for securing land 
and works along with financial contributions 
where a sum for the necessary infrastructure is not secured via CIL , including for Affordable 
Housing . 
6.17 The Council recognises that viability constraints may justify an exception being made to the delivery of infrastructure in full accordance with 
Local Plan Policy D 1 at the time of the 
application. Where , following the review of an 
independently verified viability and financial 
appraisal,  the Council is satisfied that there are 
overriding viability concerns that prohibit the 
delivery of infrastructure  in accordance with 
Policy D 1, the Council will expect the de livery of 
additional infrastructure to be made if viability 
improves before full completion of the 
development permitted. For larger -scale 
development proposals to be delivered on a 
phased basis, the Council will require section 
106 agreements to include mechanism for 
viability reviews and 'clawback' clauses (or 
similar) to ensure the fullest possible 
compliance with Local Plan policy is achieved 
where the viability of the scheme improves 
before completion.  
 
Policy D 1 Delivery of Infrastructure  
A. New devel opment must be served and supported 
by appropriate on and off- site infrastructure and 
services as identified through the Infrastructure 
Delivery  Plan. Proposals must demonstrate that 
there is sufficient appropriate infrastructure 
capacity to support the de velopment or that such 
capacity will be delivered by the propos ed 
development .  Applications must be able to 
demonstrate that such capacity will prove to be 
sufficient and sustainable over time both in 
physical and financial terms.   
B. Where a proposed development requires 
additional infrastructure capacity  to support the 
growth , measures must be agreed with the 
Council and the appropriate infrastructure 
provider.   Such measures may include (not 
exclusively):  
(i) financial contributions towards new or 
expan ded facilities and the maintenance 
thereof;  
(ii) on-site construction of new provision;   
(iii) off-site capacity improvement works; and/or    
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
184  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
(iv) the provision of land.  
For the purposes of this policy, a wide definition 
of infrastructure and infrastruct ure providers wil l 
be applied.  
C. Exceptions to this policy will only be considered if : 
(i) it can be demonstrated that the benefit of 
the development proceeding without full 
mitigation outweighs the harm;  
(ii) a financial and viability appraisal (with 
supporting evidence), which is transparent 
and complies with any relevant national or 
local guidance applicable at the time, 
demonstrates that full mitigation is not viable 
to allow the development to proceed ; 
(iii) it can be demonstrated that a full and 
thorough investigation has been undert aken 
to find innovative solutions to make the 
necessary provision and all possible steps 
have been taken to minimise the residual 
level of unmitigated impacts; and  
(iv) Obligations are entered into by the developer 
that provide for appropriate additional 
mitiga tion in the event that viability improves 
prior to completion of the development.  
D. Infrastructure and services required as a 
consequence  of development and provision for  
their maintenance,  where appropriate, will be 
sought from developers and  secured through 
planning obligations prior to the issue  of planning 
permission.  
E. In negotiating planning  obligations,  the Council  
will take  into account economic viability.  Where 
relevant,  development proposals should be 
supported by a financial and viability appra isal 
(with supporting evidence), which is transparent 
and complies with relevant national or local 
guidance applicable a t the time.  Where a 
financial and viability appraisal has been 
submitted the Council will undertake an 
independent review of that appra isal for which 
the applicant will bear the cost . 
F. Where  viability  constraints  can be demonstrated  
by evidence,  the Council  may  consider  
prioritising  contributions  in line with  the IDP 
Schedule  and phasing  developer  contributions  
appropriately.  
G. Development proposals within the Garden Town 
Communities  (as identified by Policy SP 5 ) will be 
expected to contribute collectively , equitably  and proportionally towards delivering the identified 
infrastructure requirements related to each of the 
sites . 
Essential Facilities and Services  
6.18 Over the Plan period, increased levels of 
provision of essential facilities  and services will 
be required to support growth and 
development. These essential   faciliti es and 
services include:  
• Educati on – early years, primar y, secondary 
and post 16 education;   
• Health – primary care (including GPs), acute 
and mental health care ; and 
• Emergency services – Fire, Police and 
Ambulance . 
6.19 The scale and range of this provision will need 
to be appropriate to the level of demand 
generated by development, and should address 
the specific  needs of different groups of people. 
The ti mely delivery of services and faciliti es will 
be important to ensure the District can accommodate growth in a sustain able way.  
Key Evidence  
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan (Arup, 2017); 
and 
• Essex County Council’s Developers Guide to Infrastructure Contributions (ECC, 2016).  
Education 
6.20 Access to high quality education is an important 
element of building and supporting sustainable 
communities and promoting economic 
prosperity. The Epping Forest District Council  
Infrastructure Delivery Plan and Infrastructure 
Delivery Schedule set out the future 
requirements for education services over the 
Plan period.  
6.21 Essex County Council is the Children’s Services 
Authority, and has the statutory duty to secure 
sufficient places in state funded schools, f ree 
early education and post -16 education for all 
children and young people. The Education Act 2011 represented a  shift in the County Council’s 
role from a direct provider to a commissioner of  
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 185 
                             
 
 
school places. The County Council and District 
Council will therefore work in partnership with a 
wide variety  of education providers to ensure 
that the needs of the District ar e met.  
6.22 Essex County Council seeks contributions, where 
appropriate , from developments of ten or more 
dwellings to mitigate the impact on education 
facilities. For large developments, where the 
need for a new school is identified, it  should be 
provided on site to meet the needs of the new 
population. For smaller developments which do 
not in themselves generate sufficient demand 
for a new school but which put pressure on 
existing establishments, financial contributions 
towards new, expanded or im proved off -site 
facilities will be sought. Contributions will not be 
sought on sites smaller than ten dwellings, 
unless their co -location with other sites would 
have a cumulative impact. More information is 
provided in Essex County Council’s ‘ Developers 
Guide t o Infrastructure Contributions ( 2016) ’ 
and the District Council’s  Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan.  
6.23 Education facilities should be provided in accessible locations. The Council will support proposals for dual use of school facilities and 
the joint provisi on and co -location of 
compatible facilities (such as education 
campuses or co -located sports or community 
facilities).  
Health  
6.24 Over the Plan period it is anticipated that 
models of health service delivery in the District will change, with increased emphasis  on 
providing primary care ‘hubs’ delivering a range 
of services in the community, including GPs, 
dentists, optometrists, pharmacists, district 
nurses, therapists, mental health nurses, health 
care assistants, palliative care nurses and health 
visitors. Th ese facilities will offer new, 
innovative ways of providing care and reducing 
the need to attend hospitals. As such, 
opportunities for the co -location of compatible 
services and facilities will be supported where 
this is practical and cost efficient to ser vice.  
6.25 Developers will be expected, where 
appropriate, to make contributions towards new, expanded or improved health facilities to 
meet the needs of additional residents. These 
facilities may be provided on -site (in the case of 
large development proposals)  or contributions 
may be required to improve or expand off -site 
facilities.  
6.26 The Princess Alexandra Hospital NHS Trust is 
currently considering options to meet its future 
service requirements through a Strategic 
Outline Business Case.  As part of this work the potential to relocate the Princess Alexandra 
Hospital (‘PAH’) from its current site within 
Harlow is being considered.  Two potential sites 
for relocation are currently being considered, 
the first being at Gilston to the north of Harlow 
(within the Eas t Hert ford shire District Council 
administrative boundary), and the second being 
land to the East of Harlow within the Epping 
Forest District  administrative boundary (see 
Policy SP 5 ).  
6.27 In this context, both the D istrict and C ounty 
Council ’s will work cooperatively with all 
relevant stakeholders to ensure  the future 
prov ision of high quality  healthcare facilities and 
services to serve the wider area .  These facilities 
will respond effectively to planned and 
sustained growth. The replacement/ relocation 
of PAH is considered to play an important role in this.  
6.28 The public health function of E ssex County 
Council  focuses on health improvement and 
supporting communities to remain healthy.  In 
many instances this work will focus on the 
implementatio n of preventative measures to 
help reduce poor health across the C ounty. 
Accordingly, m ost housing development s can 
promote healthy living through the ir design , 
thus contributing towards overarching public 
health priorities and helping to reduce some of 
the overall impacts  of development.  
6.29 With new housing development comes the 
potential for an impact upon the existing 
capacity of health services and facilities in the 
District. Expansion of existing health facilities 
within the district as a direct result of  
development will be supported in principle by 
both the D istrict and C ounty Councils.   
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
186  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
6.30 For large housing applications, the extent of 
potential health  impacts should be assessed 
through a Health Impact Assessment to ensure 
that adequate level s of healthcare services 
continue to be provided for the new 
development and community as a whole. Where 
significant impacts are identified, planning 
permission will be refused unless infrastructure 
provision and/or funding to meet the health 
requirements o f the development are provided. 
Health Impact Assessments should be prepared 
in accordance w ith advice and best practice as 
published by the Department of Health and 
other agencies such as NHS North Essex and in 
line with the Council’s  Local List of Valida tion 
Requirements . 
 
Policy D 2 Essential Facilities and Services  
A. Development proposals will be permitted only 
where they provide or improve the essential 
facilities and services required to serve the scale 
of the proposed development.  
B. Development proposals which would be 
detrimental to or result in the loss of essential   
facilities and services that meet community needs 
and support well -being will only be permitted 
where it can be clearly demonstrated that:  
(i) The service or facility is no longer nee ded; or  
(ii) It is demonstrated that it is no longer 
practical, desirable or viable to retain them; 
or 
(iii) The proposals will provide sufficient 
community benefit to outweigh the loss of 
the existing facility or service  
C. Proposals for new facilities will be supporte d 
where they meet an identified local need. The 
Council will work with local communities and 
support proposals to retain, improve or re -use 
essential facilities and services, including those set 
out in Neighbourhood Plans or Development 
Orders, including C ommunity Right to Build 
Orders, along with appropriate supporting 
development which may make such provision 
economically viable.  
All Use Class C2 developments and Use Class C3 
residential development in excess of 50 units will be 
required to prepare a Heal th Impact Assessment that 
will measure the wider impact upon healthy living and the demands that are placed upon the capacity of 
health services and faciliti es arising from the 
development.  
Utilities  
6.31 Utilitie s infrastructure includes water supply, 
waste water and sewage treatment, electricity 
and gas. In order to bring forward development, 
sufficient capacity is required  across each  to 
meet the needs of the development.  
Key Evidence  
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan (Arup, 2017); 
and 
• Essex County Council’s Dev elopers Guide to 
Infrastructure Contributions (ECC, 2016).  
Approach  
6.32 The Council will work with utility service 
providers to secure the provision of utiliti es 
infrastructure (including water supply, waste 
water and sewage treatment, gas and 
electricity) needed to serve existing and new 
communities. The Infrastructure Delivery Plan 
and Infrastructure Delivery Schedule will set out 
the future requirements for new and upgraded 
utiliti es over the p lan period.  
6.33 Planning Permission  will be granted for  
proposals only  where there is sufficient capacity 
within the utiliti es infrastructure or where it has 
been demonstrated that capacity is ca pable of 
being provided in a timely manner in order to 
meet the needs of the development . Develop ers 
will be expected to consult with utilities 
providers to ensure this  is the case. In order to 
bring forward large allocati ons, in particular the 
strategic sites around Harlow, development may 
need to be phased to ensure utilities 
infrastructure is in place.  
 
Policy D 3 Utilities  
A. Planning permission will be granted for  proposals 
only where there is sufficient capacity within the 
utilities  infrastructure to meet the needs of the 
development.  Applicants will be expected to 
consult with utilities providers to ensure this is the  
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 187 
                             
 
 
case, and may be required to undertake 
assessments to demonstrate sufficien t capacity.   
The Council wil l expect developers and utilities 
providers to work together to ensure the 
appropriate provision of required utilities.  
B. Where there is a capacity problem and no 
improvements are programmed by the util ities 
provider, the Council will require the developer to 
fund appropriate improvements which must  be 
completed prior to occupation of the 
development , or the relevant phase of 
development . 
C. Large developments may need to be phased to 
ensure there is sufficien t capacity, and that any 
required upgrades can take place prior to 
occupati on. 
Community , Leisure and Cultural 
Facilities  
6.34 National  planning  policy emphasises the need 
for lo cal authorities to plan for healthy and 
inclusive communities.  
6.35 Community, leisure and cultural facilities make a 
vital contribution to the social and economic life 
of a community, particularly in rural areas. They 
are often especially important to elderly people and those who do not have easy access to 
transport. Access to a range of community 
facilities provides significant benefits including 
promoting health and wellbeing, facilitating 
social inclusion and encouraging education and 
learning. The loss of s uch facilities through 
redevelopment and change of use is detrimental 
to the fabric of communities and should be 
resisted. Population growth and demographic change places additional demands on provision 
and the needs associated with growth need to 
be planned for.  
Key Evidence  
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan (Arup, 2017);  
• Open Space Strategy (4 Global, 2017);  
• Built Facilities Strategy (4 Global, 2017);  and 
• Playing Pitch Strategy (4 Global, 2017) . 
 Approach  
6.36 The Council will safeguard against the 
unnecessary loss of valued facilities and 
services. It will also plan positively for the 
improvement of existing facilities and the provision of new shared spaces and community 
facilities. The Council will work with partners in 
the public, private and voluntary sector  to 
achieve this.  
6.37 The Council has produced evidence in the form 
of the Playing Pitch Strategy and Built Facilities Strategy which identify facilities of particular 
value that require protection. This evidence 
should be used alongside the application of thi s 
policy.  
6.38 Community, leisure and cultural facilities 
encompass a wide range of facilities and services including library provision, community 
halls, cultural facilities such as arts centres and 
museums as well as pubs, leisure centres and 
other sports fac ilities.  
6.39 The District and County Co uncil ’s are moving 
towards a more integrated model for the 
provision of many types of community facilities. 
The District Council will therefore encourage  a 
more flexible use of community space and 
maximise opportunities t o co -locate activities 
and services where possible. This makes most 
efficient use of buildings as well as providing a 
better and more integrated service to residents. 
As part of this approach there may be  the 
potential to co -locate a range of services 
including for example library provision, some 
forms of early years’ provision, youth services as 
well as general multi -purpose community space 
within one building or facility. Digital 
technologies and innovative ways of providing 
library services can engage an d encourage new 
users, including by operating satellite or mobile 
libraries. This will make village and community 
halls more valuable to a broader spectrum of 
the community.  
6.40 Access to a range of ind oor sports and leisure 
facilitie s are also vital for healthy communitie s. 
The Council will ensure existi ng facilitie s are 
retained and improved where possible. The  
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
188  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Council supports dual  use of school sports 
facilities by the community.  
6.41 Development proposals should make provision 
for community, cultural and l eisure facilities in a 
way that is proportionate to the scale of 
development proposed. S trategic and larger 
development  sites  will be expected to include 
on-site provision where feasible. For smaller 
developments , financial contributions may be 
sought in l ine with any standards to be set in the 
IDP and Essex County Council’s Developer Guide  
(2016 or further iterations) . 
6.42 In some instances, it may be necessary to 
consolidate or relocate facilities to better serve 
the growing population and provide more 
access ible facilities. Where this is appropriate 
there should be no net loss of community, 
leisure or cultural facilities.  
6.43 In order to retain sites  for community use s and 
meet the identified need, the Council will require robust evidence from applicants seeking 
to demonstrate that there is no longer a 
reasonable prospect of the site’s continued use 
for community purposes before considering its 
release to other uses.   Differing requirements 
will need to be met depending upon the size, 
nature and location of the si te or property. In 
general, it should be marketed effectively for a 
minimum of 12 months at a rate which is 
comparable to local market value for its existing 
use and it must be demonstrated that the continuous use of the site for such uses is no 
longer via ble, taking into account the site’s 
existing and potential long- term market demand 
for such uses.  
 
Policy D 4 Community, Leisure and Cultural 
Facilities  
A. Development proposals will be permitted where 
they:  
(i) Retain and maintain  existing facilitie s that are 
valued by the community;  or 
(ii) Improve the quality and capacity of fac ilities 
valued by the community.  
B. Proposed developments should contribute to the 
provision of new or improved community, leisure 
and cultural facilities in a way that is proportiona te to the scale of the proposed 
development and in accordance with the 
standards in the Infrastructure  Delivery Plan and 
Essex County Council’s ‘ ‘Developers Guide to 
Infrastructure Contributions (2016)’  
C. Strategic and larger developments wi ll be 
expected to make on -site provision for 
community, leisure and cultural facilities where 
feasible. For smaller developments a financial 
contribution will be sought  where required . 
D. Financial contributions will be sought for  the on-
going maintenance of  community facilities, where 
appropriate.  
E. The provision of new facilities will be 
appropriately  phased to meet the needs of the 
community they are provided for.  
F. Where opportunities exist, the Council will 
support the co -location of community, leisure and 
culture facilities and other local services.  
G. Proposals that would result in the loss of valued 
facilities currently or last used for the provision of 
community, leisure and cultural activities will only 
be permitted if it is demonstrated that:  
(iii) The facility  is no longer needed for any of the 
functions that it can perform; or  
(iv) It is demonstrated that it is no longer 
practical, desi rable or viable to retain them; 
or 
(v) Any proposed replacement or improved 
facilities will be equivalent or better in terms 
of quality, quantity and accessibility and there 
will be no overall reduction in the level of 
facilities in the area in which the existing 
development is located; or  
(vi) The proposal will clearly provide sufficient 
community benefit to outweigh the loss of 
the ex isting facility, meeting evidence of a 
local need.  
H. The change of use of existing community facilities 
or premises (whether designated or 
undesignated) to other uses will not normally be 
permitted unless the applicant can demonstrate 
through evidence, including marketing of the site, 
that there is no  longer a reasonable prospect of 
the site being used for the existing community 
uses.  
I. The Council will work positively with national 
governing bodies and communities, including local 
voluntary organisations, and support proposals to  
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 189 
                             
 
 
develop, retain, impro ve or re -use community, 
leisure or cultural facilities, including those set out 
in Neighbourhood Plan or Development Orders 
including Community Right to Build Orders, along 
with the appropriate supporting development 
which may make such provision economica lly 
viable  
Communications Infrastructure  
6.44 National planning policy  requires local 
authorities to facilitate telecommunications 
development, including high speed broadband 
technology. An effective telecommuni cations 
network is essential to support sustaina ble 
economic growth and development and to 
provide services to local communities. Visual 
impacts should be minimised as far as possible.  
Key Evidence  
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan (Arup, 2017)  
Approach  
6.45 There are currently parts of the District that 
have slow speeds of internet connectivity. The 
Council will seek to ensure that all new 
development , and wherever possible , all 
residents and business have superfast speeds of 
internet connectivity in line with the Superfast Essex programme objective that 95 % of Essex 
should have access to fibre broadband (with the 
potential to provide superfast speeds of 24 
Mbps and above) by 2019. The Council 
addresses this matter in the  Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan which accompani es the Local Plan.  
 
Policy D 5 Commun ications Infrastructure  
A. The Council will promote enhanced  digital  
connectivity throughout the District by supporting 
high speed broadband and telecommunication 
infrastructure . In particular applicants submitting 
planning applications  for major development  
proposals should demonstrate how high speed 
broadband infrastructure will be accommodated 
within the development.  
B. Applications  for telecommunications  
development  (including for prior approval  
under Part 16 of the  General  Permitted  Development  Order,  or any other  such 
future  Order)  will be considered  in 
accordance  with  national policy  guidance .  
The visual impacts of telecommunications 
proposals should be minimised, particularly 
on rooftops/roof slopes.  
 
Neighbourhood Planning  
6.46 Neighbourhood Plans provide a mechanism for 
communiti es to bring forward development and 
to have a say in the locati on of development.    
6.47 The final Local Plan will set out the strategic 
policies to provide the framework for delivery of 
homes, jobs and infrastructure in the District.  
Neighbourhood Plans must be in general 
conformity  with  the strategic policies of the 
Local Plan. ‘Made’ (i.e. adopted) Neighbourhood 
Plans will work alongside, and where 
appropriate replace, the non- strategic policies in 
the Local Plan where they overlap.  
6.48 Alterations to Green Belt boundaries must be 
made through the Local Plan process.  
Key Evidence  
• Emerging Neighbourhood Plans in the 
District.  
Approach  
6.49 The Council will support the relevant 
representatives from local communities to 
identif y the most appropriate means o f meeting 
local community needs through Neighbourhood 
Planning and through rural exception schemes. 
Collaboration between the community and the 
Council is critical to ensure strategic requirements are met.  
 
Policy D 6 Neighbourhood Planning  
A. The Council will supp ort the preparation and 
producti on of Neighbourhood Plans. 
Neighbourhood Plans should:  
(i) Show how they are contributi ng towards the 
strategic objectiv es of the Local Plan and that 
they are in general conformity with its 
strate gic approach and policies; and   
The Local Plan should be read as a whole.  Proposals will be judged against all relevant policies.  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
190  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
(ii) Clearly set out how they will promote 
sustainable development at the same level or 
above that which would be delivered through 
the Local Plan, and Neighbourhood Plan 
policies are supported by evidence on local 
need fo r new ho mes, jobs and facilitie s, for 
their Plan area.  
Monitoring and Enforcement  
6.50 Local Plans need to be reviewed regularly to 
assess how well their policies and proposals are 
being implemented and to ensure that they are 
up to date. Monitoring provides the obje ctive 
basis necessary for such reviews.  
6.51 On occasion there are breaches of planning 
controls in the District as a result of 
development being undertaken without the 
required planning permission or a failure to 
comply with conditions or limitations on 
planni ng permissions. The Council, as Local 
Planning Authority, has the discretion to take 
whatever enforcement action is considered 
necessary in the public interest, when 
considered expedient to do so having regard to 
the Development Plan and any other material  
considerati ons.  This process should be 
transparent so that people understand what action the Council is likely to take in response to 
alleged breaches of planning control.  
Key Evidence  
• Local Enforcement Plan  (EFDC, 2013)  
Approach  
6.52 The indicators against wh ich policies will be 
monitored are listed in Appendix 3. This information will be collected as part of the 
preparation of the Authority’s Monitoring 
Report. Where it would appear through 
monitoring that targets are not being met, it 
may be necessary to rev iew the policies within 
the Local Plan to establish whether they need to be amended in order to secure delivery of the 
spatial vision. The need to review policies will be 
identified in the Authority’s Monitoring Report.  
6.53 A database will be maintained in rel ation to 
planning obligations and unilateral undertakings including details of the development site, relevant dates for receipt of funds, the purpose 
of the obligation, level of funding received and 
the timescale for delivery of the infrastructure.  
6.54 The Council will keep up to date the Local 
Enforcement Plan adopted in December 2013 to 
manage enforcement proactiv ely in a way 
considered appropriate to the District, and in 
line with national planning policy . The Local 
Enforcement Plan sets out how the C ounci l will 
monitor the implementation of planning 
permissions,  investig ate alleged cases of 
unauthorised develo pment and take 
appropriate action as considered necessary.  
 
Policy D 7 Monitoring and Enforcement  
A. The Council will monitor the implementation  of 
the Local Plan policies and infrastructure provision 
and report the results on an annual basis. It will 
deal with the enforcement of planning controls in 
accordance with the Council’s Local Enforcement 
Plan.  
 
  
 
 
 
Appendix One  
Acronyms and 
Glossary  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
Appendix 1: Acronyms and Glossary  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
192  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Appendix 1  
Acronyms and Glossary 
 
Acronym  Full Name  
AMR  Authority Monitoring 
Report  
AQMA  Air Quality Management 
Area  
BAP Biodiversity Action Plan  
CCG  Clinical Commissioning 
Group  
CCHP  Combined Cooling , Heat 
and Power  
CDA  Critical Drainage Area  
CHP Combined Heat and Power  
CIL Community Infrastructure 
Levy  
CO2 Carbon Dioxide  
DCLG  Department for 
Communities and Local 
Government  
DPD  Development Plan 
Document  
DpH  Dwellings per Hectare  
EIA Environmental Impact 
Assessment  
EPOA  Essex Planning Officers 
Association  
 
FEMA  Functional Economic 
Market Area  
FRA Flood Risk Assessment  
FRAZ  Flood Risk Assessment Zone  
GP General Practitioner  
HGV  Heavy Goods Vehicle  
HMA  Housing Market Area  
HRA Habitats Regulations 
Assessment  
HSE Health and Safety Executive  
IDP Infrastructure Delivery Plan  LDS  Local Development Scheme  
LEP Local Economic Partnership  
LNR Local Nature Reserve  
LP Local Plan  
LSCCLSP  London Stansted Cambridge 
Corridor Local Strategic 
Partnership  
LSOA  Lower Super Output Area  
LVRP  Lee Valley Regional Park  
 
LVRPA  Lee Valley Regional Park 
Authority  
 
LoWS  Local Wildlife Site  
Mbps  Megabits per second  
MoU  Memorandum of 
Understanding  
NO 2 Nitrogen Dioxide  
NOMIS  National Online Manpower 
Information  System  
NNR  National Nature Reserve  
NPPF   National Planning Policy 
Framework  
NVQ  National Vocational 
Qualifications  
OAEN  Objectively Assessed 
Economic Need  
OAHN  Objectively Assessed 
Housing Need  
OJEC  Official Journal of the 
European Union  
ONS  Office for National Statistics  
PDF Park Development 
Framework  
PPG Planning Practice Guidance  
 
SA  Sustainability Appraisal  
SAC Special Area of 
Conservation  
SCI Statement of Community 
Involvement   
Appendix 1: Acronyms and Glossary  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 193 
                             
 
 
SHMA  Strategic Housing Market 
Assessment  
SFRA  Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment  
SLAA   Strategic Land Availability 
Assessment  
SMEs   Small and Medium Sized 
Enterprises  
SNPP  Sub-National Population 
Projections  
SOC Standard Occupational 
Classification  
SPA  Special Protection Area  
SPD Supplementary Planning 
Document  
Sq.M Square Metres  
SSSI Site of Special Scientific 
Interest  
SuDS  Sustainable Drainage 
Systems  
SWMP  Surface Water 
Management Plan  
VDS Village Design Statement  
   
Appendix 1: Acronyms and Glossary  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
194  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Glossary  
Accessible and Adaptable Homes Standards  
Standards for layout and circulation space set within 
the Building Regulations 2010 as amended in 2015 and 
2016. Refer “Approved Document M: Access to and use of buildings Volume 1, dwellings” HM government  
Affordable Housing  
Social rented, affordable rented and intermediate housing, provided to eligible households whose needs are not met by  the market. The Government is 
intending to extend this to include Starter Homes . 
Agricultural Land Classification  
All land in agricultural use is graded in England according to the following system: Grade 1 (excellent), 
2 (very good), 3a (good) , 3b (moder ate), 4 (poor) and 5 
(very poor). The best and most versatile agricultural 
land are grades 1, 2 and 3a i.e. it is most flexible, 
productive and efficient in response to inputs and can 
best deliver food and non food crops for future 
generations.  
Air Quality  Management Areas (AQMA)  
Air Quality Management Areas (AQMA) are 
designations used by DEFRA to manage areas with air 
pollution.  
Air Quality Action Plan  
A document produced by the Council with Natural England setting out the steps that will be taken to 
redu ce pollution within an Air Quality Management 
Area (AQMA). This could include steps to reduce car usage and promote public transport.  
Amenity Space  
Outdoor space that may be private or communal but 
enables the enjoyment of the property. If the space is 
private this is for the enjoyment of the occupants of 
the dwelling for relaxing, drying washing etc.  
Ancient Tree 
A tree in its third or final stage of life. Ancient trees 
have reached a great age in comparison with other 
trees of the same species so their  age differs 
depending upon the species of tree.   
Ancient Woodland  
An area that has been wooded continuously since 
1600 AD. 
Appropriate Assessment  
An assessment of the effect of a development on the 
Natura 2000 network (A Europe -wide network of sites 
of international importance for nature conservation). 
The network comprises Special Protection Areas under the Birds Directive and Special Areas of Conservation 
under the Habitats Directive (collectively referred to as European sites)  
Arboricultural Implicati ons Assessment  
A written statement of the impact of any tree loss 
required to implement the design of a proposed 
development  
Area Action Plans (AAPs)  
Area Action Plans are used to provide the planning 
framework for areas where significant change or 
conservation is needed.  
Article 4 Direction  
A legal mechanism which withdraws deemed planning 
permission granted by the General Permitted 
Development Order.  See ‘Use Class’ below  
Authority Monitoring Report (AMR)  
Produced by the Council to provide an assessment of 
the progress made against targets and the 
performance of policies. The monitoring period will 
generally be from April to March. Previous editions 
were known as Annual Monitoring Report.  
Backland Development  
Backland development refers to the development  of 
land to the rear of existing buildings including garden land . 
Basement Impact Assessment  
A process that combines surface and groundwater 
conditions, and geotechnical analysis into a 
comprehensive review the purpose of which is to 
establish ground movem ents in relation to any  
Appendix 1: Acronyms and Glossary  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 195 
                             
 
 
basement development and the impact on 
neighbouring properties.  
Biodiversity  
The variety of plant and animal life in the world or in a 
particular habitat, a high level of which is usually 
considered to be important and desirable.  
Blue Infrastructure  
Infrastructure provision relating to water. This 
includes natural features such as rivers, streams and ponds, semi -natural features such as sustainable 
drainage systems, bio -swales and canals, and other 
engineering features such as dams, weirs and culverts. 
Blue and Green infrastructure are often considered 
together, placing emphasis on the importance of 
biodiversity and flood risk mitigation .  
BREEAM  
BREEAM is an environment assessment and rating 
method for buildings recognised nationally  and 
abroad. The assessment evaluates a buildings 
specification, design, construction and use, and aims 
to encourage low carbon and low impact design, to 
minimise energy use and maximise the use of low carbon technologies.  
Brownfield  
See ‘Previously Developed Land’  
Brownfield Register  
Introduced by the Housing and Planning Act 2016, this 
is a public register to be held by local planning 
authorities providing a comprehensive list of 
brownfield sites that are suitable for housing development or housing led schemes where the 
predominant land use is housing.  
Carbon Footprint  
The amount of carbon dioxide released into the 
atmosphere as a result of the particular individual, 
organisation or community. The carbon footprint of a 
development is counted over its  lifetime i.e.  the 
materials used and their sources, construction, 
lifetime use and demolition.Climate Change Adaptation  
Adjustments to natural or human systems in response to actual or expected climatic factors or their effects, 
including from changes i n rainfall and rising 
temperatures, which moderate harm or exploit 
beneficial opportunities.  
Climate Change Allowances  
Predictions of anticipated change for peak river flow 
by river basin district, peak rainfall intensity, sea level rise, offshore wind spe ed and extreme wave height. 
They are based on climate change projections and 
different scenarios of carbon dioxide emissions. There 
are different allowances for different periods of time 
over the next century. They are used by the 
Environment Agency when a dvising on flood risk.  
Climate Change Mitigation  
Action to reduce the impact of human activity on the 
climate system, primarily through reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions.  
Code for Sustainable Homes  
The Code for Sustainable Homes (DCLG, 2008) is a set 
of na tional standards for the sustainable design and 
construction of new homes, using a 1 to 6 star rating 
to identify the overall sustainability performance of a 
new home.  
Combined Cooling , Heat and Power (CCHP)  
Is the use of a CHP system in conjunction with a n 
absorption chiller to provide electricity, heat and 
cooling -also known as ‘tri -generation’.  
Combined Heat and Power (CHP)  
Is a highly efficient process that captures and uses the 
heat that is a by product of electricity generation.  
Community Facilities and Services  
Community services and facilities provide for the 
health and wellbeing, social, educational, spiritual, 
recreational, leisure and cultural needs of the 
community.  
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL)  
Community Infrastructure Levy is a mechanism  by 
which local planning authorities can secure monies  
Appendix 1: Acronyms and Glossary  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
196  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
from development to help fund both strategic and 
local infrastructure needs. Section 106 agreements will 
still be used to secure affordable housing provision 
and site specific infrastructure requirements.  
Community Right to Build Order  
A type of Neighbourhood Development Order 
prepared by a Parish council and ‘made’ by the local 
planning authority that grants planning permission for a site -specific development proposal or classes of 
development.  
Concept  Framework Plan  
A document that sets out how development and 
infrastructure can be delivered in a coordinated way 
for two or more adjacent allocation sites. The 
document should address key place shaping issues 
such as housing mix, design principles, provis ion of 
greenspace, approach to mitigating impact on heritage 
assets, include a movement strategy for vehicles, 
pedestrians and cyclists, and on- site and off -site 
infrastructure requirements, in order to ensure that a 
comprehensive and cohesive approach is taken. The 
document should be  produced and undertaken jointly 
by the landowners/promoters of the relevant sites and 
endorsed by the Council prior to the submission of any planning applications . 
Connectivity  
The state of being connected, or degree to which 
places and people are connected e.g. by transport 
systems including footpath networks.  
Controlled Parking Zone (CPZ)  
An area where on street parking is controlled through the use of parking restrictions at particular times of 
day and in particular location s. Residents are required 
to have a valid permit, and parking violations are 
enforced through parking fines issued by Civil 
Enforcement Officers.  
Conservation Areas  
A Conservation Area is an area of special architectural 
or historic interest, with a character or appearance 
which is considered to be desirable to preserve or 
enhance.  Construction Management Statement  
Explains the methods used in the construction of a 
development and can include measures such as the 
time periods in the day over which co nstruction occurs 
and delivery times for materials etc.  
Critical Drainage Area (CDA)  
Identified in surface water management plans these 
are areas particularly susceptible to surface water 
flooding 
Custom Build Housing  
Custom build housing is built by the o ccupier working 
with a developer to develop their own home.  
Design and Access Statements  
Design and Access Statements are short reports which 
accompany and support planning applications where 
required, to outline design principles and concepts 
that have be en applied to a proposal in relation to 
layout, scale, landscaping, and overall appearance.  
Design Code  
A set of illustrated design rules which instruct and may advise on the physical development of a site or area. 
The graphic and written components of the  code are 
detailed and precise, and build on a design vision such 
as a masterplan or a design and development 
framework for a site or area.  
Development  
‘Development’ includes building operations (e.g. 
structural alterations, construction, rebuilding, most 
demolition); material changes of use of land and 
buildings; engineering operations (e.g. groundworks); mining operations; other operations normally carried 
out by a person operating a business as a builder; 
subdivision of a building (or any part of it) use d as a 
dwelling house for the use as two or more separate 
dwelling houses.   As defined by s55 of the Town and 
Country Planning Act 1990 
Development Proposals  
Any proposed development scheme 
presented/submitted to the Council for consideration 
or determina tion. This includes , planning applications 
(outline or full) and proposals submitted as part of 
pre-application enquiries.   
Appendix 1: Acronyms and Glossary  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 197 
                             
 
 
Development Brief  
Used to give guidance on resolving design and 
planning issues on a specific site.  
District Open Land  
Land outlined in this Local Plan  that is intended to be 
afforded the same protection as Green Belt land via 
the use of a Local Green Space designation.  
Duty to Co -operate 
Introduced in the Localism Act 2011, it is a legal duty 
placed on local planning auth orities, county councils 
and public bodies to engage constructively, actively 
and on an ongoing basis to maximise the effectiveness 
of Local Plan preparation in the context of strategic 
cross boundary matters.  Local planning authorities 
must demonstrate ho w they have complied with the 
duty at the independent examination of their Local 
Plans.  
Dwelling  
A self -contained unit of accommodation used by a 
single household as a home.  This includes houses, flats , bungalows as well as mobile homes and 
houseboats.  
Enabling Development  
Enabling Development means allowing development to take place that would not normally be granted 
permission, to enable the delivery of a development 
which provides significant public benefit.   
Enterprise Zone  
A government initiative wher eby relief is given for 
business rates and some business taxes and a simplified planning process applies to the area.  
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)  
A procedure to be followed for certain types of project 
to ensure that decisions are made in full knowledge of 
any likely significant effects on the environment.  
Epping Forest Buffer Land  
Areas of land around the fringes of Epping Forest 
owned by the City of London Corporation and 
managed by the Conservators of the Forest. The 
purpose of Buffer Land is  to protect the rural environment of the Forest and by providing a natural 
barrier of land which is safeguard from encroachment 
of development. The land also provides areas of 
recreation and complementary wildlife habitats.  
European Habitats Directive 92/4 3/EEC  
Is a Directive adopted in respect of the conservation of 
natural habitats of wild plants and animals transposed 
into UK law through the Conservation of Habitats and 
Species Regulations 2010.  
European Site  
This is a site protected for its importance t o 
biodiversity. They are defined in Regulation 8 of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2010 
and include candidate Special Areas of Conservation, 
Sites of Community Importance, Special Areas of Conservation and Special Protection Areas.  
Evidence Base 
The information and data gathered to justify the "soundness" of the policy approach set out  in the 
Local Development Plan, including physical, economic, 
and social characteristics of an area.  
Expression of Interest  for the Harlow and Gilston 
Garden Town  
The submission by the Harlow and Gilston Garden Town partner Councils to the Government, formally 
notifying their intention to bid for Garden Town status 
and funding in response to the Garden Town 
Prospectus  published in 2016.  This was  the first stage 
in Garden Town bidding process.  
Flood Risk Assessment Zone (FRAZ)  
EFDC flood risk assessment zones are catchments of ordinary water courses where surface water run off is 
contributing to river flooding or are areas of known 
historical floo ding. Refer Appendix B of the SFRA 1.  
Flood Zone  
Land within Flood Zones 2 and 3 are areas at medium or high risk from a source of flooding including from rivers and the sea, rainfall on the ground surface and 
rising groundwater, overwhelmed sewers and 
drainage systems, and from reservoirs, canals and 
lakes and other artificial sources.   
Appendix 1: Acronyms and Glossary  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
198  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Food Security  
Is reliable access to a sufficient quantity of affordable 
and nutritious food. In this context food security refers 
to the ability of the region or nation to be able to 
produce or otherwise provide food for itself, and the 
extent to which this can be maintained in periods of 
environmental or socio -political difficulty.  
Functional Economic Market Area (FEMA)  
The geographical area at which economies and 
markets actually operate which is not contained by 
administrative boundaries.  
Geodiversity  
The range of rocks, minerals, fossils, soils and landforms.  
Garden Town  Communities /Garden Village  
Large scale development planned in a holistic and 
comprehensive way, inclu ding extensions to existing 
settlements. Development of this nature is based on 
the ‘garden town ’ principles  developed by the Town 
and Country Planning Association.  These  aim to 
improve quality of life by providing high quality design; infrastructure appr opriate for the needs of the society 
such as public transport, public services, education 
and health facilities as well as community facilities and 
provision of green spaces, gardens, open spaces and 
landscaped areas integral to their design.  
Green Belt  
Land protected by a policy and land use  designation to 
protect areas of largely undeveloped or agricultural land surrounding or neighbouring urban areas. Review 
of Green Belt boundaries is undertaken as part of the 
production of Local Plans where Green Belt exists.  
Greenfield  
Land which has not previously been developed, or 
where development has previously taken place but 
the land has reverted to a natural state and the remains of permanent structures or fixed surface 
structures have blended into the landscape in the 
process of time. See ‘Previously Developed Land’.  
Green Infrastructure  
Green Infrastructure is a network of high quality green 
spaces and other environmental features such as parks, public open spaces, playing fields, sports 
pitches, woodlands, and allotments. The provision of 
Green Infrastructure can provide social, economic and 
environmental benefits close to where people live and 
work.  
Green  and Blue  Corridors  
A natural linear feature /habitat that supports 
biodiversity , primarily by enabling wildlife to move 
along it  and connect  other wildlife populations  and 
habitats as part of a network. Green Corridors include 
features such as  woodland and hedgerows, railway 
embankments or grass verges.  Blue Corridors include 
features such as rivers, stream s, ponds, wetlands and 
sustainable drainage measures and can facilitate 
natural hydrological processes while minimising 
flooding.  
Green links  
Sites or characteristics that link spaces e.g. a 
hedgerow with footpath, or a river bank  
Green Wall  
A wall partial ly or completely covered in vegetation 
that includes a growing medium such as soil and 
usually has a watering system incorporated. They are 
also known as living walls or vertical gardens and they 
provide insulation to a building.  
Grey Water Systems  
Enable grey water -  Domestic wastewater (excluding 
sewage) to be treated and reused within the home and garden.  
Groundwater Source Protection Zone  
Identified by the Environment Agency this is a zone 
that shows the potential for contaminant migration 
into sources of drinking water from any activities that 
might cause pollution in the area. The aim is to assist 
in pollution prevention.  
Habitats Regulation Assessment (HRA)  
A process whereby the potential impact of 
development on sites protected by the Habitats 
Direct ive is assessed.   
Appendix 1: Acronyms and Glossary  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 199 
                             
 
 
Historic Environment  
All aspects of the environment resulting from the 
interaction between people and places through time, 
including all surviving physical remains of past human 
activity, whether visible, buried or submerged, and 
landscap ed and planted or managed flora.  
Historic Environment Record  
Information services that seek to provide access to 
comprehensive and dynamic resources relating to the 
historic environment of a defined geographical area 
for public benefit and use. Heritage As set 
Heritage Asset  
A building, monument, site, place, area or landscape 
identified as having a degree of significance meriting 
consideration in planning decisions, because of its 
heritage interest. Heritage asset includes designated 
heritage assets and ass ets identified by the local 
planning authority (including local listing).  
Heritage Statement  
A heritage statement describes the significance of a heritage asset affected by proposed development 
including any setting. What might be included in it will 
depen d upon the significance of the asset and the 
level of development proposed.  
Independent Examination  
The Local Plan will be examined by an independent inspector whose role is to assess whether the Plan has 
been prepared in accordance with the Duty to Co -
operate, legal and procedural requirements, and 
whether it is sound.  
Indicative Development Area  
In the context of site allocations, it is the area of the 
site which is identified as being suitable for 
development  and is commonly referred to as the 
‘gross’ si te area . This does not include areas that are 
subject to policy constraints including flood risk and 
protected habitats.  
Indicative Net Density  
In the context of residential site allocations, it is the 
density of development, measured in d wellings per 
Hectare (DpH) that is expected to come forward on 
the parts of the site developed for housing (the ‘net’ site area). This includes houses/flats, private garden 
space, car parking areas, incidental open space and 
children’s play areas. For larger sites, an allowance for 
land will be required to account for other items such 
as major distributor roads, education and community 
uses, other land uses suc h as retail and employment 
incidental to the development and larger areas of 
strategic open space provision such as recreation 
areas and landscape buffers .  
Indicative Net Capacity  
In the context of residential site allocations, it is the 
number new additi onal homes that can be delivered 
on a site. Where there are currently existing homes located within a site allocation, the indicative net 
capacity is equal to the total capacity of the site minus 
the existing number of homes.  
Indicative Plot Ratio  
In the c ontext of employment site allocations, it is a  
ratio representing the density of employment floorspace (sqm) that can be delivered on a hectare of 
land.  The indicative plot ratio for employment 
allocation sites varies depending on the proposed 
employment u se and the assumed building typologies 
(for instance higher plot ratios  are assumed  for office 
uses compared with light industrial uses).  
Infill Development  
Infill de velopment refers to the development of a 
small gap in an otherwise continuous built up 
frontage, or the small scale redevelopment of existing 
properties within such a frontage.   
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP)  
This will contain the key infrastructure required to 
support the homes and commercial development in 
the Local Plan. This includes p hysical infrastructure 
such as transport energy and water, social and 
community infrastructure such as health, education 
and emergency services and green infrastructure such 
as open spaces and allotments. The IDP sits alongside 
the Local Plan and will cont ain a programme 
identifying when items of infrastructure are expected 
to be in place, funding and costs. It will be regularly 
updated as more information becomes available.   
Appendix 1: Acronyms and Glossary  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
200  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Landscape Character Assessment  
An assessment to identify different landscape areas  
which have a distinct character based on a 
recognisable pattern of elements, including 
combinations of geology, land -form, soils, vegetation, 
land use and human settlement.  
Lifetime Homes  
Homes that are designed to a standard to allow lifetime use at mini mal cost by being adaptable 
throughout an individual’s  life stages enabling aging 
people to continue to live in their homes.  
Listed Building or structure  
A building or structure considered to be of special 
architectural or historic interest that appears on  the 
National Heritage List for England.  
Local Development Document  
Is a development plan document or a supplementary 
planning document.  
Local Development Order  
An Order made by a local planning authority (under 
the Town and Country Planning Act 1990) that  grants 
planning permission for a specific development proposal or classes of development.  
Local Development Scheme (LDS)  
This is a public statement of the Council’s progra mme 
for the production of Local Development Documents. 
The scheme will be revised wh en necessary.  
Locally Listed Building or Structure  
A building or structure considered to be of special 
architectural or historical value locally, and subject to 
specific planning policy protection.  
Local Nature Reserve (LNR)  
Places with wildlife or geologi cal features that or 
special interest locally. These are normally owned and statutorily designated by the local authority. In Epping 
Forest District, Local Nature Reserves are managed by 
the Essex Wildlife Trust.  Local Plan (LP)  
The plan for the future de velopment of the local area, 
drawn up by the local planning authority in 
consultation with the community and stakeholders. 
Once adopted the Local Plan will legally form part of 
the Development Plan for the District, superseding the 
Replacement Local Plan ( 2006).  
Local Wildlife Sites (LWS)  
Local Wildlife Sites, whilst not of national status, have 
a county -wide significance. Each site identified 
provides a high -grade habitat for a diverse range of 
flora and fauna meriting careful conservation. Sites are 
evaluated according to criteria, including: diversity of 
species; features of wildlife importance; rarity of 
habitat and species in local and county context; 
management and current use; public access and 
linkages with other sites and areas.  
Low Carbon and Renewable Energy  
Renewable energy is energy harnessed from natural 
systems e.g. the heat from the Earth, solar, 
geothermal, wind power. Low carbon energy is associated with a lower carbon output than traditional 
fossil fuels e.g. combined heat and power.  
Lower Super Output Area (LSOA)  
A geographical area used in the analysis of census data 
that is usually equal to or smaller than a ward. For 
example Epping Forest District contain s 32 electoral 
wards and 78 LSOA s.  
Main River  
Watercourse defined on a ‘Main R iver Map’ 
designated by DEFRA. The Environment Agency has 
permissive powers to carry out flood defence works, 
maintenance and operational activities for Main Rivers 
only.  
Main Town Centre Uses  
National planning policy states that main town centre 
uses incl ude retail development (including warehouse 
clubs and factory outlet centres), leisure, 
entertainment facilities and intensive sport and 
recreation uses (including cinemas, restaurants, drive -
through restaurants, bars and pubs, night  clubs, 
casinos, health  and fitness centres, indoor bowling 
centres, and bingo halls), offices, and arts, culture and  
Appendix 1: Acronyms and Glossary  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 201 
                             
 
 
tourism development (including theatres, museums, 
galleries and concert halls, hotels and conference 
facilities).  
Major Development  
Refers to types of applicatio ns for development as 
follows: 10 or more dwellings/over half a hectar e/building(s) exceed 1000square metres, office 
light industrial, general industrial or retail 1000square 
metres or more/over 1 hectare, traveller sites 10 or 
more pitches, sites of more than 1 hectare.  
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)  
A formal agreement between two or more parties, not 
legally binding but carry ing a degree of seriousness 
and mutual respect.  
Minimum Net Capacity  
For Strategic Masterplan s as that are endorsed  in the 
Plan, development proposals which are brought 
forward should ensure that the total development 
capacity meets or exceeds the number included in the 
Policy.  
Minor Development  
Refers to types of applications for development as 
follows: 1 -9 dwellings (unless floorspace exceeds 
1000square metres) under 0.5 hectare, office/light 
industrial, general industrial and retail –  up to 
999square metres/under 1 hectare, travellers site –  0-
9 pitches.  
Mixed and Balanced Communities  
Communities comprising of people living in a range of 
housing tenures and receiving varying levels of 
household income.  
National Nature Reserve (NNR)  
Statutori ly protected sites of national  importance 
which were established to protect a nd conserve 
habitats, species and geology, and to provide special 
opportunities for scientific study. NNRs are managed 
by Natural England and other bodies such as the 
National Trust, Forestry Commission, RSPB, Wildlife 
Trusts and local authorities.  
 
 National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF)  
Sets out the Government ’s planning policies for 
England, and provides a framework within which local 
people and their accountable councils can produce 
their own distinctive local and neighbourhood plans, 
which reflects the needs and priorities of their 
communities.  
Neighbourhood  Development Order (NDO)  
An Order prepared by a Parish Council and ‘made’ by a 
local planning authority through which planning 
permission for a specific development proposal or 
classes of development can be permitted.  
Neighbourhood Plans  
A plan prepared by a Parish Council for a particular 
neighbourhood area.  
New Housing Development  
Proposals for all forms of residential development 
comprising self -contained accommodation, providing 
the facilities required for day -to-day private domestic 
existence. This includes but is not limited to dwellings, housing for older people, housing with care, 
supported housing and other forms of specialist 
accommodation. It does not include traveller site  
development (Policy H 4), community -led housing, or 
houses in multiple occ upation.  
Objectively Assessed Economic Need (OAEN)  
An assessment of need for commercial development 
in an area undertaken within the criteria contained in 
national Planning Policy Guidance.  
Objectively Assessed Housing Need (OAHN)  
An assessment of need for  housing in an area 
undertaken within the criteria contained in national 
Planning Policy Guidance.  
Open Space  
All open space of public value, including not just land, 
but also areas of water (such as rivers, canals, lakes 
and reservoirs) which offer import ant opportunities 
for sport and recreation and can act as a visual 
amenity.  
  
Appendix 1: Acronyms and Glossary  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
202  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Ordinary Watercourse  
A watercourse that is not part of a main river and 
includes rivers, streams, ditches, drains, cuts, culverts, 
dikes, sluices, sewers (other than publ ic sewers  within 
the meaning of the Water Industry Act 1991) and 
passages, through which water flows.  
‘Other’ Development  
Refers to types of applications for development as 
follows: Householder applications,  change of use, 
adverts, listed building extensions/alter ations, listed 
building demolition, application for relevant 
demolition of an unlisted building in a Conservation 
Area, Certificates of Lawfulness and Notifications.  
Permeable Development/Permeability  
Easily move through, in this context to access the 
coun tryside on edge of development.  
Permeable Land or Surfaces  
Allow rainwater to soak away naturally e.g. grass.  
Planning Obligation  
A legally enforceable obligation entered into under section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 
1990 to mitigate the impa cts of a development 
proposal.  
Planning Practice Guidance  
Online guidance from government that expands upon 
the provisions in the National Planning Policy 
Framework.  
Pitch 
On a Gypsy and Traveller site, a pitch is the space that 
is required to accommodate one household. This can 
vary accordi ng to the size of a household but a single 
pitch would typically  provide space for one  mobile 
home and one touring caravan, space for parking and 
space for other amenities. In accordance with the 
Report on Site Selection  (201 6), a single pitch is 
estimated to equate to 0.1 hectare.  
Previously Developed Land (PDL)  
Land which is or was occupied by a permanent structure, including the curtilage of the developed 
land and any associated fixed surface infrastructure. This exclu des: land that is or has been occupied by 
agricultural or forestry buildings; land that has been developed for minerals extraction or waste disposal by 
landfill; land in built -up areas such as private 
residential gardens, parks, recreation grounds and 
allotments; and land that was previously - developed 
but where the remains of the permanent structure or 
fixed surface structure have blended into the 
landscape in the process of time.  
Primary and Secondary Frontages  
Primary frontages are likely to include a hi gh 
proportion of retail uses which may include food, drinks, clothing and household goods. Secondary 
frontages provide greater opportunities for a diversity 
of uses such as resta urants, cinemas and businesses.  
Primary Shopping Area  
A defined area where retail development is concentrated (generally comprising the primary and 
secondary frontages which are adjoining and closely 
related to the primary frontage) with Town Centres 
and Small District Centres.  
Prior Approval  
Prior approval means that a developer  has to seek 
approval from the local planning authority that specified elements of the development are acceptable 
before work can proceed. The matters for prior 
approval vary depending on the type of development 
and these are set out in full in the relevant parts in 
Schedule 2 to the General Permitted Development 
Order. It is a light touch process which applies where 
the principle of the development has already been 
established.  
Priority Habitats and Species  
Species and Habitats of Principle Importance incl uded 
in the English Biodiversity List published by the 
Secretary of State under section 41 of the Natural 
Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006  
Promoter  
An individual or organisation  promoting a piece of 
land for development through the planning proc ess on 
behalf of a landowner(s) . This is normally done by 
submitting the land to the Council for consideration for allocation as part of the Local  Plan and through  
Appendix 1: Acronyms and Glossary  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 203 
                             
 
 
pre-application engagement . Promoters do not 
necessarily own the land they are promoting, no r are 
they necessarily  involved  in implementing the 
proposals.  
Protected Species  
A species of animal or plant which it is forbidden by 
law to destroy . 
Quality Review Panel  
An independent panel of planning, architecture, urban 
design and construction experts set up by the Council to provide impartial expert advice to both applicants 
and local authorities on design issues in relation to 
important new development schemes and proposals 
for important  public spaces including significant minor 
applications, major planning applications, pre -
application development proposals, strategic masterplans and concept frameworks.  The Quality 
Review Panel’s feedback is a material consideration 
for local authoritie s and the planning inspectorate 
when determining planning applications.  T  The 
purpose of the Quality Review Panel is to ensure that 
new development is of a high quality and contributes 
to place making.  
Ramsar Site  
A wetland of international importance, pr otected 
under the Ramsar Convention on the sustainable use and conservation of Wetlands.  
Reduced Parking Development  
Residential development which provides only the 
necessary on -site residents’ car parking required to 
service the essential needs of the dev elopment. On 
sites subject to reduce d parking development, 
provision should be made for on-site car clubs/car 
sharing or pooling arrangements, visitor parking and blue badg e holders, and contributions will be sought 
for implementing Controlled Parking Zone s in the 
vicinity of the development.  
Registered Parks and Gardens  
Are to be found on the Register of Parks and Gardens 
of Historic Interest in England that recognises the 
importance of these as heritage assets of particular 
significance.  
 Replacement Dwel lings  
A replacement dwelling refers to the demolition of an 
existing dwelling and replacing it with a new one on -
site.  
Right to Buy  
Government provisions for tenants to buy their home 
from a local authority or registered social housing 
provider at a discou nt from what would be the market 
rate.  
Routing Management Plan  
Enables the safe planning of HGV traffic routes to and from development  
Rural Exception Sites and Schemes  
Small sites used for affordable housing in perpetuity 
where sites would not normally be  used for housing. 
Rural exception sites and schemes seek to address the 
needs of the local community by accommodating 
households who are either current residents or have 
an existing family or employment connection. Small 
numbers of market homes may be all owed at the local 
authority’s discretion, for example where essential to enable the delivery of affordable units without grant 
funding.  
s106 Agreement  
A mechanism to make a development proposal 
acceptable in planning terms that wo uld otherwise not 
be acceptable, focused on site -specific mitigation of 
the impact of development.  They can involve the 
provision of facilities or contributions toward 
infrastructure.  
Saved Plan or Saved Policies  
The Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 (as amended) allowed existing plans or policies to be 
“saved”; that is they remained part of the 
development plan until superseded by up to date 
policies.  
Scheduled Monument  
Scheduled for their archaeological  and historic  
character, these are nationally important sites that  
would particularly benefit from close management.  
  
Appendix 1: Acronyms and Glossary  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
204  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Self Build  
Self Build housing is housing built by individuals (or 
groups of individuals) for their own occupation.  
Sequential Test  
A planning principle that seeks to identify, allocate or 
develop certain types or locations of land before 
others. For example, town centres before edge of 
centre and out of centre.  
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)  
Sites designated to protect their wildlife or geology 
including those designated under the Wildlife and 
Countryside Act 1981.  
Site Waste Management Plan  
A SWMP is often produced for large scale construction 
projects, and outlines how and where site waste will 
be transported and disposed.  
Special Advertisement Control  
This places additional restrictions on th e display of 
advertisements  
Special Area of Conservation (SAC)  
Area given special protection under the European 
Union’s Habitats Directive which is transposed into UK 
law by the Habitats and Conservation of Species 
Regulations 2010. Special Protection Area  (SPA)  
Area that has been identified as being of international importance for the breeding, feeding, wintering or the 
migration of rare and vulnerable species of birds found 
within European Union countries. They are European 
designated sites, classified un der the Birds Directive  
Standard Occupational Classification (SOC)  
A common UK classification of occupational 
information whereby jobs are classified by their skill 
level and skill content.  
Starter Home  
A Government initiative to provide a form of 
affordable housing that is a market home discounted 
for sale to the under 40 age group.  
 Statement of Common Ground  
A written statement of the agreed facts between at 
least two parties, relating to a development proposal 
subject to a planning appeal or a policy matter subject 
to public examination  
Statement of Community Involvement (SCI)  
A document setting out standards to be achieved by the local authority in involving the community in the 
preparation, alteration and continuing review of all 
Local Development Documents and planning 
applications.  
Strategic Allocations  
Allocations for specific or mixed uses of development contained in Development Plan Documents. The 
policies in the document identify any specific 
requirements for individual allocations . 
Strategic Land Availability Assessment (SLAA)  
An evidence base document which identifies sites with potential for housing and employment uses and 
assesses their deliverability.  
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA)  
An evidence base document which analyses the local housing market characteristics and seeks to identify 
what factors influence those housing markets.  
Strategic Masterplan  
A masterplan is the process by which organisations undertake analysis and prepare strategies, and the 
proposals that ar e needed to plan for major change in 
a defined physical area. It acts as a context from which 
development projects come forward for parts of the area.  
Sub National Population Projections (SNPP)  
The Office of National Statistics (ONS) provides an independent view of the future population in each local authority, called the Sub National Population 
Projections (SNPP). The Department for Communities 
& Local Government (DCLG) uses these population 
numbers to estimate the number of new households 
likely to form i n the future. The resulting projection 
can be viewed as a proxy for housing demand.  
  
Appendix 1: Acronyms and Glossary  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 205 
                             
 
 
Sui Generis  
Uses which do not fall within any identified use class in 
the Use Classes Order are called ‘sui generis’ within 
national planning policy.  See ‘Use Class’ belo w 
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD)  
Documents which add further detail to the policies in 
the Local Plan. They can be used to provide further 
guidance for development on specific sites, or on 
particular issues, such as design. Supplementary 
planning do cuments are capable of being a material 
consideration in planning decisions but are not part of 
the development plan.  
Surface Water Management Plan (SWMP)  
A plan providing a large -scale assessment of the 
causes of surface water flooding, identification of areas at risk and prioritise areas for future detailed 
studies and alleviation work.  
Sustainable Community Strategy (SCS)  
A strategy, prepared by the Local Strategic Partnership 
which promotes the economic, environmental and 
social well -being of the Distri ct. It co -ordinates the 
actions of local public, private, voluntary and 
community sectors, contributing to District wide 
sustainable development.  
Sustainable Development  
Development that meets the needs of the present 
without compromising the ability of future 
generations to meet their own needs or positive 
growth that achieves economic, environmental and 
social progress.  The National Planning Policy 
Framework places a requirement on local planning 
authorities to positively seek opportunities to meet 
the d evelopment needs of their area and guide 
development to sustainable solutions.  
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS)  
These are drainage systems designed to manage surface water and groundwater to sustainably reduce 
the potential impact of new and existing 
developments on flood risk  
 
 Sustainability Appraisal (SA)/Strategic Environmental 
Assessment (SEA)  
The Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 
requires Local Development Plans to be prepared with 
a view to contributing to the achievement of 
sustainable development. The purpose of 
sustainability appraisal is to appraise the social, 
environmental and economic effects of the strategies 
and policies in a Local Development Plan from the 
outset of the preparation process.  
Sustainable Transport  
Efficient, safe and accessible means of transport with 
overall low impact on the environment, including walking and cycling, low and ultra -low emission 
vehicles, car sharing and public transport.  
Swale  
A marshy depression that can be man made as part of a sustainable dra inage system.  
Transport Assessment  
A comprehensive and systematic process that sets out 
transport issues relating to a proposed development. 
It identifies what measures will be required to improve 
accessibility and safety for all modes of travel, 
particula rly for alternatives to the car such as walking, 
cycling and public transport and what measures will 
need to be taken to deal with the anticipated 
transport impacts of the development.  
Transport Statement  
A simplified version of a transport assessment wher e it 
is agreed the transport issues arising out of development proposals are limited and a full transport 
assessment is not required.  
Travellers  
Persons of nomadic habit of life whatever their race or 
origin, including such persons who on grounds only of 
their own or their family’s or dependants’ educational 
or health needs or old age have ceased to travel 
temporarily or permanently, but excluding members 
of an organised group of travelling show people or 
circus people travelling together as such. (Planning 
Policy for Travellers Sites August 2015, Department for 
Communities and Local Government)   
Appendix 1: Acronyms and Glossary  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
206  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Travelling Showpeople  
Members of a group organised for the purposes of 
holding fairs, circuses or shows (whether or not 
travelling together as such). This includes s uch persons 
who on the grounds of their own or their family’s or 
dependants’ more localised pattern of trading, 
educational or health needs or old age have ceased to 
travel temporarily or permanently, but excludes 
Travellers as defined above.  
Travel Plan  
A long term management strategy for an organisation 
or site that seeks to deliver sustainable transport 
objectives through action and is articulated in a 
document that is regularly reviewed.  
Tree Preservation Order (TPO)  
An order made by a local planning a uthority to protect 
specific trees, groups of trees or woodlands in the interests of amenity.  
Tenure  
The conditions under which land or buildings are 
occupied e .g. rented or shared ownership.  
Use Class  
Refers to a classification of land uses into groups in  the 
‘Use Classes Order’ for the  purposes of town planning. [Refer: Town and Country Planning Use 
Classes Order 1987 (as amended), Town and Country 
Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) 
Order 2015, Town and Country Planning (General 
Permitted  Development) (England)  (Amendment) 
Order 2016].  
Validation Requirements  
The information that is required to be submitted with 
a planning application in order to be considered 
‘valid’.  This include s particular plans or supporting 
documents that must be i ncluded with a planning 
application. It include s national requirements  and local 
requirements which are specific to Epping Forest 
District. The up to date requirements are set out in the 
‘Epping Forest District Council Planning Application 
Validation Requi rements Checklist’ document.  Veteran Tree  
A tree which, because of its great age, size or 
condition is of exceptional value for wildlife, in the 
landscape or culturally. Ancient trees are all veterans 
but veterans are not all ancient.  
Visitor Accommodation  
All forms of accommodation that can be used by travellers or tourists such as hotels, youth hostels, 
activity centres, campsites, cabins, treehouses etc.  
Windfall Sites  
Sites which have not been specifically identified as available in the Local Plan process. They normally comprise previously -developed sites that have 
unexpectedly become available.  
Yard  
On a Travelling Showpeople site, a yard is the area 
required to accommodate a number of Travelling 
Showpeople households  and the storage of 
equipment . In accordance with the Report on Site 
Selection (2016 ), a yard is estimated at 0.13 hectares.   
Zero Carbon  
Causing or resulting in no net loss of carbon dioxide 
into the atmosphere. A zero carbon building is one 
with zero net energy consumption or zero net  carbon 
emissions on an annual basis.     
 
 
 
Appendix Two  
List of Policies  
replacing 
policies in the 
1998 Plan  
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
Appendix 2: List of Policies  replacing all policies of the Epping Forest District  Local Plan (1998) and Alterations (2006)  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
208  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Appendix 2  
List of Policies replacing all policies of the Epping Forest District Local Plan 
(1998) and Alterations (2006)  
The Local Plan will replace all the policies in the Combined Epping Forest District Local Plan  (1998) and Alterations 
(2006).  
There are many potential cross references in p olicy replacement, therefore this list has been confined to the main 
replacements for policies rather than an attempt made to cover all aspects of each policy. The listing of a replaced 
policy under a new policy in no way implies that this is the only poli cy to be considered in respect of that type of 
development. All policies in the new Local Plan will apply unless clearly irrelevant to  the proposal being considered.  
Chapter 2: Strategic Context and Policies  
Policy SP 1  Presumption in favour of sustainable  development  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy CP1  Achieving Sustainable Development Objectives  
Policy SP 2  Spatial Development Strategy 2011 - 2033  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy CP3  New Development  
Policy CP6  Achieving Sustainable Urban Development Patterns  
Policy CP7  Urban Form and Quality 
Policy CP8  Sustainable Economic Development  
Policy GB16  Affordable Housing  
Policy H1A Housing provision  
Policy H10A  Gypsy Caravan Sites  
Policy H11A  Travelling Showpeople  
Policy SP 3  Place Shaping  
Policies to be replaced:  
None – this is a new policy  
Policy SP 4  Development and Delivery of Garden Communities in the Harlow and Gilston Garden Town  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy H3A Housing Density   
Policy SP 5  Garden Town Communities  
Policies to be replaced:  
None – this is a new policy  
Policy SP 6  Green Belt and District Open Land  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy GB1  Green Belt Boundary 
Policy SP 7             The Natural Environment, Landscape Character and Green Infrastructure  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy CP2  Protecting the Quality of the Rural and Built Environment   
Appendix 2: List of Policies  replacing all policies of the Epping Forest District Local Plan (1998) and Alterations (2006)  
 
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 209 
                             
 
 
 
Chapter 3: Housing, Economic and Transport Policies  
Policy H 1  Housing Mix and Accommodation types  
Policy H 2  Affordable Housing  
Policy H 3  Rural Exception Sites  
Policy H 4  Traveller Site Development  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy H2A Previously Developed Land  
Policy H3A Housing Density  
Policy H4A Dwelling Mix  
Policy H5A Provision for Affordable Housing   
Policy H6A Site Thresholds for Affordable Housing  
Policy H7A Levels of Affordable Housing  
Policy  H8A Availability of Affordable Housing in Perpetuity  
Policy H9A Lifetime Homes  
Policy GB16  Affordable Housing  
Policy E 1  Employment Sites  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy E1 Employment Areas  
Policy E2 Redevelopment / Extension of Premises for Business and General Industrial Uses  
Policy E3 Warehousing  
Policy E4A Protection of Employment Sites  
Policy E4B  Alternative Uses for Employment Sites  
Policy E5 Effect of Nearby Developments  
Policy E6 Sites for Business / Industry / Warehousing  
Policy E7 Sites  for Business / Industry 
Policy E8 Sites for Small Business / Industry Workshops  
Policy E10 Town Centre Offices  
Policy E11 Employment Uses Elsewhere  
Policy E12 Small Scale Business / Working from Home  
Policy E12A Farm Diversification  
Policy E14 Seek Rel ocation / Discontinuance  
Policy E15 Resist Consolidation  
Policy E 2  Centre Hierarchy/Retail  Policy  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy TC1  Town Centre Hierarchy  
Policy TC2  Sequential Approach 
Policy TC3  Town Centre Function  
Policy TC4  Non -Retail Frontage  
Policy TC5  Window Displays  
Policy TC6  Local Centres and Corner and Village Shops  
Policy E 3  Food Production and G lasshouses  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy E13A New and Replacement Glasshouses    
Appendix 2: List of Policies  replacing all policies of the Epping Forest District  Local Plan (1998) and Alterations (2006)  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
210  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Policy E13B  Protection of Glasshouse Areas  
Policy E13C  Prevention of Dereliction of New Glasshouse Sites  
Policy E 4  The Visitor Economy  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy RST1  Recreational, Sporting and Tourist F acilities.  
Policy RST7  Recreational Function of the Lee and Stort Navigation  
Policy RST9  Carthagena and R iverside Chalet Estates  
Policy RST10A  Roydon Lodge Chalet Estate  
Policy RST11  Theydon Park Road and Curtis Mill Lane Chalet Estates  
Policy RST12  Leisure Plots  
Policy RST23  Outdoor Leisure Uses in the LVRP  
Policy RST24  Design and Location of Development i n the LVRP  
Policy RST25  Glen Faba and Roydon Mill Leisure Park  
Policy RST 66 Leisure Chalets at Glen Faba  
Policy RST32  Leisure Caravans and Camping  
Policy GB10  Development in the Lee Valley Regional Park  
Policy T 1  Sustainable Transport Choices   
Policy T  2 Safeguarding of Routes and F acilities  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy CP9  Sustainable Transport  
Policy ST1  Location of Development  
Policy ST2  Accessibility of Development  
Policy ST3  Transport Assessments  
Policy ST4  Road Safety  
Policy ST5  Sustainable Tra vel Plans  
Policy ST6  Vehicle Parking  
Policy ST7  New Roads and Extensions or Improvements to Existing Roads  
Policy ST8  Epping to Ongar Line  
Policy ST9  Stansted Aerodrome Safeguarding  
Policy RST2  Enhance Rights of Way Network  
Chapter 4:  Development Managem ent Policies  
Policy DM 1  Habitat Protection and Improving B iodiversity  
Policies to be replaced : 
Policy NC1  SPAs, SACs, and SSSIs  
Policy NC2  County Wildlife Sites  
Policy NC3  Replacement of Lost H abitat  
Policy NC4  Protection of Established H abitat  
Policy NC5  Promotion of Nature Conservation Schemes  
Policy DM 2  Epping Forest SAC and the Lee Valley SPA  
Policies to be replaced : 
Policy NC1  SPAs, SACs, and SSSIs  
Policy HC5  Epping Forest  
Policy DM 3 Landscape Character and Ancient L andscapes  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy LL1 Rural Landscape   
Appendix 2: List of Policies  replacing all policies of the Epping Forest District Local Plan (1998) and Alterations (2006)  
 
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 211 
                             
 
 
Policy LL2 Inappropriate Rural Development  
Policy LL3 Edge of settlement  
Policy LL4 Agricultural/Forestry Related Development  
Policy LL10  Adequacy of provision for Landscape Retention  
Policy LL11  Landscaping Schemes   
Policy LL13  Highway/Motorway Schemes  
Policy RST2  Enhance Rights of Way Network  
Policy RST3  Loss or diversion of rights of way  
Policy HC2  Ancient Landscapes  
Policy DM 4 Green Belt  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy GB2A  Development in the Green Belt  
Policy  GB4 Extensions of Residential Curtilages  
Policy GB5  Residential Moorings and Non -Permanent Dwellings #  
Policy GB6  Garden Centres  
Policy GB7A  Conspicuous Development  
Policy GB8A  Change of Use or Adaptation of Buildings  
Policy GB9A  Residential Conversions  
Policy GB10  Development in the Lee Valley Regional Park  
Policy GB11  Agricultural Buildings  
Policy GB13  Subdivision of Houses  
Policy GB14A  Residential Extensions  
Policy GB15A  Replacement Dwellings  
Policy GB17A  Agricultural, Horticultural and Forestry Wor kers’ Dwellings  
Policy GB17B  Removal of Agricultural Occupancy Conditions  
Policy DM 5 Green and Blue Infrastructure  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy LL7 Planting, Protection and Care of Trees  
Policy LL8 Works to Preserved Trees (and relevant Legislation)  
Policy LL9 Felling of Preserved Trees (and relevant Legislation)  
Policy LL12  Street Trees  
Policy DM 6  Designated and U ndesignated  Open Spaces  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy DBE7  Public Open Space  
Policy LL5 Protection of Urban Open S paces  
Policy LL6 Partia l Protection of Urban Open S paces  
Policy RST 8  Play Areas  
Policy RST13  Allotments  
Policy RST14  Playing Fields  
Policy RST15  Facilities in Rural Settlements  
Policy RST16  Golf Course Location  
Policy RST17  Golf Courses on Derelict or Despoiled Land  
Policy RST18  Pay and Play/Simple Golf Courses  
PolicyRST19  Design, Layout and Landscaping of Golf Courses  
Policy DM 7  Heritage Assets    
Appendix 2: List of Policies  replacing all policies of the Epping Forest District  Local Plan (1998) and Alterations (2006)  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
212  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy HC1  Scheduled M onuments and O ther Archaeological Sites  
Policy HC3  Registered P arkland  
Policy HC4  Protected Lanes, Commons and Village Greens  
Policy HC6  Character, Appearance and Setting of Conservation A reas  
Policy HC7  Development within Conservation A reas  
Policy HC9 Demolition in Conservation Areas  
Policy HC10  Works to Listed B uildings  
Policy HC11  Demolition of Listed B uildings  
Policy HC12  Development A ffecting the Setting of Listed B uildings  
Policy HC13A  Local List of Buildings  
Policy HC14  Copped Hall, Epping (to be covered through site allocation)  
Policy HC16  Former Royal Gunpowder Factory Site, Waltham Abbey (to be covered by site allocation)  
Policy HC17  Approval of details of d emolition  
Policy RST28  Character and Historic Interest of North Weald Airfield  
Policy GB18  The former radio station site at North Weald Bassett  
Policy DM 8  Heritage at Ri sk 
Policies to be replaced : 
None – this is a new policy  
Policy DM 9  High Quality Design  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy CP4  Energy Conservation  
Policy CP5  Sustainable Building  
Policy DBE1  Design of New Buildings  
Policy DBE2  Effect on neighbouring properties  
Policy DBE3  Design in Urban Areas  
Policy DBE4  Design in the Green Belt  
Policy DBE7  Public Open Space  
Policy DBE9  Loss of A menity  
Policy CF10  Public Art  
Policy DM 10   Housing Design and Quality  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy DBE5  Design and Layout of New Development  
Policy DBE6  Car Parking in New Development  
Policy DBE8  Private Amenity S pace  
Policy DBE10  Residential Extensions  
Policy DBE11  Sub Division of Properties  
Policy DM 11   Waste Recycling F acilities on N ew Development  
Policies to be replaced:  
None – this is a new policy  
Policy DM 12   Subterranean, Basement Development and L ightwells  
Policies to be replaced:  
None – this is a new policy  
Policy DM 13   Advertisements   
Appendix 2: List of Policies  replacing all policies of the Epping Forest District Local Plan (1998) and Alterations (2006)  
 
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 213 
                             
 
 
Policies to be replaced:  
DBE13  Advertisements  
Policy DM  14   Shopfronts and On Street D ining  
Policies to be replaced:  
DBE12  Shopfronts  
Policy DM 15   Managing and Reducing Flood Risk  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy U2A  Development in Flood Risk Areas  
Policy U2B  EFDC Flood R isk Assessment Zones  
Policy U3A  Catchment Effects  
Policy DM 16   Sustainable Drainage Systems  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy U3B  Sustainable Drainage Systems  
Policy DM 17   Protecting and Enhancing Watercourses and Flood D efences  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy U2A  Developmen t in Flood Risk A reas  
Policy U3A  Catchment Effects  
Policy DM 18   On Site M anagement of Waste Water and Water S upply  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy U1  Infrastructure Adequacy  
Policy RP3  Water Quality  
Policy DM 19   Sustainable Water Use 
Policies to be rep laced:  
None – this is a new policy  
Policy DM 20   Low Carbon and Renewable Energy  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy CP10  Renewable Energy Schemes  
Policy DM 21   Local environmental Impacts, Pollution and Land C ontamination  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy RP4  Contaminated L and 
Policy RP5A  Adverse Environmental I mpacts  
Policy RP6  Hazardous Substances and I nstallations Policy RST21  Lighting for Driving Ranges  
Chapter 5: Places  
Policy P 1  Epping  
Policy P 2  Loughton  
Policy P 3  Waltham Abbey  
Policy P 4  Ongar  
Policy  P 5 Buckhurst Hill  
Policy P 6  North Weald Bassett     
Appendix 2: List of Policies  replacing all policies of the Epping Forest District  Local Plan (1998) and Alterations (2006)  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
214  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Policy P 7  Chigwell  
Policy P 8  Theydon Bois  
Policy P 9  Roydon  
Policy P 10  Nazeing  
Policy P 11  Thornwood  
Policy P 12  Coopersale, Fyfield, High Ongar, Lower Sheering,  Moreton, Sewardstonebury, Sheering and           
Stapleford Abbots  
Policy P 13  Rural sites in the east of the District   
Policy P 14  Rural sites in the west of the District   
Policy P 15  Rural sites in the south of the District   
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy CP6  Achieving Sustainable Urban Development Patterns  
Policy RST28  Character and Historic Interest of North Weald Airfield  
Policy RST29  New Buildings on North Weald Airfield.  
Policy GB19  Grange Farm, Chigwell  
Chapter 6:  Delivery  
Policy D 1  Delivery of Infrastructure  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy I1A  Planning O bligations  
Policy D 2  Essential Facilities and Services  
Policies  to be replaced:  
Policy CF2  Health Care F acilities  
Policy CF3  Redevelopment of Health Care F acilities  
Policy CF5  Educational Buildings o utside the G reen Belt 
Policy CF6  Redevelopment/Change of Use of Educational F acilities outside the Green Belt  
Policy CF7  Site of Former Ongar Comprehensive School  
Policy D3  Utilities  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy U1  Infrastructure A dequacy  
Policy D4  Community, Leisure and Cultural Facilities  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy CF1  Traps Hill, Loughton  
Policy CF8  Public Halls and Places of Religious Worship  
Policy CF12  Retention of Community Facilities  
Policy RST1  Recreational, Sporting and Tourist F acilities   
Policy RST4  Horse Keeping  
Policy RST5  Stables  
Policy RST6  Fishing Lakes  
Policy RST8  Play Areas  
Policy RST 13 Allotments  
Policy RST14  Playing Fields  
Policy RST15  Facilities in Rural Settlements  
Policy RST16  Golf Course Location  
Policy RST17  Golf Courses on Derelict or Despoiled Land  
Policy RST18  Pay and Play/ Simple Golf Courses  
Policy RST19  Design, Layout, a nd Landscaping of G olf Courses  
Policy RST20  New buildings for G olf Courses   
Appendix 2: List of Policies  replacing all policies of the Epping Forest District Local Plan (1998) and Alterations (2006)  
 
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 215 
                             
 
 
Policy RST21  New buildings for Golf Courses  
Policy RST22  Potentially Intrusive Activities   
Policy RST23  Outdoor Leisure Uses in the LVRP  
Policy RST27  North Weald Airfield Leisure Centre  
Policy GB18  The former radio station site at North Weald Bassett  
Policy I3  Replacement Facilities  
Policy D 5 Communications Infrastructure  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy U5  Masts and A erials under 15m  
Policy U6  Other Masts and A erials  
Policy D 6 Neighbourhood Planning  
Policies to be replaced:  
None  – this is a new policy  
Policy D 7 Monitoring and Enforcement  
Policies to be replaced:  
Policy I4 Enforcement P rocedures  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
Appendix 2: List of Policies  replacing all policies of the Epping Forest District  Local Plan (1998) and Alterations (2006)  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
216  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
 
This page is intentionally left blank  
  
 
 
 
Appendix 
Three  
Monitoring 
Effectiveness  
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
Appendix 3: Measures to monitor effectiveness   
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
218  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Appendix 3  
Measures to monitor the effectiveness of policies in the Local Plan  
Monitoring the effectiveness of policy and enforcement  
Introduction  
The monitoring framework set out below is the minimum that will be used to assess the effectiveness of the Local 
Plan.  
Some measures are suitable for regular monitoring and reporting whilst others fit a longer timescale , and some of the 
best sources of contextual information are published infrequently e.g. the ten yearly national census of population. 
The resources required for monitoring also give rise to the need for a proportionate approach . Therefore, overall 
assessment of how well the plan vision and objectives are being met will be undertaken on a five yearly cycle and 
include the full range of contextual and specific development indicators . Some policy indicators will be published 
annually and others more infrequently.  The effect of some policies are more suitably monitored through contextual 
indicators such as people in work, others through the development completed such as numbers of houses, floorspace 
or flood defence improvements, and others through grant or refusal of planning permission indicating how the policy 
is performing.  
 
Monitoring Indicators  Key aspects / policies being measured  
Changes in population breakdown by age  and by area   
Changes in household composition by type  
Changes in life expectancy  
Indices of multiple deprivation scorings  
Overall employment and unemployment rate  
Breakdown of jobs by industry, and SIC classification  
Business composition by size  
Annual Tourism Income  
Changes in travel to work patterns, flows and mode of transport  
Changes in house price by size and by area  
Change of household income  Plan vision and objectives , SP 1 
Five year housing land supply position, Development 
Trajectories for housing including for Travellers, and 
employment trajectory.  
Whether the Council have delivered 75% of the annualised 
requirement or the projected completion rate (whichever is the 
lower) for three consecutive years.  SP 1, SP 2, E 1, DM  2, D 7  
Appendix 3: Measures to monitor effectiveness  
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 219 
                             
 
 
Number of new homes approved and/or completed through 
Self-build , community housing  or custom house building.  
Number of new homes approved and/or completed through 
provision of specialist housing  
Progress against the Acti on Plan for monitoring impacts on air 
quality in the Epping Forest SAC.  
Net gain/loss of residential development by location , tenure  
(e.g. affordable homes, traveller’s pitch, specialist needs) , and 
size ( e.g. number of bedrooms ).  
Net gain/loss of Industrial (B -use class) floorspace by Use C lass, 
location, and whether they are located inside or outside of 
defined employment designation/allocations . 
Net gain/loss of town centre uses by Use Class, location , and 
whether they are located inside or outside of defined Town 
Centres  area.  
Changes to proportions of A1 and non -A1 uses within defined 
Town Centres and Primary and Secondary retail frontages.  
Land area and floorspace of new glasshouses constructed by location, floorspace and location of new ancillary facilities for glasshouse use.  
Net number of tourist accommodation by bedspaces , location 
and type e.g. Hotel, B & B, lodges, camp site pitches.  
Net gain/loss of essential services , community uses , leisure and 
cultural faci lities  by location .  
Number of planning permissions granted through the Rural Exceptions policy (Policy H3)  SP 2 , SP 3, SP 4, SP 5, H  1, H 2, H 3, H 4, E 1, 
E 2,  E 3,  DM 19,  P  1-P 15, D 2, D 4  
The progress, production and endorsement of strategic 
masterplans  and/ or design codes  to guide development 
proposals . SP 2, SP 4, SP 5,  SP 7, DM 9  
Applications refused on the grounds of harm to the Green Belt or District Open Land by type and location  
Planning permission granted for development in the GB where 
Very Special Circumstance has been demonstrated to outweigh 
the harm to the surrounding Green Belt.  SP 6, DM 4  
Net gain/loss of public open space  
Net gain/loss of linkage s in the Green and Blue Infrastructure 
Network  SP 7,  DM 1, DM 2 , DM 3, DM 5, DM 6   
Appendix 3: Measures to monitor effectiveness   
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
220  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Net gain/loss /improve in accessibility  of natural habitat , areas of 
biodiversity (including international, national and local 
designations)  and buffer land 
Positive landscape impact assessments on proposals approved 
and negative landscape impact assessments by EFDC on 
proposals re fused.  
Number of Transport plans approved by location and land use 
type  
New developments containing electrical charging points by land 
use type  
Net gain/loss of public rights of way  T 1 
Net gain/loss of designated and undesignated heritage assets  
Changes in Listed Building at Risk register  DM 7, DM 8  
Number of planning permissions granted against Environment 
Agency Advice  
Number of development approved in flood risk zones 2, 3a and 
3b by use class and flood risk compat ibility.  
Number and location of sustainable drainage schemes approved 
for major development proposals   
Number and location of developments contributing to 
maintenance of watercourse infrastructure,  including 
watercourse re natura lisation or flood storage areas  DM 15, DM 16, DM 17  
Number of decentralised low carbon and renewable energy 
schemes approved in development  DM 20  
Change in Air Quality Management Area  
Number of planning permissions  granted with an approved  Air 
Quality Assessment.  DM 22  
Progress against the Infrastructure Delivery Plan  
Net gain/loss of essential facilities and services by type and location  
Net gain/loss of community, leisure and cultural facilities  D 1, D 2 , D 4 , T 2 
Number of Neighbourhood Plans, Community Right to Build 
Orders and Neighbourhood Development Orders Made.  D 6  
 
 
 
Appendix Four  
Policy 
Designations  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
Appendix 4: Policy Designations  
  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
222  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Appendix 4 
Policy Designations  
Policy Designations  on the PDF & Online version of the Epping Forest District Local Plan Policies Map  
 
Masterplan Areas  
MP01  South Epping Masterplan Area  MP04  Latton Priory Masterplan Area  MP07  East of Harlow Masterplan Area 
MP02  North  Weald Bassett Masterplan Area  MP05  Limes Farm Masterplan Area MP08  Jessel Green Masterplan Area  
MP03  North Weald Airfield Masterplan Area  MP06  Water Lane Masterplan Area MP09  Waltham Abbey North Masterplan 
Areea  
 
Concept Framework Plan  Area 
CFP01 South Nazeing Concept Framework Plan Area  
CFP02 West Ongar Concept Framework Plan Area  
 
Residential  allocations  
BUCK.R1  Land at Powell Road  EPP.R9  Land at Bower Vale  NWB.R2  Land at Tylers Farm  
BUCK.R2  Queens Road Car Park  EPP.R10  Land to rear of High Street  NWB.R3  Land South of Vicarage Lane   
Appendix 4: Policy Designations  
 
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 223 
                             
 
  
BUCK.R3  Stores at Lower Queens Road  EPP.R11  Epping Library  NWB.R4  Land at Chase Farm  
CHIG.R1  Land adjacent to the Paddock  FYF.R1  Land at Gypsy Mead  NWB.R5  Land at The Acorns, Chase Farm  
CHIG.R2  Woodview  HONG.R1  Land at  Mill Lane  ROYD.R1  The Old Coal Yard  
CHIG.R3  Land at Manor Road  LOU.R1  Loughton London Underground Car 
Park  ROYD.R2  Land at Kingsmead School  
CHIG.R4  Land between Froghall Lane and 
Railway Line  LOU.R2  Debden London Underground Car 
Park  ROYD.R3  Land at Epping Road  
CHIG.R5  Land at Chigwell Nurseries  LOU.R3  Land at Vere Road  ROYD.R4  Land at Parklands Nursery  
CHIG.R6  The Limes Estate  LOU.R4  Borders Lane Playing Fields  SHR.R1  Land at Daubneys Farm  
CHIG.R7  Land at Chigwell Convent  LOU.R5  Land at Jessel Green  SHR.R2  Land East of the M11  
CHIG.R8  Land at Fencepiece Road  LOU.R6  Royal Oak Public House  SHR.R3  Land North of Primley Lane  
CHIG.R9  Land at Grange Court  LOU.R7  Loughton Library  STAP.R1  Land at Oakfield Road  
CHIG.R10  The Maypole  LOU.R8  Land West of  High Road  STAP.R2  Land to the rear of Mountford & 
Bishops Bron  
CHIG.R11  Land at Hainault Road  LOU.R9  Land at Former Epping Forest College 
Site STAP.R3  Land at The Drive  
ONG.R1  Land West of Chipping Ongar  LOU.R10  Land at Station Road  THYB.R1  Land at Forest Drive  
ONG.R2  Land at Bowes Field  LOU.R11  Land West of Roding Road  THYB.R2  Theydon Bois London Underground 
Car Park  
ONG.R3  Land South -West of Fyfield Road  LOU.R12  Land at 63 Wellfields  THYB.R3  Land at Coppice Row  
ONG.R4  Land North of Chelmsford Road  LOU.R13  Land at 70 Wellfields  THOR.R1  Land at Tudor House    
Appendix 4: Policy Designations  
  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
224  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
ONG.R5  Land at Greensted Road  LOU.R14  Land at Alderton Hill  THOR.R2  Land East of High Road  
ONG.R6  Land between Stanford Rivers Road 
and Brentwood Road  LOU.R15  Land at Traps Hill  WAL.R1  Land West of Galley Hill Road  
ONG.R7  Land South of Hunters Chase and West 
of Brentwood Road  LOU.R16  St Thomas More RC Church  WAL.R2  Land at Lea Valley Nursery  
ONG.R8  The Stag Pub  LOU.R17  Land to the rear of High Road  WAL.R3  Land adjoining Parklands  
COOP.R1  Land at Parklands  LOU.R18  Land at High Beech Road  WAL.R4  Fire Station at Sewardstone Road  
EPP.R1  Land South of Epping -  West LSHR.R1  Land at Lower Sheering  WAL.R5  Waltham Abbey Community Centre  
EPP.R2  Land South of Epping -  East RUR.R1  Avenue Home  WAL.R6  Land at Roundhills  
EPP.R3  Epping London Underground Car Park  RUR.R2  Norton Heath Riding Centre  WAL.R7  Land at Pine Tree Nursery  
EPP.R4  Land at St Johns Road  NAZE.R1  Land at Perry Hill  
EPP.R5  Epping Sports Centre  NAZE.R2  The Fencing Centre at Pecks Hill  
EPP.R6  Cottis Lane Car Park  NAZE.R3  Land to the rear of Pound Close  
EPP.R7  Bakers Lane Car Park  NAZE.R4  Land at St Leonards Farm  
EPP.R8  Land and part of Civic Offices  NWB.R1  Land at Blumans  
 
 
 
  
Appendix 4: Policy Designations  
 
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 225 
                             
 
  
Employment allocations  
LOU.E2  Langston Road Industrial Estate  RUR.E19  Dorrington Farm  WAL.E8  Land North of A121  
NWB.E4  North Weald Airfield  WAL.E6  Galley Hill Road Industrial Estate  
 
Traveller site allocations  
SP4.1  Latton Priory  RUR.T1  Sons Nursery, Hamlet Hill  RUR.T5  Stoneshot View, Nazeing  
SP4.2  Water Lane  Area  RUR.T2  Ashview, Hamlet Hill, Roydon, Essex, 
CM19 5LA  WAL.T1  Yard/car park at rear Lea Valley 
Nursery, Crooked Mile, Waltham 
Abbey  
SP4.3  East of Harlow  RUR.T3  James Mead, Waltham Road, Long 
Green, Nazeing, Essex, EN9 2LU  
NWB.T1  West of Tylers  Green, North Weald 
Bassett  RUR.T4  Curtis Mill Lane, Stapleford Abbotts, 
Essex, RM4 1HS  
 
Travelling  Showpeople site allocation                                                                     
 
 
Garden Communities a llocations  
SP5.1 Latton Priory  SP5.3 East of Harlow  
SP5.2 Water Lane Area  MORE.T1  Lakeview, Moreton, Essex    
Appendix 4: Policy Designations  
  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
226  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Employment designations (existing employment sites)  
EPP.E1  Land at Eppingdene  RUR.E2  Land at Kingston's Harm  RUR.E23  Hobbs Cross Business Centre  
EPP.E2  Land at Coopersale Hall  RUR.E3  Matching Airfield South  RUR.E24  Land at Holts Farm  
EPP.E3  Falconeary Court  RUR.E4  Land at London Road  STAP.E1  Land at High Willows  
EPP.E4  Bower Hill Industrial Estate  RUR.E5  Land at Hayleys Manor  THOR.E1  Camfaud Concrete Pumps  
HONG.E1  Nash Hall Industrial Estate  RUR.E6  Land at Housham Hall Farm  THOR.E2  Land at Esgors Farm  
LOU.E1  Oakwood Hill Industrial Estate  RUR.E7  Land at Searles Farm  THOR.E3  Woodside Industrial Estate  
LOU.E3  Buckingham Court  RUR.E8  Fosters Croft  THOR.E4  Weald Hall Lane Industrial Area 
LSHR.E1  Land at The Maltings  RUR.E9  Horseshoe Farm at London Road  WAL.E1  Howard Business Park  
NAZE.E1  The Old Waterworks  RUR.E10  Land at Little Hyde Hall Farm  WAL.E2  Land at Breeches Farm  
NAZE.E2  Land West of Sedge Green  RUR.E11  Land at Quickbury Farm  WAL.E3  Land at Woodgreen Road  
NAZE.E3  Bridge Works and Glassworks at 
Nazeing New Road  RUR.E12  New House Farm  WAL.E4  Cartersfield Road / Brooker Road 
Industrial Estate  
NAZE.E4  Hillgrove Business Park  RUR.E13  Warlies Park House  WAL.E5  Meridian Business Park and 
Sainsbury's Distribution Centre  
NAZE.E5  Birchwood Industrial Estate  RUR.E14  Matching Airfield North  WAL.E7  Providence Nursery at Avey Lane  
NAZE.E6  Millbrook Business Park  RUR.E15  Land at Rolls Farm Barns  NWB.E2  Tylers  Green Industrial Area 
NAZE.E7  Land at Winston Farm  RUR.E16  Taylor's Farm  NWB.E3  Weald Hall Farm and Commercial 
Centre  
NWB.E1  New House Farm at Vicarage Lane  RUR.E17  Brookside Garage   
Appendix 4: Policy Designations  
 
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 227 
                             
 
  
ONG.E1  Essex Technology and Innovation 
Centre  RUR.E20  Land at Stewarts  Farm  
RUR.E1  Brickfield House  RUR.E21  Land at Paslow Hall Farm  
RUR.E18  Land at Dunmow Road  RUR.E22  Hastingwood Business Centre  
 
Article 4 Directions  
AD01 Staples Road  Conservation Area , 
Loughton  AD04 Lee Valley  Nursery, Waltham 
Abbey  AD07 Black Lane, Sheering 
AD02 York Hill  Conservation Area , 
Loughton  AD05 Packsaddle, Waltham Abbey  
AD03 Parklands, Waltham Abbey  AD06 Little Stiles, Nazeing  
 
 Town Centre Boundary  
TCB01  Epping Town  
TCB02  Loughton High Road  
TCB03  Buckhurst Hill  
TCB04  Ongar  
TCB05  Waltham Abbey  
TCB06  Loughton Broadway  
   
Appendix 4: Policy Designations  
  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
228  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Primary Retail Frontage s 
PRF01 Sun Street, Waltham Abbey  PRF04 High Street, Ongar  PRF07 High Road, Loughton  
PRF02 Market Square, Waltham Abbey  PRF05 Queens Road, Buckhurst Hill  
PRF03 High Road, Epping  PRF06 The Broadway, Debden  
 
Secondary Retail Frontage s 
SRF01  Sun Street, Waltham Abbey  SRF07  High Street, Ongar  
SRF02  Sun Street South/Leverton Way  SRF08  Queens Road, Buckhurst Hill  
SRF03  Market Square, Waltham Abbey  SRF09  The Broadway, Loughton  
SRF04  High Beech Road, Loughton  SRF10  Sewardstone Road, Waltham 
Abbey  
SRF05  High Road, Loughton  SRF11  High Road South/Station Road , 
Epping  
SRF06  Highbridge Street, Waltham Abbey  SRF12  St. Johns Road, Epping  
 
Primary Shopping Areas  
PSA01  Buckhurst Hill  PSA04  Loughton High  Road  
PSA02  Epping PSA05  Ongar  
PSA03  Loughton Broadway  PSA06  Waltham Abbey  
  
Appendix 4: Policy Designations  
 
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 229 
                             
 
  
District Open Land  
DOL01 North Weald    
DOL02 Thornwood  
DOL03 Chigwell  
 
Protected Lanes  
PL01 Wood Lane , Willingale  PL09 Ashlyns Lane , Magalen Laver PL17 Collins Cross Road , Matching  
PL02 Toot Hill road , Toot Hill  PL10 Low Hill Road , Roydon  PL18 High Lane , Sheering 
PL03 Old Rectory Road , Stanford Rivers  PL11 Chambers Manor Farm , Epping Upland  PL19 Watery Lane, Little Laver  
PL04 Tawney Lane , Stapleford Tawney  PL12 Tawney Common , Colliers Hatch  PL20 Mutton Row , Stanford Rivers  
PL05 Norton Lane , Norton Mandeville  PL13 Coopersale Lane , Theydon Garnon  PL21 Church Lane , Lambourne  
PL06 Church Road , Matching PL14 Clay’s Lane , Loughton  PL22 New Way Lane , High Laver  
PL07 Housham Tye Road , Housham Tye  PL15 Millers Green Road , Willingale  PL23 Faggoters Lane , High Laver  
PL08 Potash Road , Matching  PL16 Berwick Lane , Stanford Rivers  PL24 Millers Green Road , Willingale  
 
Conservation Areas  
CA01  York Hill, Loughton  CA10  Copped Hall, Epping  CA19  Matching Green  
CA02  Chigwell Village  CA11  Bell Common, Epping CA20  Ongar    
Appendix 4: Policy Designations  
  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
230  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
CA03  Abridge  CA12  Epping CA21  Great Stony School , Ongar  
CA04  Hill Hall, Theydon Mount  CA13  Coopersale Street  CA22  High Ongar  
CA05  Waltham Abbey  CA14  Lower Sheering CA23  Abbess Roding  
CA06  Royal Gunpowder Factory  CA15  Matching Tye  CA24  Staples Road, Loughton  
CA07  Nazeing and South Roydon  CA16  Matching  CA25  Baldwins Hill, Loughton  
CA08  Upshire  CA17  Blake Hall, Bobbingworth  
CA09  Roydon  Village  CA18  Moreton  
 
Scheduled Monuments  
SCH01 NW of Cobbin Pond , Waltham Abbey  SCH13  Ongar Park Pale  SCH25  Bundish Hall moated site , Ongar  
SCH02  The Temple, Temple Hill, Warlies Park  SCH14  Waltham Abbey Royal Gunpowder 
Factory  SCH26  Moated site , Weald Place , Thornwood  
SCH03  Waltham Abbey, including gatehouse and 
Stoney Bridge  SCH15  Moated site 350m south of Dorrington 
Farm , Rye Hill SCH27  Moat House , Stapleford Tawney  
SCH04  Ongar Castle  SCH16  Moated site immediately east of the Old 
Rectory , Willingale  SCH28  Latton Priory  
SCH05  Nether Hall  SCH17  Moated site immediately west of 
Skreens Lodge , Shellow Bowells  SCH29  North Weald Redoubt  
SCH06  Roman villa south of Hill Farm , Theydon 
Bois/Theydon Garnon  SCH18  Wynters Armourie moated site , 
Magdalen Laver  SCH30  Lippitts  Hill, Springfield Farm   
Appendix 4: Policy Designations  
 
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 231 
                             
 
  
SCH07  Roman villa, Long Shaw  SCH19  Shellow Hall moated site , Shellow 
Bowells  SCH31  Anti-aircraft gun site, Halls Green Farm  
SCH08  Bowl barrow, Shelley Common  SCH20  Moated site 100m south west of 
Torrell’s Hall, Willingale  SCH32  World War II bombing D ecoy Nazeing 
SCH09  One of three barrows on Shelley 
Common  SCH21  Rookwood Hall moated site , Abbess 
Roding SCH33  World War II Bofors Anti -aircraft gun, 
Cheshunt railway station  
SCH10  Bowl barrow: one of three barrows on 
Shelley Common  SCH22  Moated site known as Tanner’s Cottage, 
250m south of Greens , Moreton  SCH34  Hill Hall, brick kiln and deserted manorial 
settlement of Mount Hall , Theydon 
Mount  
SCH11  Ambresbury Banks, Copthall Green  SCH23  Moated site known as Spriggs , Norton 
Heath  SCH35  Purlieu Bank, Epping 
SCH12  Loughton camp, hillfort  SCH24  Moated site known as Tadgells, 100m 
south west of The Cottage, Housham 
Tye 
 
Registered Parks and  Gardens  
RPG01 Blake Hall, Ongar  RPG03 Copped Hall, Epping  RPG05 The House, Marsh Lane  RPG07 Briggens, Roydon  
RPG02 Hill Hall, Theydon 
Mount  RPG04 Down Hall, Near 
Matching  RPG06 Coopersale House, Near 
Coopersale  
 
Sites of Special Scientific Interest  
SSI01  Chingford Reservoirs  SSI06  Roding Valley Meadows    
Appendix 4: Policy Designations  
  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
232  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
SSI02  Curtismill Green  SSI07  Turnford &  Cheshunt Pits  
SSI03  Harlow Woods  SSI08  Waltham Abbey  
SSI04  Hainault Forest  SSI09  Epping Forest  
SSI05  Hunsdon Mead  SSI10  Commill Stream and Old River Lea  
 
Special Area of Conservation  
SAC01  Epping Forest  
SAC02  City of London Corporation Epping Forest 
Buffer Lands  
 
Safeguarded Route  
SG01  Latton Priory Safeguarded Route  
 
Special Protection Area  
SPA01  Lee Valley  Regional Park  
 
Local Nature Reserves  
LNR01 Church Lane Flood Meadow, North 
Weald  LNR06 Roughtalley’s Wood, North Weald   
Appendix 4: Policy Designations  
 
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 233 
                             
 
  
LNR02 Home Mead, Loughton  LNR07 Roding valley Meadows  
LNR03 Linder’s Field, Buckhurst Hill  LNR08 Weald Common  
LNR04 Nazeing Triangle, Nazeing  LNR09 Thornwood Flood Meadow  
LNR05 Chigwell Row Wood  
 
Local Wildlife Site  
LWS01  Galleyhill Wood Complex, Waltham 
Abbey  LWS74  Rookery Wood  LWS147  Birch Hall Pastures, Near  Theydon Bois  
LWS02  Gunpowder Park, Waltham Abbey  LWS75  Cobbins Brook  LWS148  St. Mary’s Churchyard, Theydon Bois  
LWS03  Sewardstone/Osier Marshes  LWS76  Stocking Grove/Scatterbushes Wood  LWS149  Piercing Hill Wood, Near  Theydon Bois  
LWS04  Northfield Marsh, Sewardstone  LWS77  Longcroft Grove/Claverhambury Road  LWS150  Bell Common/Ivy Chimneys Complex, 
Epping  
LWS05  Thompson Wood, Near  Sewardstone  LWS78  Deerpark Wood, Near  Harold Park  LWS151  Swaines Green, Epping  
LWS06  Oak Farm Grassland, Near  High Beech  LWS79  Copy Wood, Near  Harold Park  LWS152  Wintry Wood, Near  Loughton  
LWS07  Aldergrove Wood  LWS80  Nazeing Triangle L NR LWS153  Blunts Farm Wood, Near  Theydon Bois  
LWS08  Day’s Farm Paddocks , Near  High Beech  LWS81  All Saints’ Parish Churchyard, Nazeing  LWS154  Chigwell Row Wood  
LWS09  Lippits Hill Scrub, Near  High Beech  LWS82  Nazeing Church Fields  LWS155  Chigwell Heath and Wood  
LWS10  Carroll’s Farm Complex, Near  High 
Beech  LWS83  Totewellhill Bushes, Near  Broadley 
Common  LWS156  Hainault Forest Meadow  
LWS11  Barn Hill Wood, Near  Sewardstone  LWS84  Roydon Brickfields North  LWS157  Spratt’s Hedgerow Wood,  Near  
Copped Hall    
Appendix 4: Policy Designations  
  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
234  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
LWS12  Wood, South  of Barn Hill Wood  LWS85  Brickfield Wood, Near  Broadley 
Common  LWS158  Orange Wood, Near  Epping Upland  
LWS13  Woodlands Farm Meadow, Near  
Sewardstone  LWS86  Worlds End, Near  Roydon  LWS159  Wood East of Fitches Plantation  
LWS14  Sewardstone Green  LWS87  Hunsdon  Mead, Near  Roydon  LWS160  Pond Field Plantation, Near  Copped 
Hall 
LWS15  Wood, West Essex Golf Course  LWS88  Gills Plantation  LWS161  Epping Long Green East  
LWS16  Sewardstone Green Paddocks  LWS89  Nabhill Grive  LWS162  Griffin’s Wood, Near  Epping 
LWS17  Yardley Hill Meadow  LWS90  Ballhill Wood  LWS163  Jenkin’s Plantation, Near  Epping  
LWS18  Gilwell Park, South  LWS91  Epping Long Green West  LWS164  All Saints’ Churchyard, Epping Upland  
LWS19  Ardmore Lane Wood, Buckhurst Hill  LWS92  Little Rookery Wood, Near  Epping LWS165  Blunts Farm, Near  Theydon Bois  
LWS20  Roebu ck Green, Buckhurst Hill  LWS93  Fitches Plantation, Near  Epping  LWS166  Clark’s Wood, Near  Abridge  
LWS21  Linder’s Field, Buckhurst Hill  LWS94  Orange Field Plantation, Near  Epping LWS167  St. Margaret’s Hospital Wood, Epping  
LWS22  Warren Hill Woods, Loughton  LWS95  Barnaby Way Wood, Chigwell LWS168  Mark Bushes, Near  Rye Hill  
LWS23  Loughton Woods  LWS96  Roding Valley Meadows, Loughton  LWS169  Harlow Park, Near  Magdalen Laver  
LWS24  Gravel High, High Beach  LWS97  Grange Farm Grasslands, Near  
Loughton  LWS170  Thornwood L NR, Near  Coopersale  
LWS25  High Beach Churchyard  LWS98  St. Mary’s Churchyard, Chigwell  LWS171  Roughtalley’s L NEAR , Near  Coopersale  
LWS26  Ash Green, Loughton  LWS99  High Wood, Near  Chigwell Row  LWS172  Gernon Bushes, West, Near  
Coopersale  
LWS27  Conbury Wood,  Near  Waltham Abbey  LWS100  Lady Patience Meadow, Loughton  LWS173  Birching Coppice Complex, Near  
Coopersale  
LWS28  Oxleys Wood Complex,  Near  Waltham 
Abbey  LWS101  Broadfield  Shaw, Near  Loughton  LWS174  Redyn’s  Wood, Near  Coopersale   
Appendix 4: Policy Designations  
 
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 235 
                             
 
  
LWS29  Green Lane/Brambly Shaw, Near  
Waltham Abbey  LWS102  Broadfield Shaw Grassland, Near  
Loughton  LWS175  Steward’s Green Lane, Near  Fiddlers 
Hamlet  
LWS30  The Selvage, Near  Waltham Abbey  LWS103  Long Shaw, Near  Loughton  LWS176  Soapley’s Wood, Near  Abridge  
LWS31  Warlies Park, Near  Waltham Abbey  LWS104  Home Mead L NR, Near  Loughton  LWS177  Alder Wood, Near  Abridge  
LWS32  Copped Hall Green, Near  Waltham 
Abbey  LWS105  Theydon Bois Deer Park  LWS178  Ape’s Grove, Near  Abridge  
LWS33  Barber’s Wood and Lane, Near  
Theydon Garnon  LWS106  Church Lane Flood Meadow L NR, North 
Weald  LWS179  Hilly Spring, Near  Theydon Garnon 
LWS34  Foster Street Burial Ground  LWS107  Weald Common L NR, North Weald  LWS180  Bush Grove, Near  Theydon Mount  
LWS35  The Hermitage, Near  Harlow  LWS108  Beachet Wood, Near  Stapleford Tawney  LWS181  Shales More, Theydon  Mount  
LWS36  Pincey Brook Meadows, Near  Harlow  LWS109  Long Spring, Near  Stapleford Tawney  LWS182  Foxburrow Wood, Near  Abridge  
LWS37  Morehall Wood, Near  Harlow Tye  LWS110  Round/Hanging Spring, Near  Stapleford 
Tawney  LWS183  Great Wood and Mutton Corner, Near  
Abridge  
LWS38  St. Andrew’s Churchyard, North Weald  LWS111  Hill Hall Park, Near  Theydon Mount  LWS184  Bishop’s Moat, Near  Lambourne End  
LWS39  Featherbed Lane, Near  Lambourne End  LWS112  The Gorse Wood, Near  Matching LWS185  Faggotters Lane Verges, Near  
Threshers Bush  
LWS40  Hainault Forest Golf Course, Near  
Lambourne End  LWS113  Chalybeate Spring, Near  Matching LWS186  Belsnam Wood, Near  Threshers Bush  
LWS41  Crabtree Hill Paddocks, Near  
Lambourne End  LWS114  Housham Tye Green  LWS187  Miller’s Grove, Near  Grensted Green  
LWS42  Spill Timbers Wood  LWS115  Matching Park  LWS188  Ongar Park Woods  
LWS43  Oak Spring, Near  Lower Sheering  LWS116  More Spring West, Matching Green  LWS189  Byway 26, Stanford Rivers  
LWS44  Round Spring, Near  Lower Sheering  LWS117  More Spring, Matching Green  LWS190  Knightsland Wood, Near  Stapleford   
Appendix 4: Policy Designations  
  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
236  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Tawney  
LWS45  Little Hyde Hall Wood, Near  Lower 
Sheering  LWS118  New Way Lane, Matching Tye  LWS191  Northlands Wood, Near  Stapleford 
Tawney  
LWS46  Eighteenacre/Wrens’ Springs  LWS119  Pole Lane, Near  High Laver  LWS192  Wood, Berwick Farm, Near  Stapleford 
Tawney  
LWS47  Heathen Wood Marsh, Near  Sheering LWS120  Weald Bridge Meadow, Near  Bowler’s 
Green  LWS193  Icehouse Wood, Near  Stapleford 
Tawney  
LWS48  Heathen Wood, Near  Sheering LWS121  Renkyn’s Wood, Near  Tyler’s Green  LWS194  Twentyacre Wood, Near  Stapleford 
Tawney  
LWS49  Newman’s End, Sheering Lodge  LWS122  Tyler’s Green Grasslands  LWS195  Tenacre Wood, Near  Stapleford 
Tawney  
LWS50  The Gorse, Near  Matching  LWS123  Ongar Radio Station  LWS196  Dog Kennel Spring, Near  Stapleford 
Tawney  
LWS51  Landford Bottom, Near  Stapleford 
Tawney  LWS124  Pickle’s Garden, Near  Ongar  LWS197  Anchor House Meadow, Near  Abbess 
Roding  
LWS52  Berwick Ham, Near  Stapleford Tawney  LWS125  Penson’s Lane, Near  Grensted Green  LWS198  Abbess Roding Hedgerows  
LWS53  Bob’s Barn Wood, Near  Stapleford 
Tawney  LWS126  Greensted Wood, Near  Grensted Green  LWS199  Brickles Wood Complex, Near  Little 
Laver  
LWS54  Hawksmere Springs, Near  Stapleford 
Tawney  LWS127  Ongar Wood  LWS200  Enville Wood, Near  Little Laver  
LWS55  Passingford Bridge Wood, Near  
Stapleford Airfield  LWS128  Ongar Oaks  LWS201  Little Wood, Near  Little Laver  
LWS56  Albyns Parkland, Near  Stapleford 
Airfield  LWS129  Blake Hall Meadow, Near  Ongar  LWS202  Butthatch Wood, Near  Beauchamp 
Roding  
LWS57  Stapleford Abbotts Meadow  LWS130  Dorking’s farm Meadow, Moreton  LWS203  Blackcat Green Lane, Near  Little Laver   
Appendix 4: Policy Designations  
 
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 237 
                             
 
  
LWS58  Stapleford Abbotts Elms  LWS131  Crispins Meadow, Moreton  LWS204  Norwood, Near  Little Laver  
LWS59  Churchyard, Standford Rivers  LWS132  North Lane, Near  Moreton  LWS205  Norwood End Verges, Near  Little Laver  
LWS60  Coleman’s Lane, Near  Toot Hill LWS133  Watery Lane Verge, High Laver  LWS206  Perryfield Lane, Near  Fyfield  
LWS61  Kettlebury Spring, Near  Ongar  LWS134  Gunnets Green, Near  Matching  LWS207  The Moors, Near  Fyfield  
LWS62  Dewley Wood, Near  Lower 
Bobbingworth Green  LWS135  Matching Green  LWS208  Fyfield Mill Meadow  
LWS63  Doleman’s Spring, Near  Grensted 
Green  LWS136  Matching Airfield Mosaic  LWS209  Hallsford Bridge Meadow, Near  Ongar  
LWS64  Clatterfod End Plantation, Near  Ongar  LWS137  Chevers Hall Meadow, Near  Norton 
Manderville  LWS210  Wood, Willingale Airfield  
LWS65  Westlands/Thistlelands Springs, Near  
Ongar  LWS138  Norton Manderville Churchyard  LWS211  White’s Wood, Near  Little Laver  
LWS66  Long Edwells, Near  Ongar  LWS139  Cannons Green Lanes, Fyfield  LWS212  Birds Green Mosaic, Near  Beauchamp 
Roding  
LWS67  Sparks Farm Marsh, Near  Nine Ashes  LWS140  Witney Wood and Hedge Rows. Near  
Fyfield  LWS213  Ongar Road Verges  
LWS68  Dukes Lane Verge  LWS141  Spains Wood, Near  Willingale  LWS214  Rowe’s Wood, Near  Willingale  
LWS69  Elm Cottage Green Lane, Near  Berners 
Roding  LWS142  Norton Heath  LWS215  Beauchamp Roding Special Roadside 
Verge  
LWS70  Windmill Farm Green Lane, Near  
Shallow Bowells  LWS143  Norton Heath Verges  LWS216  Mill Street Green, Hastingwood  
LWS71  Berners Roding Church Meadow  LWS144  Bonsgrove/Lucas’s Lane, Near  Norton 
Heath  LWS217  Lea Valley, South  
LWS72  Berners Wood  LWS145  Hardy’s Plantation/Roots Spring, Near  
Berners Roding  LWS218  Lea Valley, Central    
Appendix 4: Policy Designations  
  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
238  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
LWS73  St. Andrew’s/St. Christopher’s Church, 
Willingale  LWS146  Bushey -hays Spring LWS219  Lea Valley, North  
LWS220  Parndon Wood  
 
County Wildlife Sites  
CWS01  Land on Site of Berwick Lane, Stanford 
Rivers  CWS09  Ongar Civic Amenity Site, High Ongar CWS17  Ivy Chimneys Primary School, Epping  
CWS02  Land part of  Staples Road in Buckhurst 
Hill CWS10  Land on South of WIllingale Road , 
Fyfield  CWS18  Land Part of Chigwell Lane, Loughton  
CWS03  Land in Featherbed Lane, Lambourne 
End CWS11  Land in Dunmow Road, Beauchamp 
Roding CWS19  Land on west side of Romford R oad, 
Chigwell Row  
CWS04  Land on west side of Piercing Hill, 
Theydon Bois  CWS12  Land on North Side of Nazeing Road, 
Nazeing CWS20  Lambourne Hall Farm – Land 
Remaining, Lambourne  
CWS05  Hainault Forest Country Park, 
Lambourne  CWS13  Land on North Side of old Nazeing 
Road, Nazeing  CWS21  Lambourne Hall Est ate – Apes Grove 
Woodland - Lam bourne  
CWS06  Land in Dunmow Road, Beauchamp 
Roding  CWS14  Epping Primary School, Epping  CWS22  Land at Passingford Bridge, Stapleford 
Abbotts  
CWS07  Land forming part of Ongar Road , 
Radley Green  CWS15  Coopersale and Theydon Garnon CE 
Primary School  CWS23  Debden Estate, Theydon Bois  
CWS08  St Johns CE Primary School Playing 
Field , Buckhurst Hill CWS16  Land on east side of Berwick Lane, 
Standford Rivers  CWS24  Epping St Johns CE Playing Field  
  
Appendix 4: Policy Designations  
 
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 239 
                             
 
  
 
Please note that some policy designations are not shown on the PDF version but can be seen on the 
online v ersion of the Policies Map  only . These include:  
- Footpaths  
- Environment Agency Flood 
Zone 2  
- Environment Agency Flood 
Zone 3  
- Bridleways  
- Byways  
- Listed Buildings  
- BAP Habitats & Priority 
Species  
- Ancient Woodland 
- Tree Preservation Orders  
- Veteran Trees  
- Ancient Trees  
- Local Area s for Play  - Neighbourhood Equipped Area s for Play  
- Mineral Safeguarding Area s 
- Parish Boundaries  
- Ward Boundaries  
- Allotments  
- Parks and Gardens  
- Natural and Semi -Natural 
Areas  
- Cemeteries and Graveyards  
- Air Quality Management Area    
Appendix 4: Policy Designations  
  
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
240  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
This page is intentionally left blank  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Appendix Five  
Housing , 
Employment  
and Traveller 
Trajectories  
  
  Appendix 5: Housing, Employment and Traveller Trajectories  
 
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
242  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Appendix 5  
Housing, Employment and Traveller Trajectories  
Housing Trajectory  
  
  Start of Plan Period  Year 1 -5 Year 6 -10 Year 11 -15 Year 
16 
 Total  
2011/2012  
2012/2013  
2013/2014  
2014/2015  
2015/2016  
2016/2017  
2017/2018  
2018/2019  
2019/2020  
2020/2021  
2021/2022  
2022/2023  
2023/2024  
2024/2025  
2025/2026  
2026/2027  
2027/2028  
2028/2029  
2029/2030  
2030/2031  
2031/2032  
2032/2033  
Completions  1,330  288 89 299 230 267 157 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Commitments 
(sites with planning 
permission)  1,801  0 0 0 0 0 0 334 706 563 182 16 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
10% lapse rate  -180 0 0 0 0 0 0 -33 -71 -56 -18 -2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Garden Communities  
Latton Priory  1,050  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 50 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 0 
Water Lane Area  2,100  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 100 200 200 200 200 200 200 200 200 200 200 0 
East of Harlow  750 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 50 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 0 0 0 
Other Local Plan Allocations  
Buckhurst  Hill 87 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 35 37 0 0 0 0 0 0 15 0 0 0 0 
Chigwell  376 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 25 41 26 14 20 20 30 35 0 0 32 33 20 40 40 
Ongar  590 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 52 118 118 120 120 53 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Coopersale  6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Epping  1,305  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 100 167 156 117 95 95 95 95 95 95 95 95 0 
Fyfield  14 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 14 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
High  Ongar  10 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Loughton/Debden  1,021  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 14 46 131 171 170 150 150 90 63 36 0 0 0 0 0 
Lower  Sheering  14 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 14 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Appendix 5: Housing, Employment and Traveller Trajectories  
 
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 243 
                             
 
 
  Start of Plan Period  Year 1 -5 Year 6 -10 Year 11 -15 Year 
16 
 Total  
2011/2012  
2012/2013  
2013/2014  
2014/2015  
2015/2016  
2016/2017  
2017/2018  
2018/2019  
2019/2020  
2020/2021  
2021/2022  
2022/2023  
2023/2024  
2024/2025  
2025/2026  
2026/2027  
2027/2028  
2028/2029  
2029/2030  
2030/2031  
2031/2032  
2032/2033  
Nazeing  122 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 59 63 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
North  
Weald  
Bassett  1,050  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 25 74 41 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 100 
Roydon  62 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 51 11 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Sheering 84 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 53 31 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Stapleford  
Abbotts  47 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 14 0 0 16 17 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Theydon  Bois  57 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 31 26 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Thornwood  172 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 44 50 30 40 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Waltham  Abbey  858 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 81 132 135 135 100 100 100 0 20 22 25 0 
Other rural sites  41 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 20 21 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Windfall  385 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 
Total Housing 
Supply (recorded 
and projected)  13,152  288 89 299 230 267 157 301 696 636 825 1,028  1,075  1,107  1,055  898 783 756 667 673 562 585 175 
Future housing 
requirement *  10,070  N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 661 661 661 661 661 615 615 615 615 615 615 615 615 615 615 615 
 
 
 
  Appendix 5: Housing, Employment and Traveller Trajectories  
 
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
244  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
 02004006008001,0001,200Number of new homes  EFDC Local Plan Housing Trajectory  
Annualised Local Plan Housing Requirement (Liverpool Method + 5%)
Historic Completion (2011-2016)
Local Plan Housing Supply 2017-2033
Average housing requirementAppendix 5: Housing, Employment and Traveller Trajectories  
 
   
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
Submission Version December 2017  | 245 
                             
 
 
Trajectory for Employment Allocations  
Allocation 
Reference  Site Address  Total Supply (ha)  2017/18 -
2021/22  2022/23 – 
2026/27  2027/28 -
2031/32  2032/33  
LOU.E2  Langston Road Industrial Estate  1 1    
NWB.E4  North Weald Airfield  10  5 5  
RUR.E19  Dorrington Farm  1.85  0.94     
WAL.E6  Galley Hill Road Industrial Estate  1.28  1.28     
WAL.E8  Land North of A121  10  5 5  
Total   23.22  3.22  10 10 0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 Appendix 5: Housing, Employment and Traveller Trajectories  
 
 
 
 
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
246  | Submission Version December 2017  
  
 
   
 
Trajectory for Travellers’ provision  
Allocation 
Reference  Site Address  Total Supply 
(Number of 
pitches)  2011/12 -
2016/17  2017/18 -
2021/22  2022/23 – 
2026/27  2027/28 -
2031/32  2032/33  
SP4.1  Latton Priory  5      5    
SP4.2  Water Lane Area  5       5   
SP4.3  East of Harlow  5       5   
NWB.T1  West of Tylers Green, North Weald 
Bassett  5    5      
RUR.T1  Sons Nursery, Hamlet Hill  2   2       
RUR.T2  Ashview, Hamlet Hill, Roydon, Essex, 
CM19 5LA  1   1       
RUR.T3  James Mead, Waltham Road, Long 
Green, Nazeing, Essex, EN9 2LU  4   4       
RUR.T4  Curtis Mill Lane, Stapleford Abbotts, 
Essex, RM4 1HS  1   1       
RUR.T5  Stoneshot View, Nazeing  5   5       
WAL.T1  Yard/car park at rear Lea Valley Nursery, 
Crooked Mile, Waltham Abbey  5     5     
Completions   16 16     
Extant 
Permissions   16  16    
Total Supply   70 16 34 10 10 0 
Local Plan 
requirement   64 16 33 8 4 3 Appendix 5: Housing, Employment and Traveller Trajectories  
Epping Forest District Local Plan    
247 | Submission Version December 2017  
This page is intentionally left blank  planning our futureepping forest district 
