2007
Local Development Framework2007Core
  StrategyCore
  Strategy
EEBC is committed to using recycled paper wherever possibleLDF Core Strategy 2007
1
Epsom and Ewell Borough Council
Local Development Framework
Foreword
Planning shapes the places where people live and work, and the
environment we live in. The Epsom and Ewell Development
Framework presents a real opportunity to improve the way we do
things in the future - the way we use land, the way we build, the wayEpsom town centre and local centres will develop and change, and
how planning decisions we take will fit in with other agreed plans and
strategies.
We are determined that “sustainability” becomes the core principle
underpinning our decisions. At the heart of sustainable development
is the concept of ensuring a better quality of life for everyone, nowand for future generations. It means an approach which will help us
meet the environmental, social and economic challenges that face
us all.
The Core Strategy is the first part of the new development framework
we are now preparing under the revised planning system. It provides
a long term planning vision for the Borough and the overall framework
in which more detailed plans will be drawn up and decisions made. Itcontains the broad planning strategy aimed at meeting that vision,
and contains core strategic policies which we believe will provide
sound guidance for the next fifteen years. It draws on the work that’salready been done on the Borough’s Community Strategy.
The involvement of the local community and many other
organisations and groups helped us shape the strategy in thisdocument. We are very grateful for the contributions made throughout
the development planning process. An independent public
examination took place between July 2006 and May 2007 and wewere delighted that the appointed independent Inspector found the
document sound.
Epsom and Ewell Borough Council adopted the Core Strategy on 24
July 2007. It now forms part of the statutory development plan for the
Borough.
David Smith
Chief ExecutiveCouncillor Keith Mann
Chairman -
Strategy and
Resources CommitteeEpsom & Ewell Borough Council
2LDF Core Strategy 2007
3Contents
1 Introduction 5
1.1 What is the Epsom and Ewell Local Development Framework? 5
1.2 What stage have we reached and how did we get here? 6
2 Issues facing Epsom and Ewell Borough
and our Vision for the Future 7
2.1 Context - existing policies and plans 7
2.2 The Evidence Base 7
2.3 The Main Issues 8
2.4 The Epsom and Ewell Community Strategy -
“A bright future for the Borough” 9
2.5 Our Vision - What are we planning for by 2022? 10
2.6 Our Aims and Objectives 11
3 Core Strategic Policies 13
Creating Sustainable Communities in the Borough 13
3.1 Our Approach 13
Conserving and Enhancing Open Space and Landscape Character 15
3.2 Background 15
3.3 Green Belt 15
3.4 Biodiversity and Designated Nature Conservation Areas 17
3.5 Open Spaces and Green Infrastructure 19
Conserving and Enhancing the Quality of the Built Environment 22
3.6 Background 22
3.7 The Built Environment 22
3.8 Sustainability in New Developments 25
Providing for Housing and Employment Development 28
3.9 Background 28
3.10 Housing provision 28
3.11 Broad Location of Housing Development 30
3.12 Affordable Housing and meeting Housing Needs 32
3.13 Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople 35
3.14 Employment Provision 36
Meeting Community Needs 39
3.15 Background 39
3.16 Developer Contributions to Community Infrastructure 39
3.17 Community, Cultural and Built Sports Facilities 40Epsom & Ewell Borough Council
4Supporting Epsom Town Centre and Local Centres 42
3.18 Background 42
3.19 Epsom Town Centre 42
3.20 Role of local centres 44
Managing Transport and Travel 46
3.21 Our Approach 46
4 How will the Core Strategy be delivered? 49
4.1 Agencies and Resources 49
4.2 Monitoring 49
Appendix 1 50
Core Strategy - Key Diagram
Copies of this document can be made available
in large print, Braille and audio.
LDF Core Strategy 2007
5
1  Introduction
1.1 What is the Epsom and Ewell Local Development Framework?
1.1.1 The Epsom and Ewell Local Development Framework (LDF) is a new way of planning the
future of the Borough. It will consist of a folder of documents, produced at different times(called ‘local development documents’) to guide development and land use in the Borough.
These documents will eventually replace the Epsom and Ewell District-wide Local Plan. The
timetable for preparing these documents and what they will deal with is set out in a publishedwork programme (the ‘Local Development Scheme’).
1.1.2 What is significant about the new style plans is that they go beyond traditional land use plans
by bringing together and integrating policies for the development and use of land with otherpolicies and programmes which can influence the nature of places and how they function.
This means, for example, a much closer working relationship with other agencies and
organisations, and particularly members of the Local Strategic Partnership, in thedevelopment of a spatial planning approach for the Borough.
1.1.3 The Core Strategy is one of these new planning documents. It identifies the key issues and
the social, economic and environmental objectives for the future development of the Boroughup to 2022, and a strategy to achieve them. It is central to the delivery of sustainable
development and creating sustainable communities. However it does not deal with specific
development sites, nor does it deal with the most detailed policy issues; these will follow inlater documents. It contains a Key Diagram (at the end of the document) which shows the
broad locations of development and the Borough’s relationship with adjoining areas.
1.1.4 The other key documents will be:
❏Site Allocations Development Plan Document (DPD) -
which will allocate the main development sites and identify areas to be protected from
development or where special policies apply;
❏Development Control Policies DPD -
this will guide day to day decisions on planning applications;
❏Area Action Plan DPD -
this will cover development and conservation issues within Epsom town centre;
❏Proposals Map -this will show sites and areas subject to the policies in the documents above and will beprepared in conjunction with the Site Allocations DPD;
❏Supplementary Planning Documents (SPD) -which will provide more detailed guidance on a range of issues, sites or wider areas, suchas affordable housing, developer contributions and design;
❏Statement of Community Involvement -setting out how the community can be involved in the new planning process.Epsom & Ewell Borough Council
61.2 What stage have we reached and how did we get here?
1.2.1 The Core Strategy was adopted by the Council on 24 July 2007.
1.2.2 To reach this stage we held consultations and public meetings over a 24 month period. An
important part of that process was understanding the issues the Borough faces and
considering alternative options before moving on to publish the Council’s preferred options
in January 2006. The responses we received at those stages informed our later decisions.
1.2.3 Sustainable development is at the core of policies contained in the plan. We are trying to
achieve more sustainable development and more sustainable communities. To ensure that
our proposals achieve this, the Core Strategy was subjected to a detailed ‘sustainabilityappraisal’ at each stage of its preparation to consider the social, economic and environmental
impacts of the various options considered.
1.2.4 The Core Strategy was submitted to the Secretary of State in July 2006 for examination of its
soundness by an independent Inspector. Public hearings took place in January 2007. The
Inspector’s binding report was published in May 2007 and required a number of changes to
the document in order to make it sound. These have all been incorporated, and do notchange the overall strategy.
Mark Berry
Head of Planning
Epsom & Ewell Borough CouncilLDF Core Strategy 2007
7
2  Issues facing Epsom and Ewell Borough
and our Vision for the Future
2.1 Context - existing policies and plans
2.1.1 Epsom and Ewell’s Local Development Framework is not being prepared in isolation. It is
being developed in the context provided by other strategies, plans and policies at the
national, regional and local level. These have had an important influence over the form and
content of this Core Strategy.
2.1.2 At the national level, policy is set out in the Government’s Planning Policy Guidance Notes
and Planning Policy Statements. At the regional level planning guidance is set out in Regional
Planning Guidance Note 9: South East England (RPG9), and in the emerging regional spatialstrategy, the South East Plan, which was submitted to Government in March 2006. Epsom
and Ewell is located in the “London Fringe” sub-region within the South East Plan.
2.1.3 At a more local level, the Surrey Structure Plan (2004) contains policies which will remain a
material planning consideration until superseded by the South East Plan (probably in 2008).
The Epsom and Ewell District-wide Local Plan (2000) also contains policies which will remain
in force until at least September 2007 and which represent a material planning considerationin development control. The Council will progressively bring forward local development
documents which will eventually replace the Proposals Map and those retained policies in
the current local plan.
2.1.4 Ultimately the development plan for the Borough will comprise the South East Plan, the
Council’s Local Development Framework, and the Minerals and Waste Development
Framework prepared by Surrey County Council.
2.1.5 Other plans and strategies that have influenced the development of this Core Strategy
include the Surrey Local Transport Plan, the Epsom and Ewell Community Strategy, and the
Council’s Corporate Plan and Key Priorities.
2.1.6 A full list of plans and strategies that have been used in the preparation of this Core Strategy
is contained in a supporting document, available on the Council’s website.
2.2 The Evidence Base
2.2.1 In preparing the Core Strategy we have taken into account what we understand the needs of
the local community to be, and the important issues that the new plan needs to address. Wehave done this in a number of ways:
❏By assessing the national and regional framework which provides the context for thisdocument. In particular the emerging South East Plan provides the regional and sub-regional basis that we should work within, and sets out how much housing needs to be
provided within the Borough.
❏By consulting local people and organisations as part of the earlier stages of the document,
in particular at the “Issues and Options” and “Preferred Options” stages. In addition we
have worked with the Local Strategic Partnership and drawn from the Community Strategy
and its annual action plans, in order to help define the issues the Council should currentlyEpsom & Ewell Borough Council
8be addressing. Parallel work on the Council’s Corporate Plan priorities, based on the
results of focus groups held with local residents, and with the Citizens’ Panel, has helpedensure policies take account of the needs and aspirations of local people.
❏Linked to the implementation of the Community Strategy, we have consulted with other
organisations involved in providing local services to establish how they are meeting localneeds and to ensure that the plan can integrate its own spatial proposals with those of
others.
❏By gathering information about the characteristics of the Borough and where necessary
by carrying out our own studies (or commissioning others to carry them out), to understand
particular issues in greater depth such as the Housing Needs Study and the Audit of
Open Space, Sport and Recreation Facilities and Assessment of Local Needs.
2.3 The Main Issues
2.3.1 From our work on the plan and from the responses we have received from earlier
engagement with the community, there are clearly a number of key issues facing the
Borough. These are described below. The purpose of this Core Strategy is to set out the
broad policies to address them.
2.3.2 From our background work we believe the key issues are:
❏Epsom and Ewell has a diverse and ageing population with a range of housing needs,
and an economy which needs a local workforce to help reduce longer-distance outcommuting. Local house prices are increasingly beyond the means of key workers and
local people. As a consequence many first time buyers and lower income households find
it difficult to gain a foothold in the local housing market. There is a diverse range of needsfor different sizes and types of housing across the Borough, but the provision of affordable
housing is a priority need. How can the right types of homes be provided in the right
place, within the context of significant Green Belt and environmental constraints?
❏Epsom and Ewell has a thriving local economy although considerable pressure is placed
on the Borough because of its proximity to London and the good connections it enjoys
with neighbouring areas. More workers exist in the Borough’s population than jobsavailable locally, although some businesses have problems recruiting suitable staff.
Unemployment is low in the Borough, although this may mask local variations. The
standard of premises and the quality of employment land is variable, with some which arenot necessarily suitable for the needs of modern business.  Against this background, how
can planning policy assist the reduction of longer distance commuting and the
maintenance and development of a vibrant local employment market?
❏The Borough has a high environmental quality which is much appreciated by both
residents and visitors. A significant proportion of the area is Green Belt which tightly
constrains the scope for outward expansion of the built up areas. Within the built up areasdevelopment is already dense and the attractive character of many established residential
areas depends on the balance that exists between built form and landscape. However at
the same time the area is subject to strong development pressures, particularly for newhousebuilding. How is the quality of the environment to be protected against these
pressures, while improvements are made to the other areas that need them?
❏For many people the provision of community facilities and access to open space are key
concerns. Some areas are deficient in leisure or recreational provision, or in access toLDF Core Strategy 2007
9open space. In other areas there is a surplus. Which are the facilities that should be
safeguarded and how are needs for new community, sport and recreation facilities to be met?
❏Although the Borough is generally affluent, this hides some areas of special need. Some
social issues afflict certain groups within the population and lead to problems associated
with anti-social behaviour, specific health needs in vulnerable groups, and shortages offacilities and services for minority ethnic groups, the young and the elderly. The
Community Strategy concluded that many of these problems were particularly acute in
specific locations (such as Court and Ruxley wards, and Epsom town centre). How can
the plan assist agencies in addressing these sorts of problem and the issues in the less
affluent parts of the Borough?
❏While the quality of new development may be improving, there is potential to raise the
quality still further, and to ensure that it contributes more significantly to meeting
sustainability objectives. How can policies ensure that higher quality sustainable
environments are achieved and that the most efficient use is made of land andinfrastructure which minimises the use of scarce resources and energy?
❏Epsom town centre provides a good range of facilities and services, and is currentlyundergoing a period of change and development. While providing an attractiveenvironment for the shopper and visitor, traffic congestion and other factors can detract
from the shopping experience and the enjoyment of other activities. How should the town
centre adapt to these changes, and remain a vibrant and focussed centre for retail, leisureand other day to day facilities?
❏While the future amount of new development will be governed by regional planningstrategy, and will be constrained by local environmental factors, it will be important toensure that what infrastructure improvements that are needed as a result of development
are provided in good time. How can policies ensure that this objective is achieved?
2.4 The Epsom and Ewell Community Strategy -
“A bright future for the Borough”
2.4.1 The Local Development Framework has a key role to play in setting out the spatial aspects
of the Community Strategy and in providing a long term spatial vision for the local area.Epsom and Ewell’s Community Strategy was adopted in 2003 and is managed by the Local
Strategic Partnership - a group of some twenty key interests from the statutory, business
and voluntary sectors of the community. The strategy is founded on the needs and aspirationsof local people, while acknowledging the importance of protecting the interests of future
generations. Its stated vision is to improve the quality of life for those who live and work in
the Borough by balancing environmental, social and economic factors, and it seeks toachieve this by setting out a series of key themes.
2.4.2 The two overarching themes adopted by the Local Strategic Partnership are - creating
opportunities for all, and supporting a society that recognises the needs of future generations.Seven further sub-themes are developed which reflect the priorities of the LSP:
❏a caring society and thriving economic community
❏a protected and improved environment
❏a safe society
❏a healthy societyEpsom & Ewell Borough Council
10❏a harmonious and inclusive society
❏communities working together
❏supporting the voluntary and community sectors.
2.4.3 In 2005 the LSP adopted a more focussed approach to the community strategy work it
oversees and monitors. It developed an annual action plan for its five priority areas which are:
❏young people
❏anti-social behaviour
❏transportation and congestion
❏quality of the environment
❏health
2.4.4 As a result of further consultation with local residents, and a growing awareness of the
relative importance placed by them on the various topics covered in the Community Strategy,the LSP has in addition chosen Epsom town centre as one of the areas for special focus in
its action plans. The Partnership has been particularly concerned to reduce the problems
caused by traffic congestion and to help ensure the town’s long-term economic viability.
2.4.5 The themes of the Community Strategy are reflected throughout this document. Spatial
planning policies contained in this Core Strategy, and in the other local development
documents to be produced over the next few years, will therefore contribute to meeting theaspirations of the local community through supporting actions and initiatives promoted by
the LSP. By working with the members of the Local Strategic Partnership, the Council can
help ensure that it achieves a more integrated approach towards future development inEpsom and Ewell. 
This will be based upon a shared belief in sustainable development
objectives and a shared desire to deliver an improved quality of life, and a stimulating and
healthy environment for all.
2.5 Our Vision - What are we planning for by 2022?
2.5.1 Based on the evidence we have collected and on the issues identified above, the Core
Strategy seeks to guide development in a way which reflects the key priorities for the Borough
envisaged in the Community Strategy. The Core Strategy will seek to guide change in a way
which reinforces those distinctive characteristics which make living and working in Epsomand Ewell something people do as a matter of conscious choice. It will guide development in
a way that reflects their social, environmental and economic aspirations, while ensuring the
needs of future generations are taken into account. Sustainability will be a key factor indecision making and in resource allocation.
2.5.2 By 2022 the strategy envisages the Borough as economically strong and a good place to
live, work and visit (‘working’ within this context also includes those who study in theBorough). New development will support and enhance the attractiveness of local places,
and be designed and located in a way that is safe, accessible and sustainable. There will be
greater biodiversity, more effective use will be made of natural resources, and carbon dioxideemissions will have been reduced. The Green Belt countryside surrounding Epsom will
continue to retain its character and quality, define the extent of the Borough’s built up areas,
and provide a special experience for residents and visitors.
2.5.3 Epsom town centre will have retained the best of its character, and will be an even more
attractive place in which to move around on foot and to shop. The unpleasant impacts ofLDF Core Strategy 2007
11traffic will have been reduced and the town will be a vibrant centre meeting the day to day
needs of those who live or work in the town, or who visit it for the range of services andfacilities it can provide. It will sustain thriving day time and night time economies. Ewell
village centre will have retained its unique identity and incorporated positive regeneration
and change in the interests of its longer term vitality, while other local centres such asStoneleigh will continue to serve their nearby communities.
2.5.4 The conversion and redevelopment of the remaining former hospital sites to the west of
Epsom will have created attractive and thriving living environments, in a unique rural setting.Within the urban areas the open spaces which give the Borough its distinctive appeal will
continue to be positively managed and provide important benefits to local residents. More
affordable housing will have been provided throughout the Borough to meet local housingneeds, while the special character of the existing residential neighbourhoods will be
protected as far as possible.
2.6 Our Aims and Objectives
2.6.1 In preparing the Core Strategy we presented a number of key objectives. These have been
developed during the course of the consultation on the preferred options and again followingthe responses we received. They are now targeted at four broad aims:
❏  Conserving resources
❏  Creating a quality environment and special places
❏  Addressing community needs - now and in the future
❏  Encouraging a prosperous economy
2.6.2 We believe our vision - that development should be achieved in accordance with the
principles of sustainability and the four broad aims above - can be delivered through pursuing
the following objectives:
❏making sure that sufficient suitable land is identified through the development plan for
meeting the regional and local requirements for housing and employment, and maintaining
a suitable mix of premises to meet the needs of local business;
❏focussing development on previously developed land within the built up area or in the
hospital cluster, rather than on green field releases, and ensuring it is located where access
to services can be secured and where it can make the most efficient use of the site;
❏meeting the diverse social needs of our communities and in particular meeting the needs
for affordable housing and for those with a nomadic way of life;
❏ensuring the necessary infrastructure and services are provided to support communities,and as an integral part of new development wherever possible;
❏protecting and improving community, recreational and cultural facilities, especially ones
that cater for young people and the elderly, and maximising their accessibility;
❏conserving and improving the natural landscape, the historic built environment and local
biodiversity, and protecting designated areas of special importance;
❏protecting the Green Belt and maintaining the separate identity of neighbourhoods;
❏ensuring all aspects of new developments accord with the principles of good design,create safe and inclusive places, and contribute positively towards local distinctiveness;Epsom & Ewell Borough Council
12❏ensuring new development incorporates sustainable building principles and high
standards of energy efficiency;
❏protecting and enhancing open spaces, and creating new ones, and improving public
access to them in the interests of residents, workers and visitors;
❏enhancing the vitality and viability of Epsom town centre, Ewell village and Stoneleigh
local centres, and other local centres serving the Borough’s communities;
❏minimising the need to travel and encouraging opportunities for trips to be made by
alternative modes of travel to the motor car;
❏encouraging highway safety and environmental improvement measures which reduce
the detrimental impacts of high traffic volumes.LDF Core Strategy 2007
13
3  Core Strategic Policies
Creating Sustainable Communities in the Borough
3.1 Our Approach
3.1.1 The overarching principle for this strategy document, and for the documents that follow as
part of the Epsom and Ewell Local Development Framework, is to achieve sustainable
development. The spatial strategy proposed for Epsom and Ewell Borough has an essentialrole to play in delivering the two key themes of the Community Strategy - creating
opportunities for all and ensuring society recognises the needs of future generations.
3.1.2 Achieving sustainable communities requires consideration of social and economic as well
as environmental factors. The Council’s Sustainability Policy Statement (adopted in 2005)
confirms that the Council’s intention is to promote and control development in the Borough
so as to protect and enhance the quality of life, and improve economic and socialopportunities, in line with the objectives of sustainability.
3.1.3 This Core Strategy doc ument will help assist in achieving the right balance between
protecting and improving the quality of life of the community, while ensuring that all necessarychange is sustainable in the interests of future generations. The Borough has to
accommodate development and growth but this will be in the context provided by the
distinctive local character of the area, and the Council’s intention to protect and enhance thequality of the natural and built environment of Epsom and Ewell.
3.1.4 De livering the vision of the Community Strategy will depend on the work of many
organisations and individuals. However, based on our vision and our objectives for theBorough, this Core Strategy introduces policy principles on which sustainable development
will be achieved. These form the basis on which the Core Strategy policies have been
prepared and include:
❏protecting the most valued landscapes and built environment (Policies CS2, CS3 and
CS4);
❏applying positive policies on issues such as design and conservation in order to improve
the local environment, or in some locations to counter the possible impact of declining
environmental quality  (Policy CS5);
❏minimising the use of natural resources and energy, reducing carbon dioxide emissions
and promoting more “sustainable” forms of building  (Policy CS6);
❏providing for the necessary new housing, employment and other development in the
Borough in sustainable locations within the built up areas and particularly through the re-use of previously-developed land  (Policies CS7 and CS8);
❏meeting the diverse existing and future needs of local communities for example by
improving access to facilities, and in particular to housing  (Policies CS9 and CS10);
❏maintaining a diverse and prosperous economy with an improved balance between local
jobs and local labour supply  (Policy CS11);
❏supporting the provision of services, facilities and infrastructure which meet the Borough’s
needs - where appropriate through contributions from developers, or by other means
(Policies CS12);Epsom & Ewell Borough Council
14❏promoting an inclusive and caring society, supporting the provision of community facilities
(including high quality education and health facilities), and encouraging developmentwhich meets those requirements arising from people with special needs, and in particular
from the elderly and from young people (Policy CS13);
❏safeguarding the role and function of Epsom town centre and of local centres (Policies
CS14 and CS15);
❏minimising the effect of a growth in travel by private car through providing for choice in
travel modes, assisting managing travel demand through mechanisms such as parkingpolicy, and supporting the improvement of the environment for walking and cycling (Policy
CS16).
3.1.5 The proposed strategy in this document reflects these principles. We did as far as possible
explore alternative approaches, including not controlling development within the Green Belt
to the extent proposed, and allowing expansion of the built up areas. Our conclusion is that
the right approach is one which combines minimising the adverse effects of change, andseeking positive improvements from development wherever possible, while overall
encouraging better quality development and more sustainable approaches to construction.
3.1.6 The following overarching principle will therefore apply to new development.
Policy CS 1
The Council will expect the development and use of land to contribute positively
to the social, economic and environmental improvements necessary to achievesustainable development - both in Epsom and Ewell, and more widely. Changes
should protect and enhance the natural and built environments of the Borough
and should achieve high quality sustainable environments for the present, andprotect the quality of life of future, generations.
3.1.7 This overarching policy applies to all development. The Core Strategic Policies that follow
provide the framework for its delivery.LDF Core Strategy 2007
15Conserving and Enhancing Open Space
and Landscape Character
3.2 Background
3.2.1 The natural environment of the Borough is greatly valued by both local residents and visitors.
About one half of the Borough comprises open space - much of it Metropolitan Green Belt orprotected in other ways. It helps define the character of the Borough and it plays a significant
role in achieving opportunities for improvement in health and in the quality of life sought by
the Community Strategy and Health Strategy. Its distinctive visual characteristics, habitatsand species should be carefully guarded and maintained. Policies are therefore aimed at
safeguarding this valuable resource, ensuring a suitable quantity and quality of green space
is maintained, while providing protection from harm through inappropriate development. Aswell as offering protection, wherever possible the plan will promote opportunities to improve
the appearance of the local environment in line with explicit objectives in both the Council’s
Corporate Plan and the Borough’s Community Strategy.
3.3 Green Belt
3.3.1 The designated Green Belt covers some 42% of the area of the Borough and its boundaries
have been defined in previous local plans. The general extent of the Green Belt is shown on
the key diagram. Government policies emphasise that the fundamental objective of Green
Belts is to prevent urban sprawl, by keeping land permanently open. It is therefore asignificant spatial issue in defining the extent of the built up area and in constraining
development in the Borough. As one of the first extensive areas of open space on the
southern edge of the Metropolitan area of London, the Green Belt is highly accessible to theurban population. It plays an essential role in providing recreational opportunity, securing
the quality of the Borough’s landscape setting, and in creating the special identity of the
area.
3.3.2 Land uses within the Green Belt are dominated by a small number of large-space users. It
provides protection for nature conservation, acting as a valuable reservoir for biodiversity
and provides numerous opportunities for a variety of sport and recreational activities.Approximately 40% of the Green Belt comprises public open space, including Epsom Downs,
Horton Country Park and Epsom Common.
3.3.3 Epsom has long been associated with horse racing and the Green Belt is home to the
nationally important Epsom racecourse and its associated buildings, and to facilities for the
local racehorse training industry. There are a number of other developed sites within its
boundaries including two important educational establishments.
3.3.4 Also within the Gr een Belt lies the ‘hospital cluster’; this comprises five large, former
psychiatric hospitals (the construction of which pre-dated the designation of the Green Belt).
The closure of these hospitals has provided an opportunity for their conversion andredevelopment, predominantly for housing. In the context of policies of development
constraint, they have formed an important strategic development resource over the last
decade. Schemes involving two of the hospital sites have been completed, while a third iscurrently underway. The two remaining undeveloped hospital sites (West Park and St
Ebba’s), and the remainder of the partly-developed Horton site, form an important part of
this spatial strategy. They will provide an important development resource over the firstEpsom & Ewell Borough Council
16decade of this plan. Their location is shown on the key diagram.
3.3.5 As the Green Belt is such an important feature of national and local policy, it is essential that
its permanence is safeguarded and its quality maintained. Such aims were generally
supported in the ‘Preferred Options’ paper and also performed well in the sustainability
appraisal. In line with Planning Policy Guidance 2: Green Belts, the submitted South EastPlan (London Fringe Sub-Region policies) and the Surrey Structure Plan, it is envisaged that
the extent of the Green Belt will be maintained without alteration to its boundary for the
foreseeable future.
3.3.6 As with most areas in the South East, green space is facing considerable development
pressure, and policies must therefore be robust to protect against this. The Council is
satisfied from its housing potential assessment (Surrey Housing Potential Study - September2005) that the Borough can accommodate the development requirements arising from its
housing land targets within the built up areas. The Council has therefore not identified any
exceptional circumstances which might justify the removal of land from the Green Belt. Thisposition will be tested under the “plan, monitor and manage” regime to ensure the level of
development is sustainable in the longer term.
3.3.7 With such a diverse mix of uses in the Green Belt it is important that it remains a quality,
attractive and accessible environment. Established programmes like the Lower Mole
Countryside Management Project, and new initiatives such as the ‘Green Arc’, will improve
management of the Green Belt resource, seeking improvements in the landscape,biodiversity and conservation value of the area and helping to improve access. The Council
will offer its support to such projects, which are aimed at promoting the Green Belt as a
multi-functional resource, and will endeavour to ensure that its policies and strategiesintegrate with them.
Policy CS 2
To ensure the Green Belt continues to serve its key functions, its existing general
extent will be maintained and, within its boundaries, strict control will continue
to be exercised over inappropriate development as defined by Government
policy.
3.3.8 The Site Allocations DPD will examine and define the precise Green Belt boundary and,
identify ‘major developed sites’ within the Green Belt where infilling or redevelopment maybe permitted. Those sites which have not already been implemented will be carried forward
from the adopted local plan and relevant policies developed. It is not envisaged that there
will be any reduction in the extent of the Green Belt from that contained in the adopted localplan. Policies to prevent inappropriate development within the Green Belt, and guidance
relating to ‘major developed sites’ and to other developments within the Green Belt, will be
contained in the Development Control Policies DPD.
Indicators
GNumber and type of planning permissions granted in the Green Belt
Target
GAll development allowed in Green Belt meets criteria in national policy
Delivery Mechanism
GThrough development control decisions based on Green Belt policy and
boundaries defined on the Proposals MapLDF Core Strategy 2007
173.4 Biodiversity and Designated Nature Conservation Areas
3.4.1 The term ‘biodiversity’ relates to the genetic, species and ecological richness of an area.
Maintaining biodiversity helps to promote the stability, sustainability and resilience ofecosystems and is an important national objective. The Borough’s location on the edge of
the countryside is strategically important, with the Green Belt and the many green spaces
within the built up areas acting as reservoirs for flora and fauna.
3.4.2 An important objective in conserving biodiversity is to avoid development that fragments
existing habitats and, where possible, to create links to those that are already isolated. The
Council will actively seek opportunities to increase biodiversity within the Borough, whichwill include, where possible, the creation of new habitats. A number of stretches of the River
Hogsmill have been identified in the South London River Restoration Strategy as potential
sites for river enhancement or restoration.
3.4.3 The Surrey Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP) proposed each Borough should develop its own
action plan; the Epsom and Ewell Environment Forum, in partnership with the Council, is
currently in the process of preparing one for the Borough. This plan will help to ensure thattargets from the national and regional level are translated into effective action at the local
level. The local BAP will contain information on protected species and valuable habitats that
are found within the Borough.  This document will provide a useful source of information forthe LDF.
3.4.4 There are numerous designated areas within the Borough which offer protection to sites that
are particularly valuable for nature conservation. At the national level, sites are designatedfor their contributions to biodiversity. These include ‘Sites of Special Scientific Interest’
(SSSIs) of which the Borough has two:
❏Epsom Common  is located within the Green Belt and is managed as public open space
by the Council. Due to its management history and drainage variations, this area supports
a diversity of habitats, some rare, providing a rich community for breeding birds and
nationally rare invertebrates. The whole of the Common has the potential to be designatedas a National Nature Reserve.
❏Stones Road  Pond  is located within the urban area of Epsom, surrounded by semi-natural
vegetation. This large deep pond is an important breeding locality for the great crestednewt, and supports one of the largest colonies in the South East of England.
3.4.5 Other sites have been designated within the Borough as Sites of Nature Conservation
Importance (SNCIs). These are of significant interest and they have been classified inaccordance with their existing and potential nature conservation value. Grade 2 sites are of
County-wide importance; English Nature has designated three areas of chalk grassland
containing rare plants and invertebrates as Grade 2 sites. Additionally, Surrey Wildlife Trusthas designated almost all of Nonsuch Park as being of County-wide importance. Grade 3
sites are of local significance and there are 17 such sites within the Borough, the majority
being located within the Green Belt. The Council will work with the Wildlife Trust to ensurethe designations remain up to date and that the areas are managed accordingly.
3.4.6 The Council has also designated a number of Local Nature Reserves which include Epsom
Common, Horton Country Park and a substantial area surrounding the Hogsmill River. Twoareas of ancient woodland (areas wooded since at least 1600) remain within the Horton
Country Park and cover approximately eight hectares.Epsom & Ewell Borough Council
183.4.7 All these allocated areas will be offered protection appropriate to their level of designation.
Development on these sites or in a locality which may result in damage to designated siteswill be resisted to ensure their continued presence and value. Should the benefits of
development in proximity to such areas clearly outweigh the impact, mitigation measures
would be required to assist in maintaining the quality and value of the site.
Policy CS 3
The biodiversity of Epsom and Ewell will be conserved and enhanced through
the support for measures which meet the objectives of national and local
biodiversity action plans in terms of species and habitat.
Sites that are designated for their nature conservation attributes will be afforded
protection appropriate to their designation.
Sites of Special Scientific Interest and Ancient Woodland will be afforded the
highest level of protection. Development which harms the scientific interest ofthese areas will not be permitted.
Development that would harm Grade 2, Grade 3 SNCIs or Local Nature Reserves
will not be permitted unless:
Gsuitable mitigation measures are put in place, and
Git has been demonstrated that the benefits of a development would outweighthe harm caused.
Elsewhere, development that is detrimental to the Borough’s biodiversity will be
minimised, and where it does take place, adequate mitigating measures should
be provided.  Wherever possible, new development should contribute positivelytowards the Borough’s biodiversity.
3.4.8 As required by Planning Policy Statement 9: Biodiversity and Geological Conservation, the
designated sites will be clearly defined on the Proposals Map accompanying the SiteAllocations DPD.
3.4.9 Further deta ils on potential requirements for ecological surveys to be conducted for
developments which may affect important habitats or species will be included in theDevelopment Control Policies DPD. Further policies may also be introduced in future
development plan documents following the production of the Local Biodiversity Action Plan.
Indicators
G% of SSSIs in favourable condition or improving
GNumber and area of Sites of Nature Conservation Importance (Grade 2), Sites of
Nature Conservation Importance (Grade 3), and ancient woodlands
GNumber of new developments providing mitigation for loss of biodiversity or / andincorporating features to improve existing biodiversity
Targets
G95% of the SSSIs should be in a favourable or recovering condition by 2010
(Government Public Service Agreement target)
GAppropriate targets will be developed in the Development Control Policies DPD,
informed by the local Biodiversity Action PlanLDF Core Strategy 2007
19Delivery Mechanism
GThrough development control decisions and negotiation (for mitigation measures)
GBy the effective management of designated sites
GBy maintaining up to date information on local biodiversity (including the value of
contributions from previously developed land)
GProduction of a local Biodiversity Action Plan
3.5 Open Spaces and Green Infrastructure
3.5.1 The Borough is fortunate in having a diverse mix of green spaces ranging from natural / semi
natural areas to parks, gardens and formal recreational facilities. These open spaces and
their landscaping provide relief from the density of urban form and contribute to an attractiveurban character, appreciated by both residents and visitors. They distinguish Epsom and
Ewell Borough from other places. These green spaces make a valuable contribution to
people’s health and well being and often have a multi-functional role, being havens forbiodiversity as well as providing a range of leisure and recreational opportunities. They add
to the diversity of the landscape and are a characteristic of the Borough. The large number
of trees within them is recognised as a great asset.
3.5.2 Some of the larger open spaces within the Borough are considered to have a widespread
rather than simply local significance. They have an important strategic role in separating
distinct areas, acting as a buffer to development, and in helping define urban structure.These have been designated as ‘Strategic Open Spaces’ in the adopted local plan. As they
are within the urban area they are not incorporated into the Green Belt, but play an equally
valuable role. They contain sites for ecological protection and enhancement, as well as forrecreation. They will be retained in this plan and their general locations are shown on the
Key Diagram. Their precise boundaries will be shown on the Proposals Map which will be
produced in conjunction with the Site Allocations DPD.
3.5.3 The largest strategic open space is Nonsuch Park . As well as being a Grade 2 SNCI, it
contains formal parkland of considerable archaeological and historic interest. Its attractive
ambience and exceptional amenity value is valued by residents of the north and east of theBorough, and from nearby Cheam, who do not have such immediate access to the Downs
and Epsom Common. The area surrounding the Hogsmill River , to the north of the Borough,
fulfils a similar role to Nonsuch Park and is similarly designated. A large proportion of its areais also a Grade 3 SNCI and Local Nature Reserve.
3.5.4 Extensive support for options that generally protect the Borough’s green spaces was given
in response to the ‘preferred options’ consultation. Improving their environmental quality is aspecific objective of the Community Strategy which recognises their social, recreational and
environmental value. The Council will promote healthy living by aiming to provide the required
quantity, and to improve the quality, of open space and the sports and recreational facilitiesthey contain, along with improving access to them.
3.5.5 Planning Policy Guidance 17: Planning for Open Space, Sport and Recreation, requires
local authorities to undertake robust assessments of the existing and future needs ofresidents and visitors in relation to open space, sports and recreational facilities. Consultants
were appointed by the Council to undertake a comprehensive audit and review of recreational
open space needs in accordance with PPG17. They reported in March 2006 and identifiedEpsom & Ewell Borough Council
20the types of open space and their distribution and size in relation to locally identified needs,
and suggested the standards of provision that should be set locally. The study identifiedwhere deficiencies exist and also where land did not contribute significantly and was
potentially surplus to needs. The audit will provide guidelines for the levels of provision, and
other proposals, which will be made in forthcoming development plan documents. The auditforms an important part of the evidence-base underpinning the policy approach in this Core
Strategy.
3.5.6 The following policy is intended to help improve the quality, quantity and variety of open
spaces available to the local community and provide clear and more focussed guidance to
developers on what scale and form of contribution is expected from them.
Policy CS 4
Emphasis will continue to be placed on protecting and enhancing the two
Strategic Open Spaces of Nonsuch Park and the Hogsmill River, shown on the
Key Diagram. These areas provide a particularly important recreational, amenityand wildlife resource.
Provision of the amount and type of open space within the Borough will have
regard to the standards identified in the most recent Audit of Open Space, Sportand Recreational Facilities and Assessment of Local Needs. The required
quantity and range of open spaces will be rigorously maintained, and focus will
be given to the creation and maintenance of an accessible network of greenspaces within the built up area of the Borough.
The Council will endeavour to address any shortfalls in provision of defined open
space types and will seek opportunities to enhance the quality of existing openspaces where necessary, and improve access to them.
Development which results in a deficit of open space provision will not be
permitted.
On all new residential developments there will be a requirement for open space
and recreational provision in accordance with the details set out in the Developer
Contributions Supplementary Planning Document. This policy will apply to allnew residential developments within the Borough where a quantitative or
qualitative deficiency of open space or recreational provision exists, or where
the development would lead to such a deficiency.
Where it is impractical or inappropriate to provide the open space within the
housing scheme, the Council will expect a financial contribution from the
developer to allow an alternative means of provision or enhancement. The natureand extent of that contribution will be governed by the formulae set out in the
SPD, the identification of needs in the Audit of Open Space, and other evidence
as appropriate.
3.5.6 The Council will keep the findings of the Audit of Open Space, Sport and Recreational
Facilities under review to help ensure the needs of residents and visitors are beingadequately met. More detailed policies relating to development for essential sporting /
recreational needs will be contained in the Development Control Policies DPD.
3.5.7 The Developer Contributions SPD will be prepared to provide the detailed basis for operating
this policy, particularly the estimated costs of providing open space and associated facilities.LDF Core Strategy 2007
21Local priorities for the provision of recreational open space will be set out in the SPD and in
the Council’s own Sports and Active Leisure Development Strategy. The SPD, the strategyand the core survey data on which the policy has been based, will be updated regularly,
ensuring that the evidence base remains relevant and up to date.
Indicators
GAmount and range of open space provided in the Borough relative to requirements
set out in the most recent open space audit
Target
G Provision should meet defined audit standards. Appropriate targets will be
developed in future local development documents
Delivery Mechanism
GThrough the development control process
GBy maintaining an up to date audit of open space, sport and recreational facilities to
identify shortfalls and requirements, and opportunities to fund investmentEpsom & Ewell Borough Council
22Conserving and Enhancing the Quality
of the Built Environment
3.6 Background
3.6.1 The built environment is instrumental in defining the character of the local area. The
Borough’s rich built heritage is of considerable interest to the local community, and is greatly
valued. The attractive and varied character of the built up areas, and the relationships
between them and the surrounding open countryside, contribute significantly towards thequality of life, and should be conserved and enhanced.
3.6.2 Both Government policy and that of the South East Plan seek a renaissance of urban areas,
both because of the wider benefits and to make them places where people choose to live.While urban renaissance is a wide-ranging concept, protecting and improving the quality of
the natural and built environment is a vision shared by the Council’s Corporate Plan and the
Borough’s Community Strategy. This objective may be achieved not only by offeringprotection to historical assets, and ensuring harm to the environment is minimised, but also
by ensuring that the design and layout of new developments are in harmony with, and
positively contribute to, local character and its context. This principle will extend across thepotential design range, from major sites to smaller-scale domestic extensions.
3.6.3 As new developments will have a long life-span it is important they embrace the concept of
sustainability - socially, economically and environmentally - and are a long-term asset to thecommunity. Good design is becoming increasingly important as more opportunities are takento intensify development within the built up areas. Achieving a balance between the
competing pressures of increasing density, choosing the appropriate scale and height of
building, and safeguarding local character, is an important challenge to which good designplays a vital role.
3.7 The Built Environment
3.7.1 Epsom and Ewell possesses a fine built heritage which is held in high regard by the
Borough’s residents. This has been recognised by the designation of 21 conservation areas,
each different in form and character, but all designated for their special architectural or
historic interest. Additionally, the Borough contains over 400 ‘listed buildings’ and some 100‘locally listed’ buildings, all of which add to the variety and richness of the urban environment.
The majority of these individual buildings fall within designated Conservation Areas and, as
they are limited in number, it is important they are preserved and protected from inappropriatedevelopment.
3.7.2 Support was given in the ‘Preferred Options’ paper for the continued protection of such
areas and buildings, although the importance of an emphasis on enhancement as well aspreservation was recognised. New development, carefully integrated with the old, can help
achieve this. It is an objective of the Core Strategy to seek to protect and enhance
conservation areas and listed buildings, including their settings. The value of the specialcharacter of some established residential neighbourhoods has been recognised locally and
the Site Allocations DPD will consider whether other areas of special character should also
be defined.
3.7.3 The Council has begun to prepare character appraisals and management plans for each ofLDF Core Strategy 2007
23the Borough’s conservation areas. These will assess the character of each area, defining
what contributes to making them “special”. They will identify both positive and negativefeatures of the environment, and will define elements which should be improved. Up to date
appraisals will form a vital source of detailed information for later local development
documents, particularly the Area Action Plan for Epsom town centre.
3.7.4 It is also desirable to provide for the protection and care of finite archaeological remains,
especially those of national importance. The Borough contains two Scheduled Ancient
Monuments - the site of Nonsuch Palace and its associated remains, and St Mary’s ChurchTower in Ewell. Additionally there is one identified County Site of Archaeological Importance
in the Borough - ‘Diana’s Dyke’, a site close to Nonsuch Palace. In line with Planning Policy
Guidance 16: Archaeology and Planning, the Council will promote the protection,preservation and enhancement of sites of archaeological interest and of their setting. A
positive approach will be taken when facilitating new development in areas of high
archaeological potential, with appropriate protection provided to future discoveries ofarchaeological interest.
3.7.5 Good design is a key part of sustainable development. The Council wants to help create
places where people choose to live, work and visit. It wishes to protect and enhance thepleasant scale, character and amenities of the developed areas of the Borough. New
development should enhance and complement local character, and be capable of integrating
well into existing neighbourhoods. For example the built up areas of the Borough have acharacteristically “leafy” appearance, which provides a distinctive natural element in the
urban environment. It is important that new development helps to maintain and enhance this
aspect through the incorporation of appropriate green amenity space and landscaping.
3.7.6 The Council will expect developments to be of a high quality, creating a safe environment
which enhances the public realm and which positively contributes to the townscape. Inclusive
design results in environments that are accessible and convenient for all people, regardlessof disability, age or gender. The “Surrey Design Guide”, produced in collaboration between
the Surrey District Councils, is a useful tool in helping to maintain and improve the quality of
the urban environment and is commended.
3.7.7 Although Epsom and Ewell Borough has low levels of crime and is perceived to be a safe
place in which to live, there remain concerns about crime levels, and the impact of antisocial
behaviour. Reducing crime and the fear of crime remains a priority of the Community SafetyStrategy and is reflected in the Community Strategy’s aspirations for a “safe society”. Careful
planning and good design of new developments can make a contribution towards this
objective; positively influencing human behaviour and helping people feel safe in theirenvironment. The Council will expect new developments to consider ‘designing out crime’
principles from the outset, for example covering the layout, features and lighting of a
development. Making security an inherent part of the design process during the early stagesis imperative, as once a development is built, the main opportunity for crime prevention
measures has been lost.
Policy CS 5
The Council will protect and seek to enhance the Borough’s heritage assets
including historic buildings, conservation areas, archaeological remains, ancient
monuments, parks and gardens of historic interest, and other areas of specialcharacter.
The settings of these assets will be protected and enhanced.Epsom & Ewell Borough Council
24High quality and inclusive design will be required for all developments.
Development should:
Gcreate attractive, functional and safe public and private environments;
Greinforce local distinctiveness and complement the attractive characteristicsof the Borough;
Gmake efficient use of land and have regard to the need to develop land in acomprehensive way.
3.7.8 The Council is preparing conservation area appraisals and management plans for each of
the Borough’s conservation areas. Detailed policies relating to development within and
adjacent to conservation areas, and to development affecting listed buildings and sites ofarchaeological interest, will be contained in the Development Control Policies DPD. The
Council will prepare further guidance on design such as design briefs and design statements
to help create better environments. These will be published as Supplementary PlanningDocuments.
Indicators
GPercentage of conservation areas where appraisals and management plans have
been completed
GNumber of listed buildings within the Borough on the national ‘Buildings at Risk
Register’
GNumber of “locally listed” buildings on the Council’s local ‘Buildings at Risk’ register
GNumber of potential archaeological sites where development has taken place withoutinvestigation
GRegular review of the quality of design in completed new development, incollaboration with other partners
Targets
GConservation Area appraisals: an increasing proportion until all are completed
GA reduction in the number of buildings on the national ‘Buildings at Risk Register’
GA reduction in the number of buildings on the local ‘Buildings at Risk Register’
GA method to review the quality of design will be developed in conjunction with the
Design Guidance SPD
Delivery Mechanism
GThrough development control advice, negotiation and decisions
GThrough guidance in SPDs, including development briefs, design statements and
design guidance (including the Surrey Design Guide)
GBy the preparation and publication of conservation area character appraisals andmanagement plans
GThrough designations and policies in other DPDs, including a review of relevant
boundaries of protected areas and the identification of other areas of special
character
GBy engagement with the local community, developers and other agencies involved
in securing high quality development.LDF Core Strategy 2007
253.8 Sustainability in New Developments
Background - Sustainable Design
3.8.1 It is now widely accepted that climate change is occurring, with a major contributor being
greenhouse gas emissions. The planning system can help address climate change, both
through reducing our contribution to the causes, and helping existing and new developmentadapt to the impacts. The Council is keen to ensure the way we build is done in a more
sustainable way in the future. This means in a way that minimises the resources that are
used, including energy and water, and that generates less pollution, including less of thegreenhouse gas - carbon dioxide. It also means development generating some of its own
energy requirements through renewable energy initiatives. The South East Plan encourages
larger housing and commercial schemes to provide at least 10% of the development’s energyfrom renewable sources.
3.8.2 With the Government signed up to a Kyoto Protocol target
1 and further commitments made
to reduce carbon dioxide emissions nationally2, it is important that new developments are
designed and constructed in a way that minimises their impact on the environment.
Additionally, the South East of England hass already experienced water shortages, which
are likely to be worsened through climate change and the additional demand generated bythe region’s growing population. It is essential to maximise the efficiency with which water is
used and runoff is managed. All new developments should aim to conserve water both
internally and externally and minimise the amount of water used.
3.8.3 The incorporation of sustainable design and energy conservation principles into new
developments received considerable support in the ‘Preferred Options’ consultation and had
very positive outcomes in the sustainability appraisal. New development can help combatthe causes of climate change through reducing the reliance on energy sources that generate
greenhouse gases, and can help to mitigate climate change impacts through careful design
and efficient resource use. This is highly relevant when considering the long termsustainability of the Borough and the long life span of developments. With the increases in
energy prices and the scarcity of water, developments that display efficient use of such
resources will be in increasing demand.
3.8.4 The sustainability appraisal raised some important potential conflicts between the issue of
sustainable design and other objectives, such as maximising the provision of affordable
housing and protecting the historic environment. It is therefore important that these issuesare dealt with on a case by case basis, to ensure that sites remain viable. It is likely that the
falling cost of technology will reduce the impact of these requirements. High quality design
can be instrumental in helping to overcome the visual impacts of new technologies in historicenvironments. Again, improvements in technology are likely to assist with this
3.8.5 Technology in this field is changing and new guidance is emerging from various sources.
Government policy is still emerging. There are a number of measures available that canimprove the environmental impact of a new development, and new ones are likely to emerge
in the future. It would not be appropriate for this Core Strategy to provide detailed guidance
on techniques or approaches; a more flexible approach is required, and one which can beupdated regularly as the issue develops. The Council will therefore prepare more detailed
policies to provide this guidance, and to set appropriate targets, for example for renewable
energy production in new developments in the Development Control DPD.
1 A 12.5% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions from 1990 levels averaged over a period 2008 - 2012. Kyoto came
into force in February 2005
2 Reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 20% from 1990 levels by 2010, and 60% from 1990 levels by 20503 From the Use Classes Order: B1 (business), B2 (general industrial) and B8 (storage and distribution)Epsom & Ewell Borough Council
26Flood Protection
3.8.6 The Borough contains one tributary of the River Thames - the River Hogsmill, but also a
number of underground springs. Although the Environment Agency has identified the vast
majority of the Borough as not being at risk from flooding, it is important to provide protection
for those areas that are. Planning Policy Statement 25: Development and Flood Risk, statesthat all forms of flooding and their impact on the natural and built environment are material
planning considerations. With the impact of climate change being likely to increase the
incidence of flooding and extreme weather events, it is important the plan takes full accountof the issue. The Council recognises that the avoidance and management of flood risk can
make a positive contribution to the development of sustainable communities.
3.8.7 The Environment Agency’s floodplain maps show the limits of the floodplain. The general
extent is shown diagrammatically on the key diagram. The maps show the best available
information but are only indicative and are not intended to be the sole basis on which planning
decisions are made. Local issues and circumstances, such as culverts and potentialobstructions, also need to be considered. The Environment Agency has recommended the
inclusion of an 8 meter-wide ‘buffer zone’ around the River Hogsmill and its tributaries. The
inclusion of the area surrounding the Hogsmill as an area of ‘Strategic Open Space’ will helpcontribute towards this objective which will be covered in the Site Allocations DPD.
3.8.8 PPS25 states that flood risk assessment should be carried out to the appropriate degree at
all levels of the planning process. The Council has taken account of flood risk throughout thepreparation of the Core Strategy. The Council will conduct a Strategic Flood Risk Assessment
to inform later Development Plan Documents where specific allocations will be made. Where
appropriate, site-specific flood risk assessments will be required to accompany planningapplications. In line with PPS25 the Council will apply the risk based sequential test and
exception test when allocating development sites.
Policy CS 6
Proposals for development should result in a sustainable environment and
reduce, or have a neutral impact upon, pollution and climate change. The Councilwill expect proposals to demonstrate how sustainable construction and design
can be incorporated to improve the energy efficiency of development - both new
build and conversion.
In order to conserve natural resources, minimise waste and encourage recycling,
the Council will ensure that new development:
Gminimises the use of energy in the scheme by using an appropriate layout,
building design and orientation;
Gminimises the emission of pollutants, including noise, water and lightpollution, into the wider environment;
Ghas no adverse effects on water quality, and helps reduce potential water
consumption, for example by the use of water conservation and recycling
measures and by minimising off-site water discharge by using methods suchas sustainable urban drainage;
Gavoids increasing the risk of, or from, flooding;
Gminimises the energy requirements of construction, for example by usingLDF Core Strategy 2007
27sustainable construction technologies and encouraging the recycling of
materials;
Gencourages the use of renewable energy by the incorporation of production
facilities within the design of the scheme;
Gincorporates waste management processes, for example for the recycling ofwater and waste. The waste hierarchy (Reduce-Reuse-Recycle-Recover-Dispose) should be applied to all stages of development design, construction
and final operation.
3.8.9 This policy will apply to all new developments. In view of the scale and characteristics of
future development opportunities within the Borough, for example the emphasis on smaller
sites, it is important that all development contributes in some way towards combating and
adapting to climate change. The Council will provide further detailed guidance on how this
policy will be implemented in a Development Control Policies DPD. It is envisaged that this
document will incorporate targets for the provision of on-site renewables and will includerequirements for developers to help mitigate carbon emissions in new developments.
3.8.10 It is the responsibility of Surrey County Council, as Waste Planning Authority for Surrey, to
identify and allocate land for the development of waste management facilities in Epsom andEwell Borough. The Surrey Waste Plan submission draft (2006) highlights the need for a
new Community Recycling Centre to replace the existing facility at Blenheim Road, Epsom,
but does not allocate a site. The lead in identifying a suitable alternative site in the Epsomarea will be taken by the County Council and it will be their responsibility, or that of their
contractors, to acquire or lease a site, and secure the necessary consents. In due course,
the Borough Council’s Proposals Map will incorporate any site specific allocations arisingfrom the approved Surrey Minerals and Waste Local Development Framework.
Indicators
GNumber of planning permissions granted contrary to Environment Agency advice on
flood risk
GFurther indicators and targets will be set out in the Development Control DPD and
Design Guidance SPD
Target
GFlood risk: 100% of decisions to be made in accordance with Environment Agency
advice
Delivery Mechanism
GThrough guidance in other local development documents
GThrough development control negotiation and building control practices, including
BREEAM and energy use assessments
GBy encouragement to the building industry locally to implement emerging good
practice
GBy liaison and close working with other agencies including the Environment Agency,particularly in relation to pollution control, sewage treatment and floodingEpsom & Ewell Borough Council
28Providing for Housing and Employment Development
3.9 Background
3.9.1 The proposed strategy stems from the vision and objectives of the Surrey Structure Plan
and the requirements of the submitted South East Plan. Its purpose is to translate the
development requirements of regional policy into proposals which will bring forward thenecessary land for development, at least over the period to 2022. This Core Strategy
document identifies the principles involved in strategic land allocations, but only indicates
the broad locations for development; the specific locations will be set out in more detail in theSite Allocations DPD.
3.10 Housing provision
3.10.1 The Structure Plan indicates that provision should be made for 3000 dwellings over the
period 2001 to 2016. This amounts to an annual average rate of housebuilding in the Borough
of some 200 homes. The submitted South East Plan proposes that the Borough makes
provision for 3,620 additional dwellings over the twenty years from 2006 - 2026; this equatesto an annual average of some 181 homes. Clearly the requirement may change once the
South East Plan process is complete but it is considered appropriate to plan for at least that
level of housebuilding (ie an average of 181 units pa) over the next fifteen years (to 2022),and to review the situation once the South East Plan has been finally approved.
3.10.2 The Structure Plan emphasises that new development will continue to be focussed in urban
areas, particularly through the re-use of previously developed land, and that the Green Beltwill be strongly defended. The South East Plan continues this approach by placing emphasis
on the protection of the Green Belt and making full and effective use of the potential of urban
areas. This inevitably poses some challenges for authorities such as Epsom and Ewell wherethe fabric of existing development is already dense and where intensification can bring with
it other issues such as increased congestion, pressures on services and facilities and threat
to the character and appearance of established residential areas - for example through theloss of open spaces or a change of density.
3.10.3 In interpreting the Structure Plan and the South East Plan at the local level the main principles
will be:
❏provision for housing development over a 15 year period from adoption, based on the
average housebuilding rate for 2006-2026 of 181 homes per annum and the need to
provide an additional 3,620 dwellings between 2006 and 2026;
❏commitment to a plan, monitor and manage approach to ensure adequate housebuilding
is provided in response to the results of monitoring;
❏emphasis on the reuse of previously developed land for housebuilding (including the reuse
or conversion of existing buildings);
❏provision for new housebuilding at three strategic locations within the Green Belt, to the
west of Epsom, as part of the completion of the “hospital cluster”, and the protection ofthe remaining areas of Green Belt;
❏concentration of other development within the defined built up areas of Epsom and Ewell
Borough.LDF Core Strategy 2007
29Policy CS 7
The Borough Council will seek to ensure sufficient housing is provided to meet
the Borough’s housing requirements in accordance with the submitted South
East Plan. In applying Policy H1 of the South East Plan, provision will thereforebe made for at least 2,715 homes within the period 2007-2022 (based on the
annual average of 181 new dwellings per annum).
Annual monitoring will be carried out to ensure that there is not a projected
shortfall in housing provision against the strategic requirement for the period to
2026. This will allow the managed release of housebuilding land to provide the
amount and type of homes required.
Depending on the results of monitoring it may be necessary to adjust the pace of
the delivery of housing by bringing forward, or holding back, new development.
The position will be comprehensively reviewed when the housing targets in theSouth East Plan are finally approved.
3.10.4 The Core Strategy seeks to provide guidance to meet the requirements of the submitted
South East Plan. It is recognised that for the twenty year period covered by that plan, aflexible approach is required in the Core Strategy which will enable the Council to respond to
the final decisions taken on its housing targets. The proposed delivery of the amount of
housing required is shown in more detail in the housing trajectory contained within theCouncil’s Annual Monitoring Report (AMR). The 2006 AMR shows that the expected provision
from development is above the annualised strategic allocation for the first years of the plan
period. The position will be kept under review and future annual monitoring reports will updatethe trajectory to demonstrate the progress towards the housing targets that have been set inthe South East Plan. Until the South East Plan is approved the Structure Plan’s housing
requirement should continue to be met. The housing trajectory in the AMR shows that this
requirement should be exceeded for at least the next two years, by which time the SouthEast Plan should have been approved.
3.10.5 If there is a need to amend the approach in this Core Strategy, for example as a result of
changes to the targets in the South East Plan, a review of this housing allocation policy willbe undertaken. The Council proposes to prepare a Housing Delivery Supplementary
Planning Document which will set out its overall strategy for housing provision and its
approach to managing the delivery of its housing targets and trajectories.
3.10.6  In line with Planning Policy Statement 3: Housing (November 2006) and the submitted South
East Plan, the Core Strategy sets out in Policy CS7 a 15-year housing supply, from its base
date of April 2007 to March 2022. The expected components of this housing land supply aresummarised in the table below. Further details are provided in Appendix 1. More detailed
information will be contained in the Council’s housing land availability assessments and its
AMR.
Expected principal components of housing land supply 2007-2022
Policy CS7 Housing provision target 2007-2022 Dwellings 2,715
Existing commitments 1691
Windfall sites estimate 767
Sites to be allocated 257
Total 2,715Epsom & Ewell Borough Council
303.10.7 Evidence shows that the Borough has a good record of delivering on its housing targets in
recent years. Regular monitoring and management of housing land supply through the AMRprocess and the proposed Housing Delivery SPD, and continuing dialogue with
housebuilders and other stakeholders, will help ensure adequate housing delivery over the
period of this plan.  The Borough has always relied on a significant contribution from smalland medium sized windfall sites in meeting required housing provision and evidence
demonstrates that such sites have come forward on a consistent basis in recent years. The
built up area of the Borough is tightly bordered by the Green Belt and is relatively denselydeveloped.  A reliance on small and medium sized windfalls based on past experience is
justified to avoid releasing land from the Green Belt. The need to rely on windfalls will be
further tested in the Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment now required by PPS3.The Council is not relying on windfalls from large sites.
3.10.8 It is estimated that the forthcoming Site Allocations DPD will need to allocate sites for at
least 257 dwellings over the period 2007-2022 to ensure adequate housing provision; theprecise figure will be reviewed at the time the DPD is prepared against the overall housing
target confirmed in the South East Plan.  Several major sites within the built up areas of the
Borough have recently been granted planning permission for housing, and development onthem is progressing. Further sites will be evaluated and appraised as part of the preparation
of the Site Allocations DPD, including the remaining undeveloped allocations from the Local
Plan 2000. These will be considered for allocation in order to meet the housing shortfall setout above.
Indicator
GNumber of net housing completions per annum.
Target
GSet out in Policy CS7
Delivery Mechanism
GThrough allocations and phasing in the Site Allocations DPD and Proposals Map
GThrough the development control process
GBy publishing monitoring data and a housing trajectory in the Annual Monitoring
Report
GBy the preparation of a Housing Delivery SPD
3.11 Broad Location of Housing Development
3.11.1 New housing development in Epsom and Ewell will be focused in locations that perform best
in sustainability terms. The Council has used a number of sustainability principles to assess
and to shape the policies within the Core Strategy. Economic and social objectives havebeen balanced with an assessment of the impact of new development on the environment
and on the use of natural resources. In accordance with the principles of sustainability, and
the results of the sustainability appraisal, development will be concentrated within the definedbuilt up area and in the hospital cluster sites, where there is the greatest potential for the re-
use of previously developed land.
3.11.2 Development within the existing built up areas will minimise the impact on key biodiversity
features and will reduce the need to travel because of its general location close to existing
services, jobs and public transport. A spatial strategy based on these principles will help
safeguard the Metropolitan Green Belt. Policies in the plan will support the general principleLDF Core Strategy 2007
31of making the best use of the existing housing stock in the Borough, through the adaptation
and re-use of existing dwellings.
3.11.3 There are three former hospital sites (West Park, St Ebba’s and Horton B) shown on the key
diagram as strategic development locations. These sites will make a significant contribution
over the next few years to meeting the housing targets in this plan. These sites are within theGreen Belt and it is proposed that they will be defined in the Site Allocations DPD as Major
Developed Sites in line with Planning Policy Guidance 2: Green Belts. This approach is a
continuation of the Council’s existing strategy towards the hospital cluster, as shown by theapproved development briefs for the sites.
Policy CS 8
New housing development will be located within the defined built up area of
Epsom and Ewell and within the three hospital cluster sites of West Park, St
Ebba’s and the remaining part of Horton B. The built up area will be defined on
the Proposals Map. The three hospital sites will be identified as Major DevelopedSites in the Green Belt.
Within these areas the emphasis will be on the re-use of suitable previously
developed land (including the re-use or conversion of existing buildings) forhousing. Subject to other policies in this plan, planning consent will be given for
development within the built up areas, including infilling, redevelopment and
conversion.
In principle the strategy will be to direct higher density development to central
locations, such as Epsom town centre and other local centres, close to existing
services and facilities and accessible by public transport, walking and cycling.This will enable relatively lower densities to be applied to other parts of the built
up area to help retain their character and local distinctiveness. The Council will
also encourage mixed use developments within the more accessible town or localcentre locations. Further policies on densities will be set out in subsequent DPDs.
3.11.4 The South East Plan seeks an overall regional housing density of 40 dwellings per hectare
in order to make the best use of urban land and to encourage more sustainable patterns ofdevelopment and services. The Core Strategy’s sustainability appraisal has highlighted the
potential conflict between the pursuit of higher densities and the environmental character of
an area. It is therefore important that a blanket approach to applying densities is not adopted.Instead a more flexible approach is proposed in this policy.
Indicator
G% of housing completed on previously developed land
GHousing density policies (and related indicators and targets) will be set out in future
local development documents
Target
GWill be specified in the Site Allocations DPD
Delivery Mechanisms
GThrough site allocations in the future DPD and on the Proposals Map
GThrough the development control process
GThrough discussions and negotiations with private housebuilders and Registered
Social LandlordsEpsom & Ewell Borough Council
323.12 Affordable Housing and meeting Housing Needs
3.12.1 Epsom and Ewell Borough, similar to other areas in the South East, is an area of high housing
demand and high levels of owner occupation. As a consequence many first time buyers,some key workers and lower income households find it difficult to gain a foothold in the local
housing market.
3.12.2 In 2004 the Council adopted as a key priority, “to secure additional key worker, social and
affordable housing”. This is reflected in the Community Strategy which lists as a key
objective, “Providing affordable housing and improving the recruitment of key workers.” This
is seen within the Community Strategy as a way of contributing to its over-arching theme ofseeking a caring society and a thriving economic community. The provision of affordable
housing is therefore one of the Council’s clear priorities and helping provide the right mix of
dwelling sizes and tenures, including affordable housing, is an important function of thisplan.
3.12.3 For the purposes of this plan and the operation of the Council’s housing strategy, ‘affordable
housing’ is that provided with subsidy, either as social rented housing or intermediateaffordable housing,, as an on-going resource for people who are unable to resolve their
housing requirements in the local private sector housing market because of the relationship
between housing costs and incomes. It therefore means housing where the subsidy allowsthe asking price or rent to be substantially lower than the prevailing market prices or rents in
the Borough.
3.12.4 The Council commissioned a housing needs survey in 2004 which highlighted the nature
and extent of the need for affordable housing in the Borough. This provides the basis for
more detailed guidance on the need for dwelling size, type and tenure, and the needs of
particular groups in the community. Delivering a better balance between the supply and thedemand for housing is an important driver behind policies for affordable housing in this plan.
For example the Borough is experiencing a decline in household size which is likely to result
in a continuing shift in demand for certain types of dwellings. Regular housing needs surveyswill help the Council to remain aware of such needs and adapt the detailed implementation
of policies to take these into account.
3.12.5 The 2004 survey identified an annual affordable housing shortfall of 518 units. This is some
ten times greater than the current delivery level from acquisitions, new units or conversions,
resulting in substantial levels of unmet housing need each year. When re-lets are taken into
account the net outstanding unmet local housing need is 395 dwellings annually. Theprovision of this number of units is clearly not deliverable or sustainable in the context of
previous and planned future construction rates, and the environmental constraints within the
Borough. There is a high level of local need but only limited sites on which affordable housingcan be secured. This highlights the importance of delivering the maximum number of
affordable dwellings from the new housing development that will take place over the period
of the plan.
3.12.6 Both the Surrey Structure Plan and the submitted South East Plan contain strategic targets
for the provision of affordable housing as a proportion of all new housing completions. Within
the London Fringe sub-region overall there is a requirement for 40% of new housing to beaffordable. Prior to submission of the South East Plan, and having considered the results of
the 2004 Housing Needs Assessment, the Council adopted an overall target to ensure that
at least 35% of all new housing completions in Epsom and Ewell Borough are affordable.This equates to the provision of 950 new affordable homes over the period 2007 to 2022LDF Core Strategy 2007
33based on total provision set out in Policy CS7. These should comprise a tenure mix of 70%
social rented, and 30% intermediate affordable housing. These targets will be kept underreview by the Council, and may be changed as a result of: monitoring and future housing
market assessments; significant changes in the availability of additional funding; and
changes in overall housing provision for the plan period.
3.12.7 Past and predicted future patterns of housebuilding suggest that the number of sites likely to
come forward for housing in Epsom and Ewell Borough above the national threshold of 15
units and 0.5 hectares is limited. The high level of housing need and the limited overallsupply of potential land for housing, therefore justifies the lowest reasonable threshold for
securing affordable housing, without inhibiting development or prejudicing the overall supply
of new housing. We must also take into account that the sustainability appraisal has raisedthe issue that applying a threshold for affordable housing contributions may encourage
developers to build at lower densities.
3.12.8 Because of these circumstances, in order to achieve its overall target, it is the Council’s view
that it is appropriate and necessary for smaller housing schemes to make a reasonable
contribution towards the provision of affordable housing. However because some smaller
sites may be less viable than larger sites it is recognised that in adopting a percentagerequirement care must be taken not to discourage development from taking place and
thereby restricting the supply of housing overall. Policy CS9 sets out a sliding scale of
provision based on the number of dwellings proposed.
3.12.9 The delivery of the target expressed in Policy CS9 will depend upon some sites being
developed for up to 100% affordable homes, including land currently owned by the Borough
Council, or under the control of Registered Social Landlords. Encouragement will be givento maximising the potential of land within the urban area of Epsom and Ewell to provide
housing which meets affordable housing needs.
Policy CS 9
The Council has a target that overall, 35% of new dwellings should be affordable.
This equates to the provision of 950 new affordable homes over the period 2007
to 2022.
New housing developments should include a mix of dwelling types, sizes and
tenures which help meet identified local housing needs and contribute to the
development of mixed and sustainable communities.
Taking into account the viability of the development proposed and other planning
objectives, the Council will negotiate to achieve the provision of affordable
housing as set out below:
Residential developments of between five and fourteen dwellings gross (or on
sites between 0.15ha and 0.49ha - irrespective of the number of dwellings
proposed) should include at least 20% of dwellings as affordable.
Residential development of 15 or more dwellings gross (or on sites of 0.5ha or
above) should include at least 40% of dwellings as affordable.
The Council will seek to ensure that the affordable housing remains affordable to
successive as well as initial occupiers through the use of planning conditions or
a planning obligation.Epsom & Ewell Borough Council
34Advice on the detailed operation of this policy, the definition and nature of the
local housing needs to be met, the tariff system to be used, and the mechanisms
for delivery of the affordable housing, will be set out in the DeveloperContributions SPD.
3.12.10 This policy will provide the basis of detailed negotiation with residential developers. In all
cases the Council will seek the maximum reasonable amount of affordable housing in
negotiating on individual schemes and will have regard to its affordability and tenure-balance
targets; the suitability of the site for different types of affordable housing provision; and theeconomics of site provision, taking into account any abnormal site development costs, the
availability of subsidy and any other relevant planning requirements. The 20% and 40%
figures in the policy will be regarded as baseline targets and developers will need todemonstrate why the particular targets could not be met in any specific case. The contribution
this policy makes to meeting the overall 35% affordable housing target for Epsom and Ewell
will be kept under review.
3.12.11 Other than in exceptional circumstances the provision of the affordable housing should be
made on site. Where there are specific and overriding site constraints, or where
development-specific issues inhibit the provision of affordable housing, off site provision orfinancial contributions may be acceptable. In these instances, the proposal will need to reflect
the fact that the facilitating site will be developed for 100% private market housing, and the
proportion of affordable housing units sought, or financial contribution offered, calculatedaccordingly. This may also be required where, following negotiation, the units to be
developed do not match the housing needs of those requiring affordable dwellings.
3.12.12 In addition to on-site contributions from developers, meeting the overall levels of affordable
housing proposed in this plan, and achieving the required balance between social rented
and intermediate affordable housing, will depend upon continued financial subsidy from a
variety of sources. These sources include the National Affordable Housing Programme(NAHP), via Housing Associations, and contributions from the Council’s capital reserves or
from landholdings. The level of public funding subsidy required will vary between the different
types of affordable housing being provided.  It is the Council’s intention to deploy negotiatedcommuted sums where appropriate to top up NAHP funding should this be necessary. The
Council considers that based on recent levels of public funding, the affordable housing
targets in this plan are achievable. However should there be a significant reduction in thelevel of funding through the NAHP, the Council may need to reconsider its housing
programme and its affordable housing targets. Further information on the level of subsidy
funding available for specific affordable housing schemes, and on the current availability ofpublic funding to support the Council’s housing programme, will be made generally available
in the Developer Contributions and Housing Delivery SPDs, and to individual developers as
part of the proposed ‘open book’ approach to site viability assessment.
Indicators
GNumber of affordable housing units completed per annum (and as a % of total net
completions)
GNumber of social rented and intermediate affordable housing units per annum (and
as a % of total affordable housing completions)
Targets
GNumber of affordable units is set out in Policy CS9LDF Core Strategy 2007
35GThe affordable housing tenure mix of 70% social rented and 30% intermediate
affordable housing is set out in the supporting text
Delivery Mechanism
GThrough the proposed Developer Contributions SPD which will set out the nature
and extent of contributions from developers
GThrough negotiations between development control and residential developers
GThrough the preparation of site development briefs
GBy joint liaison and close working with housing agencies including the Council’s
Housing Department, Registered Social Landlords and housebuilders
3.13 Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople
3.13.1 It is Government policy that local authorities should make adequate provision for gypsies
and travellers. Circular 01/2006 requires provision to be made on the basis of the results of
local authority Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessments. These joint studies are
currently underway in Surrey. When completed they will provide a comprehensive informationbase relating to the needs and requirements of gypsies and travellers, as well as for travelling
showpeople.
3.13.2 Indications are that in the South East as a whole there is likely to be a shortage of authorised
sites to meet an identifiable unmet need. It is intended that an early partial review of the
South East Strategy will provide a strategic view of needs across the region, and will identify
the number of pitches required for each local authority area. However in the meantime localauthorities are expected to present in their Core Strategy documents, the criteria for the
location of gypsy and traveller sites which will guide the allocation of sites in the relevant
DPD (in this case the site allocations document). Policy CS10 provides the broad context forany such allocations.
3.13.3 The County Council manages gypsy sites at two locations within the Borough which together
provide 30 pitches. There is an existing privately owned showpeople’s site in the Borough.Until the Gypsy Accommodation Assessments are completed, and information is made
available on the scale of unmet needs, there are no specific proposals made in this Core
Strategy for additional pitch provision. This position will be reviewed when the results of thesurveys are known and the South East Plan has been reviewed. Representative
organisations will be consulted at an early stage if there is a need for additional provision.
Policy CS 10
Provision will be made for additional sites for gypsies and travellers and
travelling showpeople if a need is identified in the joint accommodationassessments currently being undertaken or in the South East Plan Review. Where
additional sites are required they will be allocated in the Site Allocations DPD.
The selection of any such site will take into account the policy objectives of theCore Strategy, the needs of future occupiers and the likely availability of any site
for its intended occupiers. The Development Control DPD will include a criteria
based policy for the consideration of applications on any other sites.Epsom & Ewell Borough Council
36Indicator
GNumber of pitches provided for permanent gypsy and traveller accommodation and
pitches for travelling showpeople, against the requirements identified in the South
East Plan and needs in the Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment
Target
GTarget will be set in future DPD following the revision of the South East Plan
Delivery mechanism
GThrough the development control process
GThrough the allocation of any necessary and appropriate sites in the Site Allocations
DPD
3.14 Employment Provision
Background
3.14.1 The spatial strategy is based upon the need to sustain and enhance the Borough’s economic
performance. The Community Strategy recognises the difficulties some local companieshave in recruiting staff, and the impact this can have on their competitiveness. The
importance of maintaining a thriving economic community is recognised as a key objective
of the Strategy, particularly because of the pressure placed on the local economy by theproximity of London and other employment centres. The Council recognises that a suitably
vibrant employment market is a great advantage to any area, providing jobs and incomes to
workers, and an array of other social and economic benefits.
3.14.2 The Borough of Epsom and Ewell is an area of low unemployment (1.8% at the time of the
2001 Census) which provides a variety of workplaces and a good cross section of
employment opportunities for residents. However, many residents commute to jobs outsidethe Borough because of the proximity of London and good transport links with surrounding
areas. Although the economy of the Borough cannot be divorced from adjoining employment
centres, the Council wishes to continue to assist the reduction of longer distance outcommuting by the provision of a range of local jobs.
3.14.3 An employment land review, conducted in 2005/06, considered the Borough’s existing
employment structure and workplace provision for B1, B2 and B8
3 uses, and assessed likely
future needs. The review established that approximately half of those employed were in jobs
which require B1, B2 or B8 floorspace and that, generally, a suitable range of such
employment premises existed within the Borough to meet the needs of the local economy.The majority of this floorspace is located within Epsom town centre and the Longmead and
Nonsuch industrial estates, with many of the smaller premises (<250m2) being within Epsom
Town Centre and Ewell Village. Nonsuch Business Park has been identified in the draftSurrey Waste Plan as a potential urban site for accommodating waste development. This
may inevitably restrict the opportunities that exist within the site for employment generating
development.
3.14.4 There has been little commercial development in the last ten years, with a large number of
premises having been constructed prior to the Second World War. The Council is aware that
the market’s current preference for residential development may often be in directcompetition for employment land. In order to help safeguard the economy the plan aims toLDF Core Strategy 2007
37protect a suitable amount and range of employment premises, especially those located in
sustainable locations such as Epsom town centre.
3.14.5 Data sources indicate that over the next ten years there will be an increase in the numbers of
economically active in the Borough looking for work. Because of the excellent “connectivity”
the Borough enjoys with other employment centres, especially London, it would not bepossible to attempt to balance the number of those looking for work with the number of local
job opportunities. However, with sustainability principles in mind, the Council will support an
approach which encourages a scale of employment opportunities broadly in line with thispredicted increase in economically active population. Regular monitoring of floorspace levels
will be essential to ensure that the needs of business are being adequately provided for.
3.14.6 In addition to employment opportunities within the B1, B2 and B8 land uses, the Borough
offers many employment opportunities within the education, healthcare, retail and hospitality
industries, all of which make a valuable contribution to the economy. In addition the Epsom
Racecourse and the local racehorse training industry are an important part of the economyof the Borough, as well as a significant part of its heritage. Overall these employment
opportunities are of great importance to the community and form an essential part of the
Borough’s social and economic fabric. Providing a choice of suitable accommodation willcontribute to making the Borough an attractive location for businesses and will encourage a
diverse mix of jobs.
3.14.7 In interpreting strategic planning policy at the local level, and to address the issues raised by
the Sustainability Appraisal and meet the aims of the Community Strategy, the main
principles will be:
❏Ensuring sites are available for a range of sizes, quality and locations in order to meet the
range of needs of business, including start up, move-on and expansion accommodation;
❏Encouraging the regeneration and intensification of some designated existing businessand employment areas where there are good prospects for employment, and supportingan improvement in the quality of accommodation that is available in those areas;
❏Recognising that in some locations there may be opportunities to transfer sites to otheruses without undermining the role of the key areas of business activity in the Borough;
❏Encouraging other means of securing what is termed “smart growth” (economic growth
which does not rely on imported labour or require more land - such as more flexible
working practices, greater use of technology or home-working).
3.14.8 Within the overall strategic context of restraint there is little scope for large scale additions to
the amount of employment land that already exists within the Borough. What is already
there, is also under increasing pressure from competing uses. Achieving these principleswill therefore involve a variety of policies which will provide protection to well located
employment sites, as well as supporting the creation of some additional opportunities for
development / redevelopment to meet the changing and future needs of businesses.
Policy CS 11
Losses of employment land will be resisted in the strategic employment areas of
the Nonsuch and Longmead Industrial Estates and within Epsom town centreand Ewell village centre. Regeneration of employment premises and
intensification of employment uses will be encouraged in these locations.Epsom & Ewell Borough Council
38A cautious approach will be adopted to losses of employment land elsewhere.
The Site Allocations/ Development Control DPDs will set out detailed policies forthe redevelopment of employment sites within strategic employment areas and
elsewhere and will define sites where particular policies apply.
The Council will support and facilitate new working methods that seek to increase
productivity without significant increases in workforce and which limit the need
to travel, such as home working.
3.14.9 The strategic employment areas will be identified in the Site Allocations DPD. Encouraging
employment opportunities in these sustainable locations will provide a greater choice of
transport modes for workers, which will help to reduce reliance on the car and therefore
congestion. Support of new working methods will also help to reduce commuting.
3.14.10 The biggest threat to achieving the right amount and location of employment space comes
from the need to satisfy the Borough’s housing targets, especially as the Council is focussing
development on previously developed land in order to protect the Green Belt and surroundingcountryside. The sites which are at greatest risk of being lost are the unprotected
employment sites. Therefore, to ensure the requirements of different sectors and types of
firm in the Borough are being met, and so as not to compromise their likely future needs,applications will be assessed by criteria based policies set out in subsequent DPDs and any
losses will be carefully monitored. Regular employment studies, which monitor the provision
of employment against the needs of the local economy, will help to inform the Council’sdecisions.
Indicators
GAmount of employment floorspace gained and lost per use class (in Epsom town
centre, Ewell village, defined employment areas and rest of Borough)
Target
GWill be set in future DPDs against the background provided by Employment Needs
Surveys
Delivery Mechanism
GThrough the development control process
GBy the identification of key employment areas in the Site Allocations DPD / Proposals
Map
GWorking with key business agencies including the local Business Partnership and
with members of the Local Strategic Partnership
GThrough surveys of local employersLDF Core Strategy 2007
39Meeting Community Needs
3.15 Background
3.15.1 It is an important principle that developments should make adequate provision for the
infrastructure necessary to serve them, and that any adverse impact on existing services
and infrastructure is mitigated. New development should not make existing services and
facilities worse for local people. The Council supports the principle of new developmentbeing required to make a contribution to the community facilities and infrastructure that are
necessary to serve the development concerned. Developers will be expected to fund or
contribute towards the necessary improvements or new provision to serve the needs of theresidents of the new development.
3.16 Developer Contributions to Community Infrastructure
3.16.1 This principle will be applied to the provision of a range of infrastructure. This could include,
for example, transport, housing, public open spaces and play facilities, and social,educational, leisure and cultural facilities that bring benefit to the local community and help
promote social cohesion. Developers are expected to consult with such facility / infrastructure
providers to ensure the needs of the development will be met.
3.16.2 The Council will generally seek agreement on the form that such a contribution might take
before the granting of planning permission for the development. This will be based on policies
in this plan and forthcoming local development documents, and on evidence of need.Development will not be permitted unless the infrastructure and facilities directly required to
service it can be made available at the appropriate time. The Council may require
developments to be phased in step with the necessary infrastructure provision.
Policy CS 12
Developers must be able to demonstrate that the service and community
infrastructure necessary to serve the development is available. Whereimplementation of a development would create the need to provide additional or
improved community facilities and infrastructure, or would exacerbate an
existing deficiency in their provision, developers will be expected to make thenecessary provision.
Where the developer is unable to provide the required facility directly (preferably
on site), the Council may require a proportionate financial contribution from thedeveloper, normally secured by means of a legal planning obligation, towards its
provision elsewhere.
3.16.3 Requirements under this policy will be related in scale and kind to the development proposed
and be consistent with principles set out in Circular 05/2005 Planning Obligations. Monies
received will be devoted to such provision. In view of the restricted nature of futurehousebuilding in Epsom and Ewell, which is likely to be concentrated on smaller sites within
the urban area, contributions from individual developers may be pooled. This will help secure
provision of a facility at an appropriate site in a fair and equitable way.Epsom & Ewell Borough Council
40Indicator
G% of developments that would potentially create, or add to, a deficit in service or
community infrastructure provision, that make good the potential deficits
Target
GAll development to make good potential deficits
Delivery Mechanism
GThrough the proposed SPD on developer contributions
GThrough development control negotiation and decision making
3.17 Community, Cultural and Built Sports Facilities
3.17.1 A good variety and geographical spread of community, built sports and cultural facilities add
to the quality of life for residents, workers, visitors and those who study in the Borough.Sports facilities encourage healthy living; community facilities promote social interaction and
inclusion; and cultural facilities help develop understanding and appreciation of arts and
culture, often outside people’s normal sphere of life. The Community Strategy also promotes‘life long learning’ and the Borough’s educational establishments are key to ensuring such
opportunities are readily available. In line with the South East Plan, the Council will continue
to work closely with the education sector to ensure its needs can be met. Epsom and Ewellcontains several institutions which provide important and valued community facilities that
meet needs arising from beyond the boundaries of the Borough; these include The District
General Hospital and providers of higher / further education, including North East SurreyCollege of Technology (NESCOT) and The University College for the Creative Arts (UCCA).
3.17.2 The sustainability appraisal emphasised that the provision and retention of such facilities is
integral to achieving sustainable communities. Planning policy can assist in achieving this
objective through helping to maintain a balanced provision of facilities, by supporting theirincreased accessibility and use, and by providing a positive framework in which emerging
proposals will be considered. The Council will work with other agencies as they develop their
plans, to help ensure the necessary new facilities are provided at the right time and in theright locations.
3.17.3 A key theme of the Community Strategy is the need to work towards a more harmonious and
inclusive society. It identified the need for improved services and facilities for young people(particularly teenagers). This priority has been adopted by the Council and is embraced in
the preparation of the Epsom and Ewell Borough Youth Plan and associated Action Plan,
which aims to support the more effective coordination of agencies involved in providing youthservices. The Core Strategy will support initiatives which will help enrich the overall quality
of life in the Borough, particularly where they meet the identified needs of local communities
or of the wider area.
3.17.4 The accessibility of community and sports facilities by a wide range of travel modes is
essential, particularly where they are likely to attract people from a wider area than the local
community in which they are located. The Council’s Leisure Strategy has the aim to ensurethat services are provided to a good standard and are accessible to all. It is therefore
important to maximise the use of existing facilities as, with restricted site opportunities, the
scope for significant new facilities will be limited.LDF Core Strategy 2007
413.17.5 The Borough’s open spaces, which include outdoor sport and recreation facilities, can also
provide an essential leisure asset for the community. Policy CS4 sets out the broad policiesto protect these areas, and the detailed designation of sites will be made in the Site
Allocations DPD.
Policy CS 13
The loss of community, cultural and built sports facilities, particularly those
catering for the young or old, will be resisted unless:
Git can be clearly demonstrated there is no longer a need for such a facility in
either its current use, or in any other form of community use, or
Gthere is an appropriate alternative means of providing an equivalent facility.
The provision of new community, cultural and built sports facilities, and the
upgrading of those existing, will be encouraged, particularly where they address
a deficiency in current provision, and where they meet the identified needs ofcommunities both within the Borough and beyond.
3.17.6 The Council will endeavour, through a range of initiatives, to ensure close working with
partners and other agencies responsible for the provision of community facilities and will
maintain a dialogue with the community to help ensure that provision is suitable for the
Borough’s needs. The plans of other agencies will occur at different times over the lifetime ofthe Core Strategy. Policy CS13 provides a positive policy framework within which to consider
proposals as they come forward.
3.17.7 Community facilities are defined as uses falling within Use Class D1 (non-residential
institutions) such as public halls, places of worship, health centres and consulting rooms.
For the purposes of this plan the definition also includes public houses. Cultural facilities in
this policy refer to uses falling within Use Class D2 such as cinemas and sports halls, and forthe purposes of the plan the definition also includes theatres.
3.17.8 The issue of developer contributions towards community facilities is included in Policy CS12
and will be covered in detail in the Developer Contributions SPD.
Indicator
GNet change in the type and number of community, cultural and built sports facilities
provided each year within the Borough
Target
GNo net annual loss of community, cultural and built sports facilities
Delivery Mechanism
GThrough the development control process and, where appropriate, developer
contributions
GBy maintaining a dialogue with the community, Council partners and providers of
community facilities within the Borough and in areas adjoining the BoroughEpsom & Ewell Borough Council
42Supporting Epsom Town Centre and Local Centres
3.18 Background
3.18.1 Epsom town centre provides a good range and choice of facilities and caters for a wide
range of needs. As well as providing services and functions for those who live, work in, or
visit the Borough, it is also at the centre of a network of meeting places and social spaces inthe public realm. It provides a community identity and sense of place for the community it
serves. The Community Strategy recognises its role at the heart of the local community and
incorporates a specific vision and strategy statement for the town centre. The South EastPlan encourages further investment in services and infrastructure in Epsom on a scale which
supports its role in the strategic network of town centres in the region.
3.19 Epsom Town Centre
3.19.1 The Council recognises the importance of a lively, vibrant and viable town centre to residents,
workers, businesses and visitors to the Borough.  Maintaining the vitality and attractivenessof the town centre is key to delivering sustainable development and to maintaining and
improving the quality of life of the Borough’s residents. Widening choice and variety will help
reduce the need for longer distance travel. The Council is therefore committed to a positiveand pro-active approach to town centre development and change. Its aim is to ensure that
the town reaches its full potential to provide the essential range of services and facilities
required, in an attractive environment that is easily accessible by all modes of transport.
3.19.2 The Council’s vision for the town centre is therefore:
❏a vibrant, healthy and safe shopping environment combined with a high quality townscape
and attractive and accessible environment for all;
❏thriving day-time and night-time economies;
❏new developments which are sensitive to its conservation importance and which reinforce
the distinctiveness of its different character areas and a “sense of place”;
❏improved retail attractions increasing the range of types and form of shops and other
High Street facilities and services;
❏an improved range and quality of cultural, leisure, social and visitor attractions, including
attractive areas in which to sit and to socialise;
❏improved public transport links and facilities, combined with an enhanced pedestrian
environment, providing clear and safe opportunities for movement around the town;
❏the introduction of measures to reduce the seriously detrimental impact of vehicular traffic;
❏a variety of housing, including affordable housing for those in need, close to amenities
and public transport;
❏a variety of business opportunities providing a wide choice of jobs, but broadly maintaining
the present balance between employment uses and other town centre activities;
❏an improved sense of safety and security for all town centre users, at all times of the day
and night, and a reduction in anti-social behaviour;
❏a centre which can be planned, managed and promoted in a positive way.LDF Core Strategy 2007
433.19.3 The approach will be to focus and promote a variety of uses within the town centre, provided
their impact reinforces this vision and can be accommodated without harm to the localcommunity or to its townscape character. The Council will prepare a more detailed Area
Action Plan for the town centre which will provide the framework for future change, identify
development opportunities and facilitate the changes necessary to promote its vitality andviability.
3.19.4 This Core Strategy therefore provides the broad policy context within which further detailed
policy development can take place.
Policy CS 14
Measures to improve Epsom town centre, including new development, will be
encouraged especially where they help it to adapt and reinforce its role in meeting
the needs of the local community and acting as a focus for a range of activities
(including retail, cultural, business, leisure and residential) and where theyrecognise and build on the distinctive character of the place.
Development should contribute to the following key objectives for the town
centre:
GCreating a diversity, richness and balance of uses which will contribute to a
flourishing day-time and night-time economy, help satisfy community needs
and enhance environmental quality and sustainability;
GEnsuring that physical and land use changes recognise and build on the
distinctive character different parts of Epsom town centre already have, and
contribute to conserving and developing a “sense of place”;
G Improving the pedestrian and cyclist environments by creating new links and
developing a street network which is designed with their needs in mind, and
which reduces the adverse impact roads and traffic have on the town;
GEnsuring the town has a clear spatial structure for future growth and change
and that development can be used to protect and enhance that pattern;
GDeveloping a greater sense of safety and security for users, both during the
day and at night, and improving the perception of the town as active, inclusive
and safe.
3.19.5 The preparation of the Town Centre Area Action Plan, and other documents, will provide the
detailed planning policies required to facilitate practical partnerships to help achieve these
objectives. Future development proposals will be assessed against criteria-based policies inthe Development Control Policies DPD which will focus on regulating change so as to
maintain the right range and mix of uses, while promoting design which enhances the
uniqueness and strengths of the town centre.
Indicators
GAmount of retail floorspace gained/lost within town centre, and percentage within
defined primary or secondary shopping areas
GAmount and percentage of all completed residential, business and cultural/leisuredevelopment within the town centreEpsom & Ewell Borough Council
44Targets
GRetail floorspace gained/ lost in town centre: Targets will be set out in the Site
Allocations DPD and/ or the Epsom Town Centre Area Action Plan DPD.
GResidential, retail, business, cultural and leisure: Targets will be defined in the Site
Allocations DPD and/ or the Epsom Town Centre Area Action Plan DPD.
Delivery Mechanism
GPreparation and implementation of the Town Centre Area Action Plan and
Development Control Policies DPDs
GThrough the development control process
GAssessment against criteria-based policies in DPDs which will focus on maintainingan appropriate mix and range of uses, ensuring high quality sustainable design etc
GCollaborative working with the Local Strategic Partnership and the local Business
Partnership in the development and review of the “Strategy for Epsom Town Centre”
3.20 Role of local centres
3.20.1 Local centres provide an important and essential service particularly for residents who wish
to shop locally or who are dependent on the facilities they offer. They provide local
employment and reduce the need to travel. They represent a highly sustainable option whichoffers an alternative type of service to larger supermarkets. The Council will protect their
retail viability and vitality and ensure that it is not undermined by potentially damaging
development elsewhere. It will be important regularly to assess the health of the existinglocal centres, and to ensure development respects their scale, function and identity. The
Council will also consider the need for the designation and establishment of new local centres
which may not currently be identified. Local centres will be defined in the Site AllocationsDPD.
3.20.2 Ewell village centre provides an important local facility, but its special historic fabric is under
pressure and particular care will be needed to ensure new development enhances its vitalityand viability. The Council has embarked on a Conservation Appraisal in the village which will
provide an assessment of both the positive and negative features of the environment, and
will define elements which should be improved. This will provide the foundation of furtherpolicies in the Site Allocations DPD which will be aimed at the revitalisation of the village
centre.
Policy CS 15
Measures to protect the role, function and needs of the local centres will be
encouraged. The Council will resist proposals which are likely to damage orundermine the retail function of these centres or detract from their vitality and
viability.
Stoneleigh and Ewell village are the largest local centres in the Borough and are
shown on the Key Diagram. Other local centres will be defined in the Site
Allocations DPD including the proposed new shopping facility at Horton (hospital
cluster).LDF Core Strategy 2007
453.20.3 Other policies contained in this Core Strategy, such as those for transport, housing and the
environment, will have an impact on the achievement of the objectives for the economic andsocial vitality of the local centres. The Council will ensure that a co-ordinated approach is
followed and that proposals which would be likely to undermine the role and functions of the
local centres will be resisted.
3.20.4 More detailed policies aimed at protecting existing local centres and safeguarding the
balance of uses within them will be contained in the Development Control Policies DPD.
Future development proposals will be assessed against criteria-based policies which willfocus on protecting and enhancing existing uses and encouraging high quality design.
Specific site opportunities will be covered in the Site Allocations DPD.
Indicators
GAmount of retail space gained/ lost in the local centres
Target
GTarget will be defined in Site Allocations DPD (local centres will be identified in the
accompanying Proposal Map)
Delivery Mechanism
GDevelopment control decisions based on policies which encourage an appropriate
balance of uses within the local centre, and high quality and sustainable design
GLiaison and joint working with the Local Strategic Partnership, Chamber of
Commerce and the local Business PartnershipEpsom & Ewell Borough Council
46Managing Transport and Travel
3.21 Our Approach
3.21.1 Traffic congestion is a key concern amongst residents, and is reflected by its inclusion as a
key priority area in the Community Strategy Action Plan. Traffic congestion costs Surrey’s
businesses hundreds of millions of pounds each year, with other detrimental economic,environmental and social consequences.
3.21.2 Car ownership is high in the Borough with 1.37 cars for each household, compared to the
national average of 1.1 (Census 2001). This is a 19% increase from the 1991 levels and over40% of households in the Borough now have two or more cars. This is a determining factor
in Epsom having what some perceive as the worst traffic congestion in Surrey. It is also due
to the network of roads that run through the Borough, some which connect to key roads,such as the M25 and the A3, and which are therefore used as links or when principal roads
get congested. The main roads in the Borough (A24, A240 and A232) do not just provide
access to neighbouring towns, but they also connect towns outside the Borough to eachother, thereby creating more through traffic (e.g. Leatherhead and Ashtead to Kingston or
Sutton).
3.21.3 One of the key principles to assist in achieving more sustainable development is to reduce
reliance on the private car. The Borough is the most urbanised district in Surrey, but its
compact urban form does provide potential for encouraging alternatives to car travel. The
approach embodied in this Core Strategy will seek to manage travel demand in an effectiveand sustainable way, while improving the range of choice and responding to the needs of
residents, workers and visitors.
3.21.4 Surrey County Council is responsible for managing the highway network in Surrey and has
produced a Local Transport Plan (LTP) covering the period 2006/07 to 2010/11 (March 2006).
The document has five key objectives:
❏tackling congestion to reduce delays
❏increasing accessibility to key services
❏improving road safety and security
❏enhancing the environment and quality of life
❏ improving maintenance of the transport network
3.21.5 Epsom is identified as an ‘all-purpose centre’ and, when funds allow following the initial
focus on the three regional hubs identified in the South East Plan (Guildford, Woking and
Redhill / Reigate), the Borough will be a focus for measures to tackle congestion and improve
the public transport system and cycle network. A specific proposal for a major highwayimprovement scheme - the Kiln Lane link, Epsom - is included in the LTP and in the
implementation programme submitted in support of the South East Plan. This new road will
greatly improve accessibility to the Nonsuch and Longmead industrial estates, withconsiderable benefits for pedestrians and cyclists. Land will be allocated for this
infrastructure improvement in the Site Allocations DPD.
3.21.6 The Council will continue to work closely with the Highway Authority to ensure the
coordination of proposals within the LDF and the Local Transport Plan. The location ofLDF Core Strategy 2007
47development and the way that development is carried out are important factors in helping
achieve the priorities of the Transport Plan. Choices about where new housing andemployment uses are located for example, and patterns of travel that result, will be important
factors in helping to reduce reliance on the private car. Encouraging alternative forms of
travel and securing access to the most sustainable modes of travel such as public transport,walking or cycling, represent approaches which aim to help achieve a new balance between
non motorised transport, public transport and private car use.
3.21.7 In line with the Corporate Plan and Council’s Health Strategy the Council will aim to secure
improved transport facilities that are inclusive to all members of the community, and will
promote the development of Travel Plans. Additionally, the Council will aim to ensure as far
as possible, development minimises traffic problems and maximises the potential benefits ofaccessibility and new infrastructure to the wider community. The Council will ensure that
new development proposals will not compromise highway safety.
3.21.8 The Council will require new developments to meet specified parking standards, details of
which will be contained in the Development Control Policies DPD. It is important that new
developments help to mitigate any adverse impacts they may otherwise have on transport
and travel. Where appropriate, S106 planning obligations will be used to ensure that newdevelopments provide for related transport improvements and fund other appropriate
mitigation measures.
3.21.9 In Epsom town centre, where the Community Strategy has identified the need to improve
accessibility, particularly by public transport, the Council will continue to implement a parking
regime that manages parking demand, while supplementing this with positive measures to
reduce the demand for parking.
Policy CS 16
Encouragement will be given to development proposals and management
policies which foster an improved and integrated transport network and facilitate
a shift of emphasis to non-car modes as a means of access to services and
facilities. In particular the Council will work with the County Council and otherrelevant agencies in Epsom town centre to reduce the impact of roads and traffic
movement, to support the development of opportunities for the use of public
transport, and to enhance the pedestrian environment.
Throughout the Borough the Council will seek to ensure that highway design
responds to the positive characteristics of an area and delivers a high quality
public realm for all users. In creating new places, highway design should ensurethat the needs of vehicular traffic do not predominate to the detriment of other
modes of travel or to the quality of the environment created.
Development proposals will be required to be consistent with, and contribute to,
the implementation of the Surrey Local Transport Plan and should:
Gminimise the need for travel, through measures such as travel plans or theprovision or enhancement of local services and facilities;
Gprovide safe, convenient and attractive accesses for all, including the elderly
and disabled, and others with restricted mobility, and provide links to the
existing network of footways, bridleways and cycleways, so as to maximiseopportunities for their use;Epsom & Ewell Borough Council
48Gbe appropriate for the highways network in terms of the volume and nature of
traffic generated, and ensure that the safety, convenience and free flow oftraffic using the highway are not adversely affected;
Gavoid highway improvements which harm the environment and character ofthe area;
Gprovide appropriate and effective parking provision, both on and off-site, and
vehicular servicing arrangements;
Gensure that vehicular traffic generated does not create new, or exacerbate
existing, on street parking problems, nor materially increase other traffic
problems, taking account of any contributions that have been secured to the
provision of off-site works.
All major developments should be well located for convenient access by non-car
modes, including walking, cycling and high quality public transport.
Land will be allocated in the Site Allocations DPD for the construction of the Kiln
Lane link road.
Indicators
G% of major residential and commercial developments that encourage the use of
non-car modes of transport
G% of major residential developments located within 30 minutes public transport timeof health, education, retail and employment facilities
Target
GAll major residential and commercial developments should encourage the use of
non-car modes of transport
GAll major residential developments should be within 30 minutes public transport timeof health, education, retail and employment facilities
Delivery Mechanisms
GLiaison and close working with Surrey County Council (transport division) and other
key transport infrastructure providers
GThrough development control by the use of more detailed policies in the
Development Control Policies DPD, and through negotiation over developer
contributions and S106 planning obligation moniesLDF Core Strategy 2007
49
4  How will the Core Strategy be delivered?
4.1 Agencies and Resources
4.1.1 We recognise that we cannot achieve the vision we set out at the start of this document on
our own. Many other agencies, organisations and individuals will be involved in achieving
the objectives of this Core Strategy. The Epsom and Ewell Community Strategy, through thework of the Local Strategic Partnership, will be a major driver of change, as will be the work
of other Borough Council and County Council services.
4.1.2 The delivery of the outcomes we seek has major resource implications. We recognise that
the development industry has a key role to play, bringing investment to the Borough,
providing new homes and jobs, helping to bring about regeneration and contributing towards
the improvement of local infrastructure. Many of the proposals in this document and thosethat follow will depend largely upon private sector developers. Other agencies and utilities
will make a significant contribution in resource terms, as will the voluntary sector.
4.1.3 The Borough Council will also, where appropriate, use resources beyond just its planning
powers to help deliver what we propose in this strategy, including its own land holdings. The
Council and other agencies will continue to work together to draw resources from other
sources where this is possible.
4.2 Monitoring
4.2.1 Each po licy in the Core Strategy contains a section on how it will be delivered and
summarising what indicators will be used to measure our progress. We shall use these tocheck on how effective the Core Strategy’s policies are in helping address the issues set out.
Where appropriate, a target is also identified, or a specific reference is made to where targets
will be developed in later local development documents.
4.2.2 The suggested indicators form part of a wider collection of indicators, which will be set out in
the Council’s ‘Monitoring Strategy’. This will be used to assess both the performance of the
LDF policies and progress towards wider sustainability and Community Strategy objectives.This is part of a collaborative approach to data and spatial analysis being developed in
conjunction with the Community Strategy process.
4.2.3 The indicators specific to this Core Strategy will be monitored by the Council and a number
of them will be reported through the Annual Monitoring Report. This will provide the
opportunity to keep the effectiveness of the strategy under regular review and to highlight
the need for the review of this or other documents. This can be achieved by bringing forwardchanges to the Council’s Local Development Scheme.Epsom & Ewell Borough Council
50Footnotes to Appendix 1
1Large site provides 10 or more net dwellings on a site area of 0.4 hectares or above.
2Medium site provides 10 or more net dwellings on a site area of under 0.4 hectares.
3Small site provides 1 to 9 net dwellings regardless of size.
4Detailed explanation in Core Strategy Position Paper 1 Housing Provision November 2006Appendix 1: Expected components of housing supply 2007-2022
15 year housing provision target (net) - Policy CS7 Dwellings 2,715
Potential Oversupply 2006-07 (275 - 181) 94
Residual of large sites1 (under construction) 351
Forthcoming large sites (with planning permission) 888
Forthcoming medium sites2 (with planning permission) 149
Forthcoming small sites3  (with planning permission) 209
Windfall estimate - medium sites (43 x 11.5 years)4495
Windfall estimate - small sites (32 x 8.5 years)4272
Sub-total 2,458
Dwellings to be allocated in Site Allocations DPD 257LDF Core Strategy 2007
51NotesEpsom & Ewell Borough Council
52NotesLDF Core Strategy 2007
53Epsom & Ewell Core Strategy 2007
Key Diagram
Reproduced from the Ordnance Survey Mapping with permission of the Controller of Her Majesty’s
Stationery Office Crown Copyright. Epsom & Ewell Borough Council License No 100023771
Published by
Epsom & Ewell Borough Council
Town Hall  The Parade  Epsom  Surrey KT18 5BY
October 2007
