CORE  STRATEGY  
Adopted  
Februa ry 2012               Front cover images:  
Housing  scheme  © APEX  
Exeter Chie fs Rugby Ground  and Senate Building  © Exeter City Council  
Forum  Building  © University of Exeter 
Exeter canal  and Princesshay © Tony Howell 
Exeter aerial pho to © Roger  D Smith  ABIPP  Contents  
1. The Core Strategy  3 
2. Spatial context - The key issues  5 
3. Vision and objectives  12 
4. Providing for growth: Spatial Strategy  16 
5. Employment  21 
6. Housing  27 
7. Retail  35 
8. Transport  39 
9. Meeting community needs  43 
10. Environment  46 
11. Infrastructure  65 
12. Strategic allocations  70 
13. Monitoring and implementation  75 
Key Diagram  99 
Appendix 1: Existing guidance and strategies  104 
Appendix 2:  Additional research and study  105 
  Appendix 3: List of replaced Exeter first review Local Plan Policies  107 
Appendix 4: Minerals and waste  108 
Appendix 5: Exeter Vision 109 
Appendix 6: List of District Centres and Local Centres  110 
Glossary of terms  111 
E X E T E R L O C A L D E V E L O P M E N T F R A M E W O R K 
 
 Foreword 
Exeter is a special place; an historic city set amidst beautiful  
countryside and close to a splendid and internationally important 
coastline and estuar y. 
A city which continues to grow and to drive the economic prosperity  
of a significant part of the south west peninsula.  A city with a broad 
employment base and a thriving knowledge based econom y, linked 
to one of the country ’s most prestigious universities that continues to 
attract students from across the UK and the world.  A city with good 
road and rail links close to a rapidly expanding regional airport.  
An attractive city where people want to live and work and where  
people come to shop, to be entertained and to spend their leisure 
time.  
A city which despite its rapid growth retains its ancient monuments and historic buildings and has  
valued areas of green space and high quality townscape.  
The challenge for the future is to meet the demands for economic prosperity while retaining the  
qualities that make Exeter such a special place. We need to solve existing and emerging problems  
and to establish Exeter as a sustainable city fit for the 21st centur y. 
Problems such as a shortage of a ffordable housing, ageing infrastructure and stre tched public  
services are already with us.  The full e ffect of emerging problems including the impact of  
climate change, and the need to embrace new and renewable energy technologies and to adopt 
sustainable and low carbon construction methods are not yet fully understood.  
Our best chance to meet these existing and future challenges and keep Exeter as a place we can  
all be proud of, is to plan for them.  This Core Strategy adopted in February 2012 sets out how 
Exeter City Council intends to meet these challenges in the next 15 years. It will not be eas y, the 
future will demand that we make things happen in the right way and we may have to adjust our 
plans in response to changing times and world events.  
The Core Strategy represents the Council ’s vision and objectives to take us up to 2026 and I hope  
that, by working together we can achieve them.  
Councillor Rachel Sutton  
1  2  1. The Co re Strategy 
1.1 The Core Strategy sets out the vision, objectives and strategy for the spatial development  
of the city up to 2026, explaining how sustainable growth may be achieved that protects the 
high quality environment of the city and that takes the implications of climate change and 
the transition to a low carbon economy fully into account.  
1.2  In particula r, the Core Strategy specifies proposed levels of employment, housing and retail  
development and identifies broad locations for growth including strategic d evelopment 
allocations. It also has a co -ordinating role with development in Districts adjacent to the 
city. 
1.3  The need to make significant reductions in carbon dioxide (C O2) emissions and adapt to  
changes in climate, already underway as a result of past emissions, permeates the Core 
Strateg y. The period to 2026 covers three carbon budget periods requiring a 34% reduction 
in greenhouse gas emissions by 2022. Exete r’s ‘Climate Change Strategy’  provides 
important evidence on the challenge the city faces and the first steps in its response.  The 
Core Strategy includes measures which support this Strategy and also respond to the 
Government ’s ‘UK Low Carbon  Transition Plan’  and ‘Renewable Energy Strategy’.  
1.4 In accordance with Government guidance, the preparation of the Core Strategy has  
involved consultation with the public and stakeholders and this is set out in the Statement 
of Community Involvement (SCI).  The identification of spatial requirements arising from 
existing guidance and strategies (see  Appendix 1) supplemented by additional research 
and studies (see  Appendix 2), has been used to inform the assessment  of options and the 
preparation of policy guidance.  An assessment of the sustainability of each of the options 
has been carried out on an iterative basis.  The Sustainability  Appraisal (SA) is published 
alongside this document.  
1.5 The Core Strategy comprises:  
• its purpose and context (Section 1);  
• key issues facing the cit y, presented in the form of a spatial portrait (Section 2);  
• the spatial vision and objectives for the city (Section 3);  
• a spatial strategy which gives expression to how the vision and objectives may be  
  achieved (Section 4);  
• strategic policies designed to meet the objectives and deliver the spatial strategy  
  (Sections 5 - 10); 
• key infrastructure requirements to ensure delivery (Section 11); 
• strategic allocations (section 12);  
• monitoring and  implementation (Section 13);  
• key diagram and strategic allocation plans.  
3  1.6  The policies are presented in bold and are identified by a prefix C P and a number i.e.  
CP1.  The prefix C P stands for ‘Core Policy’.  The Core Strategy Vision, Objectives and 
Spatial Strategy (see Sections 3 and 4) are also presented in bold and, together with the 
policies, they may be taken into account in formulating policies in other Development Plan 
Documents (DPDs), and in determining planning applications.  A list of Local  Plan policies 
that will be replaced by Core Strategy policies is provided at  Appendix 3.  
1.7 There may be circumstances under which it would be necessary to revise the Core Strategy  
before 2026. In particula r, the Core Strategy should be reviewed if the Strategic Housing 
Land  Assessments (SHLAAs) in 20 11 and 2012 show a continuing shortfall of deliverable 
housing sites for the next five years, with any additional allowance to ensure choice and 
competition in the market for land, if up -to-date national planning policy requi res it. Whilst 
flexibility has been built into the Strateg y, to allow for change, a significant alteration to 
national planning polic y, for example in the area of climate change, could result in the 
need to revise the strategic approach.  The Annual Monitor ing Report (AMR) will allow the 
identification of such circumstances.  
1.8  The Core Strategy is the first and most important document to be prepared as part of the  
Local Development Framework (LDF).  The LDF consists of a folder of documents all of 
which must be in conformity with the  Core Strateg y. The main documents that will make up 
the LDF are:  
•     Core Strategy DPD  
•    Site Allocations and Development Management DPD  
1.9 The Statutory Development Plan for Exeter will comprise these DPDs, together with the  
Mineral and Waste DPDs (see  Appendix 4).  The Statutory Development Plan, together with 
Supplementary Planning Documents (SPDs), that provide further explanation of policies 
and proposals, and National Planning Polic y, set out in Planning Policy Statements (PPSs) 
and Planning Policy Guidance Notes (PPGs), will be the basis on which all planning 
decisions are made.  
4  2. Spatial cont ext – The key issues  
2.1 A spatial portrait of the city is presented below in order to set the overall context for the  
Core Strategy and highlight the main issues to be addressed.  
Geography/popul ation 
2.2 Exeter is an historic city located at the northern tip of the Exe Estuar y, some 15km from  
the coast. It has a population of over 118,500, a travel -to-work area with a population of 
over 280,000, a shopping catchment of over 550,000, and over two million day -visitors a 
year. Exeter is a young city with a student population of around 12,000.  The city is one of 
three large urban centres  within the predominantly rural county of Devon and is served by 
major transport infrastructure including the M5 motorwa y, main railway lines, and Exeter 
International  Airport.  
Histo ry 
2.3 In approximately 50AD the Romans founded Exeter as a settlement. From the 15th 
century the city began to increase in size and importance because of its position in the 
development of the Devon woollen industr y. By the 17th and 18th centuries Exeter was 
ranked fifth in importance and size amongst English provincial cities. In the 1 9th century the 
population tripled and Exeter began to take on its role as a regional administrative centre. 
This varied history has left Exeter with many h istoric buildings and archaeological remains 
that are important to the character and growth of the cit y. 
2.4 During World War II some 15 hectares of the City Centre were destroye d in the blitz. Post - 
war reconstruction included rebuilding the central shopping area, establishing industrial 
estates at Marsh Barton and Pinhoe to replace the traditional locations in the centre, and 
developing the Inner Bypass. Sowton industrial estate  was established in the 1960s. In 
the 1970s the M5 reached Exeter and, in the City Centre, the Guildhall Shopping Centre 
was built. Further retail investment in the City Centre was made in the 1980s through  
the development of Harlequins but this period als o marked the beginning of growth of 
out of town shopping on Exete r’s fringes. In 2007, Princessha y, a major new shopping 
development in the City Centre, opened.  The Marsh Barton industrial estate extended 
southwards into the Matford area from the late 80 ’s onwards.  
2.5 Since the wa r, the shape of the city has changed as residential development has expanded  
outwards creeping up the hillsides and out towards and beyond the Outer Bypass. The 
designation of the Valley Parks, measures to protect the landscape setting, and 
implementation of a range of transportation initiatives have enabled growth to occur whilst 
protecting the quality of life and character of the cit y. 
Regional/sub regional role 
2.6 Exeter is located strategically in the centre of the south west with excellent road, rail and  
air connections. It has a significant cat chment for employment, shopping, professional 
services, education, health, leisure and culture.  The University of Exeter and Exeter 
College are centres of educational excellence and both are expanding. Exeter  Airport has 
major plans for growth.  The Exeter area was identified in the South West Regional Spatial  
Strategy (RSS) as one of 21 Strategically Significant Cities and  Towns (SSC Ts) which play  
a critical strategic role regionally or sub -regionall y. With respect to the Exeter SSCT  the 
5  strategy is to focus development within and adjacent to, the urban area and to ensure that  
population and workforce growth is commensurate with economic activity and growth in 
jobs and reducing commuting.  
Empl oyment  
2.7 Exeter is a relatively prosperous and environ mentally attractive cit y. The economy supports  
some 86,000 jobs and 4,500 businesses. Within the City Centre there are over 1,000 
businesses providing some 20,000 jobs.  The rate of unemployment is around 65% of 
the rate for England and Wales. Exeter is an important centre for public administration, 
education and health and the focal point of economic activity for much of Devon, with  
around 30,000 people travelling into the city every day to work (8,000 Exeter residents work 
outside the City). Business and financial services are the most important local sectors in 
terms of their contribution to Gross Domestic Product (market value of all financial goods 
and services).  
2.8 In comparison with similar areas, there are, howeve r, relatively few young adults with high  
level qualifications in the Exeter sub -region and the area is characterised by a low ‘staying - 
on’ rate at 16+.  
2.9 The city is regarded by many employers as a key strategic location for the South West 
and is well served by communication links with the rest of the country compared with other 
similar cities. It is home to regional offices for the Environment  Agenc y, Natural England, 
the Rural Payments  Agenc y, the Countryside  Agenc y, EDF Energ y, the Guinness  Trust, 
Devon and Cornwall Constabular y, and the national offices for Flybe.  The Met Office 
relocated its national headquarters to Exeter in 2003.  
2.10  Significant employment growth has occurred  in recent years: in the City Centre, at Exeter  
Business Park, and at Matford. Whilst the economic downturn will continue to a ffect the city 
in the short run, it is expected that further significant growth will occur over the plan period. 
There are some l imited opportunities within the city but there are also major commitments  
to the east of Exete r, within East Devon, for employment development at Skypark adjoining  
Exeter  Airport, and for a science park at Redhayes, adjoining Junction 29 of the M5.  
2.11 The University of Exeter is consistently ranked in the top 20 UK universities and was 9th 
in The Times league table in 2010. In 2010/ 11 there were 12,929 full -time students living 
away from home. It is envisaged that there will be approximately 3,300 additional full -time 
students, who are living away from home (i.e. in Exeter) by 2025/26. Exeter College with  
10,000 students also plays a vital role relating to the skills agenda, learning and future 
employment.  The Peninsula Medical School, a partnership between the Univers ities of 
Exeter and Plymouth, took its first students of medicine in October 2002.  The University 
is very important to the economy and vitality of the city but the growth of student numbers 
also places pressure on the local communit y, particularly in terms  of facilities and student 
accommodation and impact on the housing stock. Road links to the University ’s main  
campus are poor from the south and east which results in traffic conjestion in these areas.  
2.12  The non -domestic sector (commercial, business and public sector) is responsible for 44%  
of Exete r’s CO2 emissions making it the largest contributor to the city ’s carbon footprint. 
This highlights the role that Exete r’s businesses will have in the city ’s transition to a low 
carbon econom y. 
6  Key empl oyment issues:  
High levels of inward commuting  
Low ‘staying -on’ rate at 16+ and few young adults with high level qualifications 
High demand for employment sites but lack of size and range available 
Challenge of accommodating university growth  
Level of CO2 emissions    
Housing  
2.13 Exeter is fortunate in that it does not have large areas of run -down housing but there  are 
some small areas with high levels of deprivation, three of which (one in Newtown ward and 
two in Priory ward) are among the 10% most deprived areas in the countr y. The Council 
housing stock is essentially sound but a significant number of houses need to be upgraded. 
The poor condition and energy efficiency associated with much of the older housing stock 
needs to be tackled, and to ensure the best use of the existing housing stock, under - 
occupation of larger houses needs to be discouraged.  
2.14 Of further concern, at present, is the imbalance between housing supply and demand.  
Demand is fuelled by the same trends experienced nationally: people are living longe r, 
young people are leaving home earlie r, people are choosing to live alone, and families 
break down more often.  The level of demand in recent years is, howeve r, also the product 
of a growing University and Exete r’s economic success. House prices have risen more 
rapidly in Exeter than in neighbouring areas and are above regional and national averages. 
Although average earnings in Exeter are above those in Devon and broadly similar  
to those in the South West as a whole, they are well below the national average.  The 
disproportionate growth in house prices means that the ability of first -time buyers to access 
mortgages is extremely limited.  This has been exacerbated by the recent credit squeeze 
which has reduced the availability of mortgages.  
2.15 To meet the demand for housing, whilst protecting Exete r’s characte r, it has been a priority  
to maximise the use of previously developed land. Howeve r, greenfield development has 
also been necessar y, within the city at Digby and beyond the city through a new community 
in East Devon at Cranbrook. Over the long term Exeter is likely to continue to be successful 
economicall y. There i s a need for balanced economic and housing growth, in particular to 
deal with issues of housing a ffordabilit y. As there are limited development opportunities 
remaining within the urban area, the development pressures on the city fringes will  
continue.  
2.16 Housing is responsible for 34% of Exete r’s CO2 emissions. New development in close  
proximity to existing buildings provides opportunities to extend low carbon energy 
infrastructure into existing buildings, providing lower cost low carbon energy to occupants.  
Key housing issues:  
Pockets of high levels of deprivation  
Imbalance between housing supply and demand resulting in lack of a ffordability  
High development pressure on city fringes  
Level of CO2 emissions  
7  Health  
2.17 The Royal Devon & Exeter Foundation Hospital in Wonford provides acute hospital services  
to around 350,000 people in Exete r, East Devon and Mid Devon, and o ffers specialist 
services to people living further afield in Devon, Cornwall and the Isles of Scill y, Dorset and 
Somerset.  
 
Overall Exeter is a healthy cit y, but people living in its more disadvantaged areas have 
comparatively poor health, as indicated by incidence of chronic illness and life expectancy 
levels.  Traffic congestion in the city has led to localised air pollution which has  potential 
impacts on health and has led to the creation of an  Air Quality Management  Area (AQMA).  2.18 
Key health issues:  
People living in areas of deprivation su ffer from particular health issues  
Unacceptable air quality in key locations  
Crime  
2.19 Many people perceive crime to be a problem in the city and it is often cited in their top  
three concerns.  The fear of crime can have a damaging impact as it can a ffect people ’s 
confidence in public agencies, constrain people ’s lives, and deter investment. Whilst in  
some parts of the city crime is a very real issue, Home Office data indicate that actual crime  
levels i n the city as a whole remain comparatively lo w. 
2.20 The Exeter Community Safety Partnership, which brings together various agencies, was  
established in 2002 and aims to make Exeter the safest city in the South West. The use of 
community patrolling, community police support officers and various neighbourhood 
engagement initiatives have proved extremely e ffective, particularly in addressing low level 
crime and anti -social behaviou r. It is important that, as the city grows, this work is built upon 
to ensure Exeter remains a safe place to live.  
Key Crime Issue:  
Perception of crime  
Retail 
2.21 Retail in Exeter City Centre is health y, despite the economic downturn, with relatively few  
shops vacant, strong retailer demand, a clean and attractive environment and a good  
range of facilities in a compact area.  The shopping catchment is estimated at over 550,000 
people.  The shopping floorspace of the City Centre is over 80,000 sq m net.  A major new 
shopping development, the Princes shay scheme, providing approximately 27,000 sq m  
net of retail (a net gain of approximately 20,000 sq m taking into account the demolition 
of existing floorspace), opened in 2007.  The City Centre includes a range of nationally 
recognised chains as well as supporting independent and specialist stores and hosting a 
vibrant farmers market.  
2.22 Ongoing environmental enhancements have been carried out in the City Centre, most  
recently in the High Street, Cathedral  Yard and Cathedral Close. Similar improvements are 
planned in key secondary shopping areas.  As the available expenditure of the population 
grows, further retail development will be needed.  
8  2.23 The population of Exeter is also served by a number of District and Local Centres that meet  
an important need for local retail facilities. Many centres are vital and viable and some have 
a good reputation for specialist shops. Improvements are ongoing but some centres still 
suffer from a poor environment and a lack of vitalit y. 
2.24 The out of centre food superstores and retail warehouses have continued to trade  
successfully and have been relatively una ffected by the current economic downturn.  
Key retail issues:  
Demand for more retail development to meet the needs of a growing population and  
maintain Exete r’s competitive position  
Poor environmental quality of some District and Local Centres  
Transpo rt 
2.25  Exeter is served by the M5 motorwa y, and the  A30 and  A38 trunk roads, and benefits from  
the convergence of 5 railway lines, including fast connections to London and the North. 
Train services connect the city to the main commuter towns of Exmouth and Crediton. 
Exeter International  Airport is only 7km from the City Centre but public transport links to the 
airport h ave yet to match the growth in passenger numbers in recent years.  
2.26 As a compact city most development in Exeter is accessible to essential services and  
to good quality public transport.  There is, howeve r, significant congestion on the major 
routes into the city at peak periods, particularly on Pinhoe Road, Heavitree Road, 
Topsham Road and  Alphington Road, and this in turn has an adverse e ffect on air qualit y. 
Transport is responsible for 22% of the Exete r’s CO2 emissions. Reductions from the 
transport sector will be needed as part of the transition to a low carbon econom y. Ongoing 
improvements continue to be introduced  to provide and enhance facilities for buses,  
cyclists and pedestrians. For example, Exeter has been established as a national “Cycling 
Demonstration  Town” and funding continues to be directed to improving the city ’s cycle 
routes and facilities. Such initi atives, together with those aimed at demand management, 
including car sharing and reducing the number of workplace parking spaces in the City 
Centre, are required and must continue in response to the economic and housing growth  
of Exete r. There needs to be  a particular focus on transport infrastructure to accommodate 
strategic development proposals to the east and south west of the cit y. 
Key issues:  
Increasing congestion, and associated air pollution, underlining the need for modal shift  
Need for transport infrastructure to enable delivery of strategic development  
Environment  
2.27 The city enjoys a high quality environment, with valley parks, formal city parks, the Exeter  
Ship Canal, the Exe Estuary and important wildlife sites.  The hills to the north and north 
west of the cit y, particularly the ridgelines, give Exeter a distinctive characte r. The city ’s 
varied terrain, influenced by the River Exe and its tributaries, add to its appeal.   
9  2.28 Exeter contains a rich variety of wildlife habitats owing to a particular combination of  
geology and topograph y. South of Countess Wear, the Exe Estuary is a Ramsar site and a 
Special Protection  Area (S PA), recognised as a wetland site of international importance that 
supports many rare species and is famous for its  Avocets and Lapwings. Within the cit y, 
there are also nationally important Sites of Special Scie ntific Interest (SSSI) and Regionally 
Important Geological and Geomorphological Sites (RIGS) as well as locally designated  
Sites of Nature Conservation Importance (SNCIs) and Sites of Local Interest for Nature 
Conservation (SLINCs). Development pressures could impact on all these areas.  
Key environment issues:  
Impact on the city ’s wildlife habitats from a growing population  
Development pressure threatens the Valley Parks and the hills and  ridgelines, which are 
vital to Exete r’s distinctive character  
Diversity 
2.29 The city has a rich cultural and social diversit y. Whilst the number of black and minority  
ethnic persons in Exeter is less than the national average, these numbers are growing. 
Minority groups tend to live across the city rather than be concentrated in pockets.  The 
population consists of many di fferent groups with d ifferent needs. In particula r, young 
people, older people, people with disabilities, people belonging to black and minority ethnic 
communities and those with limited income can all, at times, feel excluded from societ y, 
community life and the decisions tha t affect them. Exeter City Council continues to work 
with these groups to ensure their needs are met.  
Key Di versity Issue:  
Provision of facilities that meet diverse community needs  
Herit age 
2.30  The architectural landscape of Exeter plays a major role  in defining the character of the cit y.  
Despite the damage and destruction inflicted by the 1942 air raids, the City Centre retains  
a wealth of historic buildings. For example, the Guildhall, in the High Street, has served as a 
seat of local government for over 800 years whilst Exeter Cathedral, which has the longest 
uninterrupted Gothic ceiling in the world, has national and international significance. More 
recent buildings, including the post -war reconstruction of the High Street and the  
new Princessha y development, also make a significant contribution to the City Centre ’s  
characte r. 
2.31 In the residential areas of Exete r, local distinctiveness is provided by red brick late Victorian  
and Edwardian terraces, which form a key characteristic of St.  Thomas, St. Davids, St. 
James, Polsloe, Heavitree and Newtown. Early 19th century stuccoed villas are of special 
importance to St. Leonards. Within the narrow streets of the historic port town of  Topsham, 
there is a rich variety of architectural heritage and the largest concentration of listed 
buildings in the cit y. Of particular note are the late 17th century Dutch houses on the Strand. 
Overall, Exeter has 20 conservation areas, approximately 1813 listed buildings and an 
archaeological heritage that includes 19 scheduled ancient monuments.  
2.32 In providing for growth the importance of Exete r’s heritage and the key role it plays in the  
economy and prosperity of the city must be taken fully into account.  
10  Key herit age issue:  
Impact of a growing population on the city ’s heritage  
Recreation and leisu re 
2.33  Important cultural institutions with a regional profile include the Royal  Albert Memorial  
Museum (RAMM), the Northcott  Theatre, the Great Hall at the Universit y, Spacex and the 
Phoenix  Arts Centre.  The need for upgrading of cultural facilities to keep pace with the 
scale and nature of demand is recognised.  Refurbishment of the Northcott  Theatre was 
completed in 2007 and wh ilst it has experienced financial difficulties, in 2010 it is expected 
that a new company will take over the running of the  Theatre. Major improvements have 
been made to the RAMM and redevelopment of the Exeter City Library is proposed.  
2.34 Exeter City and the Exeter Chiefs are national level sports teams with their own stadia in  
Exete r. Other facilities recognised at the regional level include  The Arena  Athletics Stadium, 
the ISCA  Indoor Bowls Centre, the Exeter Golf and Country Club and the University ’s 
sports complex.  There is a good range of local facilities, including 3 swimming pools and 
approximately 80 sports pitches.  The area is also well served with children ’s play areas, of 
which there are more than 60, and various other facilities including Multi Use Games  Areas, 
skate and BMX parks, and youth shelters. New and improved facilities will be needed to 
meet the demand arising from new development.  Some facilities will need to be provided  
at the neighbourhood  level whereas others, which have a large catchment, will be more 
appropriately provided at the city/sub -regional level.  
Key recreation and leisu re issue:  
Need for provision and enhancement of community infrastructure to meet the demand from  
new development  
Conclusion  
2.35 Exeter is a prosperous city with a wealth of historical and natural assets.  The relati vely high  
quality of life that Exeter o ffers is a major factor in explaining why people choose to live in 
the cit y. It has a significant role in the region as a provider of employment, retail, cultural 
and leisure activities.  As the city grows, the quality  of life must not be diminished but 
enhanced for the benefit of all those who live or work in, or visit, the cit y. 
2.36  There are significant challenges.  The city su ffers from a lack of a ffordable housing and  
is under pressure to provide more land for housing and employment.  Traffic congestion 
on Exete r’s major routes is a problem and improving movement, whilst at the same time 
reducing CO2 emissions, must be addressed. Increasingl y, it will be necessary to resolve 
some of these issues beyond the city ’s boundaries.  This is recognised in the designation 
of the Exeter area as a Growth Point.  The Growth Point Board comprises East Devon 
District Council (EDDC), Devon County Council (DCC) Exeter City Council (ECC) and a 
range of key partners whose remit is to help deliver growth in the Exeter sub region. With 
the establishment of the Local Enterprise Partnership a Local Delivery Board has been 
established to provide a local delivery structure for the Exeter econom y. 
11  3. 
 
3.1 Vision and objecti ves 
 
The need for additional housing and employment land presents Exeter with a very real 
challenge, but growth in the city is not a new phenomenon. From its beginnings as a 
Roman town, Exeter has been an economically successful city and this has resulted in 
a steady expansion.  The speed of growth has been particularly marked since the mid - 
nineteenth century but Exeter has proved itself able to adapt and respond to change.  
The  Vision  
3.2 Exeter will embrace its role in the region as an area of growth:  
• by providing houses, jobs and supporting infrastructure through maximising the  
use of pr eviously developed land within the cit y, and through sustainable urban 
extensions to the east, at Newcourt and Monkerton/Hill Barton, and to the south 
west at  Alphington; and,  
• by m aintaining a vital and viable mix of uses in the City Centre and delivering  
development to enhance Exete r’s position as a premier retail and cultural 
destination.  
In delivering growth Exeter will build on its strengths and assets by safeguarding the  
hills to the north and north west, protecting the historic environment and enhancing 
green infrastructure. The key is to maintain and improve Exete r’s unique identity  
and quality of life, whilst addressing the challenges arising from climate change and 
facilitating the transition to a low carbon econom y. 
Exete r’s strategic role will be enhanced by new housing and employment close to  
the city within the adjoining authorities. Significant new development will occur 
within East Devon including a new settlement and an urban extension to the east of 
Exete r. 
3.3  The Core Strategy draws on the Sustainable Community Strategy (see below), together  
with other Council strategies and programmes and those of partner organisations, to arrive 
at The Vision.  
Sustain able Community St rategy 
3.4 The Sustainable Community Strategy states that:  
‘Sustainable communities are places where people choose to live and work.  They are  safe 
places, o ffering opportunities for everyone, where the environment is respected and with 
the housing, amenities, schools, hospitals, and transport links that people need to live well. 
To become a sustainable cit y, Exeter must balance the economic, so cial and environmental 
aspects of the communit y.’ 
3.5 The Core Strategy provides guidance as to how the spatial elements of Exete r’s 
Sustainable Community Strategy should be delivered.  The Sustainable Community 
Strategy is made up of nine themes (see  Appendix 5).  At the start of each section of the 
Core Strategy the relevant themes are identified.    
12  Balanced growth 
3.6 The task for the Core Strategy is to ensure that balanced economic and housing growth is  
achieved without loss to the character of Exeter and in the most sustainable way possible.  
3.7 The impact of th e city ’s growth in the context of climate change is a serious concern, unless  
that impact can be mitigated. In response, throughout the Core Strategy there is a focus on 
mitigating climate change through minimising incremental carbon emissions and managing  
and adapting to the inevitable environmental consequences of climate change that are  
a result of past emissions.  The city also needs to reduce existing emissions.  The Core  
Strategy therefore:  
•  sets out spatial planning policies that concentrate development in locations  
expected to be resilient to climate change  
• seeks to avoid and manage flood risk  
• aims to promote and preserve biodiversity and green infrastructure across the city  
•  provides policy guidance on transport, flood risk, design, low and zero carbon  
   development (including renewable energy) and sustainable construction  
•  seeks to reduce transport emissions and provide infrastructure to achieve a step  
change in public transport use;  
• links low carbon infrastructure from new development to existing buildings; and,  
• includes measures to reduce residential and non -residential carbon emissions.  
Objecti ves 
3.8 To support and deliver the Vision, the Core Strategy sets out the following ten objectives.  
The aim is to achieve a sustainable balance that responds to the key issues (identified in 
Section 2) and meets the overall needs of the cit y, but also to respond to the challenges 
arising from climate change.  These objectives are repeated at the start of each section to 
which they are relevant, together with the corresponding Sus tainable Community Strategy 
themes.  
1. Make the fullest contribution possible to the mitigation of, and adaptation to, climate  
change and the transition to a low carbon economy b y, in particular:  
• reducing the use of fossil fuels by promoting high quality public transport and  
encouraging walking and cycling;  
• making the best use of land by maximising the use of previously developed land,  
promoting conversions and encouraging high density development in the City  
Centre and in appro priate locations within the urban extensions;  
• supporting the delivery of new housing and employment in East Devon and  
Teignbrid ge including a new settlement and an urban extensions to the east of  
Exeter;  
• in partnership with others, promoting the efficient use of natural resources,  
the re -use and recycling of resources, and the production and consumption of 
renewable energy;  
13  • encouraging and facilitating the development of low and zero carbon energy  
development which reduces CO2 emissions and the city ’s exposure to high fossil 
fuel prices, and improves the city ’s energy security; and,  
• linking the provision of low and zero carbon energy infrastructure in new  
developments to existing buildings to create more viable schemes and expand  
the benefits of such schemes more widely across the cit y. 
2. Develop the potential of the  city for further economic and commercial investment by:  
• diversifying the Exeter economy with particular focus on knowledge -based  
activities and low and zero carbon technology;  
• providing sufficient land and an appropriate range of accommodation for  
businesses particularly in the Monkerton/Hill Barton, Newcourt and Matford 
areas;  
• providing opportunities for high quality office development within the City  
Centre;  
• supporting training and education including a bespoke facility at Monkerton; and,  
• improving, in partnership with others, economic inclusion and productivit y, 
particularly in areas of deprivation such as Newtown and Prior y. 
3. Aim to provide everyone in the community with the opportunity of living in a decent  
warm home of a suitable type, size and tenure for their needs, supported by the  
local community facilities they require, by making full and efficient use of previously 
develop ed land and delivering sustainable urban extensions to the east and south - 
west in co -operation with adjoining authorities.  
4. Provide and enhance retail, cultural and tourist facilities in the City Centre that  
reflect and enhance Exete r’s regional and sub -regional status and sphere of 
influence, that add to economic growth, that build social cohesion, and that promote 
vitality and viability; and continue to enhance the Quay and Canal area as a centre 
for tourism and recreation.  
5. Minimise the need to travel a nd reduce the dependence on the ca r, in accordance  
with the Local Transport Plan and the Green Infrastructure Strateg y, through:  
• the enhancement of transport infrastructure and services;  
• a step change in the use of sustainable transport; and  
• providing easy access to jobs and community facilities within the urban  
extensions to the east and south -west.  
6. Meet local needs for communit y, cultural, social, retail, health, education, religious,  
and recreational facilities, particularly within the urban extensions, regeneration 
areas and in areas of deprivation, in order to improve quality of life and reduce social 
exclusion and the perception of crime.  
14  7. Promote development that contributes to a healthy population - by implementing the  
Green Infrastructure Strategy and ensuring that environmental quality and air quality 
is protected and enhanced.  
8. Protect and enhance the city ’s unique historic character and townscape, its  
archaeological heritage, its natural setting that is provided by the valley parks and 
the hills to the north and west, and its biodiversity and geological assets.  
9. Create and reinforce local distinctiveness and raise the quality of urban living  
through excellence in design.  
10. Ensure that infrastructure is in place, when required, that will enable the proposals  
for development within the urban area, and the Monkerton and Hill Barton, Newcourt 
and Alphington urban extensions, to be delivered successfull y. 
15  4. Providing  for growth: Spatial strategy 
Levels of  growth 
4.1 Levels of growth are informed by those s et out in the Regional Strategy evidence base and  
by what the City Council feel can be accommodated within the environmental limits of the 
city. 
Housing  
4.2 In terms of housing provision work done for the draft Regional Spatial Strategy and  
published in June 2006 and based on local authorities own calculations of capacity 
identified a housing requirement of around 11,000 additional houses to be built in the 
city up to 2026. When this figure was tested a t the Examination in Public by the Panel it  
was increased to a figure of 12,000 houses to allow for changes in household formation. 
The Panel recognised however that further expansion of the city was constrained by 
“topograph y, flood plains and environmen tal factors to the north, west and south.”  The 
Panels Report was subsequently considered by the Secretary of State who proposed to 
increase the housing requirement for the city to 15,000 houses.  
16 Object ive 1 – Mitigate and ad apt to climate change  
 
 
Object ive 2 – Develop the potential for economic and comme rcial d evelopment  
 
 
Object ive 3 – Provide decent homes for all  
 
 
Object ive 4 – Provide and enhance retail, cultu ral and tourist facilities 
Object ive 5 – Achieve a step change in the use of  sustain able transpo rt 
Object ive 6 – Meet community needs  
Object ive 7 – Promote d evelopment th at contri butes to a healt hy popul ation 
 
 
Object ive 8 – Protect and enhance the city ’s character  
 
 
Object ive 9 – Achieve excellence in design  
 
 
Object ive 10 – Provide inf rastructu re to del iver high quality d evelopment  
 
 
Sustain able Community St rategy: 
• A prospe rous city  
• A lea rning city 
• An accessible city  
• A city with st rong communities  
• A city th at is he athy and act ive 
• A sa fe city  
• A city th at cares for the e nvironment  
• A city with homes for everyone 
• A city of  cultu re  4.3 With the publication in mid 2008 of the Secr etary of States’  Proposed Changes the  
Council was concerned that the increase to 15,000 was not soundly based on evidence  
of capacit y. On the basis of capacity studies already undertaken by the Council it believed 
that the figure of around 12,000 dwellings  was a figure which more closely related to the 
environmental capacity of the cit y. 
4.4 Further work was done to establish the capacity for development within the city boundaries  
culminating in publication of the 2009 and 2010 Strategic Housing Land  Availability 
Assessments (SHLAA).  The SHLAAs drew heavily on other studies such as the Exeter 
Fringes Landscape Sensitivity and Capacity Study  published in February 2007 and  The 
Strategic Flood Risk  Assessment published in February 2008. SHLAA  work also involved 
assessment of the suitability and viability of potential development sites by a Panel of 
housing stakeholders.  The conclusions of the 2 009 SHLAA  broadly supports the elected 
members view that a housing requirement of 12,000 can be accommodated within the 
environmental capacity of the city whilst 15,000 houses can only be accommodated by 
making assumptions about the number of sites coming forward as windfalls and by making 
assumptions about possible future locations for growth that are considered to threaten 
environmental limits.  The findings of the 2010 SHLA A reinforce this conclusion.  
4.5 The Council therefore concludes that a housing requirem ent of 12,000 houses up to 2026  
is justified by work done to assess housing need but is also appropriate to the locally  
determined capacity of the environment to accommodate more housing growth.  
4.6 Adjoining the cit y, the RSS Proposed Changes envisaged the development of:  
•  around 7,500 dwellings at the Cranbrook new community to the east of Exeter in East  
Devon;  
•  approximately 4,000 dwellings through urban extensions or a second new community  
also to the east of Exeter in East Devon;  
•  a further 2,000 dwellings through an urban extension to the south west of the city in  
Teignbri dge (in addition to the 500 dwellings within the city south of  Alphington that are  
included in the city wide 12,000 dwelling target above).  
The City Council will work with adjacent district council ’s, the County Council and other  
delivery partners to determine the appropriate level of growth within their boundaries, but 
the City Council supports the Regional Strategy ’s vision for further development beyond its 
administrative boundaries.  
Empl oyment  
4.7 Within the cit y, around 20 hectares of employment land have been completed since 2006  
or have planning permission. In view of competing land requirements, the Core Strategy 
evidence base, in particular the Employment Land Review and the Strategic Housin g Land 
Availability  Assessment (see  Appendix 2), suggests a maximum of around 40 additional 
hectares can be allocated within the cit y. The Exeter Employment Study indicates that the 
provision of 60 hectares of employment land for the city would provide suf ficient industrial 
and business floorspace in the area up to 2026.  The city provision will be in addition to 25 
hectares at the Science Park and 40 hectares at the Skypark, both within East Devon.  A 
further 35 hectares may be provided adjacent to the city in East Devon (as considered in 
the East Devon Issues and Options Report, 2008).  
17  Retail 
4.8  The Exeter Retail Study 2008 identifies capacity for additional retail, particularly  
comparison, floorspace within the City Centre up to 2026.  The Core Strategy makes  
provision for around 40,000 sq.metres net retail floorspace between 2006 and 2026.    
Scale of  growth 
4.9 The scale of  growth set out above has resulted in the area achieving New Growth  
Point (NGP) status.  The City Council will work with neighbouring authorities and other 
stakeholders and seek to maximise the scale of sustainable growth at Exeter in accordance 
with the go vernment ’s Pro -Growth agenda.  
Spatial approach 
4.10 The constraints on the city dictate that the focus for development beyond the urban area  
lies to the east and south west of the cit y. This is also the conclusion of the Landscape 
Sensitivity and Capacity Stud y, the Energy Strategy and the Sustainability  Appraisal for the 
Core Strateg y. 
4.11 The aim is to enable the city to grow without damaging those environmental  
assets that, to a large extent, generate the opportunities and pressures for growth. 
Accordingl y, proposals for development are identified, based on giving priority to 
sustainable locations, by:  
• focu sing on the City Centre, existing centres, and previously developed land,  
including the regeneration of the Grecian Quarter and the Water Lane area;  
• providing for additional development in sustainable urban extensions to the east  
and south west of Exete r, where the necessary infrastructure, particularly low and 
zero carbon and transport infrastructure, is in place or can be made available;  
• development to the east of Exeter should extend beyond the city ’s administrative  
boundary and the City Council will work with all stakeholders to support joint 
working to achieve this;  
• steering development away from the hills to the north and north west that are  
strategically important to the landscape setting and character of the city;  
• requiring that green infrastructure is planned for at the outset and is an integral  
part of development; and,  
• taking a precautionary approach to flood risk by applying a risk based search  
sequence that avoids areas of higher risk where possible and ma nages that risk  
elsewhere.  
18  4.12  The scale of development proposed will require significant investment in highway  
infrastructure and a step change in t he provision of public transport and other sustainable 
modes.  The promotion of development areas to the east and south west of the city (see 
Sections 5 and 6 in respect of employment and housing land requirements), is likely to 
secure a spatial balance of infrastructure provision that will enable development targets  
to be met.  The need to ensure that development comes forward in a comprehensive  
and sustainable manner requires the continuation of close working with East Devon and  
Teignbridge District Councils, Devon County Council and the Growth Point.  
4.13 The urban extensions at Monkerton and Hill Barton, Newcourt and  Alphington are central  
to the delivery of the spatial strateg y. Accordingl y, these areas are identified as strategic 
allocations (see Section 12).  A Masterplan has been prepared for each area.  The City 
Council will support the proposals for urban extensions to the east of Exeter as set out in 
the draft East Devon Core Strateg y. The Council will work with East Devon District Council 
and others to encour age early delivery of comprehensive mixed use urban extensions 
crossing the administrative boundary of Exeter and East Devon.  
19 CP1:   Over the plan period 2006 -2026 provision is made within the cit y, for:  
 
 
•  around 60 hecta res of   employment land  
• at least 12,000 dwellings  
• up to 40,000 sq met res net retail floo rspac e. 
 
 
The spatial strategy identifies the opportunities for Exeter to grow within its 
environmental limits. Development will be guided to the most sustainable 
locations, recognising the contribution to be made to growth by the existing urban 
area, particularly the City Centre, and ensuring that the necessary infrastructure, 
including low and zero carbon energ y, transport and green infrastructure, is in 
place to allow for sustainable urban extensions to the east and south west of the 
city. 
 
Proposals are based on:  
 
 
(i)     around 4,900 dwellings and 20 hecta res of  employment land th at are 
   completed or h ave planning pe rmission.  
 
 
(ii) promoting the City Cent re as the sustain able hea rt of the city to in clude 
provision for: 
 
          up to 30,000 sq met res office floo rspace on a round 1.5 hecta res of   land,   
about 200 dwelling s, and  
          around 3,000 sq met res net retail co nvenience floo rspac e, and up to 37,000    
          sq met res net retail comparison floo rspac e. 
 
 
(iii) promoting the land to the east of  the outer by -pass (within the city) at 
Monkerton/Hill Ba rton and Ne wcourt as comp rehens ively planned and fully 
integrated mi xed-use urban extensions to p rovide in total:  
 
about 21 hecta res of  employment land, and  
          around 4,800 dwelling s.  20  
(iv)    providing a fu rther 5.5 hecta res of   employment land to the no rth east of   the  
         city in the Pinhoe a rea. 
 
 
(v) securing a balance of  infrastructu re provision and housing del ivery by 
identifyin g, to the south west of  the cit y, about:  
 
15 hecta res of  employment land at Matford, and a round 500 dwellings south 
of Alphington as pa rt of a larger urban extension th at extends south of  the 
          city bounda ry into Teignbridg e.   
 
 
(vi)   bringing forward development in the rest of  the city to accommod ate around  
   1,800 dwelling s.  5. Empl oyment  
5.1  Exeter is identified by the Regional Development  Agency as one of five key areas that can  
make the biggest contribution to raising productivity and delivering sustainable growth in 
the region, through building  on existing economic strengths and investing in the knowledge 
and skills base.  This reflects the significant step change that has occurred in Exete r’s 
economic performance.  The city has benefited from significant inward investment and 
attracts labour from  a wide surrounding area. Levels of productivity have been well above 
both the regional and national average.  
5.2 This economic success is largely a consequence of the city ’s quality of life, its strategic  
location on the major transport networks, the presence of the Universit y, Exeter  
International  Airport and the Met Office, and strong working relationships between all those 
involved in economic activity in and around the cit y. As a result, it is recognised by the 
Regional Economic Strategy as having the potential to make a more significant contribution 
to the regional economy in the future.  
5.3 While the economic downturn is clearly still having an e ffect on Exete r, it is believed that  
the factors that have generated significant growth will sustain the economic prosperity of  
the city in the long term.  
5.4 Research for the RSS indicated there is potential for more jobs in retail, health and  
social care but the key growth sectors are information and communications technolog y, 
biotechnology and computer services.  There is a strong service/office sector in the c ity 
and a growing capacity for knowledge transfer and innovation (evidenced by expansion of 
the Innovation Centre at the University and increase in knowledge -economy employment 
by over 4,500 between 1998 and 2003). Howeve r, the knowledge -based employment 
structure remains under developed.  There is a need to shift the Exeter economy towards 
these high -growth, high -value -added sectors, particularly electronics, and other business 
services.  The knowledge -based institutions located in Exete r, including the Univ ersity, Met 
Office and Peninsula Medical School, will be key economic drivers.  
5.5 Particular focus will be placed on the improvement of skills and learning in the workplace  
and increased use of Information and Communication  Technology (ICT).  The development 
of innovative approaches to market development and business processes in service sector 
companies will also be encouraged.  The established close links between the Universit y, 
public sector and businesses will be exploited to encourage a higher rate of technology 
transfe r, and to increase the availability of opportunities for graduates in the cit y. A key 
21  
Object ive 1: Miti gate and ad apt to climate change  
 
 
Object ive 2: D evelop the potential for economic and  comme rcial i nvestment  
 
 
Object ive 10: P rovide inf rastructu re to del iver high quality d evelopment  
 
 
Sustainable Community Strategy:  
•  A prospe rous city  
• A lea rning city  
• A city with st rong communities   element in all of this will be the development of a science park immediately to the east  
of the city boundar y, adjoining Junction 29 of the M5, which is being promoted jointly by 
the University of Exete r, Regional Development  Agenc y, Exeter City Council, East Devon 
District Council, Devon County Council and the Met Office.  
5.6 A study of town centres in the southwest, by DTZ Pieda Consulting for the Regional  
Assembl y, points to the need for prestige office developments throughout the region. 
Exeter is identified by the study as a ‘regional office centre ’ with the fourth highest level 
of provision in the region.  The city has relatively modern office stock owing to significant  
development since 1990 and particularly since 2000.  The majority of these developments, 
howeve r, have been out of town – town -centre completions hav e been at a comparatively 
low level.  The Study suggests that, in Exete r, there is a need to stimulate town -centre office 
supply whilst limiting out -of-town development but not so that overall economic growth is 
stifled through a lack of suppl y. 
5.7  Despite having the profile of a healthy and growing economy until very recent times, there  
are other issues of concern that could constrain further growth.  These include a shortage of 
affordable accommodation, low economic performance and participation in deprived wards, 
a relatively poor skills base, inadequate transport infrastructure, under -representation of 
high-value -added employment in the creative industries and manufacturing sectors, and a 
shortage of availa ble high -quality employment land. Whilst in the short run the economic 
downturn is likely to have most significant direct impact on growth levels, it is the factors 
identified above that could continue to constrain growth in the longer period to 2026.  
5.8 The City Council is working with partners in the sub -region, particularly through the  
New Growth Point initiative, to meet these challenges and ensure the resumption of 
high levels of growth.  The LDF will complement this work by providing a choice of  
sites to meet the economic development needs of the city and by providing social and 
community infrastructure to help overcome skills and participation constraints. In particular 
a comprehensive approach will be adopted to the planning and delivery of proposals  
for housing and employment within the city between the bypass and the motorway that 
integrates closely with developments such as the Science Park, Skypark, and the new 
freight terminal within East Devon.  
Land requirements  
5.9 Completions since 2006 and planning permissions at 1  April 2010 provide  around 20  
hectares of employment land as follows:  
                  Area (hectares)  
Completions 2006 -2010:  12.68  
Land with planning permission:  8.04 
Land with a resolution to grant planning permission,  
subject to the signing of a Section 106 Obligation:  1.17 
Total: 21.89  
22  5.10 There is concern that within the city there is a lack of available quality sites for all needs,  
including for larger light -manufacturing purposes.  The majority of sites with planning 
permission are less than one hectare and many are  extensions to existing premises. In the 
main, the Local Plan allocations are relatively small and, to some degree, constrained.  This 
has the e ffect of producing upward pressure on land prices and deterring major investment 
as well as growth of indigenous businesses.  This emphasises the need to identify land to 
ensure Exeter remains economically successful.  
5.11 In response to this concern, the City Council commissioned  Atkins to assess employment  
land requirements for the city and to advise on whether the ambitions for office growth in  
the City Centre are realistic (see  Appendix 2).  
5.12 The Exeter Employment Study advises that the employment land provision proposed  
provides sufficient provision for industrial and business floorspace in the city area up to  
2026 and, in particula r, allows for the establishment of new enterprises, expansion of 
indigenous businesses and significant inward investment in key knowledge -based sectors.  
The analysis within the Study also confirms a shortfall of suitable sites  to meet short term 
demand.  
5.13  The Study concludes further that demand for new offices in the City Centre will be  
significant, particularly from medium and large sized companies.  A gross additional 
requirement of approximately 60,000 sq m of office space in the City Centre is suggested 
over the period 2006 to 2026.  The consultants advise that office development should  be 
required as a significant part of mixed -use schemes in the City Centre.   
Land p rovision  
5.14 The Spatial Strategy indicates that approximately 40 hectares of employment land should  
be found in the cit y. The Landscape Sensitivity and Capacity Stud y, together with the 
Sustainability  Appraisal,  suggests that development of the land to the north and north 
west of the city is not desirable no r, in comparison with other parts of the cit y, particularly 
suitable.  The Exeter Employment Land Review (ELR) has assessed the suitability of  
existing and potential employment sites for employment purposes. Based on this analysis, 
the main opportunities to meet the employment requirements are:  
  
  
  
  (i)   
(ii)  
(iii)  
(iv)  redevelopment on previously developed l and within the built -up area;  
development to the east beyond the outer bypass; 
development to the south west in the Matford area. 
previously developed land  
5.15 The City Centre, where good public transport provides access to all and minimises carbon  
emissions, is a key location for high -quality office development. Whilst the City Centre can 
be attractive to office development, the supply of new office floorspace in the City Centre 
has reduced significantly in recent years. Sites that come forward for development in the 
City Centre tend to be taken up, because of higher val ues, for retail or residential use. 
There are few vacant sites.  
23  5.16  A proactive stance will be taken to the provision of office floorspace in the City Centre in  
order to respond to the deman d identified in the Exeter Employment Stud y. Whilst a policy 
that seeks to exclude uses other than offices would not result in a vital and viable City 
Centre, additional business floorspace can be provided through mixed -use development, 
with a significant business component, on redevelopment sites.  The fact is, howeve r, that 
there are limited redevelopment opportunities in the City Centre and significant competing 
land demands.  Accordingl y, in response to the potential level of demand, provision is made 
for up to 30,000 sq m of office space on about 1.5 hectares of land.  
5.17  The Exeter Employment Study highlights that a significant constraint to realising the  
demand for new  office premises in the City Centre is a lack of parking facilities.  This does 
indicate that there is a need for careful assessment of parking provision together with an 
emphasis on enhancing other modes of transport.  The Council will work with Devon Count y 
Council to improve accessibility by public transport and other sustainable means of travel, 
for example Park and Ride.  
5.18  To ensure suitable provision is made for the proposed additional office space, and in  
recogn ition of the conclusions of the ELR, the Site  Allocations DPD will include a review of 
proposals in the Local Plan First Review for a mix of uses on the Bus and Coach Station 
site, between Cheeke Street and Paris Street, and around St David ’s Station, and will 
assess the potential of other areas for redevelopment, such as to the north east of Cheeke 
Street between Sidwell Street and Western Way. 
5.19 Outside the City Centre the opportunities for redevelopment of previously developed  
land for employment purposes are also in short suppl y. Such sites need to relate well  
to neighbouring uses and must be sustainable in transport terms. In the Pinhoe area an 
allowance of approximately 5.5 hectares is made for employment use.  
  (ii)  East of the Outer Bypass  
5.20  Within the City boundar y, the gr eenfield land between the outer bypass and the M5, from  
Pinhoe Road to  Topsham Road, is the area of choice for inward investment because of the 
good accessibility and links to the major highway network.  The ELR concludes that many 
sites within this area would be attractive to employers. Howeve r, it will be essential to 
ensure e ffective integration of residential, employment and infrastructure provision in order 
to create sustainable communities that contribute to a reduction in the need to travel and 
minimise carbon emissions.  
5.21 The Masterplan for the Monkerton and Hill Barton area indicates the suitability of 5  hectares  
of land fronting Honiton Road, south of the Met Office, for employment use, but proposes 
that the Local Plan allocation to the north west of Exeter Business Park at Oberon Way 
shall be used for housing.  
5.22 The Masterplan for Newcourt concludes that the Local Plan employment allocation to  
the south of the  A379, should be reconfigured to provide two sites, one to the west of 
the railway and one to the east of the railwa y, to provide in total around 16 hectares of 
employment land.  
24    (iii)    South West 
5.23 In line with the aim of providing a further development focus to the south west of the cit y, 
there is the opportunity to extend Matford Business Park southwards onto approximately 15 
hectares of land adjoining Bad Homburg Way. 
5.24 The suitability of this land for development has been considered through the ELR, Strategic  
Flood Risk  Assessment and the Core Strategy Habitats Regulations  Assessment (see  
Appendix 2)1. 
Retention of  empl oyment land or p remises  
5.25 In order to provide a range of employment sites, particularly for inward investment and  
limit the need for development on greenfield land, it is vita l that existing employment sites, 
premises and allocations that are viable for continued employment use are safeguarded. 
This will ensure that job opportunities are maintained and the economic health of the city is 
protected.  The release of viable employme nt sites or premises to other uses may only be 
made where their loss would not cause harm to business or employment opportunities, or 
where there are unacceptable amenity impacts for local residents.  
5.26 The ELR sought to establish whether there are employment sites and premises that are  
no longer required to meet employment needs. In general terms this review concludes that 
the established employment areas (Southernha y, Matford, Marsh Barton, Pinhoe, Sowton, 
Exeter Business Park, Pynes Hill and Peninsula Park) are successful and fully occupied. 
Other existing employment sites should be retained in employment use unless it can be 
demonstrated that they are no longer required by their current occupiers and there is no 
local need for employment land to be retained on the site.  All proposals to introduce other 
uses to existing employment areas or sites must be considered when they come forward in 
the light of prevailing employment requirements of the city and the local area.  
Making the best use of  empl oyment land  
5.27  The Council recognises that where an employment site is vacant for a significant period  
of time it will often be worth looking at what changes or improvements may be needed to 
bring the unit back into employment use. On some occasions it will only be through 
redevelopment that a site becomes economically viable again. Changes in layout, design, 
size of unit, overall density and tenure may all contribute to creating a more sou ght after 
development.  
Improvement of  skills  
5.28 To ensure that the Core Strategy ambition to pursue growth is sustainable, contributions will  
be sought from developers to provide infrastructure (see Section 11: Infrastructure) and to 
improve and diversify the skills base through training and other measur es (see Section 9: 
Meeting Community Needs).  
1 As at  April 2010 it has been resolved to grant planning permission to the Matford employment 
extension subject to the signing of a S106 agreement.  
25   The transition to a l ow carbon economy  
5.29 The non -domestic sector is the largest source of CO2 emissions in the cit y. The 
Government ’s ambition is that new non -domestic buildings will be zero carbon from 2019. 
Development proposals must deploy low and zero carbon technology  in order to limit C O2 
emissions over the lifetime of the development and should aim to achieve a balanced heat 
load across the scheme. Development should be future proofed to ensure that new low or 
zero carbon infrastructure can be incorporated. Further guidance will be provided in the 
Sustainable Construction and Renewable Energy Supplementary Planning Document (see 
Section 10).  
26  
CP2:  The development of around 40 hectares of employment land and associated 
infrastructure (in addition to around 20 hectares comprising completions and 
permissions at 1  April 2010) is proposed, as follows:  
 
• up to 30,000 square metres of office floorspace on about 1.5 hectares , as part of  
mixed development in the City Centre;  
 
 
• around 5.5 hectares in the Pinhoe area;  
 
 
• about 21 hectares to the east of the outer bypass: comprising 5 hectares on the 
fringes of Exeter Business Park in the Hill Barton area, and 16 hectares sout h of 
the A379 in the Newcourt area; and  
 
• about 15 hectares to the south west of the cit y, in the Matford area (subject to 
an acceptable flood risk assessment, ecological survey and habitat regulations 
assessment).  
 
The release of employment allocations for other uses will only be acceptable 
where it can be demonstrated that development for an alternative use represents 
an opportunity that would create significant economic benefits for the city and the 
Travel to Work Area.  
 
The established employment areas at Southernha y, Matford, Marsh Barton, Pinhoe, 
Sowton, Exeter Business Park, Pynes Hill and Peninsular Park will be retained in 
employment use, except where their loss would not cause harm to business or 
employment opportunities or where there are un acceptable amenity impacts for 
local residents.  
 
Elsewhere, an alternative use may be acceptable where it is demonstrated that 
employment use is not viable or needed to meet current and long term needs or 
where there are unacceptable amenity impacts for lo cal residents.   6. Housing  
Housing requirements  
6.1 The Core Strategy is concerned with the delivery of decent hom es to meet the needs of  
the community and with determining the general locations for growth, including strategic 
development allocations. In meeting these requirements the focus must be on delivering 
attractive and sustainable communities and neighbourhood s where people want to live. 
To achieve this, account must be taken of the implications for infrastructure and services, 
including the impact of the development proposals beyond the city boundary to the east  
and south west. Delivering sustainable communiti es is about a lot more than just providing 
housing and, accordingl y, this section should be read in conjunction with other sections, 
particularly 9 to12, and the Residential Design Guide SPD.  
6.2  In accordance with the spatial strategy (see section 4), the aim is to continue to make full  
and e ffective use of land within the urban area without causing unacceptable harm to its 
amenity and characte r. Additional provision will be made in sustainable urban extensions on 
greenfield land.    
Identifying housing land  
6.3 To assess the housing capacity of the cit y, and in accordance with Governmen t 
requirements, the City Council has prepared a Strategic Housing Land  Availability  
Assessment (SHLAA).  
6.4 The preparation of the SHLAA  has followed national guidance and a methodology  
produced by the Council and neighbouring local authorities.  A careful assessment of site 
suitability has ensured that development constraints are recognised and environmental 
assets protected.  A panel of key sta keholders with sound knowledge of the local housing 
development industry has also been involved in its preparation, to ensure that conclusions 
are as robust as possible.  
27 Object ive 1: Miti gate and ad apt to climate change  
 
 
Object ive 3: P rovide decent homes for all  
 
 
Object ive 8: P rotect and enhance the city ’s character  
 
 
Object ive 9: A chieve excellence in design  
 
 
Object ive 10: P rovide inf rastructu re to del iver high quality d evelopment  
 
 
Housing St rategy mission st atement:  The council aims to ensu re that: Everyone 
has the oppo rtunity to l ive in a suit able home th at they can a fford. 
 
 
Sustain able Community St rategy: 
• A city with homes for everyone 
• A  city with st rong communities   6.5  The assessment identifies a range of opportunities on previously developed land within  
the urban area, including potential ‘Regeneration  Areas’, and identifies significant capacit y, 
through urban extensions to the east of the urban area at Monkerton/Hill Barton and 
Newcourt, and to the south -west of the urban area at  Alphington.  
6.6  Other than the urban extensions to the east and south wes t (for which strategic allocations  
are made in Section 12), the Core Strategy does not allocate sites.  Site allocations will be 
brought forward through the Site  Allocations DPD.  
Sites within the urban a rea 
6.7  There are a number of previously developed sites and greenfield sites dispersed around  
the urban area that will contribute to meeting the dwelling requirement. Previously 
developed sites become available when land is no longer required for its original use, or 
where the existing occupier chooses to relocate.  The sites identified have been assessed 
carefully to determine their suitability for residential development and have the potential to 
deliver around 1,000 dwellings.  
Regene ration a reas 
6.8 The Water Lane area, located just  south of the City Centre and adjacent to the River  
Exe, is previously developed and largely in employment use.  The area is identified for 
comprehensive mixed -use redevelopment in the Exeter Local Plan First Revie w. Although 
the Exeter Employment Land Revi ew 2009 concludes that this area o ffers a poor quality 
location for employment use, it could provide a highly sustainable location for residential 
development. Redevelopment would need to improve access and address the issue of 
flood risk through design an d layout.  A Masterplan will be produced to guide growth in the 
Water Lane area.  The area has the potential to deliver around 800 additional dwellings.  
6.9 The Grecian Quarter comprises an area of previously developed land in the City Centre,  
bounded by Sidwell Street, Western Way and Paris Street. It currently incorporates a 
variety of uses, including the city ’s bus and coach station, employment, re tail, leisure, car 
parking and a small amount of housing.  The southern part of the area (including the bus 
and coach station) is allocated in the Exeter Local Plan First Review for comprehensive 
mixed -use redevelopment and will be the subject of a Masterpl an. The area as a whole is 
highly sustainable and o ffers the opportunity to deliver significant regeneration benefits to 
the cit y. The Grecian Quarter has the potential to deliver around 200 additional dwellings.  
Urban extensions to the East and South  West 
6.10  The SHLA A also identifies key developable and deliverable opportunities through  
urban extensions to the east at Monkerton/Hill Barton and Newcourt and to the south of  
Alphington.  
6.11 It is essential that these areas are brought forward for development as sustainable  
communities that recognise the various landscape, biodiversit y, noise and flood risk 
constraints; that incorporate open space, green infrastructure and community  facilities 
as an integral part of the scheme; and that provide for the significant infrastructure  
requirements, in particular highways infrastructure, necessary to accommodate this scale 
of development together with the proposals to the east of the city in East Devon.  
28  6.12 Detailed guidance is set out in Section 12: Strategic  Allocations and in Policy CP19.  
Capacity for the urban extensions has been informed by the SHLAA  and detailed 
masterplanning work.  Around 2,500 dwellings should be provided at Monkerton/Hill Barton,  
2,300 dwellings at Newcourt (in addition to 1176 dwellings with permission) and 500  
dwellings at  Alphington.  
Previous ly developed land  
6.13 The na tional target is to achieve at least 60% of new development on previously developed  
land.  The provision outlined in Policy CP3 belo w, taking into account completions and 
commitments, amounts to around 6,500 dwellings, or around 51% on previously developed 
land.  This reflects the constraints on the city and the need to provide housing through 
greenfield urban extensions.   
Implement ation 
6.14 The provision outlined above should ensure that a 5 -year supply of housing is maintained.  
The housing trajector y, based on the 2010  SHLA A findings, and guidance on monitoring 
and management of housing deliver y, is set out in section 13.  The Council will adopt a 
Development Management Policy Statement to seek to maximise the delivery of housing 
land.  
The transition to a l ow carbon economy  
6.15 Housing is responsible for 34% of Exete r’s CO2 emissions.  The national timetable for  
reducing carbon emissions requires all new homes to be zero carbon from 2016.  The 
Homes and Communities  Agency already requires higher levels of carbon reductions 
through the National  Affordable Housing Programme.  All developers should be mindful 
of the carbon emission standards required at the end of the build programme and  
developments should be future proofed to ensure new technologies can be incorporated at 
a later date. Larger developments have a particular role to play in reducing C O2 emissions. 
It will also be important to facilitate carbon reduction through modificatio ns to existing  
building stock using neighbourhood wide approaches (see 6.26). For both new and existing  
development the provision of low carbon energy supplies will be ke y. Further guidance 
will be provided in the Residential Design Guide SPD and the Decentralised Energy and 
Sustainable Construction SPD (see section 10).  
29  
CP3:  The development of at least 12,000 dwellings is proposed as follows:  
 
 
Completions 2006 -2010                                             2,687  
Planning Permissions                                                2,224  
Permissions subject to S106 agreement                      26 
Identified sites within the urban area                          977 
Regeneration  Areas                                                   1,048  
Newcourt                                                                     2,300  
Monkerton/Hill Barton                                                2,500  
Alphington                                                                     500 
 
 
Total                                                                           12,262   Density  
6.16 In meeting the development targets, increased densities clearly have an important role to  
play. 
6.17 Careful and innovative design is the key to achieving the highest appropriate density in a  
particular location.  A proposal which would harm the character of the neighbourhood or site 
through excessive densit y, poor design or inadequate open space will not be acceptable. 
The aim is to secure a more sustainable pattern of development, utilising innovative design 
to achieve higher densities and to incorporate a mix of land uses where appropriate,  whilst 
retaining the character and quality of the local environment.  This is vital in order to ensure 
the viability of public transport and low carbon energy provision (see Section 10).     
6.18 Detailed guidance is included in the Residential Design Guide, Masterplans for the  
strategic allocations (see Section 12) and will be set out in the Development Management  
DPD.  
Housing ma rket assessment  
6.19  The Exeter and  Torbay Housing Market  Assessment (HMA) was commissioned by a  
partnership comprising Devon County Council, Dartmoor National Park,  Torbay, Mid Devon, 
East Devon, Exeter and  Teignbridge District Councils. Housebuilders, Registered Social 
Landlords and other stakeholders were also involved in its production. It takes a di fferent 
approach to the RSS in that it tries to establish the need for the whole HMA  area utilising 
primary data collected through a Household Survey – a bottom up approach.  
6.20 The HMA  conclud es that whilst the local population is reducing, with fewer births than  
deaths each yea r, the number of households is still increasing due to the changing structure 
of households and substantial net migration. Modelling suggests a total requirement for  
the Exeter and  Torbay Housing Market  Area of between 16,300 and 19,200 dwellings over  
the five year period to 2012.  The HM A estimates that of this total figure approximately  
8,000 are required within the Exeter area (a sub -area including ECC, and significant  parts 
of EDDC, MDDC and  TDC).  Achieving this level of provision would require a step change 
in completions in comparison with what has been achieved in recent years.  The HMA 
recognises that the actual level of provision must seek to reconcile competing pr iorities  
and take into account environmental capacity in determining the most sustainable spatial 
distribution for new development.  Accordingl y, whilst the HMA  provides an essential 
evidence base that has influenced policy choices, the Core Strategy seeks to provide 
housing within Exete r’s environmental limits (see CP3 above).  
6.21 The HMA  stresses the importance of making best use of existing housing stock.  The under - 
occupation of larger houses, vacant properties, and poor condition and energy efficiency 
associated with older housing stock, are dealt with by the Exeter Housing Strateg y. 
Ensuring future homes provide flexible accommodation and providing homes which meet 
the needs of the older population are other important issues to be addressed.  
30  
CP4:  Residential development should achieve the highest appropriate density 
compatible with the protection of heritage assets, local amenities, the character and 
quality of the local environment and the safety and convenience of the local and 
trunk road network.   6.22 Policies in the remainder of this Section are informed by the conclusions of the HMA.  The 
City Council is continuing to work with the other neighbouring Councils, to meet, as far as  
possible, the needs identified in the HMA.  
Meeting housing needs  
6.23 The creation of sustainable, inclusive, mixed communities is a strategic policy objective set  
out in PPS3. Key characteristics of a mixed community are a variety of housing, particularly 
in terms of tenure and price and a mix of di fferent households such as families with  
children, single person households and older people.  
Housing mix  
6.24  Household size declined significantly in the 1970s and 1980s and continued to fall in the  
1990s. More single people were choosing to live alone, reflecting increased life span, 
increased independence in old age, and a high level of divorce.  Howeve r, since this time 
household si ze has remained relatively constant and it is important to ensure that family 
housing is not omitted from schemes due to a concentration on single person housing. In 
creating mixed communities the proportion of dwellings provided must reflect local housing  
need.  
6.25   All major developments (comprising 10 or more dwellings) should include a mix of house  
types informed by context, local housing need and the most up to date HMA.  
Elderly/disabled 
6.26 The long -term trend is for an ageing population, with the proportion of over -60s rising from  
14.6% now to 19% by the year 2026, and the proportion of over -80s rising to 5.3%. Many 
of these may eventually choose to live in specialist older persons accommodation or ‘extra 
care’  housing.  The provision of specialist housing can allow smalle r, older households  
to downsize, freeing up larger family accommodation. It is also important that housing 
schemes include provision of wheelchair accessible homes to meet the needs of those with 
disabilities of all ages. Such housing should normally be provided in sustainable locations, 
close to facilities, as an integral part of  mixed communities.  
Lifetime homes  
6.27 Lifetime Homes provide accessible and adaptable accommodation for everyone, from  
young families to older people and individuals with a temporary or permanent physical 
impairment.  To increase choice, independence and longevity of tenure, vital to individual 
and community well being, and to balance the large percentage of existing stock that is 
not easy to adapt, new housing should be built to Lifetime Homes Standards. Research 
undertaken by the Chartered Institute of Housing in Northern Ireland and the Joseph  
Rowntree Foundation has found that the costs associated with achieving this are minimal. 
Therefore, it is considered viable for all housing developments , except where there are 
significant building or site constraints.  
31  Students  
6.28 The continuing growth of the University of Exeter is important to the future prosperity of  
the cit y. The University of Exeter had 12,929 full -time students living away from home in  
2010/ 11 and envisages that it will have approximately 3,300 additional full -time, living away 
from home students by 2025/26.  The University ’s aim to provide housing for all full -time 
students wh o want it is supported because it will ease pressure on existing family housing.  
75% or more of additional student numbers should be accommodated in purpose built 
student housing. New purpose built student housing should be located on, or close to, the 
University Campuses, at sustainable locations at or near to major transport routes, or in 
the City Centre. Further guidance is provided by the University Supplementary Planning  
Guidance (SPG), the Student  Accommodation Development in Residential  Areas SPG,  the 
University of Exeter Masterplan Framework SPD and the HMO (Use Class C4) SPD.  
Gypsies and Travellers 
6.29 The City Council has participated in a County wide assessment of the housing needs of  
gypsies and travellers.  The intention is to meet  any gaps in provision by identifying suitable 
sites for gypsies and travellers and discourage them from living on unauthorised sites.  The 
assessment concludes that there is a need to provide 12 residential pitches in Exeter up  
to 20 11. A further 13 reside ntial pitches may also be needed by 2026 in view of national 
estimates of likely growth in the number of gypsy households.  The RSS states that five 
transit pitches will also be needed in the cit y. Sites should be of a size and in a location 
that takes into  account the needs of gypsies and travellers, and the interests of local  
residents and other local occupiers of land. Suitable and deliverable sites will be identified 
through the strategic allocations (see section 12) and the Site  Allocations DPD. If a ne ed is 
demonstrated for sites for travelling showpeople, the criteria in Policy CP6 will be applied.  
32  
CP5:   The supply of housing should meet the needs of all members of 
the community such that:  
 
• all major developments (10 or more dwellings) should include a mix of housing 
informed by context, local housing need and the most up to date Housing Market 
Assessment;  
 
• specialist housing, such as wheelchair accessible housing, sheltered housing, 
residential care homes, ‘extr a care’  housing and continuing care retirement 
communities should be provided as part of mixed communities, where possible, 
in accessible locations close to facilities;  
 
• all housing developments should be designed to meet Lifetime Homes Standards  
where f easible and practical; and  
 
 
• purpose built student accommodation should be provided to meet the housing  
need.  
  Affordable housing  
Affordable Housing Percentage and  Threshold  
6.30  For Exete r, the HM A identified a level of a ffordable housing need that exceeds total annual  
completions.  A judgment therefore has to be made on an appropriate a ffordable housing 
requirement.  The Viability  Assessment, completed in 2009, concludes that despite  
the economic downturn a requirement that 35% of dwellings should be a ffordable, on sites 
which are capable of providing three or more dwellings, is reasonable and viable. 
Developers will need to demonstrate if there are specific constraints on particular sites 
that result in the 35% requirement not bein g viable. O ff-site provision or contributions of 
affordable housing will only be agreed in exceptional circumstances where the Council is 
satisfied that the a ffordable housing cannot be managed e ffectively on the site and where 
providing the a ffordable hou sing elsewhere in the city will significantly widen housing 
choice and encourage a better social mix. Where o ff-site provision or contributions is 
agreed, it will be on the basis of the developer providing the same ratio of a ffordable 
housing to market hou sing as would have been provided on -site. 
Social rented and inte rmedi ate housing  
6.31  There is evidence that the high cost of housing relative to incomes has a significant e ffect  
on the ability of the city to attract and retain people with professional and other skills  
that are especially needed.  The Exeter Heart of Devon Economic Development (EHOD) 
Strategy identifies this as a particular weakness of the local econom y.  
33 CP6:   Land will be allocated for 25 residential pitches and 5 transit pitches, for  
gypsies and travellers.  Sites should:  
 
 
a)   be well located on the highway network;  
 
 
b)  have safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian access;  
 
 
c)   be located within a reasonable distance of local facilities, including schools 
and health centres;  
 
d)  minimise environmental and landscape impact;  
 
 
e)   protect the amenities of adjacent occupiers;  
 
 
f)   have adequate levels of privac y, securit y, storage space and residential  
amenity; and  
 
 
g)  provide appropriate parking, including parking for visitors and for commercial 
vehicles related to any business activities likely to be carried out.   6.32 The HMA  suggests that 31% of households seeking a ffordable housing in Exeter have  
an income that should enable them to  access intermediate and some a ffordable rented 
housing. In general, a ffordable rented and intermediate housing requires fewer subsidies to 
be provided by the developer or from other sources than social rented housing. Howeve r, 
people who can only a fford s ocial rented housing generally have the greatest current 
housing problems and, by definition, have very limited choice as to how to resolve them.  
It is considered, therefore, that the priority should continue to be focused on those in 
greatest need.  The C ouncil recognise that in some circumstances however the provision 
of 70% social rented may not be viable and subject to ‘open book discussions’  on viability  
the local authority may accept the provision of a ffordable rent units let so far as possible at 
social rented levels.  The remaining balance should be provided as intermediate a ffordable 
housing.  
6.33 The above is deemed appropriate to encourage mixed communities, maintain housing  
choice, prevent homelessness  and benefit dependence and assist the Council to meet its  
statutory responsibilities towards people on the Housing Registe r. 
Affordable housing mix  
6.34  Clearly a ffordable housing supply is unlikely to meet identified requirements. Because of  
this it will be necessary to prioritise supply to those in greatest need. One likely e ffect of 
this will be that the mix of house types needed for a ffordable housing will be di fferent from 
the mix required for market housing and hence securing a representative mix of a ffordable 
housing on a site by site basis will not provide a mix of types to meet the greatest need. 
For example, at present, the number of people on the Devon Home Choice system for 
prioritising a ffordable housing requiring three or more bedrooms far exceeds the supply  
of dwellings of this size.  Therefore  the Affordable Housing SPD, that will be prepared to 
amplify the Core Strategy a ffordable housing polic y, will set out the circumstances under 
which an a ffordable housing mix that reflects local need (rather than a representative mix) 
will be identified a nd secured.  The a ffordable housing mix should include specialist housing 
where there is a demonstrable need.  
Supplementa ry Planning Document  
6.35  More specific guidance amplifying Core Strategy Policy on a ffordable housing policy  will be  
provided by an  Affordable Housing SPD.  
34 CP7:   On sites capable of providing 3 or more additional dwellings (irrespective 
of the number of dwellings proposed) 35% of the total housing provision should  
be made available as affordable housing for households whose housing needs are 
not met by the market.  At least 70% of the affordable housing should be provided 
as social rented housing. The overall percentage of affordable housing and the 
tenure split will be subject to considerations of viability and feasibilit y. Where it is 
not possible for viability reasons to provide the full requirement of social rented 
housing affordable rent provision would be  considered let as far as possible at 
social rented levels. The remaining balance of the affordable housing should be 
delivered as intermediate affordable housing.   7. Retail 
7.1 Completion of the Princesshay development in 2007/2008 has strengthened Exete r’s 
retail ‘o ffer’. It is, howeve r, in the nature of retailing that the relative attractiveness of a 
shopping centre will be challenged continually by competitors from elsewhere and from  
out-of-town development.  The Local Development Framework must, together with the City 
Centre Strateg y, ensure that the sta tus of Exeter as a retail destination is maintained and 
enhanced.  
The transition to a l ow carbon economy  
7.2 The non -domestic secto r, which includes retail development, is the largest source of CO2 
emissions in the cit y. The Government ’s ambition is that new retail buildings will need to be 
zero carbon from 2019.  All developments must deploy low and zero carbon technology in 
order to limit CO2 emissions over their lifetime and should be  future proofed to allow new 
technologies to be easily incorporated.  
Retail c apacity  
7.3 In 2008, a study was carried out by consultants DTZ for the City Council on the need for  
additional retail floorspace in the city up to 2026.  The stud y, published in February 200 9, 
followed similar assessments in 2004 and 2007, which, togethe r, have allowed for an 
informed and consistent approach to retail planning in the cit y. 
7.4 The study concludes that the priority is for a new convenience food store and a major  
comparison development in the City Centre. By 20 11, the capacity for additional 
convenience floorspace in the City Centre is predicted to be around 1,500 square metres, 
sufficient for a substantial format foodstore, rising to around 2,500 square metres by  
2021 and around 3,000 square metres by 2026.  The capacity for additional comparison  
floorspace in the City Centre is expected to be around 19,000 square metres by 2016,  
37,000 square metres by 2021 and 57,000 square metres by 2026. Howeve r, if a major 
retail development was anchored by a front rank department store, the study concludes it 
would be more realistic to assume that the market share of comparison goods expenditure 
attracted by the City Centre from the catchment area would increase. Under this scenario 
capacity for additional comparison flo orspace in the City Centre is expected to be 
significantly highe r.  
35  
Objective 1: Mitigate and adapt to climate change  
 
 
Objective 4: Provide and enhance retail, cultural and tourist facilities  
 
 
Sustainable Community Strategy:  
• A prosperous city  
• A city of culture  
• A city that cares for the environment  
  7.5 The forecasts also show that there will not be capacity for a convenience food superstore  
outside  the City Centre  until about  2026  and that capacity  for comparison  (retail  warehouse) 
provision will not start to arise until after 2015, although growing to around 20,000 square 
metres by the end of the plan period.  
City Cent re 
7.6 The particular advantages of locating additional foodstore provision in the City Centre,  
district and local centres, if suitable sites are available, are that this will provide:  
• greater convenience for shoppers able to buy a range of food and non -food goods on  
one trip as well as undertaking related activities;  
• less pollution as a result of shorter multi -purpose journeys;  
• support for specialist shops and tourist facilities through joint trips and, consequentl y, 
ability to sustain the buildings that they occupy;  
• a service for residents, workers and those on low income without access to a car; and  
• an opportunity to enhance local community facilities.  
7.7 Concentrating the sale of comparison goods in the City Centre, district centres and  
local centres has similar advantages.  This includes bulky goods if these centres can 
accommodate them.  Traditionall y, goods such as electrical appliances, carpets and 
furniture have been sold from department stores and other High Street shops. Whilst the 
display of such items may require large showrooms, their sale does not require necessarily 
an out -of-centre retail warehouse format with extensive areas of adjacent surface car 
parking.  
7.8 The challenge from out -of-centre shopping has focused attention on the need to enhance  
the quality and character of every aspect of the City Centre.  The strength of the City 
Centre lies in its ability to support a wide range of retail uses, from ‘High Street’  names to 
small independent shops and markets that help to enhance the character and vibrancy  
of the centre. Being centred on the hub of the public transport system, the City Centre also 
provides a sustainable location for other act ivities such as, work, culture, tourism, leisure 
and relaxation. If the City Centre is not supported, the trend towards dispersal, car 
dependence and inequality of access will continue. Restraining dispersal must be matched 
by investment and positive actio n in the City Centre supported by a long -term commitment 
so that confidence (e.g. by retailers, financial institutions and property developers) is 
maintained and increased.  
City Cent re audit  
7.9 In 2005, an audit of the City Centre was carried out by property surveying consultants  
CBRE.  The audit presented a positive picture of an attractive, compact City Centre with a 
good range of shopping and other facilities. It also highlighted some weaknesses.  These 
included, in particula r, the need to enhance Exete r’s evening econom y, the environmental 
quality of shopping streets outside the High Street, accessibility and signage, and the 
quality of the pedestrian environment.  The audit also suggested that although Exeter has 
a competitive advantage over many centres, it also needed to widen its retail o ffer. All 
of these issues have been addr essed to some degree by the opening of Princessha y. 
Improvements to the public realm, removing barriers to pedestrian movement, and 
expansion of retail facilities through mixed -use development are ongoing and will continue 
to be the priorit y. 
36  Bus and Coa ch Station 
7.10 The key opportunity for City Centre investment, in response to the capacity forecast by  
the 2008 Stud y, is the Bus and Coach Station site on Paris Street, which is identified in 
the adopted Local Plan First Review for major mixed development including retail.  A 
Masterplan for the site is in preparation, which will feed into the Site  Allocatio ns DPD.  
Policy guidance  
7.11 The spatial approach to retail provision aims to meet shopping need, including the needs  
of disadvantaged communities, by following a sequential approach that  maintains and 
enhances the City Centre, district and local centres, and locates retail development where 
it is accessible by public transport and other sustainable modes.  The opportunities for 
additional local retail floorspace and environmental enhanceme nts in the district and local  
centres (see  Appendix 6), particularly where this would assist the regeneration of areas, will 
be examined through the Development Management DPD.  There will also be a need for 
some local retail facilities to serve the new development areas on the eastern edge of the 
city and to the east and south west of the city in East Devon and  Teignbridge respectivel y. 
7.12 In planning for new retail provision, D TZ emphasises that the capacity forecasts set out  
in its 2008 study are intended as an indication of the likely order of magnitude of future 
floorspace capacity (if forecast trends are realised), rather than as growth targets or 
rigid limits to growth. DTZ  advises that the forecasts should be revised periodicall y, as 
necessar y, in light of actual population and expenditure growth, and as development 
proceeds and its e ffects become measurable.  Accordingl y, whilst making provision for  
the relatively limited f orecast capacity for 3,000 square metres of convenience floorspace 
in the City Centre to 2026, the Core Strategy takes a cautious approach to City Centre 
comparison floorspace by proposing to meet the capacity forecast to 2021, under the 
scenario where mar ket share does not increase i.e. around 37,000 square metres of 
comparison floorspace.  
7.13  No provision  is made  for convenience or  comparison  floorspace  outside  the existing  centres  
in view of the lack of current capacity and, in respect of comparison provision, the potential 
impact on City Centre development by adversely a ffecting retailer and investor interest  
and reducing development values.  The predicted gradual rise in non-central convenience 
capacity after 2021 and non -central comparison capacity from 2015 will be monitored in 
light of progress being achieved on the Bus and Coach Station development in the City 
Centre.  
7.14 Further policy guidance on dealing with planning applications, in particula r, the need  
for a sequential approach and impact test, will be provided through the Development  
Management DPD.  
37  38 CP8:  Retail facilities will be provided so as to contribute to the delivery of 
sustainable growth and respond to the needs of local, including disadvantaged, 
communities.  
 
To maintain and enhance the vitality and viability of the City Centre, the provision  
of around 3,000 square metres of net retail convenience floorspace and around  
37,000 square metres of net retail comparison floorspace is proposed. This will 
include up to 30,000 square metres of  comparison floorspace in the Bus and 
Coach Station area, to be developed as part of a mixed -use scheme by around  
2016.  
 
 
Retail development outside the City Centre should be located in the district or 
local centres. Out of centre sites will only be consid ered if there are no suitable 
sites in, or on the edge of, the City Centre, district centres or local centres and 
the proposal would cause no significant overall impact on the existing centres  
and would bring net benefits. In all cases proposals must be ac cessible by public 
transport and other sustainable modes, and be appropriate in scale and character 
to the role and function of the proposed location.  
 
Local retail facilities will be required as part of the community provision at the  
Monkerton/Hill Barton  and Newcourt urban extensions.   8. Transpo rt 
8.1  The successful delivery of sustainable growth (see 4.1 -4.6) is dependent on the provision  
of adequate transport infrastructure.  The availability and quality of transport links play a key 
role in deciding where development takes place.  The economic strength of the cit y, and the 
quality of life it has to o ffer, depend very much on the accessibilit y, speed, quality and cost 
of transport facilities.  These are, in turn, constrained by the form and layout of the existing 
urban environment, the capacity of the infrastructure and by environ mental and social 
considerations such as climate change, atmospheric pollution, health, safet y, noise and 
vibration.  
8.2 Within the last 20 years there has been some increase in highway capacit y, as a result  
of junction improvements and traffic management. Howeve r, the highway network 
operates at well over its design capacity in many locations during the peak hou r. The 
capacity of the central area and radial highway network has now reached a point where 
further improvements in capacity cannot be easily achieved without damaging the local 
distinctiveness and heritage of the cit y, air quality and the living environment. Nitrogen 
dioxide emissions generated by motor vehicles using the busiest routes into the city have 
already reached levels that have led to the designation of an  Air Quality Management  Area 
(AQMA).  
8.3 It is clear that the sca le of growth proposed within the city together with proposals adjoining  
the city to the east and south west will result in a significant increase in traffic congestion 
as well as an unacceptable rise in emissions unless significant transport infrastructure  is 
provided.  
8.4 Building on the measures set out in the Devon Local  Transport Plan 2006 -2011, the 
transport infrastructure needed to serve the developments proposed for the Exeter area 
have been assessed jointly by the County Council, City Council, East Devon District 
Council, Highways  Agency and the Regional Development  Agenc y. This work has, in 
particula r, focused on the concentration of development to the east and south west of the 
city, and on the options for a second new community in East Devon and/or further urban 
extensions.  The measures, identified include:  
39  
Objective 1: Mitigate and adapt to climate change  
 
Objective 5:  Achieve a step change in the use of sustainable transport 
Objective 7: Promote development that contributes to a healthy population 
Objective 10: Provide infrastructure to deliver high quality development  
Sustainable Community Strategy:  
• An accessible city  
• A city that cares for the environment  
  • a step change in the qual ity and capacity and environmental performance of public  
transport through the introduction of an enhanced public transport system that would 
link initially the strategic developments to the east of the city (including Cranbrook, 
Exeter  Airport, Monkerton,  and major employment areas) with the City Centre and 
through to the employment areas and major development proposals to the south west – 
supported by steps to secure more e ffective management of demand for travel by road;  
• provision of additional Park and Ride sites around the cit y, including;  
(i)  
(ii)  a new site at Ide interchange to serve the  A30 to the west;  
enhancement of the existing Honiton Road site serving the  A30 to the east, 
subject to the provision of  a new site as part of the strategic developments to the 
east, outside the city boundar y, in East Devon;  
investigation of a potential site within the proposed urban extension to the south 
west, outside the city boundary in  Teignbridge, to serve the  A379 to  the south; 
and, 
investigation of provision to the north west of the city in the Cowley area to serve 
the A377 and  A396 to the north;  (iii)  
(iv)  
• enhancements to the strategic road infrastructure including provision of Clyst Honiton  
Bypass, improvements to M5 Junctions 29 and 30, and measures to reduce the 
pressure on these junctions, including new motorway crossings, and improvements to 
key junct ions on the Exeter Ring Road (A3015) and  Alphington Road corridor;  
• provision of a new railway station on the Exeter to Waterloo rail line at Cranbrook, to  
serve the new community and adjoining developments, and safeguarding of land for 
new rail halts on the Exeter to Exmouth line at the Monkerton/Hill Barton and Newcourt 
urban extensions and on the Exeter to Plymouth line at Matford; and  
• improvements to facilities for pedestrian, cyclists and public transport users and  
provision of school and employer travel plans.  
8.5 The transport infrastructure requirements outlined above are also listed in the Exeter  
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (see  Appendix 2). Key strategic infrastructure requirements are  
identified in Section 11: Infrastructure.   
8.6 The documents to be brought forward through the LDF will aim to facilitate, as far as  
possible, the measures outlined above. Decisions on the broad distribution of development 
will take full account of the existing and proposed transport infrastructure. Patterns of 
movement and modes of travel can, howeve r, also be influenced by a range of other 
measures  at the local level through the planning system:  
  (a)  locating activities that can generate a lot of traffic (such as shopping centres,  
employme nt areas and high density housing) in the City Centre, district centres, 
local centres and other areas with good public transport links;  
  (b)  opposing the loss of shops and other local facilities in existing housing areas;  
(c)  making sure that new housing is within easy walking distance of shops, schools,  
public -transport connections and other local facilities;  
40  (d)  making sure that no more car parking is provided to serve existing and new  
developments than is necessary;  
(e)  requiring that the design and layout of new development encourages access  on  
foot and by bike and for people with disabilities, including provision of supporting 
facilities such as cycle parking;  
  (f)  requiring that development provides fo r, and contributes towards, the improvement  
of the city ’s footpath, cycle and public transport networks, including Park and Ride, 
and towards enhancing the highway network;  
  (g)  encouraging innovative measures, where appropriate, introduced as a result of  
green travel plans, to promote the advantages of sustainable transport modes such 
as car pools, car clubs and car sharing;  
  (h)  supporting the take -up of electric and plug -in hybrid vehicles; and  
  (i)  safeguarding the role of the strategic route network whilst seeking to reduce traffic  
congestion and improve air qualit y. 
8.7 Experience has shown that the perceived advantages of car use for many journeys is  
such that improvements to alternative m odes alone are insufficient to persuade people 
to transfer to them. Measures that discourage car use are necessary as an added 
inducement.  These will be investigated, including, as proposed by the Local  Transport 
Plan, the potential of a workplace parking levy. 
8.8  There are other transport issues that need to be addressed in relation to the efficient and  
sustainable functioning of the City Centre and surrounding area, including:  
• Provision of a new bus and coach station  
• Removing through -traffic from the City Centre  
• Reducing the number of freight movements in th e City Centre  
• Managing City Centre Parking through an appropriate strategy  
• Re-routing bus services  
• Providing enhanced cycle facilities  
• Improving transport links across the City to Exeter University  
These issues will be invest igated further through the Bus and Coach Station  
masterplanning work, and other Supplementary Planning Documents.  
8.9 In view of the existing levels of congestion and the importance of limiting carbon emissions,  
all of the measures discussed above will be required to maintain quality of life and ensure 
the sustainable growth of the cit y. 
41  42  
CP9:   Comprehensive strategic transport measures to accommodate the 
additional development proposed for the city and adjoining areas shall include:  
 
• a step change in the qualit y, capacity and environmental performance of public 
transport, especially between the City Centre and proposed developments 
adjoining the city to the east in East Devon and to the south west in Teignbridge;  
 
• additional Park and Ride sites around the city including Ide interchange;  
 
 
• improvements to the strategic road infrastructure including key junctions on the  
M5, outer bypass and the  Alphington Road corridor;  
 
 
• new rail halts at Hill Barton and Newcourt on the Exeter to Exmouth line and at  
Matford on the Exeter to Plymouth line;  
 
 
• demand management measures; and,  
 
 
• improvements to facilities for pedestrians and cyclists.  
 
 
The contributions necessary to ensure the delivery of transport infrastructure will 
be secured through the application of Policy CP18.   9. Meeting  community  needs  
9.1 National and Regional guidance emphasises the need for policies to address accessibility  
for all members of the community to jobs, health, education, shops, leisure and community 
facilities. Proposals will be brought forward through the LDF to address existing deficie n- 
cies and meet needs arising from development. Such provision should reflect sustainable 
development objectives.  The aim will be to achieve this by providing facilities directl y, or by 
encouraging and supporting initiatives from the private sector and voluntary bodies, or by 
developing partnership arrangements where appropriate.  
9.2 The Council will require that developers contribute to the provision of infrastructure that is  
necessary for sustainable development and that mitigates the overall impact of change and 
growth within the Exeter Growth Point (see Sections 11 and  12). The Exeter Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan draws on the Growth Point ’s Infrastructure Study to identify much of the 
infrastructure required for successful deliver y. This work will culminate in the production of 
an Infrastructure Delivery Plan that will ensure successful delivery over the plan period.  
9.3 The objectives of the Sustainable Community Strategy and other strategies and  
programmes can be delivered, at least in part, through developer contributions sought for 
social and community infrastructure, including education/skills, health, culture, sports and 
leisure facilities. Examples of areas where developer contributions could facilitate change 
and enhancement includ e: 
• developing a skilled and adaptable workforce and raising business productivity and  
specifically addressing poor skill levels in parts of the city (Exeter and Heart of Devon  
Economic Deve lopment Strategy);  
• providing open space to meet the populations sporting, leisure and recreational needs  
(Public Open Space SPD);  
43  
Objective 1: Mitigate and adapt to climate change  
 
 
Objective 2: Develop the potential for economic and commercial investment  
 
 
Objective 3: Provide decent homes for all  
 
 
Objective 4: Provide and enhance retail, cultural and tourist facilities  
 
 
Objective  6: Meet community needs  
Objective 7: Promote development that contributes to a healthy population 
Objective 10: Provide infrastructure to deliver high quality development 
Sustainable Community Strategy:  
• A learning city  
• A city that is healthy and active  
• A city of culture  
• A city of strong communities   • reducing incidence of chronic illness and increasing life expectancy by improving  
access to open space, sport and recreation facilities (Exeter Sustainable Community  
Strategy);  
tackling inequalities in health, social care, housing and education (Soci al Inclusion  
Strategy for Exeter Social, Health and Inclusion Partnership);  
improving access to health and social care (Exeter Sustainable Community Strategy/ 
Exeter Primary Care  Trust Estate Strategy/Royal Devon and Exeter (NHS)  Trust 
Building Programme) ; 
providing additional school places and facilitating any further schools reorganisation 
(Exeter Sustainable Community Strategy/Devon County Council Education  Authority 
Strategic Plan);  
providing meeting places for clubs and societies including those creative pursuits such 
as dance, drama and film; faith communities; voluntary services, such as parent -toddler 
groups; and public sector services such as adult education night classes;  
developing new heritage attractions (Exeter Cultural Strategy) and iden tifying and 
bringing forward strategic cultural infrastructure within the Exeter Planning  Area for 
Culture (the Regional Cultural Infrastructure Strategy ‘People, Places and Spaces’); and 
providing allotments in appropriate locations to meet the demands re sulting from 
demographic change (Exeter  Allotment Strategy 2007 -2011). • 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
9.4 Important considerations with regard to new facilities are their scale  and location and the  
degree to which they contribute to social inclusion and help to reduce deprivation. Facilities, 
such as cultural, recreational and sports facilities, which have a large catchment and  
serve the city as a whole, should, if feasible, be located in the City Centre where they are 
accessible to all by public  transport. Other facilities such as surgeries, youth clubs, outreach 
centres, primary schools, community halls, places of worship, allotments and play areas 
have smaller catchments and n ormally need to be close to where people live, preferably 
within easy walking distance of them. Shared or multi -use facilities will often be an e ffective 
way to meet the needs of the communit y. It is difficult to provide, cost -effectivel y, the full 
range o f facilities within walking distance of people ’s homes if population densities are  
low and if residential areas are fragmented. Delivering sustainable communities requires 
consideration of these issues at an early stage.  
9.5 The areas of multiple deprivation need particular attention.  Three areas within Wonford  
and Newtown, are among the 10% most deprived areas in the countr y. Actions could 
include improvements to local centres, securing employment opportunities, environmental 
improvements, the use  of communication technology to facilitate access to services, or 
contributions from new development to provide more extensive or better quality facilities for 
existing areas.  
44  2 Refer to Exeter Infrastructure Delivery Plan (see  Appendix 2).  
45  
CP10:   Facilities that meet Exete r’s communit y, social, health, welfare, education, 
spiritual, cultural, leisure and recreation needs will be protected. New  and improved 
community facilities and utilities infrastructure must be provided in a timely manner 
to meet the needs of new development, make a positive contribution towards 
safeguarding and creating sustainable communities, promote social inclusion and 
reduce deprivation. 2 
 
Facilities which serve the city as a whole should be located in the City Centre o r, 
if this is not feasible, at sustainable locations which are readily accessible by all 
modes of travel, particularly public transport.  
 
Facilities which serve neighbourhood needs should, wherever possible, be located 
within or close to district or local centres or at locations easily accessible to the 
local communit y, particularly by foot or bicycle.  
 
Partnership working, direct implementation and co ntributions secured through 
Policy CP18 will help to meet community needs including: raising skills, tackling 
inequalities in health, social care, housing and education, and providing and 
improving social, cultural, sporting, leisure and recreational facil ities.  
  10. Environment  
10.1  The scientific consensus is that human activities have contributed to global warming.  The  
cause of global warming is the build up of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, the most 
common of which is carbon dioxi de. This is released into the atmosphere in a number of 
ways, including the burning of gas, oil and coal.  The potential results of climate change 
are a rise in average annual temperature, a decrease in overall average annual rainfall,  
an increasing number of extreme weather events and a rise in sea level.  The planning 
authority can make important changes at the local level that can contribute to addressing 
the wider issues of climate change.  The two principal opportunities are mitigation, including 
reducing  greenhouse gas emission from energ y, transport, waste, the built environment  
and new development, and adaptation to the potential impacts of climate change, such as 
increased flood risk and loss of biodiversit y, by implementing flood prevention measures 
and by protecting and creating habitats. Climate change will also a ffect the indoor 
environment and, without the appropriate adaptation in building design, higher summer 
temperatures will lead to buildings overheating more frequently and for more prolonged  
periods. Outside, building form and layout, trees and plants will also play an important role 
in providing attractive shade as summer temperatures rise.  
10.2 If sustainability is to be achieved, provision must be made for suitable green/environmental  
infrastructur e, such as Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems (SUDS), open space, 
Combined Heat and Power (CHP) and district heating systems and e ffective environmental 
services such as recycling and refuse collection.  The availability of infrastructure and 
services, and any potential problems a ffecting new provision, are a major consideration 
when identifying areas for sustainable development and requires detailed consultation with  
relevant agencies. Where deficiencies are identified, improvements will be a prerequisite for  
development (see Section 11). 
46  
Objective 1: Mitigate and adapt to climate change  
 
Objective 2: Develop the potential for economic and commercial investment  
 
Objective 3: Provide decent homes for all  
 
Objective 7: Promote development that contributes to a healthy environment  
 
Objective 8: Protect and enhance the city ’s character  
 
Objective 9:  Achieve excellence in design  
 
Objective 10: Provide infrastructure to deliver high quality  development  
 
Sustainable Community Strategy:  
• A city that cares for the environment  
• A safe city  
• A prosperous city  
• A city of culture  
  Pollution  
10.3 The LDF plays a key role in determining the location of development that may give rise  
to pollution, either directly or indirectl y, and in ensuring that other uses and deve lopment 
are not, as far as possible, a ffected by major existing or potential sources of pollution. 
Development should avoid and, if necessar y, mitigate against environmental impacts.  
10.4 The City Council has carried out a review and assessment of air quality in the cit y, within  
the context of national air quality objectives, and has prepared a local  Air Quality Strategy 
that outlines the measures that the Council wi ll take in order to protect and improve air 
quality throughout the cit y. 
10.5 In accordance with the  Air Quality Strateg y, regular monitoring of air pollution is carried  
out, which shows that air quality in Exeter is generally very good.  There is, howeve r, a 
need to tackle emissions of nitrogen dioxide generated by motor vehicles along the busiest 
roads into the cit y. This has resulted in the designation of an  Air Quality Management  Area 
(AQMA) where the levels of nitrogen dioxide are unlikely to meet the air quality objective. 
Measures to reduce pollution by cutting congestion on the main routes into the city  have 
been identified in the  Air Quality  Action Plan.  The Local  Transport Plan, produced by the 
Highways  Authority (DCC), and the  Air Quality  Action Plan will bring forward measures 
collectively to tackle pollution caused by motor vehicles (see Section 8:  Transport).  
10.6 The City Council will ensure that the proposals in the LDF are closely linked to, and  
complementary with, the  Air Quality Strategy and the  Air Quality  Action Plan.  
10.7 The criteria against which applications for potentially polluting developments will be  
considered, together with environmental policies relating to noise, ai r, water and soil qualit y, 
will be s et out in the Development Management DPD.  
47 CP11:  Development should be located and designed so as to minimise and if 
necessar y, mitigate against environmental impacts. Within the  Air Quality 
Management  Area shown on the following map, measures to reduce pollution and 
meet air quality objectives, that are proposed by the Local Transport Plan and the 
Air Quality  Action Plan, will be brought forward.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
48 
48  Flood risk  
10.8  Flood plains are areas of land alongside watercourses over which water flows in times of  
flood, or would flow but for the presence of defences. Flood plains perform the essential 
function of storing water during flo od events. Extensive flood defence works have been 
carried out in Exete r. 
10.9  The e ffectiveness of rivers and flood plains to convey and store flood wate r, and minimise  
flood risk, can be adversely a ffected by human activities, especially by development which 
physically changes the flood plain.  As well as increasing the risk of flooding and impeding 
works to reduce flood risk, this can destroy the ecological value of the land and break up 
linear habita ts such as river corridors.  
10.10  Planning Policy Statement 25: Development and Flood Risk (PPS25) advises that planning  
decisions should apply the precauti onary principle to the issue of flood risk, avoiding such 
risk where possible and managing it elsewhere. In exercising control over development 
and providing guidance on the growth of the cit y, the Council aims to avoid inappropriate  
development in flood r isk areas and ensure that new development does not lead to new or 
additional flooding.  A Strategic Flood Risk  Assessment, as required by PPS25, has been 
undertaken and has informed the process of identifying the strategic development areas to 
the east of t he city at Monkerton/Hill Barton and Newcourt and to the south west of the cit y, 
south of  Alphington (see Section 12).  
10.11 Within the context of the Strategic  Assessment, developers will be required at the planning  
application stage to prepare an appropriate Flood Risk  Assessment to demonstrate how 
flood risk to the development itself, and flood risk to others, will be managed over the 
expected lifetime of the d evelopment.  The assessment should be proportionate to the  
risk and appropriate to the scale, nature and location of the development. Where there is 
overriding justification for development in a flood plain, adequate protection and mitigation 
measures, whic h may include raising property floor levels above an appropriate flood level, 
must be funded and built by the develope r. 
10.12  PPS25 also recommends the use of Sustainab le Urban Drainage Systems (SUDS)  
to control surface water run -off as close to its origin as possible before it enters a 
watercourse.  This involves moving away from traditional piped drainage systems to those 
which mimic natural drainage processes.  The ben efits are reduced implementation costs, 
reduced overall flood risks, enhanced nature conservation and amenity value, recycling 
valuable water resources, and better control of pollution from urban run -off. 
10.13  The integration of SUDS into the overall site concept and layout should be considered early  
in the planning and design stage, in consultation with the Environment  Agenc y, the City 
Council and the Highways  Authorit y. Where risks are identified, appropriate flow attenuation 
facilities or mitigation measures and their ongoing maintenance will be a prerequisite for 
development.  
49  Transition to a l ow carbon economy  
10.14  The transition to a low carbon economy requires low and zero carbon development,  
but also a reduction in carbon emissions from Exete r’s existing buildings, industry and 
transport.  
10.15  Government policy has established that building regulations will require emissions from  
new buildings to reduce incrementally and that zero carbon buildings will be required 
under building regulat ions during the plan period.  Government is encouraging linkages 
between developments and existing buildings through the inclusion of allowable solutions 
as part of zero carbon development. New buildings cannot therefore be considered in 
isolation from existing development.  
10.16  Consideration of the surrounding development in the localit y may reveal a potential source  
of low carbon energy for the new development.  Alternativel y, assessment of energy 
requirements in existing buildings may identify the opportunity to provide low carbon 
energy to other buildings in the localit y, as an allowab le solution to achieve zero carbon 
development.  
10.17  The density and mix of building types and uses proposed in a development should be  
mindful of the energy load across the development. Higher densities and combinations 
that provide a balanced heat load are likely to provide greater potential for cost e ffective 
low carbon energy solutions.  
10.18  All development proposals must be planned over the lifetime of the development to limit  
carbon dioxide emissions, and minimise vulnerability and provide resilience to climate 
change. Developers must be mindful of the carbon emission standards which will be 
required at the end of the build programme, as decisions at the outset can compromise 
emissions reduction in latter phases. In parts of the cit y, where carbon savings  may be 
possible in the future, new development should include provision for such infrastructure to 
be installed easily at a later date.  
10.19  Larger developments, including the strategic allocations (see Section 12), must evaluate  
the potential for community heating and hot water  systems and Combined Heat and Power 
(CHP) and provide the infrastructure required as an integral part of the development. 
Where it is proposed not to employ such systems, developers must demonstrate why  
they are not viable over the life of developments in  that locality and propose alternative 
equivalent carbon saving measures.  
50 CP12:  The spatial strategy reflects the precautionary approach to flooding and 
flood risk. Site allocations will be determined by applying a  risk-based search 
sequence, utilising the sequential test and, where appropriate, the exception test, 
in accordance with national policy guidance. The Exeter Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment will be used to ensure that development avoids areas of higher ri sk. 
All development proposals must mitigate against flood risk utilising SUDS where 
feasible and practical.   Decent ralised ene rgy net works 
10.20  By considering existing and proposed development, and by working in partnership with  
developers and other organisations, a decentralised energy network can be established. 
More detailed guidance will be provided in the proposed Decentralised Energy and 
Sustainable Construction Supplementary Planning Document.  
Using renewable and l ow carbon ene rgy in new d evelopment  
10.21  The Government, in the UK Renewable Energy Strategy published in  July 2009, sets out  
how to reach the UK ’s target of 15% of total energy from renewables by 2020.  Renewable 
sources of energy include sun, wind and water powe r, ground and air source heat pumps, 
biomass energy from organic matte r, energy from waste (but n ot energy from mass 
incineration of waste) and landfill and sewage gas.  These can o ffer diversity and security of 
supply and can reduce harmful emissions to the environment.  The Strategy includes a very 
significant growth in the use of renewable heat in th e built environment.  
10.22  Major new developments must use renewable or low -carbon technologies, including  
microgeneration technologies, to help meet their energy needs.  
10.23  Within Exeter the most promising sources of micro -renewable energy generation within  
developments are like ly to be photovoltaic cells (which respond to daylight), solar heating 
(which respond to sunlight), small scale wind turbines, ground -source heat pumps and 
biomass heating. Di fferent sources of generation produce di fferent types of energ y, for 
example phot ovoltaic cells produce electricity and ground -source heat pumps and biomass 
produce heat. Other sources of decentralised energy are community heat and hot water 
systems and Combined Heat and Power (CHP). CH P is the use of a single piece of plant to 
generat e both heat (or cooling) and electricit y. Combining this with sustainable fuels such  
as biomass, and utilising district heating to distribute the heat generated to meet residential 
or commercial requirements, can provide low cost heating that has a minima l carbon 
footprint. CHP  plant is available in all capacities from large plants where the electricity 
output feeds into the national grid and the heat is used locall y, through to building or 
community sized plants, to micro CHP  that e ffectively replace the boiler of a single home.  
10.24   In accordance with the PPS1 Su pplement: Planning and Climate Change, and drawing on  
the RSS evidence base, developments with a floorspace of at least 1,000 square metres,  
or with ten or more dwellings, will be required to provide the necessary infrastructure,  
and use decentralised and  renewable or low carbon energy sources, to cut predicted C O2 
emissions by the equivalent of at least 10% over and above that required to meet the  
51 CP13:  Decentralised Energy Networks will be developed and brought forward. 
New development (either new build or conversion) with a floorspace of at least  
1,000 square metres, or comprising ten or more dwellings, will be requir ed to 
connect to any existing, or proposed, Decentralised Energy Network in the locality 
to bring forward low and zero carbon energy supply and distribution. Otherwise,  
it will be necessary to demonstrate that it would not be viable or feasible to do 
so. W here this is the case, alternative solutions that would result in the same  
or better carbon reduction must be explored and implemented, unless it can be 
demonstrated that they would not be viable or feasible.   then current building regulations.  These thresholds have been set in recognition of the  
difficulty of achieving technical and financial viability for smaller schemes.  The policy aims 
to encourage energy saving and reduce overall reliance on traditional energy supplies (see 
also 10.26 – 10.31 below).  
10.25  Detailed guidance on the provision of decentralised energy will be set out in the proposed  
Decentralised Energy and Sustainable Construction SPD.  Alongside any criteria based 
policy to come forward as part of the Development Management DPD, the Council will 
consider identifying suitable sites or areas for decentralised, renewable and low -carbon 
energy sources and supporting infrastructure as part of the masterplanning for the Strategic 
Allocations (see Section 12).  
Sustain able const ruction  
10.26  Buildings and their infrastructure have a major impact on the use of non -renewable  
resources and on the environment. Many buildings are environmentally inefficient and do  
not make the best use of limited resources such as energy and wate r. The energy used  
in constructing, occupying and operating buildings represents almost 50% of greenhous e 
gas emissions in the UK.  The most significant opportunity for improving a building ’s 
environmental performance is through improving insulation and installing energy and water 
saving devices.  
10.27  There is also a major opportunity to create sustainable buildings through the use of building  
materials that are renewable, recycled (especially where demolition is proposed) or local, 
thereby reducing long haul road freight and reducing carbon emissions. Using such low 
“embodied energy” materials also supports local jobs and contributes to achieving locally 
distinctive construction.  
10.28  The most appropriate current standard for assessing the qual ity of non -residential buildings  
is BREEAM (Building Research Establishment Environmental  Assessment Method).  The 
BREEAM Standard assesses a building ’s performance against a range of criteria, and 
applies a rating on a scale of Pass, Good, Very Good or Excellent.  
10.29  The Government has introduced the Code for Sustainable Home s to cover residential  
development.  This code applies di fferent rating levels for homes based on a range of 
criteria such as CO2 emissions, water efficienc y, materials and site waste management. 
The sustainability rating represents overall performance across the Code ’s nine design 
categories.  Apart from some minimum standards the Code is flexible to allow developers 
to choose how they wish to obtain points in order to achieve a particular rating.  The 
Government intends to introduce a similar Code for no n-residential buildings, and has 
indicated that non -residential buidings should be zero carbon from 2019, with public sector 
buildings achieving this status one year earlie r, in 2018.  
52 CP14:  New development (either new build or conversion) with a floorspace of at 
least 1,000 sq. metres, or comprising ten or more dwellings, will be required to use 
decentralised and renewable or low carbon energy sources, to cut predicted CO2 
emissions by the equivalent of at least 10% over and above those required to meet 
the building regulations current at the time of building regulations approval, unless 
it can be demonstrated that it would not be viable or feasible to do so.   The Code for Sustainable Homes  
10.30  Government guidance requires Local Planning  Authorities to promote best practice in  
sustainable construction and help to achieve the national timetable for reducing carbon 
emissions from residential and non -residential buildings.  To help achieve this Exeter will 
introduce a Sustainability C hecklist that must be completed and submitted with planning 
applications. Higher levels of building sustainabilit y, in advance of those set out nationall y, 
will only be sought for development areas or site specific opportunities where the evidence, 
including that within the New Growth Point Energy Strateg y, indicates that there is potential 
for such provision.  
10.31  The Growth Point Energy Strategy indicates that the strategic development areas (see  
section 12) will have the potential to achieve higher levels of building sustainabilit y. The 
Council will seek to identify other suitable areas or specific opportunities for higher levels of 
building sustainability as part of other DPDs and SPDs. Guidance on meeting the Code for 
Sustainable Homes is pr ovided in the Residential Design Guide Supplementary Planning 
Document. More detailed guidance will be provided in the Decentralised Energy and 
Sustainable Construction Supplementary Planning Document.  
53  
CP15:  Proposals for development are expected to demonstrate how sustainable 
design and construction methods will be incorporated.  All development must be 
resilient to climate change (particularly summer overheating) and optimise energy 
and water efficiency through appropriate design, insulation, layout, orientation, 
landscaping and materials , and by using technologies that reduce carbon 
emissions.  
 
Residential development will be required to achieve the above (Para 10.29) Code 
for Sustainable Homes Level (overall performance across the code categories and 
complying with minimum standards).  
 
All non -domestic development will be required to achieve BREEAM ‘ Very Good’ 
standards increasing to ‘Excellent’  standards from 2013. Non -domestic buildings 
are expected to be zero carbon from 2019.  
 
Due to their scale the Monkerton/Hill Barton, Newcourt and  Alphington urban 
extensions should achieve levels of sustainability in advance of those set out 
nationall y. Code l evel Energy standa rd (reduction f rom 2006 Part L) Year 
3 25% 2010  
4 44% 2013  
5 Zero carbon  2016   Green Inf rastructure 
10.32  Networks of Green Infrastructure (GI) will be required to enhance quality of life in the  
region and support the successful accommodation of change. Biodiversity and sustainable 
movement networks will comprise multifunctional, accessible, connec ted assets, planned 
around existing environmental characteristics. Examples of green assets include 
allotments, parks and open spaces, cemeteries, woodland, rivers, public rights of wa y, 
wildlife areas, historic parks and gardens, and open countryside.  
10.33  A Green Infrastructure Strategy has been prepared for the Exeter area that sets out a  
framework to link existing and planned communities through a coordinated and easily 
accessible network.  The Strateg y, in particul ar, provides the basis to ensure that GI is an 
integral part of new development.  The findings of the Strategy underpin the GI policy set 
out in this Core Strategy and will inform the preparation of the Site  Allocations DPD and 
Development Management DPD.  
10.34  Key elements of the approach to GI at Exeter are to provide:  
(i)  a spatial framework that protects and enhances the strategic landscape (see 10.35  
and 10.39);  
(ii)  a GI framework for the  development of the urban extensions at Monkerton/Hill  
Barton, Newcourt and  Alphington (see Section 12);  
(iii)  a sustainable movement network to enhance walking and cycling links between the 
urban extensions and the urban area, particularly the City Centre, and between the 
urban extensions and the open countryside, particularly between Monkerton/Hill 
Barton and Cranbrook to the east (see Section 8); and,  
(iv)  a biodiversity network to protect and enhance areas of biodiversity importance and  
other environmental assets (see 10.39 to 10.49).  
Landsc ape 
10.35  The Exeter Local Plan First Review identifies several areas of open land, des ignated as  
‘Landscape Setting’, to be protected from development because of their intrinsic merit  
and their contribution to the distinctive landscape quality of the cit y.  These were identified  
following landscape appraisal studies carried out in 1997 and 1999.  
10.36  This issue is thoroughly reviewed in the 2007 Landscape Sensitivity and Capacity Stud y, 
which assesses robustly the qualities of the landscape and identifies the extent to which 
each area has capacity to accommodate development.  The study provides  the detailed 
evidence that supports the protection of areas of landscape sensitivity including those 
areas that provide the strategic landscape setting for the cit y. 
10.37  These areas, which continue to be design ated as ‘Landscape Setting’, include part of  
the Clyst Valley, Knowle Hill and the hills to the north and west which have a particularly 
important role to play in forming an attractive green setting for the cit y, in addition to their 
intrinsic landscape va lue. They are complemented by seven designated Valley Parks that 
provide ‘green lungs’  within the cit y, make an important contribution to biodiversit y, provide 
formal and casual recreation opportunities, and are readily accessible by foot or cycle.  
54  10.38  The strategic  gap between  Topsham  and Exeter  is also particularly  important  in that it forms  
an open  break  between  the two settlements,  thus preventing  their coalescence,  whilst  also 
protecting Topsham ’s attractive  setting.  Whilst  this area has a low intrinsic  landscape  value, 
the role it plays makes it sensitive to development.  
10.39  The Spatial Strategy (see Section 4) provides for growth to the east and south west of the  
city in those areas that the Landscape Study concludes are of medium to low landscape 
sensitivity and have medium to high capacity for development.  The ‘Landscape Setting’ 
designation i n these areas is, accordingl y, deleted.  Any development in the remaining 
designated areas, must ensure that the character and local distinctiveness of these areas is 
protected and enhanced. Further guidance will be set out in the Development Management 
DPD.  
Biodi versity 
10.40  Biodiversity is short for ‘biological diversity’.  This means the whole variety of all living  
things on earth, including plant and animal species and their genetic diversit y. Exeter 
contains a rich variety of wildlife habitats.  This appears to be due to a fortunate combination 
of geology/topography and geography comb ined with enlightened protection and 
enhancement. Exeter is built around a series of valleys.  This has meant that the valley  
sides and ridgelines have often, due to their steepness, remained undeveloped.  
10.41  Nature conservation and the protection and creation of a healthy natural environment is  
beneficial in many ways.  A richly biodiverse city helps to create an attractive environment, 
encourages people to walk and cycle around the cit y, helps mitigate pollution, assists in 
flood prevent ion, can provide a focus for attracting tourism and assists in the economic 
success of the area by making Exeter an attractive option when people decide where to live 
or do business.  
The South West N ature Map 
10.42  The Regional Spatial Strategy Policy ENV4 encourages local authorities to use the South  
West Nature Map, produced by the South West Regional Biodiversity Partnership, to 
help map local opportunities for biodiversity enhancement, taking into ac count the local 
distribution of habitats and species, and protect these sites and features from harmful 
development. Exete r’s Strategic Nature  Areas are shown on the illustrative map.  
10.43  The Strategic Nature  Areas identify broad landscape scale blocks of land, but do not i n- 
clude other areas of biodiversity value that are equally important to Exete r. The biodiversity 
enhancement areas  will not, therefore, be restricted to Strategic Nature  Areas and will be 
chosen in order to provide maximum benefit to Exete r’s biodiversit y. These areas will be 
brought forward through the Development Management DPD and identified on the Propo s- 
als Map.  
55  56  Protected sites and species  
10.44  The most important sites for biodiversity are those identified through international and  
European Directives.  The Exe Estuary is designated as an internationally important wetland 
area under the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands and also as a Special Protection  Area 
(SPA) under the EC Birds Directive.  A Habitats Regulations  Assessment (HRA), required 
under the Habitats Directive, has been undertaken on the policies wit hin the Core Strategy 
to ensure that there will not be any adverse e ffect on any European site (Special Protection 
Areas and Special  Areas of Conservation) either within or close to the cit y. The Exeter  
Core Strategy HRA  has concluded that additional housi ng will result in extra recreational 
impact on the Exe Estuar y, Dawlish Warren, and Pebblebed Heaths.  Therefore financial 
contributions will be sought from new development towards management and other 
measures to protect these areas.  The potential for in-combination e ffects on European sites 
at Dartmoor and South Dartmoor Woods has also been identified. Developer contributions 
may also be used at these locations if the emerging evidence base justifies it. Furthermore 
any development that may have a sign ificant e ffect on the integrity of a European site  
would be contingent on a satisfactory Habitat Regulations  Assessment. Whilst the Core 
Strategy can set a framework for these later decisions (and so to that extent influence 
them, as found in the Commissi on v UK decision, October 2007), it should be noted that  
(i) the requisite requirements of the Directive/Habitats Regulations will have to be satisfied at 
those later stages; and (ii) that the Core Strategy policies do not provide support for any 
proposal which would have an adverse e ffect on the integrity of any European site. More 
specific work is underway to understand the e ffects of Exete r’s and neighbouring authority ’s 
growth on the Exe Estuar y, Dawlish Warren and Pebblebed Heaths.  This will be complet ed 
as rapidly as possible and its conclusions used to inform the measures that are necessary  
to avoid adverse e ffects.  These will be detailed in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan and 
secured through continued work with  Teignbridge District Council and East Devon District 
Council.  
10.45  The Council will work with  Teignbridge District Council (TDC) and East Devon District  
Council (EDDC) to adopt a mechanism to raise funds from develop ment to deliver the 
measures that are needed to avoid growth plans having an adverse e ffect on the integrity 
of sites and adopt a joint strategy to co -ordinate the collection of developer contributions 
and their spend on avoidance measures and the monitoring of the e ffectiveness of these 
measures in avoiding adverse e ffects.  
10.46  The Council will work with  TDC and EDDC to adopt a co -ordinated programme to monitor  
annually the e ffectiveness of the avoidance measures and the level of disturbing activities, 
drawing on evidence from RSPB, Natural England and other third parties.  A review of 
mitigation measures will be necessary should monitoring indicate that measures delivered 
have not been e ffective.  
10.47  There are three ‘Sites of Special Scientific Interest ’ in Exeter – the Exe Estuar y, Stoke  
Woods and Bonhay Road Cutting. Stoke Woods is also included in Natural England ’s 
Inventory of  Ancient Woodland Sites. Woodlands included in the inventory are those which 
are known to have been present in 1600 and have had unbroken woodland cover since that 
date.  These sites are a valuable resource both for diversity of species and for longevit y. 
Bonhay Road Cutting is recognised as one of the best inland exposures of deeper water 
deposits of the Crackington Formation in the UK.  
57  10.48  Within the city are a number of Regionally Important Geological and Geomorphological  
Sites (RIGS) including Ferry Road ( Topsham), Heavitree Quarr y, Pinhoe Brickpit and 
Pocombe Quarr y. These are sites which are of scientific and/or educational value either 
because they contain finite or limited deposits or landforms that are irreplaceable if 
destroyed or because they provide exposures of a deposit which are plentiful or extensive 
but underground.  
10.49  Sites of local biodiversity interest also have a fundamental role to play in meeting overall  
national biodiversity targets, contributing to the quality of life and the well -being of the 
communit y, and in supporting research and education. Within urban areas like Exete r, local 
sites take on an enhanced value owing to the relative scarcity of wildlife sites and because 
they are often close to large areas of population, community facilities and schoo ls. 
10.50  The Exeter Local Plan First Review identified the location of Sites of Nature Conservation  
Importance (SNCI) and Sites of Local Interest for Nature Conservation (SLINC).  A review 
of these sites was undertaken in 2004 as part of a comprehensive Wildlife Surve y. Robust 
criteria were used to assess each of the sites and as a result most of the SNCIs will be  
re-classified as County Wildlife sites - a terminology commonly used by local authorities  
to refer to sites with conservation value at a County level.  The review also identified some  
new sites and concluded that other existing sites should be extended. Howeve r, prior  
to the County Wildlife Site designation being brought forward through the Development 
Management DPD, the SNCI and SLINC designations rema in and will be identified on the 
Proposals Map.  
10.51  In making allocations for development, and in determining planning applications,  
biodiversity will be a material consideration. Sites of biodiversi ty or geological interest will 
be protected in accordance with their relative status.  A proposal that adversely a ffects the 
Exe Estuary Special Protection  Area (a site of international conservation importance) will 
not be permitted. Development on other de signated sites will be assessed against the 
nature conservation value of the site, and mitigation and compensation will be required for 
any unavoidable impacts. Proposals that contribute to the biodiversity value of a site will be 
supported.  
10.52  Development that may a ffect protected species will be determined in accordance with the  
relevant legislation. Ecological Surveys will be required to ensure the protection of species  
identified, and, where necessar y, financial contributions will be sought.  
58  59  
CP16:  The strategic green infrastructure (GI) network is shown on the key 
diagram. The Exeter GI network has been identified to protect and enhance current 
environmental assets and local identity and to provide a framework for sustainable 
new development.  
 
GI will be an integral part of planning for the urban extensions at Monkerton/Hill 
Barton, Newcourt and  Alphington. New multifunctional areas of green space and 
green corridors will be created to meet the needs of these new communities.  A 
sustainable movement  network will link the urban area to the urban extensions 
and beyond to the open countryside. To the east of the city green corridors, that  
incorporate multi -use trails (for cycling, walking and horse riding) and provide high 
quality biodiversity habitat, will link Exeter to the proposed Clyst Valley Park and on 
to Cranbrook.  
 
The character and local distinctiveness of the areas identified belo w, will be 
protected and proposals for landscape, recreation, biodiversity and educational 
enhancement brought forw ard, in accordance with guidance in the Green 
Infrastructure Strateg y, through the Development Management DPD:  
 
• the hills to the north and north west;  
• Knowle Hill to the south west;  
• the strategic gap between Topsham and Exeter;  
• and the Valley Parks: Riverside, Duryard, Mincinglake, Ludwell,  Alphington to  
Whitestone Cross, Savoy Hill and Hoopern.  
 
 
The Exe Estuary European Site will be protected. Development that is likely to 
have a significant effect on the integrity of the Exe Estuar y, East Devon Pebblebed 
Heaths/East Devon Heaths or Dawlish Warren European sites will be subject to the 
Habitats Regulations 2010 and the requirement East therein to undertake a Habitat 
Regulations  Assessment. Contributions will be sought from new development 
towards management and other measures at the Exe Estuar y, Dawlish Warren and 
Pebblebed Heaths and at other European sites as may be justified by the emerging 
evidence base.  
 
The biodiversity value of Stoke Woods and Bonhay Road cutting SSSI, and all other 
sites of national, regional and local conservation importance will be protected,  
and unavoidable impacts mitigated and compensated fo r, in accordance with their 
relative status.  
 
Biodiversity enhancement areas, for the restoration or creation of new priori ty 
habitats, will be identified within the strategic nature areas to the north of the city 
and in other areas of biodiversity and geological interest. Proposals for these areas 
will be brought forward through the Development Management DPD.  
 
Opportunities to provide green corridors, open space and allotments, to enhance 
cycling and walking opportunities, to link existing habitats, to incorporate 
environmental assets and to integrate biodiversit y, proposed by the Exeter Green 
Infrastructure Strateg y, will be  secured through partnership working, direct 
implementation and the application of Policy CP18 (see Section 11). 
  Design and local distincti veness  
10.53  Exeter is a city of great character and historic interest with a rich an d varied heritage  
of buildings, townscape and buried remains.  The quality and character of the built 
environment is of prime importance, not only to residents but also in attracting new 
commercial and industrial investment to the city and in the development of Exeter as a 
centre for tourism. It is therefore important to the city ’s economy that this character and 
interest is preserved and enhanced. Equally important is the need to encourage confident 
innovation so that high quality places of contem porary character are created and will stand 
the test of time. It needs to be recognised that cutting edge, well designed buildings that are 
sustainable and resilient to climate change may not always look familia r. Pastiche solutions 
designed to ‘fit in ’ have their place, but can lead to missed opportunities for excellence, 
perpetuating the ordinary and making little contribution to the development of Exeter  
as a vital and viable centre. New development should therefore be informed by a clear 
understanding o f Exete r’s sense of place, its historic and archaeological importance, and 
the evolution of its townscape and architecture.  
10.54  The three urban extensions at Monkerton/ Hill Barton, Newcourt and  Alphington (see  
Section 12) must create their own sense of place, that both respects the s urrounding 
development, and is innovative in its design approach.  The most successful urban places 
are unique and memorable and combine an attractive built environment with a lively mix  
of functions.  Accordingl y, design must be considered from the outset a nd should guide the 
spatial distribution of uses within a development. Getting this right will create sustainable 
and prosperous communities and truly distinctive places.  
10.55  In designing development, wherever its location, particular attention should be given to  
ensuring:  
i)   High quality townscape, landscape and amenity  
The layouts of buildings, routes and space s must be designed as one piece (integrated  
design) to achieve good enclosure, high quality public and private spaces, active frontages, 
visual delight and good quality amenit y. 
ii)   High architectural quality  
Development must be fit for purpose, providing specified space standards and facilities  
which meet a range of needs over time and which minimise energ y consumption. Internal 
spaces and layout must be flexible and allow for adaption, conversion and extension. 
Buildings must be durable, well built and aesthetically pleasing.  
iii)  Places have their own distinct identity  
Development must enhance and/or create local distinctiveness and be legible so that  
people can find their way around by the design and layout of buildings. Schemes should 
have a clear design rationale and must be built using, or reflecting, the limited Exeter 
palette of materials.  
iv)  Permeable layouts  
Development must have good clear movement routes within the site and to places and  
facilities beyond it.  
60  v)  Pedestrian and cycle friendly places and routes  
Layouts must gi ve priority to pedestrian and cycle movement with safe and convenient  
routes and the provision of associated facilities (see Policy CP9).  
vi)  Sustainable design and resilience to climate change  
Development must be designed to encourage travel by foot, cycle and public transport.  
Energy and water consumption must be mini mised through appropriate design, layout, 
orientation, landscaping and materials and by using renewable technologies and integrating 
SUDS within the scheme (see Policies CP12, CP13, CP14, and CP15). Building design and 
landscaping must be resilient to inte rnal and external overheating and be sufficiently robust 
to accommodate the impact of the rise in external summer temperatures anticipated at the 
end of the building ’s lifetime.  
vii) Attractive well managed and maintained public realm  
Public spaces and routes must be interesting and attractive so as to improve the visitor  
experience and encourage social interaction. Public art should be integral to development. 
Mechanisms that ensure the long-term retention of high quality public realm must be 
adopted.  
viii) Inclusive places  
Development must include a mix of uses where appropriate and in all cases be designed  
to encourage social inclusion. Residential developments must include a wide range of 
housing types and integrate affordable housing seamlessly into the layout.  Affordable and 
market housing must be built to the same standards, and buildings must be designed to be 
adaptable to the changing needs of di fferent age groups and people with disabilities (see 
Policies CP5, C P6, and CP7).  
xi) Safe plac es reducing the fear of, and opportunities fo r, crime  
Schemes must deliver safe places and safe buildings that do not detract from the quality of  
the townscape or architecture.  
x) High quality integrated Green infrastructure  
Development must be designed to incorporate high quality green infrastructure to meet  
biodiversit y, recreation and movement needs (see Policy CP16).  
10.56  Developments will be assessed against the twenty Building for Life criteria, and  
performance will be reported in the  Annual Monitoring Report (AMR).  
10.57 Design policies for determining planning applications will be set out in the Development  
Management DPD. Further guidance is provided by the  Archaeology and Development 
SPG, the Householde r’s Guide to Extension Design SPD, the Residential Design Guide 
SPD and Monkerton and Hill Barton and Newcourt Masterplans.  
61  62  
CP17:  All proposals for development will exhibit a high standard of sustainable 
design that is resilient to climate change and complements or enhances Exete r’s 
characte r, local identity and cultural diversit y. 
 
Development at Monkerton and Hill Barton will:  
 
 
• employ high quality design to create a distinctive sense of place that relates  
well to existing communities;  
• reinforce the east west ridgeline and provide a strategic greenway that links to  
developments to the east of the cit y, including Cranbrook;  
• integrate green lanes, hedgerows and trees and provide open space, playing 
fields and allotments;  
• be orientated on the sustainable movement network and designed so as to  
reduce the dominance of vehicles within the public realm;  
• create a safe and secure environment that encourages soci al interaction and  
inclusion and promotes healthy living and a sense of well -being;  
• retain and enhance the biodiversity of the site and adjacent areas;  
• apply innovative design to overcome constraints, such as noise, pollution and  
topography;  
• aim to install low and zero carbon energy provision (for example, Combined  
Heat and Power (CHP)).  
 
 
Development at Newcourt will:  
 
 
• integrate features of cultural, architectural and landscape value that reinforce  
local identity;  
• create a safe and secure environment that encourages social interaction and  
inclusion and promotes healthy living and a sense of well -being;  
• respect the historic setting of Newcourt House;  
• retain the distinctiveness of Topsham from Exeter;  
• retain and integrate hedgerows and mature trees and provide open space, 
playing fields and allotments;  
• be set around a high quality sustainable movement network to encourage 
pedestrian and cycle trips and to provide easy access to the Exe Valley 
strategic greenway and to Ludwell Valley Pa rk; 
• retain and enhance the biodiversity of the site and adjacent areas;  
• aim to install low and zero carbon energy provision (for example, Combined  
Heat and Power (CHP)).  
  63 Development to the south of  Alphington will:  
 
 
• seek to integrate existing and proposed communities and encourage social  
inter -action whilst ensuring the urban extension has its own recognisable sense 
of place;  
• apply innovative design to respond to the challenges presented by the steep  
topography of the ar ea; 
• create a network of safe and convenient green routes that bridge the barriers 
presented by transport infrastructure and promote healthy living and a sense of 
well-being;  
• provide open space, playing fields and allotments to meet the needs of  
residen ts; 
• retain and enhance the biodiversity of the site and adjacent areas;  
• protect ancient monuments and their setting;  
• set the built form within high quality and diverse green spaces;  
• ensure that exemplary design is employed in creating attractive and workable  
environments where people want to live;  
• aim to install low and zero carbon energy provision (for example, Combined 
Heat and Power (CHP), such sources may include the Marsh Barton Energy 
from Waste (EfW) facility).  
 
Development in the City Centre and Grecian Regeneration  Area will:  
 
 
• enhance the city ’s unique historic townscape quality;  
• protect the integrity of the city wall and contribute positively to the historic  
character of the Central and Southernhay and Friars Conservation  Areas;  
• create places that encourage social interaction, utilising public art as an 
intrinsic component of a high quality public realm;  
• enhance and expand the city ’s retail function to improve Exete r’s draw as a  
regional shopping centre;  
• include residential development in a mix of uses that encourage vitality and  
establish a safe and secure environment;  
• create a City Centre that is vital and viable and presents a positive experience  
to the visitor;  
• enhance the biodiversity of the City Centre and improve the links to the green  
infrastructure network;  
• contribute to the establishment of a decentralised energy network.  
  64 Development in the Quay and Canal Basin area will:  
 
 
• respect the historic character of the area and incorporat e uses that realise the 
potential of existing high quality historic buildings;  
• provide a high quality public realm that adds to the interest and draw of the area;  
• establish an attractive and safe environment that encourages social interaction  
and relaxation within the Piazza Terracina and along the Riverside walk;  
• include attractions that tell Exete r’s historic story as an important industrial  
centre and port;  
• create vibrancy that encourages visitors and tourists to linger longer within  
Exeter;  
• provide a permeable built form with good connections to an enhanced Exe  
Riverside Valley Park;  
• retain and enhance the biodiversity of the canal basin and adjacent areas.  
 
 
Development in the Water Lane Regeneration  Area will:  
 
 
• take a comprehensive approach to the delivery of development which ensures 
that new housing is compatible with other existing land uses in the area, 
particularly industry;  
• provide a mix of uses that encourage vitality and create a safe and secure  
environment;  
• include innovative modern design that respects the form and massing of existing  
development, to enhance the character of the area;  
• address the issue of flood risk through design and layout;  
• aim to connect to a heat supply from the Marsh Barton EfW facility  
  11. Infrastructure 
11.1 The proposals for development set out in this Core Strategy must be supported by  
appropriate infrastructure provided in a timely and co -ordinated wa y. Assessing the capacity 
of existing infrastructure and identifying what additional facilities are needed is central to  
the successful delivery of development.  To ensure that strategic infrastructure requirements 
are recognised early in the planning process, Planning Policy Statement 12: Local Spatial 
Planning indicates that the Core Strategy should be supported by evidence of what 
physical, social and green infrastructure is needed to enable the amount of development 
proposed for the area, taking account of its type and distribution.  
11.2 There are references to the provision of infrastructure throughout the Core Strateg y. This 
section focuses on identifying the key strategic infrastructure requirements and providing a 
delivery mechanism to ensure the success of the spatial strateg y. 
65  
Objective 1 – Mitigate and adapt to climate change  
 
Objective 2 – Develop the potential for economic and commercial development  
 
Objective 3 – Provide decent homes for all  
 
Objective 4 – Provide retail, cultural and tourist facili ties 
 
Objective 5 – Achieve a step change in the use of sustainable transport  
 
Objective 6 – Meet community needs  
 
Objective 7 – Promote development that contributes to a healthy population  
 
Objective 8 – Protect and enhance the city ’s character  
 
Objective  9 – Achieve excellence in design  
 
Objective 10 – Provide infrastructure to deliver high quality development  
 
Sustainable Community Strategy:  
• A prosperous city  
• A learning city  
• An accessible city  
• A city with strong communities  
• A city that is heathy and active  
• A safe city  
• A city that cares for the environment  
• A city with homes for everyone  
• A city of culture   The city’s infrastructure requirements  
11.3  The Exeter Infrastructure Delivery Plan (see  Appendix 2) identifies the transport, education,  
public services, utilities and waste, health, sport and recreation, flood prevention and green 
infrastructure works required to deliver the quantum of development envisaged for the cit y. 
The City Council has engaged with public and private sector organisations and worked in 
close liaison with Devon County Council, to identify these requirements. For each item of 
infrastructure the partners  in provision are set out, funding sources are identified, timing  
is given and, where possible, cost is estimated.  The Delivery Plan identifies whether each 
infrastructure element is critical, assesses the risk associated with provision and, where 
necessa ry, identifies mitigation measures to limit risk.   
11.4 Exeter is constrained by natural barriers and by the M5 and, as a result, the provision of  
new and improved transport infrastructure will be critical in delivering the spatial strateg y. 
A step change is required in the quality and capacity of public transport to accommodate 
the growth proposed (see 8.4). Many of the works identified  by the Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan, such as the enhanced public transport routes, M5 junction 29 improvements, Green 
Infrastructure routes and, in the longer term, the provision of new railway halts through the 
Devon Metro project, seek to enable this sh ift to occu r. 
11.5 New development must also be supported by the full range of public utilities such as  
mains drainage, wate r, power and telecommunications in a cost e ffective and sustainable 
way. Provision must be co -ordinated to ensure that new infrastructure is available when 
required, p otential savings through shared use of facilities are secured, and the visual and 
environmental impact of new pipelines, cables and similar apparatus are minimised.  The 
delivery of the required infrastructure improvements is necessary to avoid any potentia l 
effects on European sites associated with discharges to the Exe Estuary and therefore 
development is contingent on the timely provision of this infrastructure.  
11.6  In relation to the delivery of the str ategic sites (see Section 12), new types of energy  
infrastructure to support low or zero carbon communities is paramount, as is the provision 
of Green Infrastructure.  The transition to a low carbon economy will also require the 
development of low carbon e nergy infrastructure across the city and all new development 
will be required to assess the potential to tie into and/or contribute to current, planned or 
potential low carbon energy infrastructure.  The prospects of higher fossil fuel prices and the 
need f or affordable and secure energy supplies for the community is a particular concern 
and the provision of low and zero carbon energy utility infrastructure in the city has an 
important role to play in safeguarding the communit y. 
11.7 The requirement for new educational infrastructure, and the rationalisation of existing  
provision, will prove a particular challenge.  There are also requirements for leisure and 
cultural facilities, which will need to be met on a city wide basis to ensure the most 
sustainable outcome.  
11.8 The Exeter Infrastructure Delivery Plan draws on the Growth Point ’s Infrastructure Study  
to identify infrastructure requirements. It has been formulated in partnership with other 
authorities and stakeholders and sets out detailed arrangements for the provision of 
infrastructure.  
66  Identifying key st rategic inf rastructure requirements  
11.9  Inevitabl y, the timing and funding for some infrastructure works identified in the Exeter  
Infrastructure Delivery Plan remains uncertain.  There is, howeve r, a significant degree of 
certainly for those key strategic infrastructure requirements that are required early within 
the plan period and on which successful delivery of the spatial strategy depends.  The City 
Council wi ll continue to work with identified partners in provision to ensure that delivery of 
those key items continues.  
11.10 The key strategic infrastructure requirements, together with the reasons for their inclusion,  
are listed below:  
• Enhanced public transport system – to help achieve a step change in the qualit y, 
capacity and environmental performance of public transport;  
Green Infrastructure route linking Cranbrook to the city and including a new pedestrian 
and cycle crossing of the M5 – to meet green infrastructure objectives and to ensure 
that the sustainable movement network allows travel both to and from Exeter by cycle 
and bike;  
M5 Junction 29 Improvements – to reduce pressure on this junction and to allow the 
continued e ffective functioning of the motorway;  
Expansion of St Lukes Secondary School – to accommodate the additional dem and 
resulting from the strategic allocations at Monkerton and Hill Barton, and Newcourt; 
Bus and Coach Station – considered critical to achieving a step -change in public 
transport use and deliver wider objectives for a vibrant and sustainable City Centre.  • 
• 
• 
• 
67  11.11 The table below sets out details regarding the provision of t hese key strategic infrastructure  
requirements:  
11.12 The Core Strategy does not place undue reliance on any key elements of infrastructure  
where funding is unknown.  The funding sources for the key strategic infrastructure 
requirements are identified in the table above.  The assessment of risk is low or me dium 
as significant progress has been made towards securing funding.  There is a reasonable 
prospect of provision for the key strategic infrastructure requirements identified above.   
Developer contributions  
11.13 The infrastructure needed to service and deliver sustainable development must be in place  
and provided in a timely manne r. Where existing infrastructure is inadequate to serve the  
development, new or improved infrastructure and facilities to remedy deficiencies must 
be provided. Where provision on -site is not appropriate, o ff site provision, or a financial 
contribution towards it, will be sought.  
68 Infrastructure 
need  
 Key 
partners 
in 
provision  Cost  
 Funding 
sources 
 Timetable 
 Risk 
 
Enhanced  
Public  Transport 
Route between 
Cranbrook, City 
Centre and new 
development to 
the southwest  DCC, ECC, 
EDDC, Bus 
Operators, 
Developers  
 £2.5m  
 Developer  
Contributions  
 2011-2021  
 Medium  
Risk 
 
M5 Jct 29  
Improvements  
 DCC, 
Highways 
Agenc y, DfT  
 £14.4m  
 DfT (Central 
Government 
funding) and 
secured 
Developer 
Contributions  2011 – 2012  
 Low to Nil  
Risk 
 
Expansion of  
School Provision  
 DCC  
 Approx  
£45m (plus 
land where 
indicated)  Developer 
contributions  
 2011 - 2026  
 Low to 
Medium 
Risk 
 
Strategic Green 
Infrastructure 
route from 
Cranbrook into  
the cit y, to include 
a new pedestrian  
/ cycle crossing 
of M5 to north of 
J29 DCC, ECC, 
Highways 
Agenc y, DfT  
 £5m 
(crossing)  
 DCC and 
Developer 
Contributions/ 
Direct 
provision  
 2011 - 2016  
 Pedestrian  
/ cycle 
crossing 
complete  
 
Medium 
Risk for 
other 
elements  
Provision of new 
Bus and Coach 
station  
 ECC, DCC  
 £6m - £10 
m 
 Developer 
Contributions/ 
Direct 
Provision  2012 - 2021  
 Low to 
Medium 
Risk 
  11.14 Planning obligations are legal agreements between a planning authority and a develope r, or 
undertakings o ffered unilaterally by a develope r, to provide works related to a development. 
As such, planning obligations allow for developer contributions that can ensure the  
provision of infrastructure.  
11.15 The City Council is working towards the introduction of a Community Infrastructure Levy  
(CIL). CI L allows local authorities to raise funds from developers  undertaking new building 
projects in their area. Money from CIL  can be used in combination with other sources to 
fund a wide range of infrastructure but it is anticipated that some forms of infrastructure will 
continue to be provided on site or through pl anning obligations.  
11.16 Further guidance on the implementation of Policy CP18 will be set out in the CIL  Charging  
Schedule and its supporting documents and in an update to the City Council ’s Planning  
Obligations SPD.  
69 CP18:  New development must be supported by appropriate infrastructure 
provided in a timely manne r. The City Council will continue to work in partnership 
with infrastructure providers and other delivery agencies to keep an up to date 
infrastructure delivery plan that will enable proposals, in accordance with the 
spatial strateg y, to be brought fo rward.  
 
Developer contributions will be sought to ensure that the necessary physical, 
social, economic and green infrastructure is in place to deliver development. 
Contributions will be used to mitigate the adverse impacts of development 
(including any cumulative impact). Where appropriate, contributions will be used 
to facilitate the infrastructure needed to support sustainable development.   12. Strategic alloc ations  
12.1  Delivery of the Monkerton/Hill Barton, Newcourt and  Alphington areas (see Policies CP1 - 
CP3) as sustainable urban extensions is central to the achievement of the spatial strateg y. 
It is proposed that, togethe r, they will deliver around 21 hectares of employment land and 
around 6,500 dwellings (including permissions).  These areas are, therefore, identified as 
strategic allocations (see Plans 1 -3).  
12.2 It will only be by achieving well planned and comprehensive development that the potential  
for these urban extensions to contribute to creating more sustainable development can 
be maximised.  The sections below identify some of the features that will be important  
in creating strong, safe and prosperous communities, together with the  infrastructure  
requirements to ensure delivery (see Section 11). 
Delivering sustain able d evelopment  
12.3 Certain requirements, related to delivering sustainable development, are common to all  
three urban extensions.  
12.4  Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems (SUDS) can be used to ensure the risk of flooding  
is minimised.  The developments must provide the necessary infrastructure, and use 
decentralised and renewable or low carbon energy sources, to cut predicted C O2 emissions 
by the equivalent of at least 10% over and above those required to meet the then current 
building regulations.  The potential to achieve exemplary low and zero carbon development 
should be fully assessed. In particular the potential for CHP  energy centres, district heating 
networks, connections to existing buildings in the locality and connecting to other heat 
networks or sources in the localit y, should all be fully exp lored.  
Newcourt 
12.5 The Newcourt area should deliver a mix of residential, employment and community uses  
together with  open spaces, green corridors and essential infrastructure. Some 3,500 
dwellings (including 1176 dwellings with planning permission) and around 16 hectares 
of employment land should be provided.  The development must be well integrated with 
surrounding deve lopment and form a sustainable urban extension to Exete r. 
12.6 The residential development should address the context of existing permissions and create  
distinctive neighbourhoods.  At the heart of the development a local centre, positioned to 
the south of Old Rydon Lane, should provide local shops, community facilities and a local 
primary school; with a second primary school in the area also required to meet needs up 
to 2026. Newcourt House, whic h is an attractive grade two listed building, could extend  
its existing role as an administrative centre for Devon Primary Care  Trust (PCT) to include 
General Practitioner (GP) services and a health centre/polyclinic. Contributions towards the 
improvement of other educational, social and community facilities, for example  Topsham 
Librar y, will also be sought where no new facility is required on -site. 
12.7  Residential densities should reflect site specific characteristics.  The development should  
also provide a ffordable housing in accordance with adop ted polic y, and site provision made  
for Gypsies and  Travellers if identified by the ongoing site search process.  
70  12.8 The most appropriate locations for employment land are likely to be to the south of the 
A379 and along the M5 motorwa y. Employment development should be well integrated into 
surrounding development with direct links to the local centre and should benefit from good 
access onto the strategic road network and high quality telecommunications infrastructure.  
12.9 The development of the whole Newcourt area will have a strong regard to the principles  
of urban design so as to ensure an attracti ve and locally distinctive environment. High 
standards of landscaping will be expected and existing trees and important landscape 
features will be retained.  A green infrastructure framework, comprising a range of linked 
formal and informal open spaces (inc luding parks, playing fields and allotments), will meet 
local sporting and recreational needs, as well as providing health, social and environmental 
benefits.  
12.10  In order to maximise sustainability it will be important to achieve a modal switch away from  
the ca r. Therefore, at the heart of this urban extension there should be a transport hub.  The 
transport hub should focus ideally on a new rail halt on the Exeter to Exmouth line, a site  
for which has been safeguarded in the existing permission, and should include a bus and 
rail interchange allowing direct links to the city and wider area. Section 106 contributio ns 
will be sought to ensure the delivery of this and other transport infrastructure improvements 
discussed belo w. 
12.11 Good permeability must be achieved throughout the develo pment area and links to the  
surrounding urban area established.  A green network will radiate from the local centre and 
will provide convenient and safe walking and cycling routes to link existing and proposed 
housing, employment and community areas to each  other and provide access to existing 
facilities beyond the development area.  The potential for a bus route along Old Rydon 
Lane and an enhanced public transport system route will be explored full y. Proposals  
for development in the area must not preclude t hese options. Further bus priority along 
Topsham Road is also being investigated.  Access onto the  A379 has already gained 
consent and is required to serve existing development proposals. Improvements to the 
strategic road network may also be required, part icularly at Countess Wear roundabout.  
12.12  The Newcourt area is the subject of various constraints all of which must be considered  
in bringing development forward. In particula r, areas of high flood risk must be avoided, 
sources of noise and pollution taken into account and biodiversity and landscape features 
protected.  
12.13  The development of this area should have general regard to guidance contained within the  
Newcourt Masterplanning Stud y. 
71  Monkerton/Hill Ba rton 
12.14  The Monkerton/Hill Barton area should accommodate around 2,500 dwellings and about  
5 hectares of employment land (in addition to 3 hectares with permission) set in a green 
infrastructure framework.  The residential development should be integrated closely with 
adjoining housi ng and be within convenient walking distance of a primary school and 
community centre, and a local centre comprising a doctors surgery/polyclinic, local shops, 
and other appropriate facilities to meet skills, special educational and community needs. 
Contri butions towards the improvement of existing educational, social and community 
facilities, will also be sought where no facility is required on site. Contributions may  
be sought for the expansion of St Luke ’s Secondary School and Pinhoe Librar y. The 
employm ent land should have good road links to the M5 junction 29, which do not pass 
through residential areas.  The open space framework should comprise a range of linked 
formal and informal open areas (including parks, playing fields and allotments) meeting 
local sporting and recreational needs; keeping development away from natural habitats, 
areas of high flood risk and important landscape features; and screening housing from the 
motorwa y, busy roads and employment areas.  
12.15  A comprehensive footpath and cycleway network is required.  This should link existing and  
proposed housing and employment areas to each other; to the proposed local centre, and 
to existing schools, shops, public transport connections, employment opp ortunities and 
community facilities in adjoining areas. Specifically this should include links to the major 
developments proposed to the east and to open countryside via a proposed pedestrian/ 
cycle bridge over the motorwa y. 
12.16 New development will also need to facilitate and contribute towards the improvement of  
transport infrastructure in the area.  All dwellings should be within easy walking distance of 
frequent public transport services linking the neighbourhood to local facilities and 
employment, to the City Centre, and to existing and proposed residential and employment 
areas to the south and east.  The route of a new road link from Cumberland Way to the 
motorway (which leads on to the  A30 to the east) should be safeguarded.  A proposed 
enhanced public transport service linking the city with new d evelopment in East Devon 
could also follow this route. Improvements to the motorway crossing may be required to 
accommodate the resulting additional traffic.  A new rail halt on the Exeter to Exmouth line 
should also be sought to the south of the area.  
12.17  Densities should be appropriate to the location.  The highest densities should be close to the  
new local centre, existing facilities and along public transport corridors.  Affordable housing 
should be provided in accordance with adopted polic y, and site provision for Gypsies and 
Travellers, if identified by th e site search process. Development should utilise the principles 
of good urban design to ensure that the resulting development is both attractive and locally 
distinctive.  
12.18  The development of this area should have general regard to guidance contained within the  
Monkerton and Hill Barton Masterplanning Stud y. 
72  South of  Alphington  
12.19  South of  Alphington, between the urban area and the city boundar y, there is capacity for  
around 500 dwellings.  The area would deliver a compact urban extension with associated 
infrastructure.  
12.20  The area consists of a number of fields with mature boundary hedges that rise gently to  
the south to a ridge.  This prominent ridge forms the city ’s administrative bo undary and 
proposals should respond sensitively to this feature.  
12.21  The development form would be  expected to relate well to adjoining housing. Densities  
should be appropriate to the location and it will be important to ensure that the amenity of 
existing residents is protected.  The development should follow the principles of good urban 
design to ensu re that the resulting development is both attractive and locally distinctive.  
12.22  The development must have good permeability for pedestrians and cyclists throughout,  
with links to surrounding areas.  The development would also be expected to contribute to 
enhanced transport infrastructure within the area. Improvements to the Alphington Road 
Corridor will be required, a proposed enhanced public transport service could link this 
development to the City Centre, and a new rail halt at Matford on the Exeter to Plymouth 
line is proposed.  
12.23  The development of 500 new dwellings would result in significant additional pressure on  
existing facilities. Contributions towards the improvement of existing educational, social and 
community facilities, will be sought where no facility is required on site.  
12.24  Whilst the capacity of the land within the city is for around 500 dwellings, the Regional  
Spatial Strategy Proposed Changes proposed an urban extension to the south west of 
the city of around 2,500 dwellings that would include the dwellings within the city and 
approximately 2,000 dwellings in  Teignbridge.  
12.25  The prospect of a larger urban extension o ffers both challenges and potential opportunities.  
The larger urban extension could support its own local centre, on -site community facilities, 
including a new secondary school, a new park and ride, significant green infrastructure 
and improvements in the movement network giving access to surrounding countryside. 
Teignbridge and Exeter will work closely together to ensure a comprehensive masterplan 
guides development of the area.  
Successful inf rastructure deli very 
12.26  The successful delivery of a strategy that accommodates significant new residential and  
employment developmen t will be dependent upon the necessary infrastructure being 
provided in the right place and at the right time.  All new development, to varying degrees, 
creates additional demands on existing infrastructure and in many instances existing 
infrastructure will  be insufficient to accommodate new development.  Acting as a ‘ring - 
maste r’ the local authority must ensure that all the necessary infrastructure is put in place.  
12.27  In order to facilitate this deliver y, the City Council is working closely with infrastructure  
partners in undertaking an infrastructure planning process, the details of which are given in 
section 11. This work has already identified , in broad terms, the key infrastructure 
requirements for the proposed strategic allocations referred to in the preceding paragraphs.  
73  74  
CP19:  The following areas are proposed as strategic allocations:  
 
 
The Newcourt area (identified on plan 1, page 100) is proposed for around 3500 
dwellings (including 1176 with planning permission), around 16 hectares of 
employment land and all associated infrastructure including:  
 
• local centre to provide shops and community facilities including a health centre;  
• two new primary schools;  
• gypsy and traveller site provision if necessary;  
• green infrastructure framework;  
• low and zero carbon infrastructure;  
• new pedestrian and cycle crossings of the  A379 and the railway line;  
• transport hub to include rail halt and bus interchange;  
• new link road through the development with  access onto the  A379;  
• improvements to the strategic road network particularly at Countess Wear 
roundabout; and  
• contributions towards other educational, social and community facilities.  
 
 
The Monkerton/Hill Barton area (identified on plan 2, page 101) is proposed for 
around 2500 dwellings, around 5 hectares of employment land and all associated 
infrastructure including:  
 
• local centre to provide shops, doctors surgery and community facilities  
• a primary school;  
• green infrastructure framework;  
• low and zero carbon infrastructure;  
• gypsy and traveller site provision if necessary;  
• new pedestrian and cycle bridge over the motorway;  
• new link road from Cumberland Way to the motorway to provide vehicular  
access;  
• safeguarding the new rail halt on the  Exeter to Exmouth line;  
• A new training and educational facility by Exeter College; and  
• contributions towards other educational, social and community facilities.  
 
 
The area south of  Alphington (identified on plan 3, page 102) is proposed for around  
500 dwellings and all associated infrastructure including:  
 
 
• green infrastructure framework  
• low and zero carbon infrastructure;  
• enhancements to transport infrastructure in particular the strategic road  
network; and  
• contributions towards other educatio nal, social and community facilities.  
  13. 
 
13.1 Monitoring and implement ation 
 
The Core Strategy policies will be subject to continuous monitoring in order to assess their 
impact and to ensure the successful delivery of the vision and spatial objectives.  This is to 
be achieved by measuring the performance of policies through the use of indicators and 
targets.  The indicators used are set by Government, supplemented by local indicators 
where required to reflect issues of particular local importance.  
13.2 Monitoring data is drawn from national, regional and local published sources but key  
elements will be the annual employment and housing land availability studies, the Strategic 
Housing Land  Availability  Assessment (SHLAA), retail updates, ongoing environmental 
monitoring and  other local research.  
13.3 The table that follows sets out the indicators and targets in relation to each Core Strategy  
policy, the objectives relating  to each policy and the agencies responsible for deliver y. The 
range of indicators reflects the Core Strategy ’s relationship with other plans and 
programmes and therefore includes ‘National Indicators ’ (NI) and ‘Core Output indicators ’ 
(CO) as required by the Government, ‘Contextual indicators ’ (CI) which relate to local 
characteristics and issues of the locality and other ‘Local Indicators’  such as those from the 
Local  Area  Agreement (LAA) and the Local  Transport Plan ( LTP). 
13.4 The results of monitoring of each document that makes up the Local Development  
Framework (LDF) will be reported in the Council ’s Annual Monitoring Report (AMR).  The 
AMR is required to outline the progress in preparing the documents and assess the extent 
to which the policies are being implemented and their e ffectiveness. Where a policy is not 
meeting its objective, the  AMR will e xplain why and suggest what action should be taken. 
The monitoring framework itself will be reviewed as part of the  AMR.  
13.5 A Housing  Trajectory is also included in the Core Strategy and will be updated each year in  
the AMR. It presents past housing completions and expectations for future delivery over the 
plan period. Where monitoring identifies serious or sustained failure to deliver new housing 
in accordance with the trajector y, actions may include:  
• Identifying additional housing sites through the annual update of the SHLAA  
•  Using Growth Point funding to help address any barriers to development (such as  
infrastructure provision / land ownership issues)  
• Bringing forward housing sites through masterplans and planning briefs  
•  Actively marketing housing sites (including Council owned land) to the development  
industry  
• Using Compulsory Purchase Orders to assemble key sites where other delivery 
mechanisms have failed  
• Action to secure timely provision of infrastructure  
13.6 In addition to the monitoring process outlined above, a sustainability -monitoring framework  
is set out in the Core Strategy Sustainability  Appraisal Scoping report that uses indicators 
and targets to assess the performance of each Core Strategy policy against each of the 
Sustainability Objectives.  
13.7 The AMR will integrate the results of both the monitoring processes to assess the overall  
performance of the Core Strateg y. 
75  Monitoring and Implementation Framework  
76 
 
Core Strategy Policy and Objectives  
 
Core Strategy Objectives  
1   Mitigate and adapt to climate change  
2   Develop the potential for economic and commercial investment  
3   Provide decent homes for all  
4   Provide retail, cultural and tourist facilities  
5   Achieve a step change in the use of sustainable transport  
6   Meet community needs  
7   Promote development that contributes to a healthy popu lation  
8   Protect and enhance the city ’s character  
9   Achieve excellence in design  
10 Provide infrastructure to deliver high quality development  
 
 
CP1: Spatial Strategy  
 
Indicators  
 
Housing, employment 
and retail completions, 
city wide and by area  
  
Target  
 
At least 12,000 
dwellings, 60 hectares  
of employment land and  
40,000 sq m of retail  
floorspace.  
  
Delivery Mechanisms  
 
•    Core Strategy  
Strategic  Allocations  
•    Site Allocations DPD  
•    Monkerton  Masterplan  
SPD 
•    Newcourt Masterplan  
SPD 
•    South West 
Masterplan  
•  Development 
Schemes / Planning 
Applications  
  
Funding Mechanisms  
 
•  Private investment/ 
developer 
contributions /CIL  
•    Public investment  
•    Regional Funding  
Allocation (R FA) 
•    Direct Project Funding  
(SW RDA)  
•  Regional 
Infrastructure Fund 
(RIF)  
•    New Growth Point  
Team 
•    HCA  funding streams   
Key Partners  
 
•    Local Strategic  
Partnership (LSP)  
•    Exeter and East Devon  
New Growth Point  Team 
•  Landowners, developers, 
house builders  
•    City Centre Partnership  
  77  
Employment Objectives  
1   Mitigate and adapt to climate change  
2   Develop the potential for economic and commercial investment  
10 Provide infrastructure to deliver high quality development  
 
 
CP2: Employment  
 
 
Indicators  
 
Total amount of 
employment completed 
by type - B1, B2 and B8 
(CO: BD1)  
 
Total amount of 
employment floorspace 
completed on previously 
developed land by type - 
B1, B2 and B8 (CO: BD2)  
 
Employment land  
available – by type (BD3)  
 
Total amount of office 
floorspace completed 
within (i) city centre (ii) 
the local authority area 
(CO: BD4)  
 
Loss of employment land 
in specified areas (see 
Policy CP2)  
 
 
 
 
Working age population 
qualified to at least level 3 
or higher (NI 164)  
  
Target  
 
60 hectares of  
employment land  
 
 
 
 
60% on previously 
developed land (national 
target)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30,000 sq m of office 
floorspace in the city 
centre  
 
 
 
 
No loss of employment 
land except where it is 
not viable or needed (in 
accordance with policy 
wording)  
 
Increase annually  
See latest Local  Area  
Agreement (LAA) targets  
  
Delivery Mechanisms  
 
•    Core  Strategy  
Strategic  Allocations  
•    Site Allocations DPD  
•    Monkerton  Masterplan  
SPD 
•    Newcourt Masterplan  
SPD 
•    South West 
Masterplan  
•    Bus and Coach  
Station Masterplan  
•  Development 
Schemes / Planning 
Applications  
  
Funding Mechanisms  
 
•  Private investment, 
including individual 
companies  
and developer 
contributions  
/ Community 
Infrastructure Levy 
(CIL)  
•  Public investment, 
including Devon 
County Council, RDA 
and Devon Economic 
Partnership  
•  Direct Project Funding 
(SW RDA) including 
European Structural 
Funds  
•    Regional Funding  
Allocation (R FA) 
•  Regional 
Infrastructure Fund 
(RIF)  
•    New Growth Point  
Team 
•    HCA  funding streams  
  
Key Partners  
 
•    LSP 
•    Exeter and East Devon  
New Growth Point  Team 
•    Landowners, developers  
•    City Centre Partnership  
•    Devon County Council  
•    Regional Development  
Agency (RDA)  
•  Devon Economic 
partnership  
•    University of Exeter  
  78  
Housing Objectives  
1   Mitigate and adapt to climate change  
3   Provide decent homes for all  
8  Protect and enhance the city ’s character  
9 Achieve excellence in design  
10 Provide infrastructure to deliver high quality development  
 
 
CP3: Housing  
 
 
Indicator  
 
Plan period and housing  
target (CO: H1)  
 
 
Net additional dwellings  
– in previous years (CO:  
H2a)  
 
 
Net additional dwellings  
– for the  reporting year  
(CO: NI154 / H2b)  
 
 
Net additional dwellings – 
in future years (CO: H2c  
& d) including sites with 
planning permission  
 
 
New and converted 
dwellings on previously 
developed land (CO: H3)  
  
Target  
 
12,000 dwellings between  
2006 and 2026  
 
 
See yearly targets as 
set out in the Housing 
Trajectory  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50% on previously 
developed land  
  
Delivery Mechanisms  
 
•    Core Strategy  
Strategic  Allocations  
•    Site Allocations DPD  
•    Planning Obligations  
SPD 
•    Monkerton  Masterplan  
SPD 
•    Newcourt Masterplan  
SPD 
•    South West 
Masterplan  
•  Development 
Schemes / Planning 
Applications  
  
Funding Mechanisms  
 
•  Private investment 
and developer 
contributions / CIL  
•    Public investment  
•    Regional Funding  
Allocation (R FA) 
•  Regional 
Infrastructure Fund 
(RIF)  
•    New Growth Point  
Team 
•  Homes and 
Communities  Agency 
(HCA) funding 
streams  
  
Key Partners  
 
•    LSP 
•    Exeter and East Devon  
New Growth Point  Team 
•  Landowners, developers, 
housebuilders  
•    City Centre Partnership  
  79  
CP4: Density  
 
 
Indicator  
 
Number of dwellings 
completed per hectare  
  
Target  
 
Highest appropriate 
density compatible with 
protection of heritage 
assets, local amenities, 
the character and quality 
of the local environment 
and the safety and 
convenience of the local 
and trunk road network.  
  
Delivery Mechanisms  
 
•    Development  
Management DPD  
•    Residential Design  
Guide SPD  
•  Development 
Schemes / Planning 
Applications  
  
Funding Mechanisms  
 
•  Private investment 
and developer 
contributions / CIL  
•    Public investment  
•  HCA  funding streams 
including Kickstart  
  
Key Partners  
 
•  Developers and house 
builders  
 
 
CP5: Meeting Housing Needs  
 
 
Indicators  
 
Size and types of 
dwellings completed by 
location  
 
 
 
 
 
% of additional dwellings 
completed meeting 
Lifetime Homes 
standards or equivalent  
  
Target  
 
All market housing on 
sites of 10 or more 
dwellings should achieve 
a mix of housing types  
reflecting the most recent  
HMA  requirements.  
 
100% of completions to 
meet Lifetime Homes 
standards.  
  
Delivery Mechanisms  
 
•    Development  
Management DPD  
•    Student  
Accommodation SPG  
•    Residential Design  
Guide SPD  
•  Monkerton  Masterplan 
SPD and Newcourt 
Masterplan SPD  
•    South West 
Masterplan  
•  Development 
Schemes / Planning 
Applications  
  
Funding Mechanisms  
 
•  Private sector 
investment  
and developer 
contributions / CIL 
•  Funding through 
the HCA  - National 
Affordable Housing 
Programme  
  
Key Partners  
 
•    Housing Corporation  
•    Registered Social  
Landlords (RS L’s) 
•  Landowners, developers, 
housebuilders  
•    Exeter University  
•    LSP 
  80  
CP6: Gypsies and Travellers  
 
 
Indicator  
 
Net additional gypsy and  
traveller pitches (CO:  H4) 
  
Target  
 
Pitches to be completed:  
25 residential pitches and  
5 transit pitches by 2026  
  
Delivery Mechanisms  
 
•    Site Allocations SPD  
•    Monkerton  Masterplan  
SPD 
•    Newcourt Masterplan  
SPD 
•    South West 
Masterplan  
•  Development 
Schemes / Planning 
Applications  
  
Funding Mechanisms  
 
•  Private sector 
investment  
and developer 
contributions / CIL  
•    Delivery of sites  
•    Registered Social  
Landlords (RS L’s) 
•  Exeter City Council / 
Devon  County  Council  
•    Government grants  
- HCA  Gypsy and  
Traveller Site Grant  
  
Key Partners  
 
•  Gyps y, traveller & show 
people community  
•  District Councils/ Devon 
County Council (Gypsy 
liaison officer)  
•    The Gypsy Council  
•    The Showman ’s Guild  
 
 
CP7: Affordable Housing  
 
 
Indicators  
 
Number of a ffordable 
houses completed (CO: 
H5 / NI155)  
 
 
Proportion of social 
rented and intermediate 
housing completed  
  
Target  
 
35% of housing 
constructed on sites 
capable of providing 3 or 
more dwellings  
 
70% of non -market 
housing to be social 
rented and 30% 
intermediate  
  
Delivery Mechanisms  
 
•  Public / Private sector 
partnership  
•    Planning Obligations  
SPD 
•    Affordable Housing  
SPD 
•  Implementing 
Affordable Housing 
Requirements 
document  
•  Development 
Schemes / Planning 
Applications  
  
Funding Mechanisms  
 
•  Private investment 
and developer 
contributions / CIL  
•  HCA’s National 
Affordable Housing 
Programme and the 
Housing Stimulus 
Programme including 
Kickstart  
  
Key Partners  
 
•    Private sector  
•    Housing Corporation  
•    RSL’s 
•  Landowners, developers, 
housebuilders  
  81  
 
Shopping Objectives  
1 Mitigate and adapt to climate change  
4 Provide retail, cultural and tourist facilities  
 
 
CP8: Retail  
 
 
Indicators  
 
Total amount of 
completed retail 
floorspace within (i) city  
centre areas (ii) local and  
district centres and (iii) 
the local authority area 
(CO: BD4)  
 
Percentage of vacant 
units in the City Centre 
(CI) 
 
Number of independent 
outlets in the City Centre 
(CI) 
  
Target  
 
In the city centre:  
3,000 sq m net retail  
convenience floorspace  
37,000 sq m of net retail  
comparison floorspace  
 
 
 
 
The number of vacant 
units to remain below  
10%.  
 
No reduction in proportion 
of independent outlets  
  
Delivery Mechanisms  
 
•    Monkerton  Masterplan  
SPD 
•    Newcourt Masterplan  
SPD 
•    South West 
Masterplan  
•    Bus and Coach  
Station Masterplan  
•  Development 
Schemes / Planning 
Applications  
  
Funding Mechanisms  
 
•  Private investment 
and developer 
contributions / CIL  
•    Public investment  
  
Key Partners  
 
•    LSP 
•    Exeter and East Devon  
New Growth Point  Team 
•    Landowners, developers  
•    City Centre Partnership  
  82  
Transport Objectives  
1   Mitigate and adapt to climate change  
5   Achieve a step change in the use of sustainable transport  
7   Promote development that contributes to a healthy population  
10 Provide infrastructure to deliver high quality development  
 
 
CP9: Transport  
 
 
Indicators  
 
A step change in the 
quality and capacity of 
public transport within 
the city and between 
the city and proposed  
developments to th e east 
and south west  
 
Proportion of people 
travelling to work by bus, 
bike or  rail (Devon County 
Council  Travel to Work 
Survey)  
 
Year on year increase 
in the number of bus 
passengers (NI177 – 
local bus patronage)  
  
Target  
 
Introduction of enhanced 
public transport system  
 
New rail halts at Hill 
Barton, Newcourt and 
Matford and associated 
infrastructure (including 
selective duelling)  
 
Improvements to facilities 
for pedestrians and 
cyclists including the 
crossing over the M5 to 
the north of junction 29  
 
An increase in the 
proportion of people 
travelling to work by bus, 
bike or rail  
  
Delivery Mechanisms  
 
•    Local  Transport Plan  
•    Infrastructure Delivery  
SPD 
•    Planning Obligations  
SPD 
•    Monkerton  Masterplan  
SPD 
•    Newcourt Masterplan  
SPD 
•    South West 
Masterplan  
•    City Centre  Area  
Action Plan  
•  Development 
Schemes / Planning 
Applications  
  
Funding Mechanisms  
 
•  Private investment 
and developer 
contributions / CIL  
•    Regional Funding  
Allocation (FRA)  
•  Regional 
Infrastructure Fund 
(RIF)  
•  Community 
Infrastructure Fund 
(CIF)  
•  Highways  Agenc y, 
Devon County 
Council, Exeter  
City Council Capital 
budget, Natural 
England and other 
public sector funding  
•    New Growth Point  
Team 
  
Key Partners  
 
•    Devon County Council  
•  Land owners and 
developers  
•    Highways  Agency  
•  Bus Operators (including 
Stagecoach and National 
Express)  
•  Network Rail, South 
West Trains, First Great 
Western and other  Train 
Operators  
•    Neighbouring authorities  
•    Exeter and East Devon  
New Growth Point  Team 
•    Sustrans and Cycling  
England  
•    Devon Primary Care  Trust 
(PCT)  
•    Natural England  
  scheme in place to  
83  
 
 
 
 
 
Provision of Park and 
Ride sites to the south 
west and Cowley area 
to the north west and  
enhancement of provision 
to the east  
 
Improvements to 
the strategic road 
infrastructure  
 
 
 
 
Demand management 
schemes (i.e. workplace 
parking levy)  
  
Increase in bus usage  
See latest LAA  targets  
 
 
 
Additional Park and Ride 
around the city including: 
Ide Interchange to the 
south west and Cowley 
area to the northwest.  
 
 
 
Improvements to 
junctions of M5, outer 
bypass and  Alphington 
road corridor  
 
 
Demand management 
manage congestion  
     developers  
•    LSP 
and Airport Fund  
Capital Expenditure  
(Council  Tax) 
84  
Meeting Community Needs Objectives  
1   Mitigate and adapt to climate change  
2   Develop the potential for economic  and commercial investment  
3   Provide decent homes for all  
4   Provide retail, cultural and tourist facilities  
6   Meet community needs  
7   Promote development that contributes to a healthy population  
10 Provide infrastructure to deliver high quality development  
 
 
CP10: Meeting Community Needs  
 
 
Indicators  
 
Net gain / loss in facilities  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annual completions  
of community facilities 
(monitoring of use 
classes D1 and D2)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Percentage of people 
who feel they can 
influence decisions in 
their locality (LAA16 / NI  
4) 
  
Target  
 
No loss of community 
facilities, which meet 
Exete r’s communit y, 
social, health, education, 
cultural and recreational 
needs.  
 
All facilities that serve the 
city as a whole to be 
located in the City Centre 
or at sites accessible by 
public transport  
 
All facilities that serve 
neighbourhood needs 
to be within or close to 
district or local centres  
 
See latest LAA  targets  
  
Delivery Mechanisms  
 
•    Infrastructure Delivery  
SPD 
•    Planning decisions  
•    Planning Obligations  
SPD 
•    Monkerton  Masterplan  
SPD 
•    Newcourt Masterplan  
SPD 
•    South West 
Masterplan  
•  Development 
Schemes / Planning 
Applications  
  
Funding Mechanisms  
 
•  Private investment 
including developer 
contributions / CIL  
•    New Growth Point  
Team 
•  Public investment 
including HCA  funding  
•  Regional 
Infrastructure Fund 
(RIF)  
•  Exeter City Council – 
Capital Programme, 
Council  Tax and  
‘My Neighbourhood’  
scheme  
•    Devon  County  Council  
– Capital Programme  
 
•    Fire and Rescue  
 
and Policing Precept  
  
Key Partners  
 
•    Devon County Council  
– Social Services and  
Children ’s Services  
•    Devon PCT  
•    Health and Wellbeing  
•    Partnership  
•    Landowners and  
 
•    Sport England  
 
•    Devon and Cornwall  
Police / Fire and Rescue  
•    University of Exeter  
  85  
Environment Objectives  
1   Mitigate and adapt to climate change  
2   Develop the potential for economic and commercial investment  
3   Provide decent homes for all  
7   Promote development that contributes to a healthy population  
8   Protect and enhance the city ’s character  
9  Achieve excellence in design  
10 Provide infrastructure to deliver high quality development  
 
 
CP11: Pollution  
 
 
Indicators  
 
Measurements of the 
quality of air within  Air 
Quality Management 
Area, including:  
 
Annual average 
concentration of carbon 
monoxide, nitrogen 
dioxide, sulphur dioxide 
and particulate matter 
levels  
 
Per capita CO2 emissions  
in the L A area (NI 186)  
  
Target  
 
Air quality to maintain or 
improve from 1997 level  
 
 
 
 
Levels not to exceed 
national objectives  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Percentage reduction 
(LAA5) See latest LA A 
targets  
  
Delivery Mechanisms  
 
•    Development  
Management DPD  
•    Local  Transport Plan  
•    Air Quality  Action Plan  
•  Development 
Schemes / Planning 
Applications  
•    Urban design projects  
  
Funding Mechanisms  
 
•  Private investment 
including developer 
contributions / CIL  
•  HCA  funding streams 
including the Low 
Carbon Fund  
•    Exeter City Council  
  
Key Partners  
 
•    Devon County Council  
•  Landowners and 
developers  
•  Devon Joint Waste & 
Recycling Committee  
•    Environment  Agency (EA)  
•    South West Water (SWW)  
  86  
CP12: Flood Risk  
 
 
Indicators  
 
Number of planning 
applications approved 
against EA  advice on 
flooding and water quality 
grounds (CO: E1)  
 
Number of permissions 
incorporating SUDS 
schemes  
 
Planning to  Adapt to  
Climate Change (NI 188)  
 
Flood and coastal risk  
management (NI 189)  
  
Target  
 
No planning permissions 
granted contrary to  
the advice of  The 
Environment  Agency  
 
 
 
All major schemes to 
incorporate SUDS  
 
 
 
See latest LAA  targets  
  
Delivery Mechanisms  
 
•    Strategic Flood Risk  
Assessment (SFRA)  
•    Residential Design  
Guide SPD  
•    Monkerton  Masterplan  
SPD 
•    Newcourt Masterplan  
SPD 
•    South West 
Masterplan  
•  Decentralised Energy 
and Sustainable 
Construction SPD  
•    Development  
Management DPD  
•  Development 
Schemes / Planning 
Applications  
•    Urban design projects  
  
Funding Mechanisms  
 
•  Private investment 
including developer 
contributions / CIL  
•  Environment  Agency 
will submit bid to 
DEFRA  
•    South West Water 
•  Developer 
contributions  
•    Exeter City Council  
  
Key Partners  
 
•    EA 
•    SWW  
•    Highways  Agency  
•    Emergency Planning  
•  Devon County Council 
and neighbouring local 
authorities  
•  Land owners, riparian 
owners and developers  
  87  
CP13: Decentralised Energy Network  
 
 
Indicators  
 
Provision of decentralised 
energy infrastructure  
  
Target  
 
All major development 
schemes will be required 
to utilise any existing 
decentralised energy 
infrastructure and provide 
new infrastructure (or 
equivalent financial 
contribution)  
  
Delivery Mechanisms  
 
•    Residential Design  
Guide SPD  
•  Decentralised Energy 
and Sustainable 
Construction SPD  
•    Low Carbon Utilities  
Study  
•    Monkerton  Masterplan  
SPD 
•    Newcourt Masterplan  
SPD 
•    South West 
Masterplan  
•    Development  
Management DPD  
•  Development 
Schemes/ Planning 
Applications  
  
Funding Mechanisms  
 
•  Private investment 
including developer 
contributions / CIL  
•  HCA  funding streams 
including the Low 
Carbon Fund  
•    Regional Funding  
Allocation (R FA) 
•  Regional 
Infrastructure Fund 
(RIF)  
  
Key Partners  
 
•    REGEN SW  
•  Land owners, riparian 
owners and developers  
•    Developers  
•    Exeter and East Devon  
New Growth Point  Team 
•    East Devon District  
Council  
•    Devon County Council  
  88  
CP14: Renewable and Low Carbon Energy  
 
 
Indicators  
 
Renewable energy 
generation by installed 
capacity and type (CO: 
E3) 
  
Target  
 
All major development 
schemes to use 
decentralised and 
renewable or low carbon 
energy sources, to cut 
predicted CO2 emissions 
by the equivalent of at 
least 10% over and above 
those required to meet  
the then current building 
regulations.  
  
Delivery Mechanisms  
 
•    Residential Design  
Guide SPD  
•  Decentralised Energy 
and Sustainable 
Construction SPD  
•    Low Carbon Utilities  
Study  
•    Monkerton  Masterplan  
SPD 
•    Newcourt Masterplan  
SPD 
•    South West 
Masterplan  
•    Development  
Management DPD  
•  Development 
Schemes/ Planning 
Applications  
  
Funding Mechanisms  
 
•  Private investment 
including developer 
contributions / CIL  
•  HCA  funding streams 
including the Low 
Carbon Fund  
•    Regional Funding  
Allocation (R FA) 
•  Regional 
Infrastructure Fund 
(RIF)  
  
Key Partners  
 
•    REGEN SW  
•  Land owners, riparian 
owners and developers  
•    Developers  
•    Exeter and East Devon  
New Growth Point  Team 
•    East Devon District  
Council  
•    Devon County Council  
  89  
CP15: Sustainable Construction  
 
 
Indicators  
 
Level achieved by 
housing development 
under the Code for 
Sustainable Homes  
 
Level achieved by non - 
domestic development 
under BREEAM  
  
Target  
 
All new Homes to be:  
•   at Level 3 from 2010 
(25% reduction on  
2006 Part L  Building  
Regulations)  
•   at Level 4  from 2013 
(44% reduction)  
•  Zero Carbon  from 2016  
 
All development to 
achieve BREEAM ‘very 
good’  standard increasing 
to BREEAM ‘excellent’  in 
2013.  
 
All non -domestic 
developments to be Zero 
Carbon from 2019  
  
Delivery Mechanisms  
 
•  Decentralised Energy 
and Sustainable 
Construction SPD  
•    Residential Design  
Guide SPD  
•    Development  
Management DPD  
•    Monkerton  Masterplan  
SPD 
•    Newcourt Masterplan  
SPD 
•    South West 
Masterplan  
•    Development  
Schemes  
•    Planning  Applications  
•    Urban design projects  
  
Funding Mechanisms  
 
•    New Growth Point  
Team 
•    Developer  
Contributions  
•    HCA  Low Carbon  
Fund  
•  Regional 
Infrastructure Fund 
(RIF)  
•  Public and private 
investment  
  
Key Partners  
 
•    LSP 
•    Developers  
•    Exeter and East Devon  
New Growth Point  Team 
•    East Devon District  
Council  
•    Devon County Council  
•    REGEN SW  
  90  
CP16: Green Infrastructure  
 
 
Indicators  
 
Implement green 
infrastructure proposals 
detailed in the Green 
Infrastructure Strategy  
 
Number of International,  
National, Regional and 
Local sites  
 
Percentage of land 
designated as a Site of 
Special Scientific Interest 
(SSSI) found to be in a  
‘favourable’  condition  
(as assessed by Natural  
England).  
 
Change in areas of 
biodiversity importance 
(CO: E2)  
  
Target  
 
Delivery of Green  
Infrastructure (GI) Study  
 
No loss of or 
inappropriate 
development on 
designated International, 
National, Regional or 
Local sites  
 
100% of land designated 
as a SSSI found to be in 
a favourable condition  
(as assessed by Natural  
England).  
 
No decrease in the 
condition of County 
wildlife sites within the 
city 
  
Delivery Mechanisms  
 
•    Monkerton  Masterplan  
SPD 
•    Newcourt Masterplan  
SPD 
•    South West 
Masterplan  
•    Infrastructure Delivery  
SPD 
•    Planning Obligations  
SPD 
•    Open Space SPD  
•    Implementing Open  
Space Requirements  
•    Development  
Schemes  
•    Planning  Applications  
•    Urban design projects  
•    Biodiversity  Action  
Plan 
  
Funding Mechanisms  
 
•  Developer 
contributions  
•  Community 
Infrastructure Fund 
(CIF)  
•    New Growth Point  
Team 
•    Devon  County  Council  
•    Exeter City Council  
•    East Devon District  
Council  
•    Teignbridge District  
Council  
•  Natural England 
including ‘green 
farming’  scheme for 
the Valley Parks  
•    Devon Wildlife  Trust 
  
Key Partners  
 
•    Devon District Local  
•    Authorities  
•    Devon County Council  
•  Biodiversity  Action Plan 
Partnership and Local 
Sites Partnership  
•    Landowners  
•    Dartmoor National Park  
•    Authority  
•    Exmoor  
•    National Park  Authority  
•    Natural England  
•    British Waterways  
•    Environment  Agency (EA)  
•    English Heritage (EH)  
•    Devon Wildlife  Trust 
•  R.S.P.B and other 
environmental agencies / 
groups  
  E X E T E R L O C A L D E V E L O P M E N T F R A M E W O R K 
91  
Improved local 
biodiversity - proportion 
of local sites where 
positive conservation 
management has been 
or is being implemented 
(NI197)  
 
Total area of allotments  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Percentage of people 
surveyed satisfied with 
parks and open spaces 
(Resident survey - Local)  
  
See latest LAA  targets  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Strategic  Allocations 
to meet their own 
requirements based on  
20 per 1,000 households 
(National Society of 
Allotment and leisure 
Gardeners)  
 
Increase in percentage  
of residents satisfied with  
parks and open spaces  
     92  
CP17: Design and Local Distinctiveness  
 
 
Indicators  
 
Housing Quality  
– Building for Life  
Assessments (CO: H6)  
 
 
 
Percentage of strategic 
allocations with 
masterplans completed  
 
The proportion of 
conservation areas 
demonstrating change 
consistent with their 
character  
  
Target  
 
Percentage of schemes 
achieving a good or 
better Building for Life 
Assessment  
 
100%  
 
 
 
 
No Conservation  Areas  
‘at risk’  
  
Delivery Mechanisms  
 
•    All DPDs  
•    Residential  
Extensions SPD  
•    Residential Design  
Guide SPD  
•    Conservation  Area  
Appraisals  
•    Listed Building grants  
•    Monkerton  Masterplan  
SPD 
•    Newcourt Masterplan  
SPD 
•    South West 
Masterplan  
•    Development  
Schemes  
•    Planning  Applications  
•    Urban design projects  
  
Funding Mechanisms  
 
•  Private investment by 
individual companies 
including developer 
contributions / CIL  
•    Exeter City Council  
•    HCA  funding streams  
  
Key Partners  
 
•    CABE  
•    English Heritage  
•    Conservation forum  
•    Developers  
  93  
Infrastructure Objectives  
1   Mitigate and adapt to climate change  
2   Develop the potential for economic and commercial investment  
3   Provide decent homes for all  
4   Provide retail, cultural and tourist facilities  
5   Achieve a step change in the use of sustainable transport  
6   Meet community needs  
7   Promote development that contributes to a healthy population  
8   Protect and enhance the city ’s character  
9  Achieve excellence in design  
10 Provide infrastructure to de liver high quality development  
 
 
CP18: Infrastructure  
 
 
Indicators  
 
Progress on the delivery 
of infrastructure provision 
(see delivery plan)  
 
Amount of funding 
received  
 
Monitoring of Section 106 
payments and spending  
  
Target  
 
Timely delivery of 
infrastructure  
  
Delivery Mechanisms  
 
•    Infrastructure Delivery  
SPD 
•    Planning Obligations  
SPD 
•    Development  
Schemes  
•    Planning  Applications  
•    Urban design projects  
  
Funding Mechanisms  
 
•    Regional Funding  
Allocation (R FA) 
•  Regional 
Infrastructure Fund 
(RIF)  
•  Private sector 
investment  
including developer 
contributions / CIL  
  
Key Partners  
 
•  Landowners, developers 
and/or house builders  
•    Exeter and East Devon  
Growth Point  Team 
•    East Devon District  
Council  
•    Devon County Council  
- Social Services and  
Children ’s Services  
  94     
•  Public investment 
including Devon 
County Council 
Capital Programme 
and Airport Fund  
•  Building Schools 
for the Future 
Programme  
•  Learning and Skills 
Council (Further 
Education)  
•    Devon PCT  
•    New Growth Point  
Team 
•    HCA  funding streams  
•  Water charges  and 
SWW capital funding 
stream   
•    LSP 
•    Devon PCT  
•    EA 
•    RDA  
•  Stagecoach, Network Rail 
and Highways  Agency  
•    Exeter University  
•    SWW and other utilities  
  95  
Strategic  Allocations Objectives  
1  Mitigate and adapt to climate change  
2  Develop the potential for economic and commercial investment  
3  Provide decent homes for all  
4  Provide retail, culture and tourist facilities  
5  Achieve a step change in the use of sustainable transport  
6  Meet community needs  
7  Promote development that contributes to a healthy population  
8  Protect and enhance the City ’s character  
9 Achieve excellence in design  
10 Provide infrastructure to deliver high quality development  
 
 
CP19: Strategic  Allocations  
 
 
Indicators  
 
Net additional dwellings 
and total amount of 
additional employment 
floorspace in the 
Newcourt area, 
Monkerton/Hill Barton 
area and  Alphington area  
  
Target & Dates  
 
Newcourt: 3,500 
dwellings and 16 hectares 
of employment land  
 
Monkerton/Hill Barton:  
2,500 dwellings and 
around 5 hectares of 
employment land  
 
Alphington: 500 
dwellings  
  
Delivery Mechanisms  
 
•    Core Strategy  
Strategic  Allocations  
•    Monkerton  Masterplan  
SPD 
•    Newcourt Masterplan  
SPD 
•    South West 
Masterplan  
•    Planning Obligations  
SPD 
•    Infrastructure Delivery  
SPD 
•    Development  
Schemes  
•    Planning  Applications  
•    Urban design projects  
  
Funding Mechanisms  
 
•  Private sector 
investment  
including developer 
contributions / CIL  
•    Regional Funding  
Allocation (R FA) 
•  Regional 
Infrastructure Fund 
(RIF)  
•    Devon  County  Council  
Capital Programme  
•    Refer to Infrastructure  
Delivery Plan  
  
Key Partners  
 
•    LSP 
•    RDA  
•    Exeter and East Devon  
Growth Point  Team 
•    EA 
•    Devon County Council  
•    Devon PCT  
•  Landowners, developers 
and housebuilders  
•    RSL’s 
•  Stagecoach, Network Rail 
and Highways  Agency  
•    SWW and other utilities  
•    University of Exeter  
  Housing t rajecto ry 
 
To ensure that the supply of land for housing is sufficiently flexible and responsive, national 
planning policy adopts a ‘plan, monitor and manage’  approach to the provision and release of land 
for housing. In terms of the Local Development Framework, the key features of this approach are:  
•  a requirement to identify broad locations and specific sites that will enable continuous  
delivery of housing for at least 15 years from the date of plan adoption;  
• an illustration, in the form of a ‘housing trajectory’  covering  the plan period, of the expected 
rate of housing delivery compared to the annualised rate over the plan period;  
• annual monitoring to assess whether the actual release of land for housing is broadly in line 
with trajectory ’s forecast; and  
•  procedures t o quickly address any significant shortfall in housing provision.    
Policies CP1, CP3 and CP19 of this Core Strategy indicate the broad distribution of housing growth  
and identify strategic allocations. Sites will also be allocated for housing in the Site  Allocations DPD  
and the City Cent re Area  Action Plan.  
The Core Strategy housing trajectory for Exeter is set out belo w. The trajector y, which is based on  
the SHLA A findings, estimates the rate of future housing completions over the Plan period.  The 
trajectory takes into account the timetable for adopting and implementing DPD ’s, masterplanning 
work undertaken for the strategic allocations, an understanding of the local housing market, and 
the need to provide for the implementation of necessary infrastructure to enable the development 
of sustainable new communities.  
The delivery of  housing will be monitored annually in accordance with national planning policy  
requirements. If it is found that the following thresholds have been exceeded, then the Council will  
use its powers (see actions listed at 13.5), to avoid a significant under -provision of housing:  
• a 10% deficit in the 5 year supply of deliverable housing sites  
• a 10% under -supply of housing from trajectory forecast.  
96  Exeter Core Strategy Housing Trajectory (Smoo thed)  
1200  
1000  
800 
600 
400 
200 
0 
Year 
97 
Number of dwellings 
       Alphing ton 
Monkerton / Hill Barton 
Newcourt 
Regene ration Areas 
Identified sites within the urban area 
Planning  permissions/permissions subject to S106 Agt 
Completions 2006 -2011    
   
   
   
          
               
   
  
    
               
      
    
     
                              
       
         
                                 
 
        
   Annual  dwelling requ irement  taking into account  past comp letions (smoo thed)  
800 
600 
400 
200 
0 
-200 
-400 
Year 
98 
No. of dwellings 
Annual  requirement taking into account past 
completions   
  
  
  
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
99 
99   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E X E T E R   L O C A L   D E V E L O P M E N T   F R A M E W O R K 
100   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
101 
101  102  Appendix 1: Guidance and st rategies 
Appendix 2: Resea rch and studies  
Appendix 3: Replaced policies  
Appendix 4:  Mine rals and waste 
Appendix 5: E xeter Vision  
Appendix 6: List of  district cent res and local cent res 
103  Appendix 1: Existing guidance and st rategies 
 
The framework of guidance and strategies includes the following:  
• National Planning Policy Statements and Planning Policy Guidance Notes which  
explain government policy arising from legislation on a variety of topics such as housing, 
employment and transport  
• www.communities.go v.uk; 
•  Regional Planning Guidance for the South West (RPG10) to 2016  
www.communities.go v.uk; 
• Regional Spatial Strategy for the South West 2006 -2026, the LDF must be in conformity  
with the Regional Spatial Strategy;  
• Adopted Devon County Structure Plan 2001 -2016,  produced by the County Council  
(www.devon.go v.uk/structureplan);  
• Other strategies produced by the City Council and County Council and other statutory  
and local organisations – these include:  
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  (i)  
 
  
 
  
 
(ii) 
(iii)  
  
 
(iv)  
 
  
 
(v)   
 
  
 
(vi)  
 
  
 
(vii)  
 
  
 
(viii)  
 
  
 
(ix)  
 
  
 
(x)  
 
  Exeter Vision (the City ’s Sustainable Community Strategy) prepared  
 
by the Vision Partnership (the City ’s Local Strategic Partnership); 
(www.exete r.gov.uk) 
Exeter and East Devon New Growth Point Growth Delivery Plan;  
Exeter and Heart of Devon Economic Partnership Strategy; 
(www.exete r.gov.uk) 
City Council Environmental Strategy;                
(www.exete r.gov.uk) 
City Council Climate Change Strategy and  Action Plan;        
(www.exete r.gov.uk) 
City Council Biodiversity Strategy and  Action Plan;          
(www.exete r.gov.uk) 
City Council City Centre Strategy;                                 
(www.exete r.gov.uk) 
Devon Community Strategy;                                         
(www.devonsp.org.uk)  
Devon County Council Strategic Plan;                             
(www.devon.go v.uk) 
Devon County Council Local  Transport Plan;                  
 
(www.devon.go v.uk)   
 
  
104  Appendix 2: A dditional resea rch and study  
 
The following studies have informed the assessment of options and the preparation of policy 
guidance:  
• Strategic Housing Land  Availability  Assessment, 2009: to assess the housing capacity of the  
City; 
• Exeter and  Torbay Strategic Housing Market  Assessment, 2007: to establish housing need  
for the HMA  area and to understand the strategic context within which the housing market 
operates;  
• Exeter  Affordable Housing Strategic Viability Stud y, 2009: to advise on the viability of  
affordable housing requirements;  
• Urban Capacity Study 2006 -2026, 2006: to identify the maximum potential capacity for  
previously developed land to accommodate development;  
•  Exeter Employment Stud y, 2007: to identify employment land and floorspace  requirements in  
response to anticipated economic growth and job creation in the Exeter area up to 2026;  
• Exeter Employment Land Revie w, 2009: to assess the potential for continued and enhanced  
employment use of existing employment land and buildings;  
• Newcourt Masterplanning Stud y, 2010:  to assess the capacity of the Newcourt area to  
provide  sustainable development;  
• Monkerton and Hill Barton Masterplan Stud y, 2010:  to assess the capacity of the Monkerton  
and Hill Barton areas to provide sustainable development;  
• South West of Exeter Masterplan, 2010: to demonstrate how a sustainable urban extension  
can be delivered within the study area;  
• Exeter Infrastructure Delivery Plan, 2010: to identify the infrastructure required to deliver the  
spatial strategy;  
• Exeter and East Devon Infrastructure Study 2010: to identify the infrastructure required to  
support development in the Growth Point area;  
• Exeter City Centre  Audit, 2005: to identify the strengths and weaknesses of Exeter City  
Centre;  
• Exeter Retail Stud y, 2008: to forecast retail capacity in the  City up to 2026;  
• Exeter Fringes Landscape Sensitivity and Capacity Stud y, February 2007: to assess the  
characte r, quality and value, and the capacity to accommodate change, of all open land 
around the City;  
• Audit of Outdoor Recreation Facilities, 2005: to determine the adequacy of open spaces, play  
areas and playing fields within the City;  
105 E X E T E R L O C A L D E V E L O P M E N T F R A M E W O R K 
 • Green Infrastructure Strategy for the Exeter and East Devon New Growth Poin t (jointly with  
East Devon District Council,  Teignbridge District Council and Natural England) 2009: to 
ensure that an accessible network of green spaces, landscapes and linkages between town 
and countr y, that support biodiversity and contribute to people ’s health and quality of life, is 
integrated with development proposals from the outset of the planning process;  
• Strategic Flood Risk Assessment, 2008: to ensure that inappropriate development is avoided  
in flood risk areas and that new development does not lead to new or increased risk of  
flooding;  
• Water Cycle Strateg y, 2010: to ensure that sustainable water management solutions are in  
place to accommodate proposed growth;  
• Habitats Regulations  Assessment, 2010: to assess whether the Core Strategy would  
adversely a ffect the conservation objectives or integrity of European Sites (The Exe Estuary 
Special  Protection  Area within Exeter and Special  Areas of Conservation in surrounding 
authorities);  
• Exeter and East Devon New Growth Point Energy Strateg y, 2008: to identify the imp act of  
policies and technologies which would reduce CO2 emissions;  
• Assessment  of Options for Delivery of RSS Growth in the Exeter Sub Region, 2010: to  
assess transport infrastructure requirements to support the growth envisaged by the RSS;  
and 
• Sustainable Design and Low Carbon Infrastructure Strateg y, 2010: to identify infrastructure  
requirements in respect of utilities for the Growth Point.  
106  Appendix 3: List of  replaced  
local plan policies  Exeter first review  
H6 - Affordable Housing  
CS9 - Gypsies and  Travelling Show People  
107  Appendix 4: Mine rals and waste 
 
Devon County Council is currently the Mineral Planning  Authority and the Waste Planning  Authority 
for Exeter City and deals with all mineral and waste applications.  The Minerals Local Plan was 
adopted in June  2004 and the Waste Local Plan in June 2006.  To replace the adopted Minerals  
and Waste Local Plans, DCC intends, over the next 5 years, to prepare a Minerals and Waste 
Development Framework.  
The adopted Minerals Local Plan identifies a series of Mineral Consultation  Areas.  These  Areas  
provide a mechanism for consultation where development would be likely to a ffect the winning  
and working of minerals.  To avoid the sterilisation of mineral resources it is important to safeguard 
mineral deposits and facilities from development unles s there is an overriding need for the 
development, or it can be demonstrated that workable mineral resources would be una ffected. 
Within Exete r, Minerals Consultation  Areas are identified at the Pinhoe Clay Pit, Exeter St Davids 
Yard and the Bishops Court Sand Quarr y. 
The adopted Waste Local Plan designates the Exeter  Transfer Station, Marsh Barton, as a  
Strategic Waste Management Facility and, subject to a S106 legal agreement, planning permission 
has now been granted for an energy from waste facility on this site.  The Plan also suggest s that  
the Exton Road Materials Reclamation Facility could accommodate additional features such as an 
expanded waste transfer station and road/rail interchange.  
Within the cit y, the boundaries of Mineral Consultation  Areas, Sites for Waste Management  
Facilities, and any Mineral Safeguarding  Areas designated under the new Minerals and Waste 
Development Framework, will be identified on the Proposals Map.  These designations act as 
constraints to development and in determining non -mineral and non -waste application the city 
Council will have regard to these designations.  
108  Appendix 5: E xeter Vision  
Our Economy  
• A prosperous city  
• A learning city  
• An accessible city  
Our Society  
• A city with strong communities  
• A city that is healthy and active  
• A safe city  
Our E nvironment  
• A city that cares for the environment  
• A city with homes for everyone  
• A city of culture  
109 E X E T E R L O C A L D E V E L O P M E N T F R A M E W O R K 
 Appendix 6: List of  
centres district  centres and local  
• City Centre  
District Centres  
• Heavitree  
• St Thomas  
• Topsham  
Local Centres  
• Sidwell Street / Blackboy Road  
• Mount Pleasant  
• Magdalen Road  
• Countess Wear (Topsham Road)  
• Beacon Lane  
• Polsloe Bridge  
• Pinhoe  
• Whipton  
• Exwick Road / Winchester  Avenue  
• Isleworth Road  
110  Glossa ry of terms 
areas where national air quality standards are not met.  
effectiveness of, a Local Development Framework.  
simultaneousl y. 
of infrastructure.  
construction of new homes  
111 Acronym  Term Description  
 Affordable Housing  
 Affordable housing includes social rented, a ffordable rented 
and intermediate housing, provided to eligible households 
whose needs are not met by the market.  Affordable  
housing should meet the needs of eligible households 
including availability at a cost lo w enough for them to a fford, 
determined with regard to local incomes and local house 
prices. Includes provision for the home to remain at an 
affordable price for future eligible households o r, if these 
restrictions are lifted, for the subsidy to be recycle d for 
alternative a ffordable housing provision.  
 
AAAP  
 Air Quality  Action  
Plan A management plan seeking to improve local air quality in  
 
 
 
AQMA  
 Air Quality  
Management  Area  
 A designated ar ea where national air quality standards are 
not being met and where action is required to address the 
matte r. 
 Allowable Solutions  
 The measures permitted for dealing with residual emissions 
remaining from a home or other building after taking  
account of carbon abated through on -site technologies and 
connections to low and zero carbon heat networks in order 
to achieve zero carbon status.  
 
AMR  
 Annual Monitoring  
Report  An annual report that assesses progress with, and the  
 
 
 
BREEAM  
 Building Research 
Establishment 
Environmental 
Assessment Method  A form of assessment used to measure a building ’s 
environmental performance.  
 
 Carbon Budget  
 A cap on the total quantity of greenhouse gas emissions 
emitted in the UK. Each budget covers a five -year period, 
with three budgets set at a time.  The first three set by the 
Government run from 2008 -12, 2013 -17 and 2018 -22. 
 
CHP  
 Combined Heat and  
Power  An efficient method of generating heat and electricity  
 
 
 
CIF 
 Community  
Infrastructure Fund  
 A Government scheme designed to support the  
transport infrastructure costs required to enable housing 
development.  
 Community Facilities  
 Buildings or meeting places that provide for the health, 
welfare, social, educational, spiritual, recreational, leisure 
and cultural needs of the communit y. 
 
CIL 
 Community  
Infrastructure Levy  A charge levied on developers to contribute to the provision  
 
 
CSH  
 Code for Sustainable  
Homes  An assessment to rate the sustainable design and  
  112 Acronym  Term Description  
 Contextual Indicators  
 Monitoring indicators that measure changes in the wider 
social, economic, and environmental background against 
which policies operate.  As such, they help to relate policy 
outputs to the local area.  
 Core Output  
Indicators  
 Monitoring indicators that measure the direct e ffects of a 
policy. Used to assess whether policy targets are being 
achieved in reality using available information.  
CP Core Policy  A Policy within the Core Strateg y. 
 Cycling  
Demonstration  Towns  English towns funded by Cycling England to promote 
cycling as a means of transport.  
 Decentralised Energy  
Network  
 A system of pipes and/or cables that connects a number of 
energy users in a locality to a locally generated supply of 
renewable and low carbon energ y. 
 Development  
 The carrying out of building, engineering, mining or other 
operations in, on, over or under land, or the making of any 
material change  in the use of any buildings or other land.  
DPD  
 Development Plan  
Document  
 Local policy documents that, when combined with the RSS 
and any relevant SPDs, will form the basis, once adopted, 
upon which planning decisions are made.  
DCC  
 Devon County  
Council  
 The county authority for Devon, excluding Plymouth and  
Torbay. 
 
Devon  
PCT Devon Primary Care  
Trust A public body responsible for commissioning healthcare 
within Devon.  
 District Centres  
 A group of shops normally containing at least one 
supermarket or superstore and a range of non -retail 
services and public facilities.  
EDDC  
 East Devon District  
Council  The district authority for the area to the east of Exete r. 
 
 Employment Land  
 All land and buildings which are used or designated for  
purposes within Use Class B1 (Business), Class B2  
(General  Industrial),  and Class  B8 (Storage  and Distribution) 
and other uses of employment character or which generate 
substantial employment or economic benefits and which  
may include sui generis uses such as car showrooms.  
ESCO  
 Energy Services  
Company  A company specialising in sustainable energy solutions.  
 
EA 
 Environment  Agency  
 A public body with a role that seeks to protect and enhance 
the environment.  
ECC  Exeter City Council  The district authority for Exete r. 
ELR 
 Exeter Employment  
Land Review  An assessment of the suitability of existing and potential 
employment sites for employment purposes.   113 Acronym  Term Description  
EHOD  
 Exeter Heart of 
Devon Economic 
Partnership  
 A local bod y, bringing together representatives from  
the private, public and voluntary sectors, that promotes 
sustainable economic growth in the areas covered by 
Mid-Devon,  Teignbridge, East Devon and Exeter district 
councils.  
 Five Year Supply  
 A device by which local planning authorities assess and 
demonstrate the extent to which existing plans fulfil the 
requirement, as laid out in Planning Policy Statement 3 on 
Housing, to identify and maint ain a rolling 5 -year supply of 
deliverable land for housing.  
GI 
 Green Infrastructure  
 A network of, often interconnected, waterways, woodlands, 
wildlife habitats, parks and other natural areas and green 
spaces which supports the natural and ecological processes 
and is integral to the health and quality of life of sustainable 
communities by encouraging sustainable movement, 
recreational opportunities and/or climate c hange mitigation.  
 Gypsies and  
Travellers  
 Persons of nomadic habit of life whatever their race or 
origin, including such persons who on grounds only of their 
own family ’s or dependents’  educational or health needs or 
old age have ceased to travel temporarily or permanentl y, 
but excluding members of an organised group of travelling 
showpeople or circus people travelling together as such.  
HMA  
 Housing Market  
Assessment  An assessment of housing need in a given area.  
 
HMO  
 Houses in Multiple  
Occupation  Residential properties occupied by three or more unrelated 
tenants.  
HRA  
 Habitats Regulations  
Assessment  
 An assessment of the impact of proposed development 
plans on European nature conservation sites – as per 
Regulation 48 of the Conservation (Natural Habitats &c.) 
Regulations 1994.  
ICT 
 Information and 
Communication 
Technology  A generic name for  all of the technologies involved with 
communicating with computers.  
 
 Infrastructure  
 Publicly accessible assets, systems and networks including 
roads, electricit y, sewers, water and education services.  
 Intermediate Housing  
 Housing at prices and rent s above those of social rent, but 
below market price or rents.  
 Issues and Options  
 A consultation pape r, published at the beginning of the Core  
Strategy process, which sets out the options available for 
the future development of a Council ’s district. Followed by 
Preferred Options.  
 Local Centres  
 A range of small shops of a local nature serving a small 
catchment area.  
LDF 
 Local Development  
Framework  Portfolio of documents setting out development plans and 
planning policies for an area.   114 Acronym  Term Description  
LDS 
 Local Development  
Scheme  
 Document setting out the timetable for the production of 
documents within the Local Development Framework.  
 
LPA 
 Local Planning  
Authority  The statutory provider of planning services in a local area.  
 
LSP 
 Local Strategic  
Partnership  
 A non-statutory body bringing together representatives from 
the private, public and voluntary sectors to set out the long - 
term vision for a local area.  
LTP 
 Local  Transport Plan  
 A five year strategy prepared by local authorities for the  
improvement of local transport systems.  
 Masterplan  
 Initial document setting a clear framework for the later 
detailed design of a development area.  
 Material  
Consideration  
 Any issue that should be taken into account when deciding 
a planning application or an appeal against a planning 
decision.  
MDDC  
 Mid Devon District  
Council  The district authority for the area north of Exete r. 
 
 Minerals Consultation  
Area  
 An area identified in order to ensure consultation between 
the relevant district planning authorit y, the minerals industry 
and the county council before certain non -mineral planning 
applications made within the area are determined.  
 Mitigate  
 In the case of planning obligations, actions to correct the 
negative impacts and e ffects of a development.  
NGP  
 New Growth Point  
 A Government scheme that provides financial assistance to 
facilitate significant sustainable growth in certain designated 
areas.  
 Park and Ride 
schemes  
 Scheme enabling motorists to leave their vehicles at edge - 
of-town car parks and travel into town centres by public 
transport.  
PACT 
 Partners and 
Communities 
Together  A scheme by which the police and other agencies engage 
with the communit y. 
 
PINS  
 Planning  Inspectorate  
 A Government agency that processes planning and 
enforcement appeals and holds public enquiries on local 
development plans.  
PPG  
 Planning Policy  
Guidance Notes  
 A series of Government guidance notes that set out national 
policy on various planning issues.  In the process of being 
replaced by PPSs.  
PPS 
 Planning Policy  
Statement  A series of Government guidance notes that set out national 
policy on various planning issues.  
 Preferred Options  
 A consultation pape r, published early in the Core Strategy  
process, setting out the Council ’s preferred vision for the 
future development of its district.  
 RAMSAR  
 Wetland sites of international importance, especially  
as waterfowl habitats, given special protection under a 
convention signed at Ramsa r, Iran in 1971.   K 
115 E X E T E R L O C A L D E V E L O P M E N T F R A M E W O R Acronym  Term Description  
 Regeneration  Areas  
 Typically a previously developed area identified for  
comprehensive redevelopment.  
RDA  
 Regional  
Development  Agency  
 A public body that provides strategic direction for economic 
development in one of England ’s Government Office 
regions.  
 Renewable and Low  
Carbon Energy  
 Includes energy for heating and cooling as well as 
generating electricit y. Renewable energy covers those 
energy flows that occur naturally and repeatedly in the 
environment  - from the wind, the fall of wate r, the movement 
of the oceans, from the sun and also from biomass.  
Low-carbon technologies are those that can help reduce  
emissions (compared to conventional use of fossil fuels).  
RIF 
 Regional  
Infrastructure Fund  
 Scheme administered by the South West Regional 
Development  Agency that provides forward funding for 
developer contributions to essential pieces of infrastructure 
required to unlock growth, bring forward del ivery and make 
growth more sustainable.  
RSS 
 Regional Spatial  
Strategy  
 Under the previous Labour  Administration, it was intended 
that the South West RSS would provide a strategic 
development plan for the South West and guide Exete r’s 
Local Development Framework policies.  The new Coalition 
Government proposes to abolish RSSs in the next 
parliamentary session.  
RIGS  
 Regionally Important 
Geological and 
Geomorphological 
Sites  Non-statutor y, locally designated sites that are of geological 
and geomorphological importance.  
 
RSL 
 Registered Social  
Landlord  Bodies formerly known as housing associations.  
 
 Ribbon Development  Buildings along a road radiating from a town.  
RAMM  
 Royal  Albert  
Memorial Museum  Exete r’s main public museum.  
 
 Scheduled  
Monuments  
 Archaeological sites or historic buildings of national 
importance a fforded protection by the  Ancient Mon uments 
and Archaeological  Areas  Act 1979.  
SLINCs  
 Sites of Local 
Interest for Nature 
Conservation  
 Sites that have nature conservation value at a local level 
within the Cit y. Their importance is derived from a 
combination of moderate wildlife interest and the community 
value of the site.  
SNCIs  
 Sites of Nature 
Conservation 
Importance  Sites of nature conservation value at a regional, county or 
city level.  
 
SSSI  
 Site of Special  
Scientific Interest  
 An area of land, notified under Section 28 of the Wildlife and 
Countryside  Act 1981, as being of special interest by reason 
of its flora, fauna, geological or physiological features.   116 Acronym  Term Description  
 Social Rented  
Housing  
 Rented housing, normally owned and managed by local 
authorities and registered social landlords, for which 
guideline target rents are determined through the national 
rent regime.  
SWRDA  
 South West Regional  
Development  Agency  A public body that provides strategic direction for economic 
development in the south -west of England.  
 Spatial Planning  
 Addresses not only the physical development of land but its 
use, and activities undertaken on it.  
SAC 
 Special  Area of  
Conservation  
 Site of European conservation importance comprising 
habitats or species defined under the E.C. Directive 1992 
on the Conservation of Natural Habitats of Wild Flora and 
Fauna.  
SPA 
 Special Protection  
Area  A site of European importance for bird conservation (EC  
Directive 1979 for the Conservation of Wild Birds).  
SCI 
 Statement of 
Community 
Involvement  
 Document setting out how a local authority will involve 
the community in the preparation of development plans 
and planning policy and the consideration of planning 
applications.  
 Strategic  Allocation  
 An area identified for development in a Core Strateg y, which  
is considered central to the achievement of the strateg y. 
SFRA  
 Strategic Flood Risk  
Assessment  
 A flood risk assessment designed to assist local authorities  
in locating new developments in low flood risk areas.  
 
SHLAA  
 Strategic Housing 
Land  Availability 
Assessment  
 An assessment that identifies housing capacity within a 
given area and considers the suitability of sites and the 
reasonable likelihood of those sites coming forward for 
development.  
SNA 
 Strategic Nature  
Areas  Blocks of land important for the conservation and expansion 
of important habitat types.  
SSCT  
 Strategically 
Significant Cities and 
Towns  Cities and towns that have been identified as playing a  
critical strategic role regionally or sub -regionall y. 
 
SPD 
 Supplementary  
Planning Document  Document that amplifies and provides more details on the  
policies contained within DPDs.  
SPG  
 Supplementary  
Planning Guidance  Document that amplifies the policies of a Local Plan.   
 
SCS 
 Sustainable  
Community Strategy  
 Document setting out the long -term vision for an area, which 
should be delivered, in part, by the Local Development 
Framework.  
 Sustainable  
Development  Meeting the needs of the present without compromising the 
ability of future generations to meet their own needs.   K 
117 E X E T E R L O C A L D E V E L O P M E N T F R A M E W O R Acronym  Term Description  
SUDS  
 Sustainable Urban  
Drainage System  
 A wide range of techniques used on most new development 
sites to reduce the environmental impact from surface water 
drainage.  
SA 
 Sustainability  
Appraisal  
 Tool for appraising  policies  to ensure  they reflect  sustainable 
development objectives (i.e. social, environmental and 
economic factors).  
TDC 
 Teignbridge District  
Council  The district authority for the areas to the south and west of  
Exete r. 
 Travelling 
showpeople  
 Members of a group organised for the purposes of holding 
fairs, circuses or shows (whether or not travelling together 
as such).  This includes such persons who on the grounds o f 
their own family ’s or dependents’  more localised pattern of 
trading, educational or health needs or old age have ceased 
to travel temporarily or permanentl y, but excludes Gypsies 
and Travellers as defined above.  
 Zero Carbon  
 No carbon dioxide emissions from energy used through 
space heating and cooling, hot wate r, lighting, and building 
services as covered by the Building Regulations.   Core Strategy 
Exeter City Council  
Civic Centre 
Paris Street 
Exeter EX1 1NN 
Tel: 01392  265223  
Fax: 01392  265431  
Email:  ldf@ exeter.gov.uk 
www.exeter.gov.uk/corestrategy 
Februa ry 2012   