1
®Draft Local Plan Consultation
August 2022FENLAND
Local Plan 
2021 - 20402OS Map - Copyright Note
The maps within this document are reproduced from Ordnance Survey Material with the permission 
of Ordnance Survey on behalf of the controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office © Crown copyright. 
Unauthorised reproduction infringes Crown copyright and may lead to prosecution or civil proceedings.
External Websites
This document includes links to supporting documents and evidence from third party websites. These links 
are provided for information. These links are correct at time of publication (August 2022) but may change 
in the future.  The Council has no control of the content of any linked website and is not responsible for 
these websites or their content or availability.3Foreword
The Future of Fenland 
I am pleased to present to you the draft Fenland Local Plan. This is the first 
opportunity for you to see the proposed policies and sites to deliver future growth for Fenland to 2040, and the first opportunity for you to comment on these proposals.
I know that you all care passionately about Fenland and want to help ensure 
that the towns and villages grow and prosper in the best possible way to bring benefits to all communities. 
I want to thank all those who took the time to comment on the Issues and 
Options document, we have listened to all comments and balanced all views in preparing this draft plan that meets the Council’s ambitions and communities’ views. 
The new Plan will focus on commercial deliverability, market demand, and meeting growth targets as well as supporting and encouraging economic growth. The new Local Plan will also place far greater emphasis on directing growth to areas where there is market demand, to where people want to live, and to where businesses want to invest, taking into account the unique and historic pattern of development and settlements in the district. Growth should benefit all communities, down to the smallest level, rather than seeking to focus growth only in the largest settlements. Our strategy should recognise the ways that our district functions and should provide consumer choice.
We really value your views; therefore, I encourage you to get involved and help shape the future growth of 
the district. 
Council Leader – Councillor Chris Boden 
4Draft Local Plan Consultation 
Fenland District Council is preparing a new Local Plan for the district, this is an important document as it 
will determine what the district will look like in the future. 
The new Local Plan will replace the adopted Fenland Local Plan (May 2014). It will not replace the recently 
adopted Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Minerals and Waste Plan (July 2021). 
This is the draft version of the Local Plan. It sets out the emerging strategies and policies for growth and 
regeneration to 2040. Unlike the Issues and Options Document (October 2019), this draft version includes 
proposed policies and specific allocations for new development. This is still a draft plan and therefore your 
views are essential.
The draft policies are set out in Parts B and C and the proposed sites are listed in Part D. The Policies Map 
(Part E) shows the location of the proposed sites, which can also be viewed on the Interactive Map: 
www.fenland.gov.uk/interactivepoliciesmap
How do I submit my comments? 
This is an opportunity to comment on the draft policies and proposed site allocations identified in the 
emerging Local Plan. We encourage you to let us know your views and help inform the future of the district. 
Further information about the Draft Local Plan is available on our website at:
www.fenland.gov.uk/newlocalplan. 
The Online Questionnaire is our preferred method to receive comments. Alternatively, you can download 
the Form E from the above website. www.fenland.gov.uk/localplansurvey
Copies of the Plan and the Response Form are available at local libraries in the district. 
The Response Form (Form E) can be returned by e-mail or post to:   
localplan@fenland.gov.uk 
or   
Local Plan Team
Fenland District Council
Fenland Hall, County Road 
March  
PE15 8NQ
 
Please clearly show exactly which question or which part of the document you are commenting on. The 
closing date for all comments is 11.59pm on 19 October 2022 . Please note that all comments 
will be available to view on the Council’s website and will not be confidential. All comments received will 
be taken into consideration and will help inform the Local Plan to be published for public consultation and 
submission to the Planning Inspectorate in 2023. 
How we will protect your data? 
All personal information that you provide will be used solely by Fenland District Council for the purpose of 
the consultation on the Fenland Local Plan. Please note that each comment and the name of the person 
who made the comment will be featured on our website – comments will not be confidential.
 
This information will be held by the Council for four months after the adoption of the Local Plan. Any 
personal information you give us will only be used in accordance with principles found in the General Data 
Protection Regulations (GDPR). Please see www.fenland.gov.uk/privacy for further information. 5What stage are we at? 
This is the second stage in a lengthy process of producing a new Local Plan. The Local Plan timetable is 
summarised below: 
No. Stage Description
1 Issues and Options Public 
Consultation Completed October and November 2019
Opportunity for interested parties and statutory consultees to 
consider the options for the Plan before the first draft document is 
produced.
Draft Local Plan 
Consultation 
(Regulation 18)  Current Stage - August 2022
Opportunity for interested parties and statutory consultees to 
consider the options for the Plan before the final document is 
produced.
2 Pre-submission Publication 
(Regulation 19)The Council publishes the Local Plan which is followed with a 
6-week period when formal representations can be made.
3 Submission (Regulation 22) The Council submits the Local Plan to the Secretary of State 
together with the representations received at Regulation 19 stage.
4 Independent Examination An independent Planning Inspector appointed by the Secretary of 
State examines the submitted Local Plan, taking into account all 
comments made at Regulation 19 stage.
5 Inspector’s Report Issued This report will conclude whether the Inspector finds the 
Plan ‘sound’ or ‘not sound’. The Inspector may make 
recommendations to make the plan ‘sound’.
6 Adoption of Local Plan Final stage, the Council will formally need to adopt the Local Plan 
and it will then be used in making planning decisions.
In October and November 2019, we consulted on the Issues and Options Consultation document (the first 
stage). All comments received can be viewed on our website and have been taken into consideration during 
the production of this Draft Local Plan. 
As part of the Issues and Options Consultation we also carried out a call for sites. Local agents, developers, 
landowners, Parish Councils and local residents were invited to suggest sites to be considered as potential 
allocations to meet the future growth targets. All proposed sites have been assessed against detailed site 
assessment criteria, and the preferred sites are included in this draft plan (see Part D) and shown on the 
Interactive Map. All sites proposed and the full assessment process is set out in the Strategic Housing 
Economic Land Availability Assessment (SHELAA) Part 2, and the Site Evidence Report.
For further information about the Local Plan, including supporting evidence documents please visit: www.
fenland.gov.uk/newlocalplan.
National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) 
This draft Plan has been produced in accordance with the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF). A 
revised NPPF was published in July 2021 and is supported by ‘live’ National Planning Policy Guidance 
(NPPG). This draft Plan has been written to complement the NPPF and comply with the guidance in the 
NPPG. Should the NPPF or NPPG be revised in the future then references to the NPPF and NPPG in this 
document should be checked against the latest version of the NPPF and NPPG in force at that point in time. 
This Local Plan does not repeat policies in the NPPF; it builds on them when necessary and ensures locally 
specific issues are covered.  6Status of Draft Local Plan July 2022 for Decision Makers
When reading this draft Local Plan please note the following information about its status. The NPPF at 
Paragraph 48 clarifies the position on the status of emerging plans it states:  
 Local planning authorities may give weight to relevant policies in emerging plans according to: 
 a) the stage of preparation of the emerging plan (the more advanced its preparation, the greater the  
  weight that may be given); 
 b) the extent to which there are unresolved objections to relevant policies (the less significant the   
  unresolved objections, the greater the weight that may be given); and
 c) the degree of consistency of the relevant policies in the emerging plan to this Framework (the closer  
  the policies in the emerging plan to the policies in the Framework, the greater the weight that may be 
  given). 
In accordance with the NPPF paragraph 48, the policies contained within this emerging plan will be 
used (alongside the current Fenland Local Plan (2014) and other material considerations) in determining 
planning applications, especially where it contains ‘new’ policy not currently found in either the current 
Local Plan or the NPPF . In helping determine proposals, the amount of ‘weight’ to be given to the content 
of this emerging plan in comparison with the amount of weight given to other plans, strategies and material 
considerations, will be a matter for the decision maker to decide and will vary depending on the specific 
elements of the proposal. However, at this draft stage of plan preparation, the weight is likely to be limited.
Glossary of Terms 
Throughout this document you will find a number of technical planning terms. We have tried to explain 
these clearly within the text. However, Appendix 1 provides a quick summary of the terms used to help 
you understand the planning process. Please see the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) for a 
comprehensive glossary of planning related words and phrases.  7Contents  
Part A - Setting the Scene 12
1.  Introduction 14
2.  Overarching Issues 16
3.  Our Vision  17
4.  Our Objectives 18
Part B - The Spatial Strategy 20
5.  Local Plan Growth Strategy 20
  Housing Need 20
  Fenland Economy 21
6.  The Settlement Hierarchy and the Countryside 22
7.  Growth Strategy 24
  Housing   24
  Employment 27
8.  Securing Fenland’s Future 29
Part C - The Policies 33
9.  The Policies 33
10. Health and Wellbeing 33
11. Renewable Energy 34
  Renewable and Low Carbon Energy 34
12. Design and Amenity 40
  Design   40
  Amenity Provision 43
  Residential Annexes 44
  Shop Frontages, Security Shutters, Canopies 45
13. Housing   47
  Meeting Housing Need 47
  Custom and Self Build 55
  Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople 57
14. Employment 59
  Established Employment Areas 60
15. Town Centres 63
16. Culture, Leisure, Tourism and Community Facilities 67
17. Development in the Countryside 68
18. Transport and Infrastructure 72
  Strategic Infrastructure 72
  Accessibility and Transport 74
  Public Rights of Way 79
  Parking Provision 80
19. Historic Environment 81
20. Natural Environment 85
  Biodiversity and Geodiversity 85
  Biodiversity Net Gain 90
  Carbon Sinks and Carbon Sequestration 92
  Trees and Hedgerows 93
  Landscape  95
  Green Infrastructure 97
  Local Green Spaces and Existing Open Space  99
  Open Space and Recreational Facilities 100
21. Flood and Water Management 103822. Environmental Pollution 105
  Development on Land Affected by Contamination 105
  Air Quality  106
Part D - Policies for Sites and Settlements 108
23. Introduction 108
  Summary of Distribution of Growth 108
  Housing Growth 108
  Housing Trajectory 112
  Employment Growth 115
24. Market Towns 116
  Wisbech   116
  March   121
  Whittlesey  130
  Chatteris  133
25. Large Villages 140
  Doddington 140
  Manea   143
  Wimblington 145
26. Medium Villages 146
  Coates   146
  Elm    148
  Friday Bridge 149
  Gorefield  150
  Leverington 151
  Parson Drove 152
  Wisbech St. Mary 153
27. Small Villages 154
  Small Villages A 155
  Christchurch 155
  Eastrea   156
  Guyhirn   156
  Murrow   158
  Tydd St. Giles 158
  Small Villages B 159
  Coldham  159
  Collett’s Bridge 159
  Newton   160
  Ring’s End  161
  Tholomas Drove 161
Part E - Policies Map 163
  Appendix 1 - Glossary of Terms 164
  Appendix 2 - Neighbourhood Planning 167
  Appendix 3 - Affordable Housing Worked example 169
  Appendix 4 - Landscape Character Areas 171
  Appendix 5 - Open Space Standards 172
  Appendix 6 - Parking Standards 174
  Appendix 7 - Additional Committed Sites (2021/22) 176
 9Tables
  Table 1: Strategic Priorities 15
  Table 2 : Sustainability Objectives 18
  Table 3: Wind Turbines - Permitted Development 36
  Table 4: Break down of proportion of different types of affordable housing required 49
  Table 5: Established Employment Areas (EEAs)  60
  Table 6: Hierarchy of Centres 64
  Table 7: Hierarchy of Designated Sites for Nature Conservation in Fenland 85
  Table 8: Landscape Character Areas 96
  Table 9: Summary of Distribution of Housing Growth 110
  Table 10: Housing Trajectory 113
  Table 11: Summary of Distribution of Employment Growth 115
Figures
  Figure 1: Council’s Priorities 15
  Figure 2: Goose and Swan Functional Land IRZ 87
Maps
  Map 1: Fenland District in Context 12
  Map 2: Key Diagram 32
  Map 3: Affordable Housing Zones 48
List of Policies 
  Policy LP1: Settlement Hierarchy 23
  Policy LP2: Spatial Strategy for the Location of Residential Development 26
  Policy LP3: Spatial Strategy for Employment Development 28
  Policy LP4: Securing Fenland’s Future 30 
  Policy LP5:  Health and Wellbeing 34
  Policy LP6: Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Infrastructure 38
  Policy LP7: Design 41
  Policy LP8: Amenity Provision 43
  Policy LP9: Residential Annexes 44
  Policy LP10: Shop Frontages, Security Shutters and Canopies 45
  Policy LP11: Community Safety 46
  Policy LP12: Meeting Housing Needs 54
  Policy LP13: Custom and Self Build 56
  Policy LP14: Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople 58
  Policy LP15: Employment 62
  Policy LP16: Town Centres 66
  Policy LP17: Culture, Leisure, Tourism and Community Facilities 67
  Policy LP18: Development in the Countryside 70
  Policy LP19: Strategic Infrastructure 74
  Policy LP20: Accessibility and Transport 79
  Policy LP21: Public Rights of Way 79
  Policy LP22: Parking Provision 81
  Policy LP23: Historic Environment 83
  Policy LP24: Natural Environment 88
  Policy LP25: Biodiversity Net Gain 92
  Policy LP26: Carbon Sinks and Carbon Sequestration 92
  Policy LP27: Trees and Planting 94
  Policy LP28: Landscape 97
  Policy LP29: Green Infrastructure 9810  Policy LP30: Local Green Spaces and Other Existing Open Spaces 99
  Policy LP31: Open Space and Recreational Facilities 101
  Policy LP32: Flood and Water Management 104
  Policy LP33: Development on Land Affected by Contamination 106
  Policy LP34: Air Quality 107
  Policy LP35: Regeneration of Wisbech 117
  Policy LP36: Residential Site Allocations for Wisbech 118
  Policy LP37: Site allocations for non-residential development in Wisbech 119
  Policy LP38: March Community Regeneration 122
  Policy LP39: Site allocations for March 123
  Policy LP40: Site allocations for non-residential development in March 127
  Policy LP41: Land north of Knight’s End Road and East of the A141 129
  Policy LP42: Whittlesey - A Market Town fit for the Future 131
  Policy LP43: Residential site allocations in Whittlesey 131
  Policy LP44: Site allocations for non-residential development in Whittlesey 132
  Policy LP45: An aspirational community 134
  Policy LP46: Residential site allocations in Chatteris 135
  Policy LP47: Employment allocations in Chatteris 138
  Policy LP48: Residential site allocations in Doddington 140
  Policy LP49: Residential site allocations in Manea 144
  Policy LP50: Residential site allocations in Wimblington 145
  Policy LP51: Residential site allocations in Coates 146
  Policy LP52: Employment allocations in Coates 147
  Policy LP53: Residential site allocations in Elm  148
  Policy LP54: Residential site allocations in Friday Bridge 149
  Policy LP55: Residential site allocations in Gorefield 150
  Policy LP56: Residential site allocations in Leverington 151
  Policy LP57: Residential site allocations in Parson Drove 152
  Policy LP58: Residential site allocations in Wisbech St Mary 153
  Policy LP59: Residential site allocations in Christchurch 155
  Policy LP60: Residential site allocations in Eastrea 156
  Policy LP61: Residential site allocations in Guyhirn 156
  Policy LP62: Residential site allocations in Murrow 158
  Policy LP63: Residential site allocations in Tydd St Giles 158
  Policy LP64: Residential site allocations in Coldham 159
  Policy LP65: Residential site allocations in Collett’s Bridge 159
  Policy LP66: Residential site allocations in Newton 160
  Policy LP67: Employment allocations in Newton 160
  Policy LP68: Residential site allocations in Ring’s End 161
  Policy LP69: Residential site allocations in Tholomas Drove 16111List of Abbreviations
  ALC   Agricultural Land Classification 
  AMR   Authorities Monitoring Report
  AQMA    Air Quality Management Area 
  BNG   Biodiversity Net Gain
  CIL    Community Infrastructure Levy
  CPCA   Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Combined Authority 
  CPIER    Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Independent Economic Review 
  DEFRA  Department for Environment Food & Rural Affairs
  EEA     Established Employment Area 
  FDC    Fenland District Council 
  GTANA   Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Needs Assessment 
  HDT    Housing Delivery Test 
  IDB    Internal Drainage Bord 
  IDP    Infrastructure Delivery Plan 
  LGS    Local Green Space
  LHN    Local Housing Need 
  LLFA    Lead Local Flood Authority 
  LTP    Local Transport Plan 
  NCA    National Character Areas
  NDG   National Design Guide 
  NPPF   National Planning Policy Framework
  NPPG   National Planning Practice Guidance 
  PRoW   Public Rights of Way 
  PSA    Primary Shopping Areas 
  RP    Registered Provider 
  SA    Sustainability Appraisal 
  SFRA   Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 
  SHELAA  Strategic Housing Economic Land Availability Assessment 
  SHMA   Strategic Housing Market Assessment 
  SPD    Supplementary Planning Document 
  SuDS   Sustainable Drainage System 
  TPO    Tree Preservation Order 
  WCS   Water Cycle Study 
  WFD   Water Framework Directive 12
Part A - Setting the Scene
1. Introduction 
1.1 This is the draft Fenland Local Plan. It contains emerging proposals for planning policies for the   
  growth and regeneration for the district to 2040.
1.2 Within this document you will find a vision for what the district could be like in 2040. There are   
  also some objectives to explain what is trying to be achieved and policies setting out what and   
  how much development should take place and the sites required to meet this growth. This Plan is   
  structured as follows:
  Part A  - sets the overall vision and objectives;
  Part B  - identifies the spatial distribution and broad areas of growth and sets out the main strategic  
     policies;
  Part C  - includes the detailed policies and standards that will be used in determining planning   
     applications;  
  Part D  - identifies the sites required to deliver the future growth requirements; and
  Part E  - the Plan is supported by a Policies Map which shows where the spatial policies in the Local  
     Plan apply. This is also shown on the Interactive Map.
Fenland in Context
1.3 Fenland District Council (FDC) is located within the northern part of Cambridgeshire. To the north  
  is the district of South Holland (part of Lincolnshire), to the north-east the Borough Council of King’s  
  Lynn and West Norfolk (part of Norfolk) and to the east and south the district of East Cambridgeshire. 
  Huntingdonshire District (also part of Cambridgeshire) is to the south-west and the unitary authority
  of Peterborough City Council is to the west. The sub-regional centres of Cambridge, Peterborough  
  and King’s Lynn have a considerable influence on various parts of the district in terms of employment, 
  retail, and health provision.
Map 1: Fenland District in Context131.4 The district covers approximately 200 square miles and includes the four market towns of Chatteris,  
  March, Whittlesey and Wisbech as well as around 30 villages.  It is a rural and sparsely populated  
  district with many diverse communities, each with very different needs. The population of Fenland is  
  approximately 101,5001 with approximately 70% of the population living within one of the four   
  market towns. 
1.5 Fenland falls within the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Combined Authority (CPCA) area which  
  has ambitious proposals and funding relating to growth, economy and infrastructure. Fenland’s   
  market towns and its rural economy have a key role to play in achieving these ambitions.
1.6 The district is also located in the north-eastern corner of the Oxford – Cambridge Arc. Currently   
  the government is preparing a Spatial Framework for the area to support strategic and sustainable  
  economic growth. This will set national planning policy and transport policy for the Arc, which   
  covers the  ceremonial counties of Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, Northamptonshire  
  and Cambridgeshire.
1.7 To meet the needs of the growing workforce, Fenland requires growth in employment land and   
  business opportunities, leading to an improved range of jobs for everyone. To achieve this, infrastructure 
  needs to be improved to retain and attract employers, and the district needs to keep its presence and 
  appeal in front of potential investors.
1.8 The employment rate for 16-64 year olds in Fenland is above that for England as a whole but below 
  that for Cambridgeshire. 
1.9 Based on the Index of Multiple Deprivation (2019)2,  Fenland is Cambridgeshire’s most deprived   
  district (ranking as 80th most deprived authority out of 317 nationally). Deprivation levels in Fenland 
  are generally more severe to the north of the district, and this is evident in Wisbech in particular. 
1.10 Fenland has a unique environmental character, with its flat, open landscapes, big skies and complex 
  network of drainage channels and watercourses. Although much of the land outside settlements is  
  intensively farmed, there are areas, including within the watercourses, which remain important for  
  their biodiversity and/or heritage value. Each of the four market towns in the district has its own   
  individual character, which has evolved over time in response to key changes in history, such 
  as the drainage of the fens and the arrival of the railways. There are 20 scheduled monuments, 10  
  conservation areas and over 650 listed buildings of special architectural or historic interest. The   
  gardens of Peckover House in Wisbech are included in English Heritage’s register of parks and   
  gardens of special historic interest.
Neighbourhood Plans
1.11 Several communities in the district have demonstrated an interest in neighbourhood planning since  
  its introduction through the Localism Act of 2011. The following lists designated neighbourhood   
  areas and the status of any plan:
  • March Neighbourhood Plan was made in November 2017
  • Parson Drove Neighbourhood Plan was made in August 2020
  • Whittlesey Town Council submitted their draft Neighbourhood Plan June 2022
  • Tydd St Giles Neighbourhood Area was designated in June 20143 
  • Doddington Neighbourhood Area was designated in April 2016
  • Wimblington & Stonea Neighbourhood Area was designated in March 2021
1 Mid 2018 https://cambridgeshireinsight.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/2018-Based-Population-Forecasts-1.xlsx
2 https://cambridgeshireinsight.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/Fenland_1.1.pdf 
3 Please note: Tydd St Giles was designated a neighbourhood area in 2014, however, the Parish Council advised Fenland
  District Council on the 13 January 2016 that it has taken the decision to no longer progress the Tydd St Giles Neighbourhood Plan.141.12 Neighbourhood Plans are optional plans prepared by communities. Once they are approved by the  
  Council, they form part of the development plan for Fenland, sitting alongside the Fenland Local Plan. 
  If an area has a Neighbourhood Plan, any planning application in that area will be determined using 
  the Local Plan, Neighbourhood Plan, national policy, and taking account of any other material considerations.
1.13 Copies of all ‘made’ Neighbourhood Plans, and details of any emerging Neighbourhood Plans, can 
  be found on our website (www.fenland.gov.uk/neighbourhood-planning). 
 
2. Overarching Issues 
2.1 The Local Plan is required to be consistent with the National Planning Policy Framework  (NPPF),   
  National Planning Practice Guidance  (NPPG) and to have regard to any other plans, policies and  
  strategies. To help identify the key issues that have been used to develop the Local Plan objectives, a  
  review of the following plans, policies and strategies has been carried out:
  
  • Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Minerals and Waste Plan
  • East Inshore and Offshore Marine Plans
  • March Neighbourhood Plan
  • Parson Drove Neighbourhood Plan
  • Fenland Business Plan
  • Fenland Health and Wellbeing Strategy 
  • Fenland Leisure Strategy 
  • Fenland Playing Pitch Strategy
  • Fenland Indoor Sports Facilities Strategy 
  • Fenland Local Football Facility Plan
  • Housing Strategy 
  • Fenland’s Creativity and Cultural Strategy
  • A Green Future: Our 25 Year Plan to Improve the Environment
  • Cambridgeshire Green Infrastructure Strategy
  • Natural Cambridgeshire ‘Doubling Nature’ Vision 
  • Natural Cambridgeshire Future Parks Accelerator Project
  • Natural Cambridgeshire Developing with Nature Toolkit
  • Middle Level Biodiversity Action Plans and Manual
  • North Level District Internal Drainage Board Conservation Policy Director of Public Health’s
   Annual Report 
  • Adjoining local authorities’ local plans
  • Local Transport Plan 
  • Cambridgeshire Transport Investment Plan
  • Fenland Transport Strategy (Draft)
  • Chatteris Market Town Transport Strategy
  • March Market Town Transport Strategy
  • Whittlesey Market Town Transport Strategy
  • Wisbech Market Town Transport Strategy
  • Fenland Rail Development Strategy
  • Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Independent Economic Review (CPIER)
  • Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Combined Authority Local Industrial Strategy
  • Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Independent Commission on Climate Change
  • Anglian Water - Water Resource Management Plan 
  • Environment Agency - River Nene Catchment Flood Management Plan (CFMP)
  • Environment Agency - Great Ouse Catchment Flood Management Plan (CFMP)
  • Cambridgeshire’s Local Flood Risk Management Strategy
  • Cambridgeshire Surface Water Management Plan
  • March Surface Water Management Plan
  • Cambridgeshire Flood & Water Supplementary Planning Document (SPD)152.2 The CPCA provided funding for the Growing Fenland6 project, to allow FDC to produce masterplans 
  for each of the four market towns.  The masterplans examine the needs of each town and look at how 
  investment in education and skills, commercial and industrial development and new transport initiatives 
  could help stimulate growth and create more jobs. They also identify potential improvements and 
  opportunities for growth, developing a case to attract additional funding to help deliver their ambitions. 
Council’s Priorities
2.3 The Fenland District Council Business Plan7 (2022) sets out the following priorities:
  Figure 1: Council’s Priorities  
Council for the FutureQuality OrganisationCommunities
Environment
EconomySummary of our Corporate Priorities structure
 Suppor t vuln erable member s of our c ommunit y
 Promot e health and w ellbeing f or all
 Work with p artners to promote Fenland thr ough C ulture and Her itage
 Deliv er a high perf orming refuse, r ecycling an d street c leansing ser vice
 Work with p artners and th e communit y on pr ojects that improve th e
    en vironm ent and our str eet sc ene
 Work with p artners to keep people saf e in their n eighbour hoods b y
    reducing cr ime an d anti-social beha viour an d promotin g social c ohesion
 Attract new businesses, jobs and oppor tunities whilst suppor ting our
   existin g businesses in F enlan d
 Promot e and enable housing gr owth, ec onomic gr owth an d regener ation
    acr oss F enland
 Promot e and lobb y for inf rastruc ture impr ovements acr oss the distr ict
2.4 Through these priorities the Council aims to improve the quality of life for all residents and communities 
  and to create sustainable towns and villages.
Strategic Priorities for Development and Use of Land in Fenland
2.5 The strategic priorities for the development and use of land in Fenland District Council area (for the  
  purpose of section 19(1B) of the Planning Compulsory Purchase Act 2004) are:
Table 1: Strategic Priorities
NPPF 
Strategic 
Priorities8  Local Planning Authority Strategic Priorities  Key Policies to 
Address these 
Priorities  
Housing and 
Jobs To facilitate the delivery in full of the homes and jobs identified as 
being needed in the district. To deliver a balanced mix of tenures, 
types and sizes of new homes, including affordable homes of a type 
and tenure which meet identified needs. LP2, LP3 and 
LP12
Retail Fenland to continue to be a destination for shopping and leisure. LP16
Infrastructure Ensure necessary infrastructure is in place to support growth. 
Working with the CPCA and County Council, and update the 
Council’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP).LP19
Health To provide safe and healthy environments, reduce health inequalities 
and help everyone live healthy lifestyles.LP5
Historic, Built 
and Natural 
EnvironmentTo conserve and where possible enhance the natural, built and 
historic environment through high quality design that is responsive 
to its surroundings creating distinctive communities that people are 
proud to be part of.LP23, LP24, 
LP25, LP29, 
LP30 and LP31
Climate 
ChangeTo reduce and manage flood risk, improve community resilience and 
ensure that Fenland adapts to climate change. To minimise the impact 
of growth, ensure that development is sustainable, designed to allow 
for active travel connectivity and high levels of energy efficiency.LP4, LP6, LP7, 
LP32
6 https://www.fenland.gov.uk/growingfenland 
7 www.fenland.gov.uk/businessplan 
8 NPPF Paragraph 20 162.6 This Local Plan sets out policies to address these priorities when taken as a whole. 
Other Strategies, Plans and Evidence Base
2.7 On our website you will find a library of documents which have helped inform preparation of the Local 
  Plan. You can search the list of documents and filter by topic.
  www.fenland.gov.uk/article/15175/Document-Library
 
Overarching Issues  
2.8 A good understanding of the needs, constraints and issues facing the district is essential to inform the 
  Local Plan.
 
2.9 The Issues and Options Consultation Document (October 2019) asked for views on issues and   
  policies the emerging Local Plan could address and include. The document was based around a   
  series of questions and asked for views on the vision for the district and priorities. The Key Issues   
  Report provides a summary of responses. The responses have helped to identify the key issues for   
  Fenland. 
2.10 An extensive review of all strategies, plans, policies and other local and national information was   
  undertaken through the Sustainability Appraisal (SA) Scoping Report (October 2019).  This identified 
  that the district faces a range of challenges.
2.11 In addition, this draft Local Plan has been prepared during a time of great uncertainty and change to 
  the economy brought on by both the Covid 19 pandemic and the UK departing the European Union 
  The full impacts of these events are yet to be fully understood.
2.12 The issues are set out below and have been categorised into a number of topic areas. It is emphasised 
  that these are issues that the Local Plan must take into account, but it does not follow that it has to  
  address them all. Some will be addressed by other means outside the Local Plan process.  The order 
  of overarching issues set out below does not imply any relative importance of one over another.
  Overarching Issues
 • Healthy Communities  - There are significant health inequalities within the district, with   lower life 
  expectancy than the national average and lower levels of physical activity.
 • Jobs, Education and Housing  - Fenland has a diverse economy, but is based on a low skill and 
  low wage economy with high levels of deprivation and social exclusion. Insufficient affordable
  housing to meet high need.
 • Transport -  The district has poor quality roads, limited bus services in rural areas and a lack of
  cycle routes and public footpaths. 
 • Heritage, Place Making and Landscape  - A total of 14 heritage assets in the area are on   
  Historic England’s Heritage at Risk Register. Some historic assets do not benefit from proper and   
  timely management.
 • Resilience to Climate Change and Flood Risk  - Much of the district is located within areas at
  risk of flooding. Increased risk of flooding due to rising sea levels and change in weather patterns.  
  Impacts  of climate change on infrastructure and agricultural. 
 • Land Use and Wildlife  - The district includes high grade agricultural land and a number of 
  international, national and locally designated nature sites but habitats have been depleted and
  tree cover is low. Poor public open space provision. 17 • Water Resources  - Fenland is located in an area of water stress: growth will put pressure on
  water supply and existing sewage infrastructure.
 • Pollution and Waste - Air pollution has an adverse impact on health and life expectancy.
  Recycling rates below national average.
 • Sustainable Resources  - Cumulative impact of windfarms on the landscape. Financial viability of  
  developments in Fenland.
3. Our Vision 
3.1 This section describes our vision for the district over the period to 2040. 
  
 Our Vision for Fenland
 By 2040 all settlements, big and small, will be attractive and prosperous places to live, set within our  
 unique and protected Fens landscape. They will benefit from economic growth and inward investment.
 
 Between 2021 and 2040, Fenland will grow by approximately 10,500 new homes and 18,000 new   
 jobs, meeting the needs of all communities. 
 Growth will be focussed on our four market towns, but villages will not be left behind, with appropriate  
 levels of development being permitted to ensure they remain thriving local communities.
 The district will attract new business, jobs and investment, whilst also supporting existing businesses
 and encouraging them to expand, helping to boost productivity. Rural communities and the rural
 economy will be supported. 
 Growth in homes and jobs will be closely linked, with new infrastructure such as schools, roads,
 health facilities and open space provision planned and provided at the same time as the new buildings. 
 The natural and historic environments, and their assets, will be conserved and enhanced, and
 high-quality agricultural land will be protected, with new development taking into account the
 surroundings of the area in which it would be situated.
 Through growth, current issues such as health inequalities, community deprivation, infrastructure
 deficit and low skills, will be tackled and addressed. Growth will attract investment, businesses and
 new residents to the district.184. Our Objectives
4.1 To achieve our vision, we have identified a set of overarching objectives. These objectives have   
  evolved from the review of relevant plans and programmes undertaken for the Sustainability Appraisal 
  (SA) process. The NPPF clearly states that the purpose of the planning system is to contribute to the 
  achievement of sustainable development.  
4.2 Each Local Plan policy, and all reasonable alternative options, have been assessed against the above
   sustainability objectives. The results are set out in the SA report which is published alongside this Local Plan. 
Table 2 : Sustainability Objectives
1. Healthy 
Communities1.1 Provide for an ageing population; and redress inequalities related to health, well-
being, age, gender, disability, race, faith, location and income
1.2 Improve the quality, range and accessibility of services and facilities (e.g., health, 
transport, education, training, leisure opportunities and community activities); and 
ensure all groups thrive in safe environments
1.3 Create and enhance multifunctional open space that is accessible, links with a 
high-quality green infrastructure network and improves opportunities for people to 
access and appreciate wildlife and wild places
1.4 Encourage healthy choices and opportunities for the consumption of locally 
produced food by maintaining and enhancing the provision of allotments, community 
orchards and farmers’ shops and markets  
2. Jobs, 
Education 
and Housing2.1 Help people gain access to a range of employment, education and training 
opportunities
2.2 Support investment in people, places, communications and other infrastructure to 
improve the efficiency, competitiveness, vitality and adaptability of the local economy
2.3 Help provide decent and affordable homes that meet the various needs of all in 
appropriate locations
3. Transport3.1 Reduce the reliance on private motor vehicles and encourage more sustainable 
transport modes such as walking, cycling and public transport and contribute to the 
safety of all highway users.
3.2 Seek to ensure that all new developments can be accessed by a variety of transport 
modes and provide permeability
4. Heritage, 
Place 
Making and 
Landscape4.1 Conserve and where appropriate, enhance heritage assets, their setting and the 
wider historic environment
4.2 Create places, spaces and buildings that are attractive and well designed, 
contribute to a high-quality public realm and maintain and enhance diversity and local 
distinctiveness of townscape character
4.3 Retain the distinctive character of Fenland’s landscape
5. Resilience 
to Climate 
Change and 
Flood Risk5.1 Limit or reduce vulnerability to the effects of climate change
5.2 Minimise and wherever possible remove the vulnerability of people, places and 
property to the risk of flooding from all sources19
6. Land Use 
and Wildlife  6.1 Minimise the irreversible loss of undeveloped land, particularly high grade 
agricultural land
6.2 Utilise brownfield sites for re-development in appropriate circumstances 
6.3 Minimise and avoid where possible impacts to biodiversity and geodiversity, both 
within and beyond designated sites of international, national or local significance, and 
on protected species
6.4 Achieve net gains in biodiversity and create and enhance an ecological network 
that is resilient to the effects of climate change
7. Water 
Resources7.1 Minimise water consumption and encourage re-use
7.2 Avoid deterioration and seek opportunities to enhance water quality in rivers and 
other water bodies
8. Pollution 
and Waste8.1 Reduce emissions of greenhouse gasses and other pollutants (including air, water, 
soil, noise, odour, vibration and light)
8.2. Reduce the risk of pollution to the environment from contaminated land
8.3 Support and enhance opportunities for the reduction, reuse and recycling of waste
9. Sustainable 
Resources9.1 Reduce energy consumption and increase the use of renewable and low carbon 
energy sources 
9.2 Support the use of locally sourced building materials and encourage those that 
are of a sustainable form and allow for re-use20Part B – The Spatial Strategy
5. Local Plan Growth Strategy
5.1 Part B of the Local Plan sets out the overall strategy for meeting the future growth of Fenland to 2040, 
  and the main strategic policies.  It sets out how much growth is needed and how it will be distributed 
  to ensure that the Local Plan vision and sustainability objectives can be met. Part C of this Plan sets 
  out the detailed planning policies and Part D identifies the sites required to meet the future growth.
Housing Need
5.2 As required by the NPPF , this Local Plan must define the overall level of growth for new housing for 
  the district. National policy requires that the ‘standard method’ is used to assess the Local Housing  
  Need (LHN). The method is set out in the NPPG - Housing and Economic Need Assessment9. 
5.3 At April 2021 (the base date for this Draft Local Plan), the Standard Method for Fenland indicated 
  a need for 517 dwellings per year. In late March 2022, ONS published new affordability data,  
  thereby requiring the Local Housing Need to be recalculated. From 2022 onwards, the Standard 
  Method generates a local housing need for Fenland of 556 dwellings per annum. 
5.4 The housing requirement for this Draft Local Plan therefore consists of 517 dwellings for the period  
  01 April 2021 to 31 March to 2022 (1 year) plus 556 dwellings in each year from 01 April 2022 to 
  31 March 2040 (18 years) thereby providing a total requirement of 10,525 dwellings from 01  
  April 2021 to 31 March 204010. 
5.5 Part D of this plan identifies the sites required to meet the housing requirement and Table 10 ‘Housing 
  Trajectory’ projects the delivery of new dwellings in each year to 2040. 
5.6 Since the LHN figure is adjusted by government each year as new data and statistics are published, 
  it is likely that the housing requirement will change further during the course of preparing this new 
  Local Plan for Fenland. For context, the current LHN figure is similar to the 550 dwellings per year 
  target in the adopted Local Plan (2014). The Proposed Submission version will include the latest 
  LHN figure at the time of publication and will include specific and deliverable sites to meet this target. 
  The Council’s intention is to accommodate its LHN requirement in full. 
Five Year Land Supply 
5.7 The NPPF11 requires councils to ‘identify and update annually a supply of specific deliverable sites 
  sufficient to provide a minimum of five years’ worth of housing against their housing requirement’. 
5.8 The latest Five-Year Land Supply Report12 (September 2021) shows that the Council can demonstrate 
  6.69 years supply of housing land over the five-year period.
5.9 The NPPF at paragraph 74 states that a 5% buffer should be included as part of the five-year 
  requirement, and that this should increase to 20% where there has been significant under delivery of 
  housing over the previous three years.
 
5.10 In 2019, the NPPF introduced the Housing Delivery Test (HDT), which measures net additional 
  dwellings provided in each Council area against the homes required, using national statistics and 
  local authority data over the previous three financial years. The purpose of the HDT is to hold local 
9 Paragraph: 004 Reference ID: 2a-004-20201216 
10 ( 517 dwellings * 1 year ) + ( 556 dwellings * 18 years ) = 10,525 total dwellings
11 Paragraph 74
12 https://www.fenland.gov.uk/media/17835/Five-Year-Housing-Land-Supply-Report-2021/pdf/FYLSReport_Sept21.
pf?m=6376720920348300002113 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/housing-delivery-test-2021-measurement 
14 https://www.cpier.org.uk/final-report/  authorities to account over the past delivery of new housing. Where the Housing Delivery Test indicates 
  that delivery has fallen below 95% of the local planning authority’s housing requirement over the 
  previous three years, the authority should prepare an action plan in line with national planning 
  guidance, to assess the causes of under delivery and identify actions to increase delivery in future years.
5.11 The latest HDT results were published in January 2022 and shows that Fenland District Council’s   
  result is 95%. Please see the Housing Delivery Test: 2021 Measurement  for further information. This 
  means that the Council is not required to prepare an Action Plan and a 5% buffer must be applied to 
  the five-year land supply.
 
5.12 A separate Five-Year Land Supply Report (July 2022) has also been prepared to support this Draft 
  Local Plan and to show that the proposed sites identified in Part D of the Plan are deliverable and can 
  meet the five-year requirement for 2,585 dwellings between 1 April 2021 and 31 March 2026. (See 
  Table 10 Housing Trajectory) 
Fenland Economy
5.13 Fenland’s economy is diverse and of national importance, as a centre for agriculture, food processing 
  industries, manufacturing, logistics and storage, engineering, public administration and other industries.
5.14 Fenland’s market towns provide the main locations for employment within the district. Fenland has a 
  functional relationship with major employment centres such as Peterborough, King’s Lynn and 
  Cambridge. These sub-regional centres exert a considerable influence on various parts of the district, 
  providing employment opportunities for Fenland residents.
5.15 This local plan has been produced at a time of great uncertainty and change to the economy brought 
  on by both the COVID-19 pandemic and the UK departing the European Union. The true impact 
  of these events on the commercial environment are yet to be fully understood. Fenland District Council, 
  Cambridgeshire County Council and the CPCA are working together to ensure the local economy is 
  robust and will bounce back strongly. 
5.16 The CPCA published the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Independent Economic Review14 (CPIER) 
  analysis in 2018: this included the ambition to ‘double economic output across Cambridgeshire and 
  Peterborough by 2040’.
5.17 The Council’s Employment Needs Report (November 2021) identifies a minimum target of 18,000   
  jobs, through the allocation of 215 hectares of employment land between 2021 and 
  2040 , to keep pace  with housing growth and meet the needs of new residents, whilst addressing the  
  current shortfall of jobs.
5.18 In making site allocations for employment growth, this Plan has sought to deliver the needs and 
  growth aspirations of individual settlements. To ensure that existing locations for employment remain 
  in employment use, this Local Plan (see Policy LP15) safeguards a number of existing business parks 
  and major locations for employment across the district. In addition to the site allocations, this Local 
  Plan creates opportunity for a further 100ha of employment land at broad locations for employment 
  growth at Chatteris.226. The Settlement Hierarchy and the Countryside
6.1 A settlement hierarchy ranks settlements according to their size and range of existing services and 
  facilities. It provides a framework for decisions about the scale and location of new development, 
  and the targeting of investment in any new services and facilities. In general terms, a hierarchy helps 
  decision making achieve more sustainable communities, bringing houses, jobs and services closer 
  together in settlements that already offer the best range of services and facilities.
6.2 A settlement hierarchy also helps to protect the character of the landscape, by maintaining and 
  reinforcing the distinction between built-up areas and countryside, and carefully managing the forms 
  of development that would be acceptable in the countryside. However, any settlement hierarchy must 
  also respect how Fenland has evolved over the centuries, its agricultural context and the unique linear 
  pattern of many of its smaller settlements, and it should allow development that reflects and reinforces 
  that character to continue.
6.3 In the District there are a number of settlements ranging in size from market towns to small villages, 
  hamlets and individual, isolated dwellings.  
6.4 The Fenland Survey of Existing Services and Facilities Study (May 2022) identifies which settlements 
  should be included in the settlement hierarchy and at what tier they sit. It also explains the rational in 
  more detail.
 
6.5 It is emphasised that the position of any village in the hierarchy is largely a reflection of its size, and 
  the scale and range of its existing services and facilities.  Whilst this offers a pointer to its suitability 
  (or not) for further development, it does not follow that new development is either appropriate or   
  necessary.  For example, if there is no need to identify sites for development in the rural area, then a 
  village which is highly placed in the hierarchy may not need to have any site allocations.  Another
  example, a village may be highly placed in the hierarchy, but subject to constraints which restrict the  
  scope for further development: the constraints would not alter its position in the hierarchy, but would  
  be a critical factor in determining its suitability for any growth.
6.6 The settlement hierarchy identified in Policy LP1 below has been used to assist in determining the   
  overall distribution of growth and for identifying which settlements, subject to consideration of   
  constraints, would be more suitable for future growth.
6.7 This policy, together with Policy LP2 (Spatial Strategy for the Location of Growth) and Policy LP3 
  (Spatial Strategy for Employment Development), steers most new development to those larger places 
  that offer the best access to services and facilities (both now and for the foreseeable future).  This 
  can help reduce the need to travel, as well as making best use of existing infrastructure and previously 
  developed land in built-up areas. However, it is also recognised that smaller communities should 
  benefit from an appropriate level of growth to ensure their long-term sustainability.
6.8 This policy does not set an absolute restriction on the number of dwellings or other development that 
  would be acceptable. This would be determined by applying Local Plan policies relating to such 
  matters as density, amenity, traffic implications and greenspace provision.
6.9 It is emphasised that place names in the policy are references to villages, not parishes, as there are 
  instances where a village extends across parish boundaries and therefore includes properties in more 
  than one parish.
6.10 For many years the Council defined a settlement boundary for each settlement on the Policies Map: 
  these settlement boundaries set the limit of the physical framework of the built-up area. The Local Plan 
  adopted in 2014 removed such boundaries, to allow for greater flexibility to support growth, but in 
  doing so reduced certainty as to where development may or may not go.236.11 This Plan reintroduces settlement boundaries: these are shown on the Policies Map (see Part E). The 
  supporting document provides background information to  the process. However, because of the way 
  in which many Fenland villages have evolved there is not always a clearly defined built form or village 
  core, and there is therefore a need to allow some development within the settlement hinterland where 
  this respects and reinforces local distinctiveness.
6.12 The primary purposes of settlement boundaries, and the policies which apply within and outside them, 
  is to carefully manage new development in the countryside thereby balancing the need for housing 
  and employment growth with conserving its intrinsic character and beauty15; to maintain the essential 
  character of each settlement; and to manage the growth within and outside each settlement in 
  accordance with the settlement hierarchy in Policy LP1. Policy LP18 (Development in the Countryside) 
  sets out further criteria for considering development in the countryside. All other residential development 
  not in accordance with Policies LP1 and LP18 will, by definition, be contrary to the vision, objectives,  
  development strategy and policies of this Local Plan.
6.13 Recognising the traditional pattern of development in the area, Policy LP1 enables appropriate 
  sites outside the settlement boundary but within the settlement hinterland to come forward for frontage 
  development for up to 3 new homes. These frontage sites could be suitable for self-build or custom  
  build homes as set out in Policy LP13. The provision of prestige or executive homes would also be  
  particularly welcomed (defined as houses falling within council tax bands G and H).
6.14 This approach is not suitable for all villages due to the characteristics and constraints of each settlement 
  but is intended to provide some level of flexibility. They will form additional windfall sites. 
 Policy LP1: Settlement Hierarchy 
 
 Part A – Settlement Hierarchy 
 Decisions on investment in services and facilities and on the location and scale of new development
 will be taken on the basis of the following settlement hierarchy.
Market Towns Chatteris, March, Whittlesey, Wisbech
Large Villages Doddington, Manea, Wimblington
Medium Villages Benwick, Coates, Elm, Friday Bridge, Gorefield, Leverington, Parson Drove, 
Wisbech St. Mary
Small Villages A Christchurch, Eastrea, Guyhirn, Murrow, Tydd St. Giles
Small Villages B Church End, Coldham, Collett’s Bridge, Newton, Pondersbridge,
Ring’s End, Tholomas Drove, Turves, Tydd Gote.
 Part B - Settlement Boundaries 
 The boundary for each settlement is identified on the Policies Map. Proposals within the settlement   
 boundary will be supported in principle. Land outside the settlement boundaries is defined as
 countryside. Development in the countryside (i.e. outside the boundary of all settlements in the
 hierarchy) will be restricted to that which is:
 • demonstrably essential to the effective operation of local agriculture, horticulture, forestry, outdoor  
  recreation and access to natural greenspace, transport or utility services and infrastructure; or  
 • residential development which satisfies the ‘exception’ test set out in Policy LP12 (Meeting Housing  
  Needs); or
 • frontage development in accordance with Part C of this Policy; or  
 • development in accordance with Policy LP18 (Development in the Countryside) or  
15 A requirement of Para. 174 NPPF 202124 • minerals or waste development in accordance with the separate Cambridgeshire and Peterborough  
  Minerals and Waste Local Plan (2021)16; or 
 • to enable sites occupied by existing businesses to expand in accordance with Policy LP15
  (Employment); or
 • otherwise acceptable within a made Neighbourhood Plan.
 Part C - Frontage Infill Development
 Recognising the historic, linear pattern of development in the district, land leading directly or indirectly  
 out of a settlement, but outside of the defined boundary (as shown on the Policies Map) could be
 suitable for residential frontage development of up to 3 new homes in the settlement hinterland*.
 These plots will be particularly suitable for self-build or custom build homes in accordance with Policy  
 LP13, or for prestige or executive homes. Any frontage development must meet the following criteria:
 • be within the settlement hinterland and respect the existing character and pattern of development   
  within which it would be set;
 • must be adjacent to and accessed directly from a public highway (tandem or backland
  development is not permitted by this policy);
 • should consolidate existing development within the settlement hinterland boundary, and not
  introduce development beyond the existing physical and visual limit of the settlement hinterland   
  boundary into the open countryside; 
 • should not normally extend into areas of flood risk unless it can be demonstrated that no other
  sites at lower flood risk are available within the settlement and that the development will be resilient  
  to flood risk during its lifetime. Any such development should demonstrate innovation in flood risk  
  mitigation; 
 • be of a high quality design and environmental performance; 
 • should not result in the physical and visual coalescence of settlements nor loss of or significant   
  reduction in important gaps within or between settlements; 
 • should take into account the historic environment if within or adjacent to a conservation area, or   
  within the setting of any listed buildings.
 All other residential development outside of settlement boundary will, by definition, be contrary to the  
 vision, objectives, development strategy and policies of this Local Plan, and should be refused. 
 
 *Settlement hinterland boundary - the settlement hinterland boundary shall be defined by
 that existing property furthest outside the settlement boundary which is wholly and
 exclusively identified as being  integrally part of that settlement, as opposed to being in any  
 way identified with another settlement or being identified as constituting an individual,
 isolated dwelling unconnected to any settlement.
7. Growth Strategy 
Housing 
7.1 As set out in Section 5, the Local Plan housing target is for 10,525 dwellings between 1 April 2021  
  and 31 March 2040. Policy LP2 sets out the overall spatial strategy housing growth. 
7.2 The spatial strategy makes provision for housing growth in a wide variety of places across the district, 
  with particular emphasis on the four market towns of Chatteris, March, Whittlesey and Wisbech. 
7.3 As the main population centres, the market towns provide opportunities for new development in   
  locations with good access to employment, retail, education, transport, leisure and community facilities. 
16 https://www.cambridgeshire.gov.uk/business/planning-and-development/planning-policy/adopted-minerals-and-waste-plan257.4 Fenland faces significant challenges to the delivery of new homes. Historic delivery rates of housing 
  development failed to keep pace with the housing requirement. A Viability Assessment to inform the 
  preparation of this Local Plan was commissioned. The assessment found that Fenland has lower 
  house prices and land values than other authorities in the wider Cambridge sub-region and has 
  relatively low development viability, particularly in locations in the north of the district.
7.5 In formulating the strategy for growth, particular regard has been given to deliverability and viability 
  issues present in the district. Notably, the spatial strategy:
 • Directs growth principally to market towns;
 • Provides opportunities for growth in settlements across the rural area, where there is proven market  
  demand that people want to live there and businesses want to invest;
 • Offers choice for prospective home-buyers and renters and ensures that all communities receive the  
  benefits of growth;
 • Allocates a range of site types and sizes to provide choice in the market for land, recognising that   
  smaller sites can often be delivered most quickly; and 
 • Includes a robust buffer (approx. 10%), over-allocating land to compensate for any sites which do not 
  come forward, or do not come forward as quickly as expected.
7.6 As set out in Policy LP1 (Settlement Hierarchy), this Local Plan defines settlement boundaries 
  around all settlements in the district, creating opportunities for windfall and infill development in  
  existing communities. Outside of these settlement boundaries, opportunities for development are 
  generally limited to that in accordance with Policies LP12 (Meeting Housing Needs: Part C Exception 
  Sites/ First Homes Exception Sites) and LP18 (Development in the Countryside).
7.7 It is expected that planning decisions will support delivery of the spatial strategy, with the majority of  
  new housing development taking place on sites allocated by policies in Part D, and shown on the   
  Policies Map (Part E).
Neighbourhood Areas
7.8 National policy requires the Council to set a housing requirement for designated neighbourhood   
  areas17. As explained in section 1.11, several communities have shown an interest in preparing 
  neighbourhood plans but take up in Fenland has been fairly limited and communities have 
  generally not sought to create additional sites for housing development. The Local Plan meets the 
  housing requirement in full, and there is no additional identified need for housing growth to be 
  met exclusively through neighbourhood plans. Consequently, this Local Plan sets a target of ‘zero’ for 
  all designated neighbourhood areas.
7.9 Policy LP2 is considered to be a strategic policy, and neighbourhood plans should achieve general 
  conformity with the policy. However, it is commonly accepted that neighbourhood plans can identify 
  additional growth above and beyond that set out in Local Plans. The Council is supportive of   
  neighbourhood plans and encourages communities to identify additional opportunities for housing  
  growth through their neighbourhood plans.
7.10 The Key Diagram (Map 2) indicates the general distribution of future growth across Fenland’s towns  
  and villages. 
17 Para. 66 NPPF July 202126 Policy LP2: Spatial Strategy for the Location of Residential Development
 
 Through applying Government’s Local Housing Need method, Fenland has a housing requirement
 of 10,525 new dwellings between 01 April 2021 and 31 March 2040 .
 This Local Plan focuses the majority of new residential development in and around Fenland’s four
 market towns of Wisbech, March, Whittlesey and Chatteris. The plan also recognises the benefits
 growth can bring to rural communities and the important role the rural area plays in delivering new   
 homes, and therefore distributes a portion of the housing requirement across Fenland’s villages. 
 The site allocations set out at Part D of this plan and shown on the Policies Map (Part E) provide
 specific, deliverable sites for housing development across Fenland’s towns and villages. 
 The settlement boundaries identified by Policy LP1 provide opportunities for appropriate windfall   
 development, such as small-scale infill and brownfield redevelopment, within existing towns and
 villages. In the open countryside, opportunities for development are more limited.
 Through the site allocations, windfall development, and existing sites with planning permission, it
 is estimated that this Local Plan makes provision for 10,828 dwellings over the plan period. The broad   
 distribution of growth is informed by the settlement hierarchy at Policy LP1 and is set out in the table.
 Growth Strategy
Settlement Hierarchy Tier New Dwellings 
(units)Dwelling supply 
as percent of 
total housing 
requirement (%) 
(rounded)
Market Towns March 2,746 26%
Chatteris 1,737 17%
Wisbech 1,287 12%
Whittlesey 886 8%
Large Villages 798 8%
Medium Villages 1,513 14%
Small Villages A 156 1%
Small Villages B 61 1%
Open Countryside 
(Outside settlement boundary)144 1%
Windfall 1,500 14%
District Total 10,828 103
 Planning decisions should support delivery of, and should not undermine, the Spatial Strategy.
 Neighbourhood Areas
 This Local Plan meets its housing requirement in full. There is no additional identified housing need to  
 be met through Neighbourhood Plans or Neighbourhood Development Orders. 
 For the purposes of setting a housing requirement for designated Neighbourhood Areas, this
 requirement figure is equal to the sum total of the estimated dwelling supply from all site allocations
 (as indicated in Part D) within the Neighbourhood Area.
 Neighbourhood Plans which identify additional sites and opportunities for housing development will   
 generally be welcomed.27Employment 
7.11 The Council’s business plan states one of its priorities is to ‘attract new business, jobs and opportunities 
  whilst supporting our existing businesses in Fenland’. Taking into account the CPCA’s ambition to 
  ‘double economic output across Cambridgeshire and Peterborough by 2040’ it is proposed that   
  the new Local Plan should take a much more flexible and facilitative approach to economic growth  
  by allocating significantly more employment land and allowing more windfall opportunities.  
7.12 Policy LP3 sets out the spatial strategy for employment growth supported by Policy LP15 which sets out 
  the Council’s vision for future employment development.
Characteristics of Employment in Fenland
7.13 In Fenland the main types of businesses are associated with agriculture, agritech and food 
  manufacturing. Fenland’s market towns provide the main locations for employment within the district.
 
7.14 Wisbech, the district’s largest population centre, provides a range of employment opportunities, 
  notably in food processing industries, manufacturing, logistics and storage, with good access to the 
  A47. The town has an inland port which provides economic opportunity and is already identified as 
  an area for regeneration.
7.15 March’s economy supports Fenland’s ongoing economic function as a centre of agricultural production, 
  reflected in a number of food production businesses which are key employers in the town. The public 
  sector is an important local employer in March, which is home to the District Council’s offices and 
  Whitemoor Prison. March’s connections to the rail network offers employment through Network Rail’s 
  supply and infrastructure depot, and from a variety of rail-based jobs in freight, logistics and recycling.
7.16 Chatteris’ major local employers include large-scale food production firms as well as ‘Metalcraft’, 
  which specialises in high-end engineering solutions. The South Fens Business Centre has been   
  designed to meet the needs of dynamic small and start-up businesses. 
7.17 Whittlesey benefits from its close connections to Peterborough, a major employment centre. The town is 
  home to a number of important local employers, including Hanson Brick and McCain Foods. The town 
  includes a railway station offering links to local employment centres such as Peterborough and Cambridge. 
7.18 In addition, Fenland’s villages and rural areas offer local employment opportunities, business parks  
  and locations for major employers.
7.19 Fenland has a functional relationship with major employment centres such as Peterborough, King’s  
  Lynn and Cambridge. These sub-regional centres have a considerable influence on various parts of  
  the district in terms of employment. In recent years, growth in employment in Fenland has not matched 
  workforce expansion. Consequently, out-commuting is high, with half of Fenland’s residents commuting 
  out of the district to work.
Challenges
7.20 Through dialogue with the development industry, the Council has identified a number of challenges 
  affecting employment growth and business expansion in the district, including a lack of available and 
  serviced employment land; environmental constraints such as flood risk; high expectations of land 
  values and high rent and build costs; a lack of ‘ready-made’ units for businesses to occupy; and 
  changing work and shopping habits as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
7.21 Current high levels of out-commuting causes congestion and is detrimental in environmental terms, 
  and impacts on the quality of people’s lives. 
7.22 Recent changes to planning law have added greater flexibility to some employment uses, which could 
  increase the rate at which land and buildings normally used for employment is lost to other uses.287.23 In addition, Fenland’s population will grow over the plan period creating demand for more employment 
  opportunities. It is therefore important that jobs growth keeps pace with housing development.
Strategy for Employment Growth
7.24 As explained in Section 5, it is identified through the Council’s Employment Needs Study that a  
  minimum of 18,000 jobs are required over the plan period to keep pace with housing growth, 
  meeting the needs of new residents, and address the current shortfall of jobs. To achieve this target 
  will require the allocation of 215 hectares of employment land (of which, approximately 41ha is   
  made up of existing commitments as at 1 April 2021). 
7.25 This target is considered to be aspirational, but realistic and consistent with past net jobs growth and 
  floorspace delivery. 
7.26 In making site allocations, the Plan has sought to identify employment sites to meet the needs and 
  growth aspirations of individual settlements. In addition, the Council has been mindful of the potential 
  losses of employment land which could occur through permitted changes to alternative uses. 
7.27 Sites designated for employment development are set out in the site allocations in Part D. The total  
  amount of land generated by these sites is 225ha which exceeds the identified requirement of 215 ha. 
7.28 To ensure that existing locations for employment remain in employment use, through Policy LP15, this 
  plan safeguards a number of established business parks and major locations for employment across 
  the district. These Established Employment Areas (EEA) are indicated on the Policies Map.
7.29 Delivering the Local Plan jobs growth target will require input from a wide range of partners, and 
  is also ultimately dependant on national and international factors. Nevertheless, the planning system 
  can make a significant contribution by ensuring sufficient quality of land is available in the right locations.
7.30 To attract and facilitate the delivery of employment growth, the Council will work with relevant 
  partners, including the CPCA’s Business Board, and continue to play an active role in the CPCA. 
  Including infrastructure requirements for road and improved train services. 
 Policy LP3: Spatial Strategy for Employment Development
 The employment growth strategy will be principally focused on the market towns of Wisbech, March,   
 Chatteris and Whittlesey, with limited new employment allocations in the rural area. Policies LP15 and  
 LP18(f), however, set out how existing local businesses could be supported to expand and adapt in   
 the future, including in the countryside.
 Site allocations for employment development, as set out in Part D of this plan, make provision for
 225ha of employment land (Use Classes B2, B8, and E(g)) between 01 April 2021 and 31 March 2040. 
 The broad distribution of site allocations, including commitment from sites with extant planning
 permission, is as follows:29Settlement Hierarchy Tier Available 
employment land 
(Ha)Land supply as 
percent as total 
employment land 
requirement 
(215Ha)(%)
(rounded)
Market Towns March 53.91 25%
Chatteris 51.59 24%
Wisbech 89.72 42%
Whittlesey 9.71 6%
Large Villages 0.00 0%
Medium Villages 4.78 2%
Small Village A 0.00 0%
Small Village B 0.00 0%
Open Countryside 15.68 7%
District Total 225.39 105%
 Individual sites to deliver the scale of jobs growth set out above are contained in Part D of this Plan
 and shown on the Policies Map (Part E).
 Established Employment Areas (EEA), as set out in Policy LP15 and as indicated on the Policies Map
 (Part E), are safeguarded for future employment use to support existing businesses and to adaptation
 to future employment needs.
 To reflect local aspirations for employment growth at Chatteris, two ‘broad locations’ for
 employment growth are identified to the south-west and north-east of the town, as indicated on
 the Policies Map. It is estimated that these broad locations for growth could deliver around 100ha
 of additional employment land.
8. Securing Fenland’s Future
8.1 A central part of the planning system is achieving sustainable development. The NPPF sets out   
  economic, social,18 objectives to achieve sustainable development and includes a ‘presumption   
  in favour of sustainable development’ which aims to ensure that these objectives are met. The NPPF  
  also dictates that:
  “...planning policies and decisions should play an active role in guiding development
  towards sustainable solutions, but in doing so should take local circumstances into account,
  to reflect the character, needs and opportunities of each area19”. 
8.2 To achieve sustainable development, policies within this Plan must secure development that meets the 
  current needs of the district without compromising future generations. Ensuring that new development 
  is sustainable will help to secure Fenland’s future: at the heart of the growth strategy for Fenland 
  is a desire to deliver growth that is not for its own sake, but growth that brings benefits to all sectors 
  of the community now and in the future. All policies in this Plan have been tested against the Local  
  Plan Sustainability Appraisal objectives to ensure that the plan meets these requirements (see Section 4). 
18 NPPF Paragraph 8
19 NPPF paragraph 9308.3 This Local Plan, and indeed the planning system, can play a vital role in achieving sustainable   
  development. It can address issues such as:
  • adapting to climate change, and moving to a low carbon economy;
  • reducing energy and water use; 
  • design and location of development; 
  • biodiversity; and 
  • reducing reliance on the car and encouraging walking and cycling. 
8.4 A changing climate is one of the greatest challenges of our time and is already impacting on our   
  lives. We are seeing more extreme weather events, including hotter and drier summers, the increased 
  risk of flooding, and sea level rise.  In 2019 central government set a target to achieve net zero   
  carbon emissions by 2050.
8.5 The CPCA set up the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Independent Climate Change Commission 
  to help identify challenges and opportunities faced by the region due to the impacts of climate   
  change. In October 2021 the independent commission published its findings. This reported that 
  greenhouse gases in the Combined Authority region are high, the region is at high-risk from the 
  changing climate and whilst there is a huge task ahead urgent action is needed. The Combined 
  Authority has since established a Climate Working Group to develop an Action Plan and effective   
  local response20.  
8.6 Tackling climate change is clearly a long-term challenge that will be faced internationally, but Fenland 
  must consider the local responsibilities and implications for the future plans of the district.
8.7 A changing climate poses a number of risks to Fenland (which has particular vulnerabilities given 
  its flat Fen landscape) which are likely to result in major environmental, economic, social and health 
  consequences in the future. Among these risks are an increase in the severity and frequency of 
  flooding; changes in agricultural practice; and failing infrastructure.
8.8 The planning system is tasked with supporting the transition to a low carbon future in a changing 
  climate. It is directed, by Government policy in the NPPF21, to shape places in ways that contribute to 
  “radical reductions” in greenhouse gas emissions, minimise vulnerability and improve resilience. As 
  part of that, it is tasked with supporting renewable and low carbon energy and associated infrastructure. 
8.9 Local Plans are also legally obliged to include policies ‘designed to secure’ that the development 
  and use of land contributes to the mitigation of, and adaptation to, climate change. National policy22 
  also reminds planning authorities that Local Plans are obliged to proactively contribute towards the  
  legally binding requirement of emissions in the UK to become net zero by 2050.
8.10 The following Policy LP4 sets out the Council’s overall vision and objectives to securing Fenland’s 
  future by achieving sustainable development and supporting a transition to a low carbon future: it is 
  further supported by policies throughout this Plan.
 Policy LP4:  Securing Fenland’s Future
 When considering development proposals, the Council will take into account the presumption in
 favour of sustainable development contained in the National Planning Policy Framework23. It will seek
 to work proactively with developers and investors to find solutions which mean that proposals
 can be approved wherever possible, and to secure development that improves the economic, social
 and environmental conditions in the area. 
20 Fairness, nature and communities: addressing climate change in Cambridgeshire and Peterborough https://www.cpier.org.uk/final-report/
21 Paragraph 152
22 NPPF footnote 53
23 NPPF paragraph 1131 Proposals should clearly demonstrate how they will achieve the requirements for emission
 minimisation, climate change mitigation and adaptation to a changing climate required by
 various policies throughout this plan, including:
 • LP6 - Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Infrastructure
 • LP7 - Design
 • LP8 - Amenity Provision
 • LP20 - Accessibility and Transport 
 • LP24 - Natural Environment
 • LP25 - Biodiversity Net Gain
 • LP26 - Carbon Sinks and Carbon Sequestration
 • LP27 - Trees and Planting
 • LP29 - Green Infrastructure
 • LP31 - Open Space and Recreational Facilities
 • LP32 - Flood and Water Management
 • LP34 - Air Quality 32A605
A141A141A1101
A47A47
Market townsFenland District boundary
SettlementsKey
Large villages
Medium villages
Smalll villages A
Small villages B
Major road
Railway
River
© Crown Copyright and database rights 2021 Ordnance Survey 10023778Tydd Gote
Collett’s BridgeTydd St Giles
Newton
Gorefield
Leverington
WisbechChurch End Wisbech
St Mary
Parson Drove
Murrow
WhittleseyElm
Tholomas DroveFriday Bridge
Guyhirn
Ring’s End
March Christchurch
Wimblington
Doddington
Manea
ChatterisBenwickPondersbridgeTurvesCoates
EastreaColdhamMap 2: Key Diagram 33Part C – The Policies
9. The Policies
9.1 In this part of the Local Plan, we set out various criteria-based policies which will be used to appraise, 
   and reach decisions on, planning applications. 
10. Health and Wellbeing 
10.1 One of the Council’s corporate objectives is to ‘Promote health and wellbeing for all’. The Local Plan 
   can play a key role helping achieve this by setting out policies that will ensure new development will 
   support and encourage healthy lifestyles and meet the NPPF aim to ‘achieve healthy, inclusive and 
   safe places24’.
10.2 The government’s health profile for Fenland shows that life expectancy, obesity and physical activity  
   are all significantly worse than the England average. 
 
10.3 The Draft Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Joint Health Strategy25 (2020 to 2024) shows that needs 
   for health and social care services are not equally distributed across Cambridgeshire. People in 
  Fenland are more likely to have long term illnesses which limit their activities in daily life. Communities 
  with the poorest health are concentrated in north Fenland.  
10.4 There is strong evidence that inequalities in health and wellbeing are influenced by social, economic 
  and environmental factors. These are known as the wider determinants of health. In order to help 
  address these priorities and issues, it is essential that community needs are supported through 
  appropriate physical social and green infrastructure, and by other facilities and key services which 
  contribute to improving physical and mental health and wellbeing, and the overall quality of life 
  experienced by residents.
10.5 Most developments have the potential to positively influence health and wellbeing. The impacts of 
  proposed development on the wider determinants of health could be assessed and considered by the 
  applicant at the earliest stage of the design process, this includes developers consulting with health 
  care commissioners at an early stage to identify the need for new or enhanced health care infrastructure. 
  This is particularly true for major schemes such as town extensions: see Part D of this Plan, which   
  identifies strategic sites.
10.6 Active Design, developed by Sport England and supported by Public Health England, provides a set 
  of principles for creating the right conditions within existing and proposed development for individuals 
  to be able to lead active and healthy lifestyles. The Active Design guidance, which provides further 
  details for each of the principles along with a set of case studies, can be found on Sport England’s 
  website26. Developers may find it helpful to consider the guidance when preparing a planning 
  application.
10.7 Health and wellbeing cuts across many policies in this Local Plan and is one of the Local Plan 
  objectives and sustainability criteria. Policy LP5 should be read alongside other policies in this plan 
  that seek to address the wider detriments to health in more detail. 
24 NPPF paragraph 92
25 https://www.peterborough.gov.uk/asset-library/draftcambridgeshireandpeterboroughjointhealthandwellbeingstrategy2020-24.pdf
26 https://www.sportengland.org/how-we-can-help/facilities-and-planning/design-and-cost-guidance/active-design 34 Policy LP5: Health and Wellbeing 
 Development proposals should contribute to achieving the Council’s corporate objective to ‘promote  
 health and wellbeing for all’ by promoting health and well-being of the community and contributing
 to reducing health inequalities and helping to enable healthy and active lifestyles. 
 This will be achieved by: 
 • seeking in accordance with Policy LP19 (Strategic Infrastructure) developer contributions towards   
  new or enhanced health facilities from developers where development results in a shortfall or
  worsening of provision, as informed by the outcomes of consultation with health care
  commissioners;
 • creating sufficient homes, in the right location, and of the right mix to meet people’s needs
  (see LP12 Meeting Housing Needs); 
 • planning housing that reflects the changes that occur over a lifetime so people are not excluded
  by design as they grow older and frailer or as their circumstances change (see LP12 Meeting
  Housing Needs); 
 • building homes which are easy to warm (see LP6 Renewable and Low Carbon Energy
  Infrastructure) and safe from flooding (see LP32 Flood and Water Management)); 
 • promoting high levels of residential amenity (see in particular LP7 Design and LP8 Amenity Provision); 
 • creating opportunities for employment in accessible locations (see Part D); 
 • providing good access to health, leisure and recreation facilities (see, for example, LP17); 
 • providing and maintaining effective, sustainable and safe transport networks to ensure access to
  all essential services (see LP20 Accessibility and Transport);  
 • helping to reduce crime, the fear of crime and anti-social behaviour (see LP11 Community Safety);  
 • acknowledging and providing or protecting as appropriate, the role of allotments, farm shops
  and farmers’ markets in providing access to healthy, affordable and locally produced food; 
 • provision of open space and green infrastructure (see LP29, LP30 and LP31); and
 • provision of walking and cycling infrastructure (see LP20 Accessibility and Transport). 
 New Healthcare Facilities
 Proposals for new healthcare facilities should relate well to public transport services, walking and
 cycling routes and be easily accessible to all sectors of the community. Proposals which utilise
 opportunities for the multi-use and co-location of health facilities with other services and facilities,
 and thus co-ordinate local care and provide convenience for the community, will be particularly   
 supported. 
 The provision of new or expanded healthcare services and facilities will be particularly supported
 where the project is identified by the Council’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP).
11. Renewable Energy 
Renewable and Low Carbon Energy 
11.1 Policy LP4 highlights the importance the Council places on Securing Fenland’s Future. Household   
  energy bills have risen significantly in recent months (for some, by more than 50%), and are   
  set to continue to increase due to soaring wholesale gas and electricity prices. Many households are 
  already struggling to pay their bills, and more households may be affected as this unprecedented 
  national crisis continues. But the effects of increased gas and electricity prices are not just impacting 
  households: businesses and industries that are high energy users are also particularly vulnerable. In 
  some industries and businesses, this can result in the higher costs being passed onto consumers.
11.2 While the cost of gas has led the price rise, electricity prices have followed as gas is one of the fuels  
  used to generate electricity. Given that the United Kingdom is a net importer of natural gas, this   
  makes the UK vulnerable to global price volatility. 3511.3 The Council recognises that there is a need to increase renewable and low carbon energy generation 
  so as to reduce reliance on imported non-renewable energy and in turn vulnerability to volatile global 
  markets. This Local Plan is therefore supportive of proposals that will deliver renewable and low 
  carbon energy.
11.4 The benefits of proposals that deliver renewable and low carbon energy are not just limited to those  
  set out above: a shift away from non-renewables will help minimise climate change.
 
11.5 Rising levels of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere create a ‘greenhouse 
  effect’, trapping the Sun’s energy and causing the Earth to warm. The impacts of this - increased 
  flooding and droughts, increased temperatures and the adverse effects that result from these - can 
  already be seen, and will become more severe and widespread if global temperatures continue to 
  rise. How great the impacts will become depends upon the success in reducing greenhouse gas   
  emissions.
11.6 The planning system is tasked with supporting the transition to a low carbon future in a changing 
  climate. It is directed, by Government policy, to shape places in ways that contribute to radical 
  reductions in greenhouse gas emissions, minimise vulnerability and improve resilience. As part of 
  that, it is tasked with supporting renewable and low carbon energy and associated infrastructure.
11.7 The use of energy from renewable and low carbon sources reduces demand for fossil fuels, thus 
  reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Renewable and low carbon technologies include, but are not 
  limited to: 
   • Photovoltaic solar panels - for electricity generation
   • Thermal solar panels - for heating
   • Wind turbines - for electricity generation
   • Ground source heat pumps - for heating
   • Air source heat pumps - for heating 
11.8 Not only does the use of renewable and low carbon energy reduce carbon emissions, and thus help  
  address climate change, but it also has many other benefits too, namely:
   • Renewable and low carbon energy will not run out, unlike fossil fuels which are finite;
   • The renewable/ low carbon energy sector creates jobs in the short and long term, for example, 
    project planning, installation, operation and maintenance;
   • Onshore wind offers the most cost-effective choice for electricity in the UK and these cost 
    savings can be passed onto the consumer;
   • Onshore wind technology is getting more efficient whilst maintaining the same footprint, and 
    land between wind turbines can be used for other productive purposes, such as food production.
11.9 The transition towards renewable and low carbon alternatives needs to take place with increasing 
  momentum in order to meet the challenges of spiralling household energy bills and meeting the UK 
  target of being net zero by 2050. The key implication of the move towards renewable and low carbon 
  energy will be the increasing demand for electricity: the associated infrastructure will also need to 
  adapt to the increased need, and the need to manage and store electricity will need to be 
  accommodated. Energy storage (including battery storage), consideration of existing and new   
  electricity substations, and energy strategies for large developments are required to help support the 
  future energy infrastructure needs for Fenland. Policy LP6 therefore supports, in principle, wider energy 
  infrastructure development that supports the transition to net zero.
11.10 Fenland District Council welcomes proposals for new housing which include energy efficient 
   measures ahead of any future changes to build regulations. Policy LP22 (Parking Provision) includes 
   the requirement for Electric Vehicle Charging points.36Wind Turbines
11.11 Certain types of wind turbine development can take place without planning permission - known  
   as ‘permitted development’27. There are several conditions that such development must meet, but  
   the key limitations on such development are summarised below.
 
Table 3: Wind Turbines - Permitted Development
For building 
mounted wind 
turbines:• Permitted development rights apply only to installations on detached houses  
 and other detached buildings within the boundaries of a house or block of  
 flats (such flats must not contain any commercial premises).
•  Only the first installation of any wind turbine would be permitted development, 
 and only if there is no existing air source heat pump at the property.
•  No part of the building mounted wind turbine (including blades) must be 
 within five metres of any boundary.
•  No part (including blades) of the building mounted wind turbine should 
 protrude more than three metres above the highest part of the roof (excluding 
 the chimney) or exceed an overall height (including building, hub and blade) 
 of 15 metres, whichever is the lesser.
For standalone 
wind turbines: •  Only the first installation of any wind turbine would be permitted development.
•  The highest part of the stand-alone wind turbine must not exceed 11.1 metres.
•  The swept area of any stand-alone wind turbine blade must be no more than 
 3.8 square metres.
11.12 All turbine development that does not fall under ‘permitted development rights’ needs planning 
   permission. 
11.13 In June 2015 Government issued a Written Statement on wind energy development, stating that:
    “when determining planning applications for wind energy development involving one or 
   more wind turbines, local planning authorities should only grant planning permission if:
    • the development site is in an area identified as suitable for wind energy 
     development in a local or neighbourhood plan; and
    • following consultation, it can be demonstrated that the planning impacts identified 
     by affected local communities have been fully addressed and therefore the proposal 
     has their backing.”
11.14 This position is transcribed in the NPPF at footnote 54 (page 46): applications for the repowering 
   of existing wind turbines are excluded and do not need to satisfy these requirements.
11.15 Applications for wind turbines can (in accordance with the above national policy) only be approved 
   if they are in a location identified as suitable for wind energy development. This Local Plan allocates 
   two sites for medium to large scale wind turbine development, Coldham Wind Farm and Land 
   adjacent to Graysmoor Drove, as designated on the Policies Map (Part E).  
11.16 Coldham Wind Farm is an existing wind farm development. Turbines were installed in 2005 and 
   make a significant contribution to the supply of low carbon renewable energy in Fenland District. 
   The current wind farm has eight existing wind turbines with total energy generating capacity of 
   c. 15 MW. The site benefits from good wind resource and contains a substation enabling the 
   efficient transmission of renewable energy onto the grid. Allocating the existing Coldham Wind 
   Farm in the Local Plan enables investment in the generation and storage of renewable energy to 
   continue in this area. 
27 For more information visit www.planningportal.co.uk/info/200130/common_projects/57/wind_turbines3711.17 The site at Land adjacent to Graysmoor Drove, Elm comprises agricultural land, is situated away  
   from residential properties and is not subject to environmental or landscape designations. The site 
   is located in an area with high wind speeds with an available grid connection point nearby, 
   enabling the efficient transmission of renewable energy onto the grid. Allocating the site through 
   the Local Plan enables the development of a new wind farm in this location.
11.18 In addition to the allocation of these two sites, this Local Plan ‘allocates’ the whole of the Fenland 
   District as potentially suitable for small to medium size domestic and non-commercial wind turbines 
   (e.g. to serve a business)28.
11.19 The alternative (i.e. not identifying any sites/ areas) would mean that wind turbine applications 
   in Fenland could only be approved if an area/ site for wind turbine development was identified in 
   a neighbourhood plan: at present, there are no ‘made’ neighbourhood plans in Fenland that 
   allocate sites or identify areas suitable for wind turbine development, and there are no emerging 
   plans seeking to do so either. This could result in no or very limited wind turbine development,  
   which would be a barrier to Fenland making a meaningful contribution to addressing the climate 
   change crisis. 
11.20 The Council would like to stress that any application for wind turbine development on the sites 
   allocated in Policy LP 6 would need to meet the relevant policies set out in this Local Plan, as well 
   as comply with national policy. As set out above, current national policy requires that for any 
   wind turbine proposal to be granted permission, it must be demonstrated that following consultation 
   ‘the planning impacts identified by affected local communities have been fully addressed and 
   therefore the proposal has their backing’. Allocation of the sites is not an automatic ‘green light’ 
   for development. 
Solar Panels 
11.21 Fenland District Council is supportive of proposals for solar panels: the installation of solar panels 
   on the roofs of both existing buildings and new ones represents a significant opportunity to utilise 
   space efficiently to provide energy at source for the building. The benefits of this are reduced fuel 
   bills; reduced demand for centralised energy; improved energy security and independence; and 
   decreased energy losses compared to electricity transported long distances.
11.22 Solar farms generate electricity on a far larger scale and feed directly into the grid. In 2019, the 
   UK was the tenth largest producer of solar power worldwide29. Solar farms offer many advantages 
   compared to the use of traditional fossil fuels, namely: they are environmentally friendly, as solar 
   power does not contaminate land or water; solar farms also use almost no water compared 
   to traditional power plants; they are low maintenance; they are quiet once in operation; and 
   sunlight is sustainable, it is not a finite resource. 
11.23 Furthermore, solar farms can also demonstrate dual-purpose land use: sheep and free-range 
   poultry can successfully inhabit grassland on solar farm sites. Thus the development of solar farms 
   in Fenland does not necessarily mean that the land can no longer serve as active farmland. 
Safeguarding Infrastructure
11.24 In addition to supporting the development of new renewable and low carbon energy schemes and 
   installations, it is also important to protect existing (and approved) infrastructure, to ensure that 
   benefits to the environment and users (e.g., reduced heating bills) continue. Policy LP6 therefore 
   aims to safeguard such infrastructure. 
28 Small to medium scale is defined as a turbine up to a maximum of 40m from ground to tip of blade.
29 https://www.irena.org/Statistics/View-Data-by-Topic/Capacity-and-Generation/Country-Rankings38Decommissioning
11.25. Furthermore, Fenland District Council want to ensure that if any renewable energy infrastructure  
   becomes redundant, sites are returned (as far as possible) to their original state. Policy LP6 below  
   therefore includes a clause regarding the decommissioning of renewable energy infrastructure.
 Policy LP6:  Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Infrastructure
 Part A: Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Infrastructure
 Proposals for renewable and low carbon energy schemes, including ancillary development, will be   
 supported where the direct, indirect, individual and cumulative impacts on the following considerations  
 are, or will be made, acceptable:
  a) As a result of its scale, siting and design, the impacts on the following issues are satisfactorily   
   addressed: landscape character; visual amenity; biodiversity; geodiversity; flood risk; townscape;  
   historic assets; and highway safety; and
  b) Impacts on aviation and defence navigation system/communications; and
  c) Impacts on the amenities of sensitive neighbouring uses (including local residents) are minimised  
   (including by virtue of noise, dust, odour, shadow flicker, glint and glare, air quality or traffic).
 Testing compliance with part ‘a’ above will be via applicable policies elsewhere in a development plan 
 document for the area (i.e. this Local Plan; a Neighbourhood Plan, if one exists; any applicable policies
 in a Minerals or Waste Local Plan; and any further guidance set out in a Supplementary Planning Document).
 Requirement ‘b’ above will require (for relevant proposals) the applicant to submit robust evidence of
 the potential impact on any aviation and defence navigation system/communication: evidence must   
 document areas of agreement or disagreement reached with appropriate bodies and organisations   
 responsible for such infrastructure.
 In order to test compliance with part ‘c’ above, for relevant proposals applicants will be required to   
 submit a robust assessment of the potential impact on such users, and the mitigation measures
 proposed to minimise any identified harm.
 For all matters ‘a to c’, Fenland District Council may commission its own independent assessment of
 the proposals, to ensure it is satisfied what the degree of harm may be and whether the mitigation   
 measures proposed are reasonable and likely to be effective. 
 Where significant adverse effects are concluded by the local planning authority following consideration  
 of the above assessment(s), such effects will be weighed against the wider environmental, economic,   
 social and community benefits provided by the proposal. In this regard, and as part of the planning   
 balance, significant additional weight in favour of the proposal will arise for any proposal which:
  • Is community-led for the benefit of that community; or
  • Creates opportunities for co-location of energy producers with energy users; or
  • Facilitates renewable and low carbon energy innovation.
 Additional policy considerations for solar proposals
  d) Proposals for solar thermal or photovoltaics panels to be installed on existing property will be
   under a presumption in favour of permission unless there is clear and demonstrable significant   
   harm arising.
  e) Proposals for ground-based photovoltaics, including commercial large-scale proposals, will be  
   under a presumption in favour unless: 
    • there is clear and demonstrable significant harm arising; or 
    • the proposal is (following a site-specific soil assessment) to take place on Best and Most   
     Versatile (BMV) agricultural land, unless such land is peat based and the proposal is part of  
     a wider scheme to protect or enhance the carbon sink of such land; or 39   • the land is allocated for another purpose in this Local Plan or other statutory based document  
    (such as a nature recovery strategy or a Local Transport Plan), and the proposal is not
    compatible with such other allocation.
 Additional policy considerations for wind turbine proposals
 Proposals for medium to large scale* wind turbine development must be located within an area allocated 
 for wind development in a Neighbourhood Plan or at the following site allocations:
Site Allocation SHELAA Site Area Site name
LP06.01 40468 98.79 ha Coldham Wind Farm, Elm
LP06.02 40469 174.29 ha Land adjacent to Graysmoor Drove, Elm
 To demonstrate no adverse effect on the Nene Washes SPA / Ramsar, proposals in an area allocated
 for wind development in this Local Plan must include a non-breeding bird survey to assess whether 
 the land affected by the proposed development is regularly used by qualifying SPA / Ramsar bird
 species (especially foraging and roosting swans). If the land is identified to be functionally linked to
 the SPA / Ramsar, avoidance measures and mitigation will be required, and the planning application
 will need to be assessed through a project level Habitats Regulations Assessment to ensure that the   
 development does not result in adverse effects on site integrity.
 Proposals for small to medium scale** domestic wind turbines and non-commercial wind turbines
 (e.g. to serve a business) which require planning permission will be supported, in principle, across
 the whole of the Fenland District, subject to local and national policy.
 * medium to large scale is defined as a turbine over 40m from ground to tip of blade
 **small to medium scale is defined as a turbine up to a maximum of 40m from ground to tip of blade
 Part B: Wider Energy Infrastructure
 Fenland District Council recognises and supports, in principle, the need for significant investment in
 new and upgraded energy infrastructure to support the transition to a net zero carbon future.
 Where planning permission is needed from Fenland District Council, support will be given to
 proposals which are necessary for, or form part of, the transition to a net zero carbon sub-region.
 This could include energy storage facilities (such as battery storage or thermal storage) and
 upgraded or new electricity facilities (such as transmission facilities, sub-stations or other electricity   
 infrastructure). However, such proposals should take all reasonable opportunities to mitigate any
 harm arising from such proposals, and take care to select appropriate locations for such facilities
 thereby minimising harm arising.
 Part C: Decommissioning Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Infrastructure 
 Permitted proposals will be subject to a condition that will require the facility to be removed and the
 site fully restored to its original condition (or as near as reasonably practical to its original condition)   
 within one year of that facility becoming non-operational, subject to consideration of any biodiversity
 net gain which has arisen on site as a consequence of the original proposals.
 Part D: Safeguarding Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Infrastructure
 Development that would have a significant adverse impact on any existing or approved renewable   
 or low carbon energy generation infrastructure will not be permitted. Specifically, development must
 not significantly harm: 
  a) the technical performance of any existing or approved renewable/ low carbon energy generation  
   facility; or
  b) the potential for optimisation of strategic renewable energy / low carbon installations; or 
  c) the availability of the required resource, where the operation is dependent on uninterrupted flow  
   of energy to the installation.4012. Design and Amenity 
Design 
12.1 Good design can help create attractive places and spaces for people to live, work and visit and can  
  contribute to the creation of healthy and sustainable places. Design is not only about appearance, it  
  is also about how places function. 
12.2 Achieving good design is about creating places, buildings, or spaces that work well for everyone, look 
  good, last well, and will adapt to the needs of future generations.
12.3 National policy states that plans should set out clear design vision and expectations, so that it is clear 
  what will be acceptable. In October 2019 the government published the National Design Guide30  
  (NDG) which forms part of, and should be read alongside, the NPPG. The NDG sets out the 
  characteristics of well-designed places and demonstrates what good design means in practice and is 
  based around the following 10 characteristics:
       • Context • Public spaces
       • Identity • Uses
       • Built form • Homes and buildings
       • Movement • Resources
       • Nature • Lifespan
12.4 The Fenland Local Plan is a strategic document and so is not the appropriate mechanism to undertake 
  a detailed assessment of the character and heritage of every settlement. Instead, the Local Plan should 
  provide a framework for applicants, decision makers and communities to undertake such assessments 
  and deliver the right responses for the local context.
12.5 The majority of the district is rural in character. The unique open, flat character of the fens means that 
  new developments in the countryside and on the edge of settlements can have a significant impact on 
  the landscape form, even when viewed from a considerable distance (see Policy LP28 Landscape).
12.6 Policy LP7 sets out the overall design vision for Fenland, taking into account the NDG. This sets out 
  what is expected, and any planning application will be expected to demonstrate to a degree 
  proportionate to the proposal that they meet the design principles set out in Policy LP7.
12.7 The NPPF states:
  “to provide maximum clarity about design expectations at an early stage, all local planning   
  authorities should prepare design guides or codes consistent with the principles set out in 
  the National Design Guide’ ... ‘Design guides and codes can be prepared at an area-wide,   
  neighbourhood or site-specific scale, and to carry weight in decision-making should be 
  produced either as part of a plan or as supplementary planning documents”31
12.8 Therefore, the Council will prepare a Design Code for the district taking into account the different 
  characteristics of the market towns and rural areas as a separate Supplementary Planning Document (SPD). 
12.9 Policy LP7 is a strategic policy setting out the overall vision for the district, it is then supported by   
  other policies that relate to more locally specific design issues such as Amenity Provision (LP8),   
  Residential Annexes (LP9), Shop Frontages, Security Shutters and Canopies (LP10), Community Safety 
  (LP11), Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Infrastructure (Policy LP6) and Historic Environment (LP23), 
  and other policies throughout this Plan and any Design SPD. In addition, locally specific design   
  policies set out in any ‘made’ neighbourhood plan, conservation area appraisals and Character 
30 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-design-guide41  Area Assessments where they have been prepared, will also apply. Where relevant reference should 
  also be made to other national guidance and tools such as the ‘National Design Guide’, the ‘Building 
  Better, Building Beautiful32’ report, ‘Building for Life33’ and the ‘Dementia Friendly Housing Charter34’.
12.10 Applications for new development must be supported by a Design and Access Statement, in line 
   with current planning legislation. Developers will be expected to explain how the policy matters 
   below have been addressed within their development proposals.
 Policy LP7: Design 
 All development, including the construction of new buildings, extensions and alterations to existing   
 buildings, must achieve high quality sustainable design that contributes positively to local character,   
 landscape and townscape, supports diversity, equality and access for all, and mitigates climate change.
 Development will be assessed against the following ten design principles. Proposals will be required   
 to demonstrate to a degree proportionate to the proposal that they meet the following design principles. 
 Proposals which fail to adequately address the design principles will not be supported. All development  
 proposals will:
 Part A: Context
  a)  Be based on a sound understanding of the context, integrating into the surroundings and responding 
   to local history, culture and heritage;
  b) Relate well to the site, its local and wider context and existing characteristics, including the retention 
   of existing natural and historic features wherever possible, and including appropriate landscape
   and boundary treatments to ensure that the development can be satisfactorily assimilated into the 
   surrounding area in accordance with Policies LP23 (Historic Environment) and LP28 (Landscape);
  c) Protect any important local views into, out of or through the site (LP28 Landscape);
 Part B: Identity
  a) Contribute positively to the sense of place, reflecting and enhancing existing character and 
   distinctiveness;
  b) Reflect or improve on the original architectural style of the local surroundings, or embrace   
   opportunities for innovative design and new technologies which sympathetically complement or  
   contrast with the local architectural style;
  c) Use appropriate, high-quality materials which reinforce or enhance local distinctiveness;
  d) Not result in the visual or physical coalescence with any neighbouring settlement nor ribbon   
   development;
 Part C: Built Form
  a) Make effective and efficient use of land that contributes to the achievement of compact, walkable  
   neighbourhoods;
  b) Be appropriate for its context and its future use in terms of its building types, street layout,   
   development block type and size, siting, height, scale, massing, form, rhythm, plot widths, gaps  
   between buildings, and built footprint-to-plot ratio;
  c) Achieve a density not only appropriate for its context but also taking into account its accessibility;
 Part D: Movement
  a) Form part of a well-designed and connected travel network with consideration for all modes   
   of transport offering genuine choices for non-car travel and prioritising active travel and where   
   relevant demonstrate this through evidence clearly showing connectivity for all modes and a   
   hierarchy of routes;
31 NPPF Paragraph 128
32 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/living-with-beauty-report-of-the-building-better-building-beautiful-commission 
33 https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/resources/guide/building-life-12-third-edition 
34 https://www.housinglin.org.uk/_assets/Resources/Housing/OtherOrganisation/AlzheimersSociety_HousingCharter.pdf 42  b) Maximise pedestrian and cycle permeability and avoid barriers to movement through careful   
   consideration of street layouts and access routes both within the site and in the wider context   
   contributing to the delivery of walkable and cyclable neighbourhoods (see Policy LP20
   Accessibility and Transport);
  c) Ensure areas are accessible, safe and legible for all including people with physical accessibility  
   difficulties and people with conditions such as dementia or sight impairment for example;
  d) Deliver well-considered parking, including suitable electric vehicle charging points (see Policy 
   LP22), with appropriate landscaping. 
  e) Deliver suitable access solutions for servicing and utilities;
 Part E: Nature
  a) Incorporate and retain as far as possible existing natural features including hedgerows, trees,   
   and ponds particularly where these features offer a valuable habitat to support biodiversity;
  b) Incorporate appropriate landscape and boundary treatments to ensure that the development 
   can be satisfactorily assimilated into the surrounding area, maximising opportunities to deliver 
   biodiverse habitats and to strengthen wildlife corridors and green infrastructure networks;
  c) Be sufficiently green to help achieve wider goals for climate change mitigation and adaptation 
   (Policy LP6 Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Infrastructure), to manage water, or support
   diverse ecosystems or deliver biodiversity net gain (see Policy LP25 Biodiversity Net Gain);
 Part F: Public Spaces
  a) Ensure public spaces are accessible to all, are safe and secure and will be easy to maintain
   with clear definition of public and private spaces;
  b) Form part of a hierarchy of spaces where relevant to offer a range of spaces available for the 
   community and to support a variety of activities and encourage social interaction;
  c) Be carefully planned and integrated into the wider community to ensure spaces feel safe and
   are safe through natural surveillance, being flanked by active uses and by promoting activity
   within the space;
  d) Maximise opportunities for delivering additional trees (Policy LP27 Trees and Planting) and 
   biodiversity gains through the creation of new habitats and the strengthening or extending
   wildlife corridors (Policies LP24 Natural Environment and LP25 Biodiversity Net Gain) and the   
   green infrastructure network (Policy LP29 Green Infrastructure);
 Part G: Uses
  a) Create or contribute to a variety of complementary uses that meet the needs of the community;
  b) Be compatible with neighbouring land uses and not result in likely conflict with existing ‘bad   
   neighbour’ uses unless it can be satisfactorily demonstrated that both the ongoing use of the   
   neighbouring site will not be compromised, and that the amenity of occupiers of the new   
   development will be satisfactory with the ongoing normal use of the neighbouring site;
  c) Not result in adverse noise and vibration taking into account surrounding uses nor result in   
   adverse impacts upon air quality from odour, fumes, smoke, dust and other sources;
 Part H: Homes and Buildings
  a) Provide homes with good quality internal environments for users and adequate access to
   private, shared or public spaces;
  b) Make the best use of site orientation, building form, layout, landscaping and materials to
   maximise natural light and heat, whilst avoiding internal overheating by providing passive
   cooling and ventilation;
  c) Minimise space heating and cooling demand and total energy demand by adopting a
   ‘fabric first’ approach to construction;
  d) Aspire towards water neutrality by meeting high water efficiency standards of 110 litres per
   person per day and incorporating facilities to recycle, harvest and conserve water resources
   (Policy LP32 Flood and Water Management);43  e) Be adaptable to changing needs of future occupants and be cost effective to run;
   f) Not result in harm to people’s amenity either within the proposed development or neighbouring
   it through overlooking, overshadowing, loss of light or increase in artificial light or glare
   (Policy LP8 Amenity Provision);
  g) Provide adequate storage, waste, servicing and utilities for the use proposed (see Minerals and  
   Waste RECAP35SPD);
 Part I: Resources
  a) Minimise the need for resources both in construction and operation of buildings and be easily   
   adaptable to avoid unnecessary waste; 
  b) Use high quality materials which are not only suitable for the context but that are durable and   
   resilient to impacts of climate change;
 Part J: Lifespan
  a) Ensure that buildings are durable, flexible and adaptable over their planned lifespan, taking  
   into account potential future social, economic, technological and environmental needs, through  
   the structure, layout and design of buildings and places; and M4(2) and wheelchair homes
   in accordance with Policy LP12 (Meeting Housing Needs);
  b) Encourage the creation of a sense of ownership for users and the wider community with a clear  
   strategy for ongoing management and stewardship.
 Development proposals will be expected to satisfy requirements of any adopted local design guide
 or design code where relevant to the proposal.
Amenity Provision
12.11 Standards of amenity influence people’s health and quality of life. The Council will seek to ensure 
   that standards of amenity, which all existing and future occupants of neighbouring land and 
   buildings may reasonably expect to enjoy, are provided for in new development. This includes 
   preventing unacceptable harm to existing occupiers arising from new development. This policy   
   applies as much to extensions and conversions as it does to new development. 
12.12 Policy LP8 expands on the design principles set out in Policy LP7 Part H. 
 Policy LP8: Amenity Provision
 Part A: Amenity of Existing Occupiers
 New development should not result in an unacceptable impact on the amenity of existing occupiers of  
 any nearby properties. These impacts may include:
  a) loss of privacy for the occupiers of any nearby property; or
  b) loss of public green space and/or amenity space; or
  c) noise and/or vibration levels resulting in disturbance for the occupiers or users of any
   nearby property or land; or
  d) loss of light to and/or overshadowing of any nearby property; or
  e) overbearing impact on any nearby property; or
  f) adverse impact on air quality from odour, fumes, dust, smoke or other sources; or
 Part B: Amenity of Future Occupiers
 Development proposals should be designed and located to ensure that the needs of future occupiers
 are provided for and should include:
  h) adequate natural light, privacy and noise attenuation; and
  i) adequate amenity for the living and storage needs of prospective occupiers; and
  j) well designed and located private amenity space, and/or communal amenity space in the case 
   of  apartments/flats;44  k) well designed and located bin storage and collection areas, including workable turning space
   for collection vehicles where appropriate (in accordance with the RECAP36SPD); and
  l) well-designed parking and cycle storage (Policy LP22 Parking Provision). 
 Proposals that would result in unacceptable impact on the amenity of existing or future occupiers will
 not be supported. 
Residential Annexes
12.13 Within Fenland, there are a relatively high number of applications for residential annexes; this   
   is partly due to the area’s increasing ageing population and the need to live near to family for care 
   and support. 
12.14 However, the addition of annexes to residential properties can have a considerable impact upon 
   the character and amenity of an area through the intensification of development. Through Policy  
   LP9 the Council will seek to ensure that any residential annexe development is solely provided
   as ancillary to the original dwelling and not a new dwelling, and that it is retained for that purpose 
   thereafter. 
 Policy LP9: Residential Annexes
 Planning permission for the creation of a residential annexe will only be granted if all the following
 criteria are met:
  a) the annexe shall presently, and in the future, be within the same ownership as, and will be
   occupied in conjunction with, the occupiers of the original dwelling;
  b) the annexe does not appear as tantamount to the creation of a new dwelling or separate
   planning unit;
  c) the annexe is ancillary and subordinate in size and scale to the original dwelling, and of a
   design which, taken as a whole, complements the original dwelling;
  d) the occupant(s) of the annexe share(s) the access, garden and parking areas of the original   
   dwelling;
  e) there is a clear functional relationship between the occupant(s) of the annexe and the original 
   dwelling;
  f) the annexe is not capable of subdivision from the original dwelling to create a new dwelling or   
   separate planning unit;
  g) the provision of services and utilities to the annexe are provided via the host dwelling; and 
  h) the proposal does not cause any other harm, such as, but not limited to, amenity (including
   on occupiers of the annexe, the original dwelling and neighbours), heritage and biodiversity
   assets, highways, parking, flood risk or character of the locality.
 Development of detached residential annexes within the defined property boundary, will only be   
 permitted where it is demonstrated that the accommodation cannot reasonably be provided through   
 extension to the original dwelling.
 Development of residential annexes within the countryside will only be permitted where they are an   
 extension to the existing dwelling or the conversion of an existing outbuilding where there is a close   
 physical relationship to the main dwelling. Any proposal for the creation of new detached building for  
 use as an annexe in the countryside will be treated as a new dwelling, and proposals considered as such, 
 in accordance with Policy LP18 (Development in the Countryside).
36 RECAP Waste Management Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document - 
   https://www.cambridgeshire.gov.uk/business/planning-and-development/planning-policy/recap-waste-management-design-guide 45Shop Frontages, Security Shutters, Canopies 
12.15 Shop fronts can make a substantial and positive contribution to the visual interest of an area if   
   sympathetically designed, but a degree of control is required if the character of buildings or the 
   overall appearance of a street or area is not to be affected by poor design. Open shop fronts, such 
   as those with expansive glazing and thin metal frames, can create visually unacceptable voids  
   and adversely impact on the character and appearance of buildings and areas and proposals 
   for their development will generally be resisted. Particular care is necessary in the design of shop 
   fronts in conservation areas, and on listed buildings, or where the shop front would straddle 
   buildings of different designs.
12.16 Security shutters (especially if solid) on shopfronts can be visually unattractive and create a 
   ‘dead’ frontage with a hostile appearance. This can reduce natural surveillance, create   
   an unwelcoming environment and encourage crime which in turn can have a knock-on effect on 
   the commercial viability of an area. There are other means of providing for the security of 
   shop premises such as the use of laminated glass, improved lighting, internal security grilles or 
   natural surveillance, that have a less detrimental impact. The Council will strive to achieve a 
   balance between the security requirements of individual shops and the impact on the wider area.
12.17 Canopies for shop fronts and other buildings need to be designed sensitively to ensure they are 
   compatible with the building’s style and character. It is important that the proposed style, proportions, 
   materials and colours do not result in over dominant and discordant features or impact on 
   pedestrian safety and convenience. 
12.18 Any applications for the display of advertisements are subject to a separate advertisement consent 
   process37, which relates to the effect on amenity and public safety. 
 Policy LP10: Shop Frontages, Security Shutters and Canopies
 Planning permission for any new, replacement or altered shop front, including signage, will only be   
 granted if:
  a) its design would be sympathetic in size, architectural style, proportion, materials and
   architectural detailing to the building to which it would be fitted; and
  b) it would not detract from the character or appearance of the street as a whole; and
  c) any proposed advertising material is incorporated as an integral part of the design from the   
   outset.
 Planning permission for the installation of an external security shutter will only be granted where:
  d) it is demonstrated that there is a persistent problem of crime or vandalism affecting the
   properties in the area which cannot be satisfactorily and reasonably addressed by an alternative  
   measure/s; and 
  e) the shutter is designed to a high standard, taking account of the design features of the
   frontage into which it would be installed; and
  f) the design is open mesh/perforated in style.
 A proposal for the installation of a canopy will only be acceptable on the ground floor of a shop, cafe,  
 restaurant or public house, and only if it can be installed without detracting from the character of the  
 building or surrounding area.
37 Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007
   http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2007/783/contents/made 46Community Safety 
12.19  The NPPF states that planning policies and decisions should aim to achieve healthy, inclusive and  
   safe places. This means designing places that are safe and accessible, so that crime and disorder, 
   and the fear of crime, do not undermine the quality of life or community cohesion – for example 
   through the use of clear and legible pedestrian routes, and high-quality public space, which 
   encourage the active and continual use of public areas.
12.20 One of the design principles set out in Policy LP7 (Design) is that new development should provide 
   places that are safe and designed to minimise crime and antisocial behaviour, taking into account 
   secure by design principles38. The following policy provides further detail on crime prevention   
   measures.
 
12.21 Using crime prevention measures in the design of new developments can ensure a proactive 
   approach is taken which should be incorporated into a scheme from the start of the design process. 
 
12.22 Through the design process the proposal should seek to maximise natural surveillance by 
   considering how people and property are visible from occupied buildings. The design of the street 
   network should encourage activity by being open for use by everyone and include integrated 
   streets and paths so that people can take the most direct route. Streets and paths should also be 
   well lit, highly visible, not overshadowed by vegetation nor contain recessed areas. A mix of uses, 
   dwellings sizes and tenures can all contribute towards increasing activity, and thus natural 
   surveillance, throughout the day.  
12.23 Safe and secure parking and storage facilities for cars, motorcycles and bicycles should be   
   incorporated into the scheme with natural surveillance where possible.
 Policy LP11: Community Safety 
 In order to create safe environments and to prevent crime, development proposals should demonstrate  
 that they have regard to the following criteria:  
  a) where appropriate, include a mix of uses, tenures and dwelling sizes to create a range of
   activities throughout the day;  
  b) include a street and footpath network that is convenient, attractive and safe to use; 
  c) maintain and enhance permeability and connectivity of a site to aid surveillance and security
   by increasing activity; 
  d)  all footpaths should be well lit and, if possible, overlooked by dwellings. Footpaths to the rear
   of properties should be avoided where possible; 
  e) proposals for new shop frontages should avoid the use of external roller shutters in accordance  
   with Policy LP10 (Shop Frontages, Security Shutters and Canopies) and secure by design principles;
  f) street furniture and public realm works should be designed not to obstruct pedestrian views or   
   encourage anti-social behaviour;
  g)  landscaping should be well located to help define public and private spaces. Visual
   surveillance corridors should be maintained by limiting the height of shrubbery. Deterrent
   plants should be used where appropriate; and
  h) car parks should be designed for both vehicle and personal safety through being well lit, have
   clear line of sight and avoid opportunities for concealment. 
38 https://www.securedbydesign.com/guidance/design-guides4713. Housing 
Meeting Housing Need 
13.1 A key task of the Local Plan is to provide a policy framework that will facilitate the delivery of housing 
  that meets the needs of all people. This policy therefore seeks to ensure that new residential development 
  delivers a balanced mix of housing tenures, types and sizes, provides sufficient affordable housing, 
  and improves the overall quality of the housing stock. 
13.2 Meeting the needs of all can be subdivided into matters relating to the mix of dwellings of different 
  sizes that will satisfy need and demand, the provision of housing for those households unable to meet 
  their needs in the open market, and the provision of housing for those with special requirements.
Mix
13.3 Developers will be expected to bring forward proposals which, in overall terms, will secure the market 
  and affordable housing mix as recommended by the most up to date Strategic Housing Market 
  Assessment (SHMA), currently the Housing Needs of Specific Groups in Cambridgeshire and West 
  Suffolk Study39  (October 2021).
13.4 There is a range in the mix and it is not prescriptive thereby allowing developers to respond to 
  demand and site-specific characteristics, whilst taking local circumstances and up to date evidence 
  into account. Nonetheless, unless financial viability indicates otherwise, the guidance on mix in the 
  most up to date SHMA will be sought.
Affordable Housing 
13.5 It has been difficult for many years for local people on lower incomes to secure market housing.
  House prices in Fenland are lower than those across the region as a whole but so too are average 
  incomes. A limited supply of new affordable dwellings, and the loss of existing affordable homes 
  through ‘right to buy’ and ‘right to acquire’ provisions have tended to exacerbate housing problems 
  over time for those in need. As at May 2022 the total number of people on the housing register is 
  1,482. The latest SHMA evidence has calculated that there is a total annual affordable housing 
  requirement of around 289 dwellings which is over 50% of the total housing need for Fenland. To
  help meet this need it is therefore important that a proportion of all new housing developments are 
  affordable, subject to viability.
13.6 For developer contributions, national guidance is clear that the viability considerations of the policy 
  requirement for affordable housing should be considered as a whole with other policy requirements 
  such as infrastructure contributions. This means that it is important to get the right balance between 
  meeting affordable housing needs and meeting infrastructure needs whilst ensuring that Fenland 
  continues to be an attractive and viable place to build and invest.
13.7 To inform the preparation of this draft Local Plan a viability assessment was undertaken, which looked 
  at the cost of building new homes and the costs associated with the policies in this Local Plan. This 
  evidence helps to identify what level of affordable housing can be sought to ensure that development 
  would remain viable. 
13.8 The Fenland Local Plan and CIL Viability Report40  (March 2020) concluded that viability in Fenland
  is marginal, with a clear north-south divide. Development in the northern part of the district is between 
  10% to 15% lower in terms of viability than the rest of the district. ‘This will have an impact on the 
  Local Plan affordable housing requirement.  Overall, it means in the south of the district a 20% 
  affordable requirement could be achieved, whilst in the north the provision of any affordable housing 
  is not considered viable or achievable’.
39 https://cambridgeshireinsight.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/CWS-Housing-Needs-of-Specific-Groups-Oct21.pdf 
40 https://www.fenland.gov.uk/media/16705/FDC-Viability-Assessment--HDH-2019-12-19-/pdf/FDC_Viability_Assessment_
(HDH_19-12-19).pdf 4813.9 To address this difference in viability, the draft Local Plan includes a policy which sets different 
  affordable housing requirements within different parts of the district. The following map shows the 
  different areas, with the north shown in blue and the south in red for the purposes of applying the 
  affordable housing requirements of Policy LP12. 
Map 3: Affordable Housing Zones
13.10 For the purpose of this policy, areas defined as being in the north of the district are comprised of  
   the parishes of:
    • Gorefield CP
    • Leverington CP
    • Newton-in-the-Isle CP
    • Parson Drove CP
    • Tydd St Giles CP
    • Wisbech CP
    • Wisbech St Mary CP
13.11 All other parishes generally fall as being in the ‘south’ of the district.4913.12  The NPPF defines affordable housing as ‘housing for sale or rent, for those whose needs are not met 
   by the market’41 This is split into different types of affordable housing including, affordable homes to 
   rent; discounted market sales; and other routes to home ownership. The NPPF42 requires that 10% of 
   the total number of homes provided on any given site should be provided as affordable home ownership. 
13.13 Although the Fenland Viability Report concludes that affordable housing provision in the north of 
   the district is likely to be unviable, a policy that requires zero affordable housing in the north of the 
   district would not meet the National Policy requirement that ‘planning policies and decisions 
   should expect at least 10% of the total number of homes to be available for affordable home 
   ownership.’ Therefore, in the north of the district a 10% affordable housing requirement is needed 
   to meet the NPPF requirement. This can be made up of discounted market sales and other affordable 
   housing routes to home ownership (including first homes) as defined in Annex 2 of the NPPF .
13.14  Policy LP12 brings together all of the above evidence and sets out the affordable housing requirements 
   for the district. For sites in the south of the district development proposals of 10 or more dwellings on 
   greenfield sites should, through negotiation, provide 20% affordable housing. For sites in the north of  
   the district, development proposals of 10 or more dwellings should meet the NPPF requirement for 
   10% affordable home ownership. For all brownfield43 sites proposals of 10 or more dwellings 
   anywhere in the district should meet the NPPF requirement for 10% affordable home ownership. 
13.15 In May 2021, the Government introduced First Homes44, a new tenure of affordable housing, 
   to the NPPG. First Homes are a specific type of discounted market housing which are discounted 
   by a minimum of 30% against market value, sold to people meeting set eligibility criteria.  First 
   Homes are the government’s preferred discounted market tenure. The NPPG stipulates that First 
   Homes should make up at least 25% of all affordable housing units being delivered through 
   planning obligations. The purpose of First Homes is, as set out in the NPPG, a mechanism to 
   allow people, particularly key workers, to get on the housing ladder in their local area. First Homes 
   are a type of affordable home ownership product and therefore make up part of the NPPF 10% 
   requirement for affordable home ownership. 
13.16 In Fenland this means that in the south of the district there will be a 50/50 split between affordable 
   rented products and affordable home ownership products, with at least half of the affordable home 
   ownership requirement made up of First Homes. 
13.17 The following table shows the break down and proportion of the different types of affordable 
   housing required within the north and south of the district. Appendix 3 sets out worked examples 
   of how affordable housing requirements will be calculated. 
Table 4: Break down of proportion of different types of affordable housing required
 
 South of the district
(Greenfield sites)North of the district
and all Brownfield sites
Total % of homes to be Affordable Homes 
on schemes of 10 or more
Units made up of:  20%  10%  
1. Affordable rent   10%  0%  
2. First Homes   At least 5%  At least 2.5%  
3.Other affordable home ownership products   5%  7.5%
41 See NPPF Annex 2 definition of affordable housing
42 Paragraph 65
43 See NPPF Annex 2 definition of previously development land 
44 https://www.gov.uk/guidance/first-homes 5013.18 As required by national policy45, it is expected that affordable housing provision will be met on   
   site unless in exceptional circumstances where off-site provision or an appropriate financial 
   contribution in lieu can be robustly justified. 
13.19 The Council is aware that in some cases developers can struggle to secure Registered Providers  
   (RPs) to take on the affordable rented housing particularly when this is less than 10 dwellings. 
13.20 In these circumstances where a developer can demonstrate that the number of affordable rented 
   units are too small for an RP to take on and manage (and site-specific written evidence from at 
   least three RPs that operate in the local area is submitted to that effect) then the Council will 
   negotiate an off-site contribution for the affordable rent element only. The 10% home ownership 
   product must still be provided on-site. 
   
13.21 Any off-site provision will be through a commuted sum. The Fenland Viability Report concludes that 
   the commuted sum should be £45,000 per dwelling as at December 2019. If this is indexed linked 
   to BCSI All-in Tender Price Index (TPI) at April 2022 (Q2 2022) the requirement is £48,513.51.  
13.22 To help avoid any undue delays that may arise during S106 negotiations, a separate guidance   
   note will be prepared annually setting out the amount of the payment and to allow a simple review 
   should viability change.
13.23 The policy sets an affordable housing requirement for sites of 10 or more dwellings. Where the 
   affordable housing policy would result in the requirement relating to part of a dwelling, the 
   calculation will be rounded upwards for 0.5 and over and downwards for less than 0.5.
13.24 If a development scheme comes forward which is below the 10 dwelling thresholds and does not 
   require the provision of affordable housing, but the scheme is followed by an obviously linked 
   subsequent development scheme at any point where the original permission remains extant, or 
   up to 10 years following completion of the first scheme, then, if the combined total of dwellings 
   provided by the first scheme and the subsequent scheme(s) exceed the 10 dwelling threshold then 
   Policy LP13 will be applied as a whole, with the precise level of affordable housing to be provided 
   being ‘back dated’ to include the earlier scheme(s).
13.25 Affordable housing will be delivered through different mechanisms including contributions from 
   developers; securing funding from the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Combined Authority 
   (CPCA), Homes England and other external agencies; working with partner Registered Providers; 
   delivery of exception sites either through an application or through a neighbourhood plan 
   maximising the take up of Government initiatives for intermediate or assisted home ownership.
13.26 In accordance with the Council’s Local Letting Policy (July 2021), there may be circumstances   
   where a Local Letting Plan could be used, to help create balanced and mixed communities, and to 
   mitigate housing management issues.
Entry Level Exception Sites/First Home Exception Sites and Rural Exception Sites 
13.27 Policy LP1 (Settlement Hierarchy) restricts development outside the defined settlement boundaries  
   to that which is demonstrably essential to the effective operation of local agriculture, horticulture,  
   forestry, outdoor recreation and access to natural greenspace, transport or utility services, or   
   in accordance with Policy LP1 Part C – Frontage Development. Or minerals or waste development  
   in accordance with the separate Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Minerals and Waste Local Plan 
   (2021).
 
45  NPPF paragraph 63 5113.28 National Policy also sets out other exception to development which adjoins a village boundary   
   such as entry level exception sites and rural exception sites. Paragraph 72 of the NPPF states: 
   “Local planning authorities should support the development of entry-level exception sites, 
   suitable for first time buyers (or those looking to rent their first home), unless the need for
   such homes is already being met within the authority’s area. These sites should be on   
   land which is not already allocated for housing and should: 
    a) comprise of entry-level homes that offer one or more types of affordable housing as 
     defined in Annex 2 of this Framework; and 
    b) be adjacent to existing settlements, proportionate in size to them, not compromise   
     the protection given to areas or assets of particular importance in this Framework,   
     and comply with any local design policies and standards.”
13.29 This can include First Home exception sites. Footnote 35 of the NPPF explains that ‘entry-level   
   exception sites should not be larger than one hectare in size or exceed 5% of the size of the
   existing settlement’.
13.30 Rural exception sites are small sites for affordable housing in perpetuity where sites would not   
   normally be used for housing. Rural exception sites seek to address the needs of the local   
   community by accommodating households who are either current residents or have an existing  
   family or employment connection. A proportion of market homes may be allowed on the site at the 
   local planning authority’s discretion, for example where essential to enable the delivery of affordable 
   units without grant funding.
13.31 Policy LP12 supports entry-level exception sites and rural exception in appropriate locations   
   adjoining existing settlements. 
Homes for Older People
13.32 There is projected to be a two-thirds increase in the population aged 75 and over across Fenland 
   during the plan period to 2040 with similar increases in the number of people with dementia and 
   just over a 50% increase in people with mobility difficulties. Providing for an increasingly elderly
   population is therefore a key objective of the Local Plan. Elderly person accommodation whether 
   purpose built housing or residential care homes can also assist in freeing up housing for younger 
   people and families.
13.33  As set out below the requirements for dwellings with higher access standards that can be adapted  
   can also help support the needs of older people and allow people to remain in their family home 
   for longer without the need for specialist accommodation. 
Accommodation for Vulnerable People
13.34 Affordable housing is housing that is provided for eligible households who are unable to meet   
   their housing needs in the open market because of the relationship between housing costs and 
   income. It is tightly defined by national policy. The affordable housing needs of the most vulnerable 
   people will be prioritised by the Council. The term ‘vulnerable people’ refers to a broad group of 
   people who need some kind of support with their living arrangements to enable them to live safely. 
   This could include people with learning disabilities and autism; physical disabilities; sensory 
   impairment; mental health support needs; ex-offenders; older people, young people and care 
   leavers; and statutorily homeless households. It is important that accommodation proposals for 
   vulnerable people consider the location of housing in relation to essential services and community 
   facilities. While such services should be accessible to all residents, their location might become 
   more significant for those with mobility issues, or where cost of travel is a barrier.52Dwellings with Higher Access Standards 
13.35 In the past, Local Plans could set different standards for technical issues, such as access standards, 
   but this led to inconsistencies between different Districts, and Government believed it generally 
   caused confusion and expense for developers. Government therefore undertook a ‘Housing 
   Standards Review’ and rationalised the setting of technical standards for new housing reducing 
   the burdens on developers. This prevents Local Plans from setting their own standards and instead 
   imposes national standards via the Building Regulations system. However, there are three exceptions 
   to this general rule.
13.36 The NPPG ‘Housing: Option Technical Standards’46 allows local planning authorities the option  
   to set technical standards exceeding the minimum standards required by Building Regulations in 
   respect of access, water efficiency, and a nationally described space standard. However, to 
   implement such standards evidence will be required to justify inclusion of such technical standards, 
   not least in regard to viability. 
13.37 Whilst the Council acknowledge there could be evidence of ‘need’ to introduce one or more of the 
   optional standards, there is strong evidence to indicate that viability of development would 
   be compromised (or other essential infrastructure not deliverable) if such standards were imposed 
   on development in full.
13.38 This section of the Plan looks at the issues of access standards only. (Water efficiency is covered in 
   Policy LP32).  
13.39 Building Regulations (Part M47) sets out three levels of access standards for new homes:
    • Category 1 – Dwellings which provide reasonable accessibility (M4(1)
    • Category 2 – Dwellings which provide enhanced accessibility and adaptability (M4(2)
    • Category 3 - Dwellings which are accessible and adaptable for occupants who use a   
     wheelchair (M4(3)
13.40 All new homes must meet basic access standards for visitors- category M4(1). 
13.41 However, there is the option via the Local Plan to set higher access standards (Categories 2 and 
   3) than minimum required by Building Regulations (Category 1).  But only if there is clear evidence 
   of need and the viability implications of introducing the standard have been adequately considered. 
   Therefore, the result of the Council’s Viability Report (March 2020) must be taken into account in 
   any decisions. 
13.42 In a September 2020 central government consultation (Raising accessibility standards for new 
   homes48), proposals were set out to increase the required access standards for all housing through 
   building regulations. This consultation set out a range of options for how standards can be improved 
   and, whilst at the time of writing there are no formal changes being made, making M4(2) standards 
   mandatory for all housing looks to be a potential outcome.
13.43 Ahead of any national changes to building regulation the draft Local Plan proposes that on all 
   schemes for new dwellings at least 25% of the dwellings must meet building regulations M4(2), 
   unless there are exceptional design reasons for not being able to do so (e.g. listed building 
   constraints or site-specific factors such as vulnerability to flooding).
46 Housing: Option technical Standards’
47 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/access-to-and-use-of-buildings-approved-document-m 
48 https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/raising-accessibility-standards-for-new-homes 5313.44 For category 3 (M4(3)(b)) wheelchair adaptable homes National Guidance states ‘Local Plan 
   policies for wheelchair accessible homes should be applied only to those dwellings where the 
   local authority is responsible for allocating or nominating a person to live in that dwelling’49. 
   Therefore, it is proposed that the need for wheelchair adaptable homes apply to affordable rent 
   homes only.
13.45 Policy LP12 states that any scheme that provides 10 or more affordable rented units 10% of 
   affordable rented dwellings should meet building regulations M4(3)(a) (wheelchair adaptable 
   dwellings) subject to viability. Schemes that include additional wheelchair dwellings will be supported.  
13.46 For example, based on the affordable housing requirements set out in Policy LP12, the requirement 
   for wheelchair adaptable homes will apply for schemes of over 100 dwellings which would result 
   in 10 affordable rented properties to be provided on site, of which 1 dwelling would be required 
   to meet building regulation M4(3)(b) wheelchair adaptable. 
13.47 Policy LP12 sets additional higher access standards so that sufficient choice is available in the 
   market for people with particular needs, such as homes which can be adapted to suit people’s 
   needs over time as well as the requirement for wheelchair adaptable homes. 
   Park homes and boat dwellers  
13.48 The Council is required through the Housing Act 1985  (as amended) to assess and understand 
   the accommodation needs of people residing or resorting to their District with respect to sites for  
   caravans and the mooring of houseboats. 
13.49 The Council has jointly undertaken a needs assessment with other local authorities in the region 
   to establish the requirements for park homes and boat dwellers, but this has been delayed by the 
   Covid 19 pandemic. Until such time as a needs assessment is completed, any proposals for these 
   types of accommodation will be treated on their merits using the policies in this Plan as a whole. 
   Once prepared, the Council will use the latest accommodation needs assessment to inform 
   planning decisions.
13.50 The requirements of the Housing Act and Planning Policy for Traveller Sites  (August 2015) for 
   Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople are covered by Policy LP14.
13.51 Park homes provide a small but important part of the district’s housing accommodation. A ‘park 
   home’, is a residential mobile home, similar to a bungalow or caravan in style, installed on a 
   dedicated site or ‘home park’. They are designed to be lived in permanently and provide an 
   opportunity for residents to own a home but pay rent to the owner of the site that includes costs 
   towards maintenance of communal areas. These sites require all the services and facilities of 
   built residential development and will not be acceptable on sites poorly related to services and 
   facilities necessary to meet residents’ needs, or where they may over-dominate an area. 
13.52 A limited number of houseboats can be found in the district. A houseboat is defined by s8(3) of 
   the Housing Act 1985 (as inserted by s124 of the Housing and Planning Act 2016) as ‘a boat 
   or similar structures designed or adapted for use as a place to live’. Houseboats are a lifestyle 
   choice for some residents and they contribute to the diversity of homes within the district, and there 
   may be instances whereby someone wishes to seek permission for a houseboat, or houseboats. To 
   satisfying its statutory duties above, Policy LP12 (Part G) aims, as a whole, to deliver new development 
   in sustainable locations and so the same principle applies to proposals for houseboats. The policy 
   below will ensure that potential residents of houseboats benefit from the same level of access to 
   services and facilities as those living in traditional housing.
49 https://www.gov.uk/guidance/housing-optional-technical-standards 56-009-20150327
50 https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1985/68/contents 
51 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/planning-policy-for-traveller-sites 54 Policy LP12: Meeting Housing Needs
 Part A – Housing Mix
 Development proposals for housing will be supported where they provide a mix of high-quality homes  
 of  varying sizes, types and tenures to meet current need, including homes for market rent, plots for
 self-build and older person accommodation.
 Developers are expected to provide housing that contributes to meeting the housing needs of the 
 district within the Cambridgeshire housing market area, as identified in the latest Strategic
 Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) and in any other appropriate local evidence.
 Part B – Affordable Housing  
 Development proposals should, through negotiation, provide the following amounts of affordable   
 housing:
  • For sites in the south of the district (as shown on Map 3) development proposals of 10 of more  
   dwellings on greenfield sites should through negotiation, provide 20% affordable housing. 
  • For sites in the north of the district development proposals of 10 or more dwellings should meet
   the NPPF requirement for 10% affordable home ownership.
  • All brownfield52 sites across the district of 10 or more dwellings should meet the NPPF
   requirement for 10% affordable home ownership.
 
 For a worked example see Appendix 3.
 Affordable housing should be provided on-site unless exceptional circumstances can be demonstrated  
 and off-site provision would contribute to the objective of creating balanced and mixed communities. 
 Provision of homes and/or land to be provided off-site or through a commuted sum, this shall be
 based on the figure set out in the Council’s latest guidance note. At April 2022 this is £48,513.51
 per unit. 
 
 If a development scheme comes forward which is below the threshold of 10 dwellings and thus does
 not require the provision of affordable housing, but the scheme is followed by an obviously linked   
 subsequent development scheme at any point where the original permission remains extant, or up to
 5 years following completion of the first scheme, then, if the combined total of dwellings provided by
 the first scheme and the subsequent scheme(s) provides the threshold amount, then Policy LP12 as
 a whole will be applied, with the precise level of affordable housing to be provided being ‘back dated’  
 to include the earlier scheme(s). 
 
 Of the affordable dwellings provided, the exact tenure mix should be identified through discussions
 with the local authority and informed by the latest Government guidance and up-to date Strategic 
 Housing Market Assessment (SHMA). The starting point for discussions will be based on delivery of
 25% of all affordable housing delivered through planning obligations as First Homes, after which
 priority will be for delivery of affordable rent, subject to satisfying national policy requirements for 10%
 all housing being for affordable home ownership. This will form the basis of a S106 Agreement to   
 accompany the planning permission.
 Part C – Exception Sites/First Home Exception sites and Rural Exception Sites
 Proposals for residential development on unallocated greenfield sites immediately adjacent to the
 defined settlement boundary will only be supported where this is either:
  • A First Homes exception site in accordance with the NPPF and where there are no fundamental  
   constraints to delivering the site or significant harm arising.
  • A rural exception site that through an assessment of local need indicates there is an identified
   need for affordable housing.
53 http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2015/17/contents/enacted/data.htm55  Part D – Homes for Older People
 To help meet the demands of an ageing population in Fenland proposals will be supported, in
 principle, which incorporate measures which are likely to be beneficial to older people, and thereby   
 encourage and enable older people to reside in such properties, both now and as they grow older.
 
 All development proposals should set out how such measures have been considered and incorporated  
 into the scheme. Proposals will be refused which fail to demonstrate appropriate measures have been  
 considered and incorporated, where it would appear to have been practical, likely viable, and appropriate 
 to have done so.
 Part E – Accommodation for Vulnerable People
  Planning permission will be granted for accommodation which is entirely aimed at meeting the
  housing needs of the most vulnerable, provided that the development:
   • Meets an identified need and is supported by Adult Social Care Commissioning;
   • Will be suitable for the intended occupiers in terms of standard of facilities, the level of   
    independence and the provision of support and/or care;
   • Will be accessible by non-car means to essential services and community facilities as
    appropriate to the needs of the intended occupiers;
   • Does not conflict with any strategic policy of this plan and does not have any fundamental   
    constraint.
 A legal agreement will likely be necessary to ensure that such accommodation is retained for the
 purpose for which it was intended under this policy.
 Part F – Dwellings with Higher Access Standards 
 Housing should be adaptable to meet the changing needs of people over time. Proposals which
 deliver housing at the higher access standards of Building Regulations will be viewed favourably.
 At least 25% of all new dwellings on any site should meet building regulation M4(2).
 On any scheme delivering 10 or more affordable rented properties, at least 10% of the affordable   
 rented dwellings should meet building regulation M4(3)(a) subject to viability.
 Part G - Homes for Permanent Caravan Dwellers/Park Homes and Boat Dwellers
 Planning permission will be granted for permanent residential caravans (mobile homes) on sites which  
 would be acceptable for permanent dwellings provided that these are a subsidiary element to bricks
 and mortar housing existing, or to be provided, in an area.
 Proposals for new moorings and marinas will be supported in principle in locations in or adjacent
 to settlements with a range of key services, where navigation and flood risk are not jeopardised
 and where a need has been identified through an up-to-date accommodation assessment.
Custom and Self Build  
13.53 Policy LP12 (Meeting Housing Needs) requires the provision of a wide choice of homes to meet  
   the needs of the community, this includes custom build and self-build homes.
13.54 The Self-build and Custom Housebuilding Act 2015 (as amended by the Housing and Planning  
   Act 2016)53 places a requirement on Local Planning authorities to maintain a register of individuals 
   and associations of individuals who have expressed an interest in acquiring land for the purposes 
   of self-build or custom build. It also requires Local Planning Authorities to grant planning permission 
   on sufficient serviced plots of land to meet the needs for self-build and custom build, as identified 
   through the register.
53  See NPPF Annex2 definition of previously developed land5613.55 The Act provides a legal definition of self-build and custom housebuilding:
    ‘self-build and custom housebuilding means the building or completion by— (a)   
    individuals, (b) associations of individuals, or (c) persons working with or for individuals 
    or associations of individuals, of houses to be occupied as homes by those individuals’.
13.56 This definition will be used to determine whether or not a home can be categorised as a custom or 
   self-build house.
13.57 There is only a subtle difference between the two forms of development, with custom build being 
   where a person commissions a specialist developer to help to deliver their own home or where they 
   can make choices about the design, layout or style of the home; whilst self-build is where a person 
   is more directly involved in actually organising and constructing their home. 
13.58 There are a number of mechanisms for delivering custom and self-build homes, ranging from 
   people finding their own plot and building their own home, to developers providing serviced plots 
   for people to design and have their own home built, to sites being specifically acquired, marketed 
   and delivered by a builder or developer as custom build where the builder will construct the custom 
   homes for an individual to their chosen specification. 
13.59 In Fenland a high proportion of custom and self-build plots come forward each year through the 
   planning application process. The latest Authorities Monitoring Report54 (AMR) (2020/21) shows 
   that at the end of the base period 31 October 2019 to 30 October 2020 the Self Build and 
   Custom Build Register included 5 applicants and during that period a total of 65 self-build or 
   custom built dwellings were granted planning permission. This demonstrates that permissions 
   granted comfortably meet the demand for self-build and custom housing (as identified on the register).
13.60 In broad terms the Council will continue to support custom and self-build plots aimed at individuals 
   seeking permission for their plot if consistent with other policies in this plan. As set out in Policy LP1 
   the frontage policy might allow the opportunity for self-build plots to come forward.
13.61 If a landowner/developer is seeking permission for more than one plot and has no intention of 
   building any of the properties for themselves and instead proposes to build the properties for an 
   individual who can choose and customise the design to be built at a later date, then as part of 
   the outline planning application process a design code (sometimes also referred to as a plot 
   passport) is required.
  
13.62 This is intended to provide a simple way of helping private homebuilders understand what they 
   can build on a site. The design code will be a succinct summary of the design parameters for the 
   site and specific requirements for any given plot.
13.63 Sites of 100 dwellings or more will be expected to provide 5% of the dwellings as serviced plots 
   for self-build and custom build homes, to help meet the number of people on the custom and self-
   build register. Sites of this scale are likely to have a master plan developed, and can apply design 
   codes to ensure that any custom and self-build homes have clear parameters of what will be 
   considered acceptable within the development. 
 Policy LP13: Custom and Self Build 
 Part A: Individual plots
 Proposals for self and custom build dwellings consistent with the policies of this Local Plan, to be built  
 and occupied by the applicant or to be built on behalf of the applicant, will be supported in principle.
54 https://www.fenland.gov.uk/media/18154/Fenland-Monitoring-Report-2020-2021/pdf/Fenland_Monitoring_Re -
port_2020-2021.pdf?m=63779572525063000057 The Council will support custom and self-build dwellings on sites frontage development as set out
 in Policy LP1 Part C. 
 Part B: Multiple plots on a site
 When outline permission or permission in principle is sought for plots for custom and self-build homes  
 and where details of each plot will be secured via a custom/self-builder at a later date, a design code
 is required. This will include a plot passport that summarises the main marketing details and specifications 
 of each plot, including: 
   a) the site location;
   b) the plot size (m²);
   c) the ratio of built footprint to overall plot size;
   d) the indicative developable footprint;
   e) permissible building lines;
   f) side spacing requirements; and 
   g) building heights.
 Applications which satisfy the requirements of the plot passport will be supported in principle. Any   
 variations on the plot passport parameters in a detailed application will require full justification for the  
 changes to demonstrate that they are suitable for the plot if they are to be supported.
 Part C: Provision of plots on sites of 100 dwellings or more
 Proposals for 100 or more dwellings will provide serviced plots to deliver at least 5% of the total
 number of dwellings on the site as self-build or custom build homes. All plots set aside for self-build
 or custom build housing (secured via a legal agreement or planning condition) must include:
  a) legal access onto a public highway; 
  b) water, foul drainage, broadband connection, and electricity supply available at the plot boundary; 
  c) sufficient space in order to build without compromising neighbouring properties and their amenity 
   and the amenity of future occupiers; and
  d) an agreed design code or plot passport for the plots.
 If plots remain unsold after more than a year of a thorough and proportionate marketing exercise,  
 including making details available to people on the custom and self-build register, these plots may   
 be built out as conventional market housing subject to detailed permission being secured and the   
 Council is satisfied that through marketing exercise has been carried out. 
Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople
13.64 Throughout many parts of the country the Gypsy and Traveller community has experienced   
   difficulties in securing sufficient caravan sites to meet their needs. The Government’s overarching 
   aim is to ‘ensure fair and equal treatment for travellers, in a way that facilitates the traditional and 
   nomadic way of life of travellers while respecting the interests of the settled community’ (Planning 
   Policy for Traveller Sites (PPTS), August 2015).
13.65 The PPTS requires local planning authorities to make an assessment of accommodation needs and 
   for the purposes of planning policy, Annex 1 of the PPTS provides definitions of “Gypsies and 
   Travellers” and “Travelling Showpeople”. These are: 
    • Gypsies and Travellers:  “Persons of nomadic habit of life whatever their race 
     or origin,  including such persons who on grounds only of their own or their family’s
     or dependants’ educational or health needs or old age have ceased to travel   
     temporarily, but excluding members of an organised group of travelling showpeople 
     or circus people travelling together as such.”58    • Travelling Showpeople: “Members of a group organised for the purposes of holding 
     fairs, circuses or shows (whether or not travelling together as such). This includes 
     such persons who on the grounds of their own or their family’s or dependants’ 
     more localised pattern of trading, educational or health needs or old age have 
     ceased to travel temporarily, but excludes Gypsies and Travellers as defined above.”
13.66 In addition, section 124 of the Housing and Planning Act 2016 requires the periodic assessment  
   of accommodation needs in a local housing district to include all people residing or resorting to 
   the area in caravans or houseboats. The NPPF (paragraph 62) states that the housing needed for 
   different groups in the community should be assessed and reflected in planning policies. 
13.67 A Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Needs Assessment (GTANA)55 commenced in early 2020 
   covering Cambridgeshire, King’s Lynn and West Norfolk, Peterborough and West Suffolk. This 
   includes assessment of all Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople, Bargee Travellers, 
   and other Caravan and Houseboat dwellers.
13.68 However, the GTANA has been delayed due to the Covid 19 pandemic, which initially completely 
   prevented face to face interviews taking place, and continued to present challenges as the pandemic 
   extended. As of June 2022, no needs figures have yet emerged from the assessment. Once the 
   study is completed, should a need for accommodation be identified, this will inform the policy 
   below and will be used as evidence in the determination of planning applications.
13.69 The Covid 19 pandemic has meant that it has not been possible to fully assess the number of 
   pitches and plots required for the Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpeople community in the 
   district and thus not possible to allocate specific sites and plots in this Draft Local Plan. As a result, 
   Policy LP14 currently presents a criteria-based approach to be used to determine planning 
   applications. 
13.70 There are currently five Council owned sites including one transit site as well as a number of private 
   sites in the district.  Vacancies become available from time to time and the Council will expect 
   applicants for new pitches to explore the possibility of utilizing existing accommodation prior to 
   submitting a planning application for a new site. 
 Policy LP14: Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople
 Irrespective of whether a need is established through an accommodation assessment planning
 permission will be granted for the development of land, including in the countryside (i.e. outside urban   
 areas and village envelopes), as a Gypsy and Traveller site, or a Travelling Showpeople site, provided 
 each of the following criteria can be met:
  a) the intended occupant(s) can substantiate their credentials as a Gypsy and Traveller, or a
   Travelling Showperson in accordance with the definitions in the PPTS 2015;
  b) the Council cannot show a 5-year supply of deliverable Gypsy and Traveller sites or Travelling   
   Showpeople’s plots against its locally set targets (if any);
  c) there are no suitable vacancies on publicly owned or private sites to meet the needs of the applicant; 
  d) the site and its proposed use does not conflict with other local or national planning policy relating 
   to issues such as flood risk, contamination, landscape character and openness, protection of the   
   natural, built and historic environment or agricultural land quality;
  e) the site is located within reasonable travelling distance of a settlement which offers local services  
   and community facilities, including a primary school;
  f) the site can enable safe and convenient vehicle access to and from the public highway, and   
   adequate space for vehicle parking, turning and servicing;
55 Accommodation Needs Assessment of Gypsies, Travellers, Travelling Showmen and Bargee Travellers and other Caravan 
   and Houseboat Dwellers in the Cambridge Sub-region Housing Market Area59  g) safe and convenient pedestrian access to local services is available;
  h) the site is served, or capable of being served, by adequate mains water and sewerage connections 
   and should not place unacceptable pressure on local infrastructure; and
  i) the site can enable development and subsequent use which would not have any unacceptable   
   adverse impact on the amenities of occupiers of nearby properties or the appearance or character 
   of the area in which it would be situated (in accordance with Policy LP8 Amenity Provision).
 Proposals for caravan accommodation for Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople that do not 
 meet the PPTS definitions will be considered on a case by case basis. If a need is established through the 
 latest accommodation assessment, the NPPF , Government guidance, legislation and the above criteria  
 (c to i), will be taken into account in determining planning applications.
 In the countryside, any planning permission granted will restrict the construction of permanent built   
 structures to small amenity blocks associated with each pitch or plot, and where appropriate the Council 
 will ensure, by means of a condition or planning obligation, that the site shall be retained for use as a  
 Gypsy and Traveller site or a Travelling Showpeople site in perpetuity.
 Extant sites for Gypsy and Traveller pitches
 The following site for Gypsy & Traveller pitches had extant planning permission at time of preparing this 
 Local Plan*. The site is allocated for the purpose of providing clarity on the nature and scale of 
 development, and to secure the principle of development over the plan period.
 No specific policy requirement is set as it is expected that the site will be developed in accordance with  
 the planning permission.
Site Allocation SHELAA Pitches** Site name
LP14 40520 6 Land North West of Nemphlar Begdale Road, Elm 
 * Site with extant planning permission at 01 April 2021.
 ** Number of pitches reflects net commitment at 01 April 2021.
14. Employment
14.1 Fenland is a predominantly rural district with a strong agricultural economy based around the four 
  market towns of Wisbech, March, Whittlesey and Chatteris. The sub-regional centres of Cambridge, 
  Peterborough and Kings Lynn have a considerable influence on various parts of the district in terms of 
  employment opportunities. 
14.2 It is a key priority of the Council to deliver employment growth through attracting new businesses, jobs 
  and opportunities, whilst supporting existing businesses. The Council will achieve this through:
   • Working with external stakeholders, local businesses and the Combined Authority to attract 
    inward investment and establish new business opportunities.
   • Providing responsive business support to encourage business growth, job diversity, skills 
    development and increased grant application.
   • Promoting and developing the Council’s business premises at South Fens, The Boathouse and 
    Light Industrial Estates to encourage investment, business development, job creation and skills 
    diversification.
14.3 To deliver the Council’s objectives, and the CPCA’s aspiration to double GVA across the sub-region56, 
  this Local Plan sets an ambitious target for employment growth.
56 https://cambridgeshirepeterborough-ca.gov.uk/what-we-deliver/6014.4 Policy LP3 identifies a requirement for a minimum of 18,000 over the plan period which requires the 
  allocation of approximately at least 215 hectares of employment land. This requirement will be met  
  through the development of sites allocated by policies in Part D of this plan (and as illustrated on the 
  Policies Map (Part E)).
14.5 To achieve this economic growth, further investment in infrastructure is required. Details of how 
  investment will be secured are set out in Policy LP19 and specific infrastructure projects to meet growth 
  needs are identified by the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP). 
14.6 The Council considers ‘employment’ development to include proposals within classes B2, B8 and   
  E(g) of the Use Classes Order57. Other commercial, business and service uses such as those   
  within use classes E(a) to E(f) are predominantly ‘main town centre uses’, as defined by the NPPF , 
  and are principally addressed by Policy LP16 (Town Centres).
Established Employment Areas
14.7 Within the district there are many existing business parks, industrial estates and trading estates where 
  clusters of businesses are located providing centres of local employment. Each Established Employment 
  Area (EEA) has unique characteristics and many offer a range of different land uses. For example, 
  some EEAs offer workshops and units for small business enterprises close to existing settlements, whilst 
  other EEAs offer a diverse mix of land uses in addition to employment such as retail, leisure, community 
  facilities and even housing development. 
14.8 Notably, Wisbech and March’s town centres and Chatteris and Whittlesey’s district centres also 
  constitute EEAs as these provide both employment and main town centre uses (for example, offices 
  are both an employment generating use and a main town centre use). Policy LP15 – Employment and 
  Policy LP16 Town Centres are therefore especially relevant to proposals within the town centres and 
  district centres and to proposals for development of main town centre uses.
14.9 Table 5 identifies Fenland’s EEAs, with their locations indicated on the Policies Map (Part E).
Table 5: Established Employment Areas (EEAs)
Ref Employment Site Location Main characteristics
EEA1 Honeysome Industrial 
Estate
ChatterisIndustrial units in B2 and B8 use classes, with some 
units offering trade counter services.
EEA2 Isle of Ely Way Includes a range of uses including industrial units 
in B2 and B8 use classes, the South Fens Business 
Centre (E(g)(i) use class), and a supermarket (E(a) 
class).
EEA3 Curf Farm Business Park Industrial units in B2 and B8 use classes.
EEA4 Chatteris District Centre Chatteris’s town centre offers a range of Main Town 
Centre uses (as defined by NPPF), places of worship 
(F1 use), a range of Local Community Uses (F2), and 
dwelling-houses (C3 use).
EEA5 Beechwood Yard Gorefield Workshops and units in B2 and B8 use class.
EEA6 Coleseed Business 
Centre, MarchMarchOffers small and medium-size workshops and units 
(B2 use) and storage (B8 use).
EEA7 HMP Whitemoor Area Includes HMP Whitemoor prison (C2a) and industrial 
units (B2 and B8 use).
57 The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) (Amendment) (England) Regulations 2020 61EEA8 March Enterprise Park
MarchProvides a mix of uses including a range of industrial 
units (B2, B8), supermarket and comparison retail 
(E(a)), offices (E(g)), motor vehicle sales, scrapyard 
and waste recycling (SG uses). 
EEA9 March Town Centre March’s town centre offers a range of Main Town 
Centre uses (as defined by NPPF), places of worship, 
museum and library (F1 use), a range of Local 
Community Uses (F2), and dwelling-houses (C3 use).
EEA10 Lakeside Business Units Manea Workshops and units in B2 and B8 use class.
EEA11 Peterborough Road, 
Whittlesey
WhittleseyProvides a mix of uses including a range of industrial 
units (B2, B8), including McCain factory and 
brickworks), offices (E(g)), retail (E(a)), motor vehicle 
sales, waste disposal (SG).
EEA12 Station Road, Whittlesey Includes principally B2 and B8 industrial units and 
comparison retail (E(a)).
EEA13 Whittlesey District Centre Whittlesey’s town centre offers a range of Main Town 
Centre uses (as defined by NPPF), places of worship, 
museum and library (F1 use), a range of Local 
Community Uses (F2), and dwelling-houses (C3 use).
EEA14 Doddington Road 
Industrial Estate
WimblingtonWorkshops and units in B2 and B8 use class.
EEA15 Eastwood Industrial 
Estate Industrial units in B2 and B8 use class.
EEA16 Knowles Transport Industrial units in B8 use class.
EEA17 River Nene Frontage, 
Wisbech
WisbechIncludes B2 and B8 industrial units, comparison 
retail (E(a)), and offices (E(g)), notably the Boathouse 
Business Centre.
EEA18 South-west Wisbech 
employment areaIncludes B2 and B8 industrial units, motor vehicle 
sales (SG), waste disposal (SG), and comparison 
retail (E(a)), cinema (SG) and fast food restaurants 
(E(b)) at Wisbech Retail Park. 
EEA19 Wisbech Town Centre Wisbech’s town centre offers a range of Main Town 
Centre uses (as defined by NPPF), places of worship, 
museum and library (F1 use), a range of Local 
Community Uses (F2), and dwelling-houses (C3 use).
14.10 The EEAs are of great importance to Fenland’s economy and are critical to how the local economy 
   functions. This Local Plan seeks to retain employment uses within EEAs. This will avoid economic 
   harm from loss of employment floorspace to other uses, and provide certainty to encourage 
   businesses to invest in those areas with confidence.
14.11 The EEAs form an important part of the Local Plan’s strategy for economic growth. The EEAs are 
   typically built out and occupied. It is difficult to quantify the amount of additional employment 
   floorspace which EEAs could provide over the plan period. However, such locations are likely 
   suitable for:
    • Construction of additional new employment floorspace i.e. intensification of use of the site;
    • Change of use between employment use classes - which could increase or decrease job 
     density depending on the use classes involved;
    • Bringing vacant units back into employment use; and/or
    • Redevelopment or regeneration to ensure the site continues to meet business needs.62Existing employers and rural enterprise
14.12 In addition to EEAs, there are many other businesses and smaller areas of employment dispersed 
   across settlements and the countryside. These make an important contribution to the supply of 
   local employment opportunities, and are particularly vital in supporting smaller and rural 
   communities. Existing employment sites can often face pressures for re-development or change 
   to alternative uses. Policy LP15 therefore seeks to limit the loss of existing employment sites to other 
   non-employment generating uses.
14.13 To support the creation and expansion of local businesses, existing employment sites and areas are 
   afforded flexibility to grow by Policy LP15. Fenland’s strategy for employment growth recognises
   that growth for certain types of businesses will need to take place outside of designated EEAs, site 
   allocations and defined settlement boundaries. Some sectors, such as Agri-food, Horticulture and 
   Tourism, may justifiably require a countryside location and can be supported where it is demonstrated 
   that the scheme is sustainable and appropriate. The Development in the Countryside policy (LP18) 
   sets out specific requirements for proposals located outside of settlement boundaries.
Summary of employment growth strategy
14.14 The Local Plan provides a supply of available employment land in the right places to support a   
   growing economy and offers flexibility to support the growth of new and existing businesses. 
14.15 In the broadest terms, Policy LP15 aims to:
    • Direct employment growth principally to allocated employment land and EEAs;
    • Protect existing employment sites and premises;
    • Make it easier for key growth sectors and growing businesses to achieve their potential; 
    • Encourage new inward investment and expansion; 
    • Support the growth of small and micro businesses, encourage business start-ups and promote 
     an entrepreneurial culture; and 
    • Complement the hierarchy of town centres (see Policy LP16). 
 Policy LP15: Employment
 Fenland’s ambition is to attract new businesses, jobs and opportunities whilst supporting growth of   
 existing businesses.
 Proposals for new employment development should normally be located at sites allocated for employment 
 use, within Established Employment Areas (EEAs), or within settlement boundaries, unless the exceptions 
 for proposals which support the rural economy apply. 
 Site allocations are set out in Part D. Site allocations and EEAs are indicated on the Policies Map (Part E).
 Part A - Established Employment Areas (EEAs)
 Existing employment land and premises within EEAs should be retained for employment uses, defined as 
 uses falling within classes B and E(g) of the Use Classes Order. 
 Within EEAs, proposals which result in the change of use of employment land or buildings to non-  
 employment generating uses should not normally be permitted.
 EEAs offer potential for intensification and renewal through new employment development. Proposals  
 for employment development including B2, B8 and E(g) Use Classes within or adjoining an EEA will
 be supported where the proposal demonstrates there is or will be sufficient capacity in the local and   
 strategic highway network to accommodate the proposal. 
 63 Proposed extensions to EEAs through the development of adjoining land (including land outside settlement 
 boundaries) will be supported where the proposal: 
  a) Is proportionate in scale to the existing EEA; and
  b) Provides a clear, defined boundary which maintains or enhances local character and the EEA’s   
   landscape setting.
 Part B - Location of Office Developments 
 The NPPF defines offices (E(g)(i) use class) as a main town centre use. In identifying locations for office  
 development, proposals should apply the sequential approach set out in Policy LP16 (Town Centres)   
 which prioritises sites in town centres, unless exceptions to support the rural economy apply. In the   
 context of office developments, the sequential test may also give preference to sites within EEAs.
 Proposals for other commercial, business and service developments (i.e. proposals falling within use   
 classes E(a) to E(f)) must apply the sequential approach against the hierarchy of town centres, as set out 
 in Policy LP16, unless it is demonstrated that the proposal is ancillary to existing uses on the site.
 
 Part C - Expansion of existing businesses 
 The expansion of sites occupied by existing businesses, located within settlement boundaries, will normally 
 be supported.
 Proposals for the expansion of existing businesses located outside of the defined settlement boundaries   
 or EEAs will be supported where the requirements of Policy LP18 Part F: Rural Economy are met. 
 Part D - Limiting the loss of employment sites and buildings to non-employment uses
 Outside of EEAs, proposals for changes of use or redevelopment resulting in the loss of existing   
 employment sites in B2 or B8 use classes will be permitted where the proposal will not compromise the   
 operation of nearby uses and:
  a) The site has been marketed without successful conclusion for a period of not less than six months; or
  b) The site is unsuitable for alternative employment use due to site constraints; or
  c) The proposal would enhance amenity by alleviating existing issues associated with the current use; or 
  d) The proposal would support the delivery of wider sustainability or regeneration objectives. 
 Within EEAs or at allocated employment sites, proposals for the development of any of the following 
 will be subject to a planning condition to limit their ability to change use to other Class E uses without  
 the need for planning permission:
  • Offices; or 
  • Research or Development; or
  • Industrial processes which can be carried out in a residential area without harm to amenity.
15. Town Centres  
15.1 Town centres are at the heart of communities, providing a focus for retail and other main town centre 
  uses, including leisure, commercial, office, cultural and community facilities. It is national policy to 
  enhance vitality and viability of town centres. 
15.2 In Fenland the main retail offer comes from the four market towns of Wisbech, March, Whittlesey 
  and Chatteris.  However, the proximity of the larger settlements of Cambridge, Peterborough, King’s  
  Lynn and Huntingdon means there is a high-level spending in shops outside the district, as well 
  as increased online shopping which are all impacting on the success of the high streets: this has been
  exacerbated by the Covid-19 pandemic. As such many centres need to reinvent themselves to compete 
  and thrive, with town centres focusing more as destinations and leisure uses not just for retail. 
15.3 In September 2020 Government introduced changes to the Use Classes Order which brought together 
  a range of “Commercial, Business and Service” uses under one Use Class (E).  The new E Use Class 
  is broadly compatible with the NPPF definition of Main Town Centre Uses, though not precisely. 6415.4 The aim of the new E Use Class is to allow units in town centres to change to other uses that are   
  suitable in town centres without the need for planning permission.  With the exception of isolated 
  village shops, which are exempt from this ability to change use without first seeking planning   
  permission, this means that town centres should no longer be viewed in just ‘retail terms’.  That said, 
  in order to implement wider policies in the NPPF (such as the sequential test for retail proposals), it 
  remains necessary for the Local Plan (and associated Policies Map) to identify ‘Primary Shopping   
  Areas’ (PSA).  
15.5 The Council is committed to strengthening the role of market towns and increasing the viability and  
  vitality of such centres by providing flexibility and a wide range of facilities and services in a high 
  quality environment. The Council therefore considers it is essential that its town centres do not worsen 
  further and that the existing offer is maintained and improved. The four market towns hold regular
   markets and the Council will support and enhance the markets.
15.6 As part of the Government’s ‘Future High Street Fund’ March town centre has been awarded significant 
  funding towards public realm improvements, activating the use of redundant buildings and floor 
  space, and the regeneration of brownfield sites.
15.7 For Wisbech a master plan is being prepared to support the regeneration and renewal of the town 
  centre. This will help support a Levelling Up Fund (LUF) bid to Government. It is proposed that the 
  Wisbech Town Centre Master Plan will be integrated into the Proposed Submission version of the Local 
  Plan. 
15.8 Policies LP35 (Regeneration of Wisbech) and LP38 (March Town Centre) in Part D of this Plan provide 
  further policy requirements for the wider regeneration of the Town Centres. 
15.9 Policy LP16 sets the framework for how planning applications for retail and other main town centres 
  uses will be assessed to make sure that they are appropriate in scale and location. 
Hierarchy of Town Centres
15.10 The NPPF requires local plans to define a network and hierarchy of centres. The Fenland
   Hierarchy Study (May 2022) identifies March and Wisbech at the top of the hierarchy due to the 
   wider range of services and facilities and as they are the principal comparison goods centres within 
   the district. The report notes that the towns of Chatteris and Whittlesey more closely meet the 
   definition of the smaller ‘District Centre’. The report also identifies a number of local centres, 
   serving the day-to-day needs of their local communities. The Policies Map identifies these centres.
15.11 Policy LP15 identifies the Town Centres and District Centres of Wisbech, March, Chatteris and 
   Whittlesey as EEAs. 
Table 6: Hierarchy of Centres
1Town Centres March and Wisbech Centres providing a range of facilities and 
services for a wider catchment area. 
2District Centres Chatteris and Whittlesey  Centres serving particular areas within the 
main settlements, typically including a range 
of services, restaurants, library and usually at 
least one supermarket.
3Local and Village 
Centres Centres that serve their locality, typically 
including a convenience store and a limited 
range of other local shops and services such as 
a post office, newsagent, hot food takeaway.65Sequential Test 
15.12 Policy LP16 sets out the sequential approach to the location of retail development and other main 
   town centre uses based on the above hierarchy of centres.
15.13 Where development proposals are made for town centre uses outside of the defined centres and 
   which are not in accordance with an up-to-date Local Plan a sequential test should be applied, 
   against the criteria in the NPPF , with town centres coming first, then edge of centre sites, and only 
   if suitable sites are not available (or are not expected to become available) in these locations 
   should out of centre sites be considered.  
15.14 The meaning of ‘edge-of-centre’ is a location that is well connected to and within easy walking 
   distance (i.e. up to 300 metres) of the town centre boundary. In determining ‘easy walking distance’, 
   the Council will take into account barriers to pedestrian movement, such as the need to cross 
   major roads or car parks, the attractiveness and perceived safety of the route and the strength of  
   attraction and size of the centre.
15.15 In accordance with Policy LP15 (Employment) office developments (Use Class E (g)) will also be 
   supported in defined EEA and allocated employment sites as shown on the Policies Map, without
    the need for a sequential test. 
Impact Assessment 
15.16 National policy sets a threshold of 2,500 sq m as a threshold for when an Impact Assessment is  
   required to support a planning application for a main town centre use. National policy allows for 
   Local Plans to set their own local threshold for impact assessment. 
15.17 The four market towns are generally characterised by relatively small units. With few shops over  
   1,000 sq m located within the town centres. Therefore, any application up to 2,500 sq m outside 
   a town centre is very likely to result in a negative impact on the town centre. The adopted Local 
   Plan (2014) sets a threshold of 500 sq m which is the equivalent to the size of a small discount style 
   supermarket on the basis that a larger store would result in harm to the high street. Therefore, 
   Policy LP16 includes a threshold of 500sqm. 
Rural Shops
15.18 The creation of a new or extension to an existing village shop, will be supported where it is in   
   connection with the planned growth of the village or where it would help to achieve a more   
   sustainable rural community. This will be subject to amenity and environmental considerations, and 
   the requirement that the scale of any additional retail provision should be of an appropriate size 
   and scale for the size of the village and its catchment.
15.19 Where a proposal will result in the loss of a shop of under 280sqm selling essential goods, which 
   is located farther than 1km from a similar shop, defined as a local community use under F2 Use 
   Class, permission will not normally be granted unless suitable alternative provision of a similar 
   shop is included within the proposal or where evidence is provided clearly demonstrating that the 
   shop has been appropriately marketed for a continuous period of 12 months or more without 
   successful conclusion on terms that reflect the lawful use and condition of the premises: this 
   evidence will be considered in the context of local market conditions and the state of the wider 
   national economy.66 Policy LP16: Town Centres
  
 This policy applies to main town centre use types as defined in the NPPF .
 Part A- Vision for Town Centre Development and Regeneration
 Town centre development and regeneration will be encouraged to help maintain and enhance the   
 vitality and viability of centres, with a requirement that the nature and scale of any development should  
 be appropriate to the role and function of the centre in which it would be situated. The Council will: 
  • embrace a strong ‘town centre first’ message when considering the most appropriate locations for 
   retail and leisure development in the towns; 
  • support, and regenerate where necessary, existing Town, District and Local Centres to ensure they  
   continue to cater for the needs of communities that they serve. 
 Part B: Hierarchy of Town Centres
 The following hierarchy will be used to guide investment and other activity to improve the vitality and  
 viability of the identified centres, and in planning applications for retail and other town centre uses (as  
 defined in the NPPF):
  1. Town Centres - Wisbech and March
  2. District Centres - Chatteris and Whittlesey 
  3. Local and Village Centres - Based on Settlement Hierarchy 
 The boundary of the Town Centres, District Centres, Local Centres and the Primary Shopping Areas (PSA) 
 are defined on the Policies Map. (For Local Centres the PSA is the same as the centre boundary as shown 
 on the Policies Map). 
 Part C: Primary Shopping Area
 Within the PSA, development proposals for town centre uses as defined in the NPPF should, wherever  
 possible, maintain an active frontage. Where an active frontage would not be appropriate or otherwise  
 cannot be achieved, care should be taken to ensure that the frontage provides visual interest and would 
 not be to the detriment of the character of the centre or to maintaining or enhancing footfall in the PSA. 
 Proposals that would result in lengthy ‘dead frontages’ within a PSA will not normally be acceptable.
 Part D: Out of Centre Development  
 Development proposals for main town centre uses in out-of-centre and edge-of-centre locations will be 
 required to demonstrate their suitability through a sequential site test in line with the NPPF . 
 In addition, all proposals for main town centre uses outside of town centres (and designated employment 
 areas for office development (Use Class E (g)) which would result in an increase of over 500 sq m will  
 need to be accompanied by an impact assessment, to include a robust assessment of impact on nearby 
 centres. Proposals which fail to satisfy the sequential test or are likely to lead to significant adverse   
 impacts will not be permitted. 
 Part E: Rural Shops
 Where a proposal will result in the loss of a shop of under 280 sq m selling essential goods, including  
 food, and is located farther than 1km from a similar shop, defined as a local community use under   
 F2 Use Class, permission will not normally be granted unless a suitable alternative provision of a similar 
 shop is included within the proposal or where evidence is provided clearly demonstrating that the shop
 has been appropriately marketed for a continuous period of 12 months or more without successful   
 conclusion on terms that reflect the lawful use and condition of the premises. This evidence will be   
 considered in the context of local market conditions and the state of the wider national economy.6716. Culture, Leisure, Tourism and Community Facilities 
16.1 A priority of the Fenland Leisure Strategy (2017)58 is to ‘provide an effcient, sustainable leisure 
  centre service, focused on getting more people, more active, more often’.
16.2 The district has four leisure centres located in the four market towns. March, Wisbech and Whittlesey 
  include swimming pools. Each market town includes library, with a variety of cultural events held   
  throughout the year.  
16.3 New cultural, tourist and visitor attractions will therefore be encouraged and supported in appropriate 
  locations, whilst proposals that would adversely affect an existing cultural, tourist or visitor attraction 
  will be resisted.    
16.4 New development will require the provision of additional community facilities. The Infrastructure 
  Delivery Plan identifies requirements for additional community facilities to meet needs arising from 
  Local Plan growth.
 Policy LP17: Culture, Leisure, Tourism and Community Facilities
 
 The Council will support the development of new cultural, leisure, tourism and community facilities   
 that help improve the range and quality of facilities for local communities and makes the most of
 existing facilities. 
 In exceptional circumstances when there is no appropriate town centre site, due to the nature and
 scale of the proposed development, other locations for cultural, leisure and tourism facilities will be   
 considered in accordance with a sequential approach to site selection outlined in Policy LP16.
 Community Facilities
 All development proposals should recognise that community facilities such as libraries, public houses,  
 places of worship and community halls, or any registered asset of community value, are an integral   
 component in achieving well integrated development.
 Proposals for new community facilities will be supported in principle, and should:
  • Prioritise and promote access by walking, cycling and public transport. Community facilities may  
   have a local or wider catchment area: access should be considered proportionately relative to
   their purpose, scale and catchment area;
  • Be accessible for all members of society;
  • Where applicable, be operated without detriment to local residents, this especially applies to   
   facilities which are open in the evening, such as leisure and recreation facilities.
 Loss of Culture, Leisure, Tourism and Community Facilities
 The loss, via redevelopment, of an existing culture, leisure, tourism or community facility will only be   
 permitted if it is demonstrated that:
  • The facility is demonstrably no longer fit for purpose and the site is not viable to be redeveloped  
   for a new community facility; or
  • The service provided by the facility is met by alternative provision that exists within reasonable   
   proximity: what is deemed as reasonable proximity will depend on the nature of the facility and
   its associated catchment area; or
  • The proposal includes the provision of a new facility of a similar nature and of a similar or greater 
   size in a suitable on or off-site location.
58 https://www.fenland.gov.uk/media/16522/Leisure-Strategy/pdf/Leisure_Strategy.pdf?m=637164905506270000 6817. Development in the Countryside 
17.1 Areas outside the defined settlement boundaries are considered as being in the countryside for the  
  purpose of policies in the Local Plan. As set out in Policy LP1 (Settlement Hierarchy) development   
  will be restricted to that which is demonstrably essential to the effective operation of local agriculture, 
  horticulture, forestry, outdoor recreation and access to natural greenspace, transport or utility services. 
  Or in accordance with Policy LP1 Part C – Frontage Development.
17.2 As the majority of the district is rural in character with a strong agricultural economy, there may be  
  occasions where development in the countryside is required to support the rural economy. Policy LP18 
  sets the overarching policy relating to development in the countryside and in what circumstances this 
  would be supported. 
17.3 Policy LP18 recognises the potential for conversion of redundant rural buildings in the open countryside 
  to dwellings. Given that new housing in the countryside is subject to strict control set by the NPPF , 
  applications for residential conversions will be examined with particular care and will only be 
  acceptable where all the criteria of Part A of Policy LP18 can be met and the development complies 
  with all other relevant policies of the Local Plan.
17.4 The replacement of an original dwelling with a new dwelling on a one-for-one basis may be acceptable 
  in certain circumstances and Part B of Policy LP18 sets out the criteria to be applied. Where a building 
  is of historic or traditional nature or is otherwise worthy of retention, redevelopment will be resisted 
  and proposals for restoration and renovation will be encouraged.
17.5 Policy LP1 (Settlement Hierarchy) places a restriction on development in the countryside and new 
  isolated homes in the countryside will generally be avoided, although an exception may be justified 
  when required to enable agricultural, forestry and certain other full-time workers to live at, or in the 
  immediate vicinity of, their place of work. Or in accordance with Policy LP1 Part C – Frontage 
  Development. 
17.6 It will often be as convenient and more sustainable for such workers to live in one of the Market Towns 
  or other nearby towns or villages, or suitable existing dwellings, so avoiding new and potentially 
  intrusive development in the countryside. It is recognised however that there will be some cases where 
  the nature and demands of the work concerned make it essential for one or more people engaged in 
  the enterprise to live at, or very close to, the site of their work. This requirement will depend on the 
  needs of the enterprise concerned and not on the personal preferences or circumstances of any
  individuals involved.
17.7 Where permission is being sought for a new dwelling in the countryside, the Council will require the 
  applicant to supply sufficient information to demonstrate that both the functional and financial tests
  are satisfied as set out in Policy LP18 Part D. The functional test is necessary to establish whether it is 
  essential for the proper functioning of the enterprise for one or more workers to be readily available
  at most times. In applying this test, the Council will consider matters such as:
   • the scale and nature of the enterprise
   • the potential for things to go wrong or need attention unexpectedly or at short notice
   • the frequency of such events
   • the ability for a person living off the site to deal with such events
   • the period of time over which events occur.
17.8 If a functional need is established, the Council will then consider the number of workers needed to 
  meet it, and the dwelling should be of a size commensurate with the established functional requirement 
  and economic viability of the enterprise. It is the requirements of the enterprise, rather than those of 
  the owner or occupier, that are relevant in determining the size of the dwelling that is appropriate.6917.9  Any temporary planning permission in association with a proposed or newly established enterprise 
   will only be granted at a location which would be suitable for a permanent occupational dwelling, 
   and will always be subject to a condition requiring the removal of the caravan, mobile home or 
   structure and the reinstatement of the land to its original condition at the end of the temporary 
   period. T he Council will not normally grant successive extensions to a temporary permission over 
   a period of more than three years.
17.10 Whenever permission is granted under Policy LP18, suitable conditions will be attached to restrict 
   occupancy of the dwelling and, if necessary, to remove certain permitted development rights
   relating to residential extensions. To prevent abuse of the process, applications to remove a 
   restrictive occupancy condition will need to include considerable evidence about previous 
   occupancy for this to be justified.
17.11 A further exception to isolated development in the countryside, as set out in National Policy would 
   be if the design of the proposed dwellings is ‘of exceptional quality and is truly outstanding or 
   innovative, reflecting the highest standards in design and architecture’59. This would help to raise 
   design standards in the district. 
17.12 The re-use of buildings in the countryside for employment purposes can play an important role 
   in meeting the need for employment in rural areas. It can provide jobs, give renewed use to vacant 
   buildings and reduce the demand for new buildings in the countryside. The re-use of buildings 
   for tourist accommodation and attractions is generally supported because of the contribution to 
   rural diversification and the wider economic benefits for the district.
17.13 Successful rural enterprises located in the open countryside, where new development is closely 
   controlled, may need to expand on their current site. This can protect existing jobs and create 
   additional employment in rural areas. However, such development needs to be highly sensitive to 
   its surroundings. Part F of Policy LP18 allows such expansion but ensures that it will be carried out 
   in a way which does not cause significant harm to the countryside or amenity.
17.14 In order to maximise opportunities for rural working it is also necessary to retain land which 
   provides existing employment. This will be achieved by preventing use for other purposes unless 
   continued employment use is not viable or would be unsuitable for other planning reasons.
17.15 Tourism in rural areas would need to be limited to avoid undue harm to the open nature of the 
   countryside. Where accessibility is poor, proposals would need to be limited to small-scale 
   development such as conversion of existing rural building for tourism/leisure use.
17.16 In all cases where tourism, leisure or a cultural facility is proposed in the open countryside and 
   requires the construction of a new building, the Council will require a robust business plan, 
   appropriate to the proposed scheme. The business plan must demonstrate the demand and viability 
   of the scheme on an on-going basis. This requirement will help prevent development being 
   permitted in the countryside, which quickly fails as a business and leads to pressure on the Council 
   to permit the conversion of the failed development to another use (e.g. conversion to residential)  
   which the Council would not have permitted on that site in the first instance.
17.17 Fenland is part of one of the most productive agricultural areas in the UK, and generates a 
   significant proportion of the national food production. The Agricultural Land Classification (ALC)  
   mapping show that almost the whole of the district comprises high grade agricultural land and 
   much of this is Grade 1, 2 and 3a (the best and most versatile). Therefore, the protection of the
   best and most versatile land is key to ensure that food production is not negatively impacted by 
   development. Any loss of this asset even on an incremental basis is a significant environmental issue.
59 NPPF paragraph 80 (e)7017.18 Development of the best and most versatile agricultural land will only be supported where it can
   be demonstrated that the need for the development, its benefits and/or sustainability considerations 
   outweigh the need to protect such land taking into account the economic and other benefits of the 
   best and most versatile agricultural land.
17.19 As set out in Part H of Policy LP18, proposals for development on unallocated sites which would 
   individually or cumulatively result in a significant loss (one hectare or more) of best and most 
   versatile agricultural land will also need to demonstrate that there are no other suitable alternative 
   sites which could accommodate either all or part of the development on either previously developed 
   land, or land within the built up area of existing adjacent or nearby settlements, or on poorer 
   quality agricultural land. All proposals over one hectare which would have the potential to involve 
   the loss of best and most versatile agricultural land will be expected to be accompanied by an 
   agricultural land classification statement.
 Policy LP18: Development in the Countryside
 Part A: Re-use and conversion of non-residential buildings for residential use in the  
  countryside:
 Where a change of use proposal to residential use requires permission, and where the site is located in  
 the countryside, then the proposal will be supported provided that the following criteria are met:
  a. the use of the building has ceased; and
  b. where the use of the building was previously for agricultural purposes, it was not constructed within 
   10 years preceding the proposal being submitted; and
  c. the proposal results in no more than five residential units; and
  d. the building is not in such a state of dereliction or disrepair that significant reconstruction requiring 
   planning permission would be required; and
  e. there are no fundamental constraints to deliver the site, or significant harm arising.
 Part B: Replacement of a permanent existing dwelling in the countryside:
 Planning permission for the replacement of an existing dwelling in the countryside with a new dwelling  
 will be supported if:
  f. the residential use of the original dwelling has not been abandoned; and
  g. the original dwelling is not of any architectural or historic merit and it is not valuable to the   
   character of the settlement or wider landscape; and 
  h. the original dwelling is a permanent structure, not a temporary or mobile structure.
 Provided that criteria d to f can be met, any replacement dwelling should be:
  i. of an appropriate scale to the plot and its setting in the landscape; and
  j. of a design appropriate to its setting; and
  k. located on the site of the original dwelling, unless an alternative suitable position exists within the 
   existing residential curtilage, in which case the existing dwelling will be required to be completely   
   removed immediately. 
 Proposals for large prestige homes will be encouraged where they meet the above criteria. 
 Part C: Mobile homes within the countryside:
 Applications for temporary and mobile homes will be considered in the same way as applications for  
 permanent dwellings. 
 Part D: New dwellings in the countryside (relating to agricultural workers, forestry   
 and other enterprises where a countryside location is essential):
 Planning permission for a permanent dwelling in the countryside to enable an agricultural worker to live 
 at, or in the immediate vicinity of, their place of work will only be granted to support existing agricultural 
 activities on a well-established agricultural unit, provided that:71  l. there is a clearly established existing functional need (i.e. it is essential for the proper functioning  
   of the enterprise for one or more workers to be on the site for all or most of the time); and
  m. the need relates to a full-time worker, or one who is primarily employed in agriculture and does not 
   relate to a part-time requirement; and
  n. the unit and the agricultural activity concerned has been established for at least three years, has 
   been profitable for at least one of them and is currently financially sound with a clear prospect of 
   remaining so; and
  o. the functional need cannot be fulfilled by an existing dwelling, or the conversion of an existing 
   building in the area, or any other existing accommodation in the area which is suitable and   
   available for occupation by the worker concerned.
 These criteria will be applied on a similar basis to proposals for new forestry dwellings and to dwellings  
 which are needed in association with other enterprises where a countryside location is an essential   
 requirement. In the case of the latter, a pre-requisite for any dwelling is that the enterprise itself must have 
 planning permission.
 Planning permission will not be granted for a new permanent dwelling in association with a proposed or 
 newly established enterprise in the countryside. In such cases, if a functional need is demonstrated, there 
 is clear evidence of a firm intention and ability to develop the enterprise and there is clear evidence that 
 the enterprise has been planned on a sound financial basis, permission may be granted on a temporary 
 basis for no more than three years for a caravan, mobile home or wooden structure which can easily 
 be dismantled. After the three year temporary permission has expired, permission will only be granted for 
 a permanent dwelling if the above criteria have been met. A further temporary period will not be permitted.
 Any such development will be subject to a restrictive occupancy condition.
 Part E: New dwellings of exceptional design quality:
  In accordance with the NPPF the Council will support new dwellings in the countryside that are of truly  
 outstanding or innovative design that reflect the highest standards in architecture.  
 Part F: The Rural Economy:
 In the countryside, development involving the expansion of an existing employment use on its current site 
 or the conversion of an existing agricultural building (particularly if it is adjacent to or closely related to
 a village) will be acceptable for employment uses within Use Classes B1 to B8 or tourism and leisure  
 related uses, provided that all of criteria (p) to (v) below are met:
  p. it would be consistent in scale with its rural location, without unacceptable environmental
   impacts; and
  q. it would not adversely affect existing local community services and facilities; and
  r. it would be compatible with, or would enhance, the character of the village or the landscape in  
   which it would be situated; and
  s. it would not cause undue harm to the open nature of the countryside or any site designated for
   its natural or heritage qualities; and
  t. it would be easily accessible, preferably by public transport; and
  u. if it would involve the construction of a new building in the open countryside, the development is  
   supported by a robust business plan that demonstrates:
     (i) the demand for the development and
    (ii) that the facilities to be provided would constitute a viable business proposition on a long-  
     term basis; and
  v. in the case of a conversion, the building is not in such a state of dereliction or disrepair that   
   significant reconstruction would be required.72 Part G: Agricultural diversification:
 Proposals involving farm-based diversification will be permitted, provided that the proposal will support  
 the applicable farm enterprises and providing that the development is:
  w. in an appropriate location for the proposed use;
  x. of a scale appropriate to its location; and
  y. of a scale appropriate to the business need
 Part H: Protecting the best and most versatile agricultural land:
 Proposals should protect the best and most versatile agricultural land so as to protect opportunities for   
 food production and the continuance of the agricultural economy. With the exception of allocated sites, 
 development affecting the best and most versatile agricultural land will only be permitted if:
  z.  there is insufficient lower grade land available at that settlement (unless development of such lower 
    grade land would be inconsistent with other sustainability considerations); and
  aa. the impacts of the proposal upon ongoing agricultural operations have been minimised through 
    the use of appropriate design solutions; and
  ab. where feasible, once any development which is permitted has ceased its useful life, the land 
    will be restored to its former use, and will be of at least equal quality to that which existed prior
    to the development taking place (this requirement will be secured by planning condition where  
    appropriate).
18. Transport and Infrastructure
Strategic Infrastructure 
18.1 Policy LP19 seeks to ensure that appropriate infrastructure is provided to support new development  
  in Fenland, and has been informed by the Council’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) and discussions 
  with key infrastructure providers.
Infrastructure Delivery Plan
18.2 New development will generate a need for new infrastructure, services and facilities to be delivered. 
  It is vital that such infrastructure requirements are planned for and provided alongside new 
  developments. This Local Plan is accompanied by an IDP . The IDP assesses the availability and capacity 
  of existing local infrastructure through engagement with service providers and by drawing on the 
  findings of other technical studies and publicly available data. The IDP identifies specific infrastructure 
  projects which are necessary to meet needs arising from Local Plan growth. In addition, site-specific 
  infrastructure requirements are identified in site allocations policies in Part D.
18.3 The IDP will be reviewed and updated periodically to ensure it continues to accurately reflects the 
  district’s infrastructure needs, which will likely change over the course of the plan period.
18.4  New infrastructure and improvements to existing infrastructure will be delivered and funded by a 
  range of different public bodies such as Fenland District Council, Cambridgeshire County Council, 
  the Combined Authority, NHS, or Environment Agency, and private companies such as energy and 
  water suppliers. Development proposals will play a critically important role in funding and delivering 
  infrastructure required to meet the needs of the development, and will typically be secured through 
  planning obligations. The IDP identifies the funding sources and delivery mechanisms for each 
  infrastructure project, thereby providing clarity on the contributions expected from new development. 
Transport Infrastructure
18.5  As the Strategic Transport Authority for Cambridgeshire the CPCA is responsible for preparing the 
  Local Transport Plan60(LTP) which was published in January 2020. The LTP is currently being updated  
  and it’s replacement The Local Transport and Conectivity Plan (LTCP) is due to be published in Autumn 
  2022.
60 https://cambridgeshirepeterborough-ca.gov.uk/what-we-deliver/transport/local-transport-plan/ 7318.6  The LTP’s vision is to “deliver a world-class transport network for Cambridgeshire and Peterborough 
   that supports sustainable growth and opportunity for all”. The LTP supports the CPCA’s strategic  
   ambition to become the UK’s capital of innovation and productivity, doubling the size of its 
   economy. Improvements to the transport network are critical to achieving this ambition. The LTP 
   identifies that the transport network must provide access to a wide range of sites and amenities, all 
   of which are important for effective social functioning. It must connect current housing and 
   employment sites and provide additional capacity for the transport network to accommodate extra 
   journeys from more households and to more jobs.
18.7  This Local Plan is aligned with the LTP’s vision. The Infrastructure Delivery Plan which accompanies 
   this Local Plan incorporates the strategic and local transport infrastructure projects identified by the
   LTP . This Local Plan has been informed by the Local Plan Transport Assessment, which assessed the 
   likely effects of growth in the context of the existing transport network and strategic infrastructure 
   projects identified by the LTP .
Community Infrastructure
18.8  New development will also increase demand for other forms of infrastructure such as schools, 
   health services, sports and leisure facilities, open spaces, flood defences, etc. over the course of 
   the plan period. New development will place additional pressures on existing infrastructure - but 
   can also have positive effects through helping sustain existing facilities by providing additional 
   footfall, particularly in rural communities. Through the spatial strategy and settlement hierarchy, 
   this Local Plan directs growth to those settlements best served by existing infrastructure, taking into 
   account evidence of existing available infrastructure capacity.
Development Viability
18.9  Fenland District Council commissioned a viability assessment to inform the preparation of this 
   Local Plan. The viability assessment concluded that due to poor development viability in the area, 
   new development has limited scope to bear contributions toward the provision of infrastructure. 
18.10  The viability assessment explored the potential to introduce a Community Infrastructure Levy (also  
   known as “CIL ”) for the purpose of funding strategic infrastructure from new development. However, 
   the assessment concluded that new development in Fenland cannot support a CIL.
18.11 Developer contributions, secured through planning obligations in section 106 agreements, will 
   continue to make an important contribution to the provision of new infrastructure to meet needs 
   arising from growth. However, in negotiating such planning obligations the Council and service 
   providers must be mindful of the area’s low development viability. If the infrastructure ‘ask’ is too 
   high, new development will be stifled.
 
18.12 To ensure the area’s growth needs are met and are supported by necessary infrastructure will 
   therefore require investment from other sources, such as from public sector bodies, and will require 
   coordination between many different stakeholders and service providers. Opportunities for funding 
   and delivery are explored in the IDP .
18.13 Policy LP18 sets out principles for the provision of infrastructure, including the delivery of strategic 
   infrastructure projects identified by the IDP , and the application of developer contributions.
18.14 Site-specific requirements for the development of site allocations are set out in the relevant sites 
   policies in Part D.  74 Policy LP19: Strategic Infrastructure
 All new development should be supported by, and have good access to, all necessary infrastructure.   
 Planning permission will only be granted if it can be demonstrated that there is, or will be, sufficient   
 infrastructure capacity to support and meet all the necessary requirements arising from the proposed   
 development. Development proposals must consider all of the infrastructure implications of a scheme;  
 not just those on the site or its immediate vicinity.
 
 Developer Contributions
 Where new development creates a need for additional infrastructure, it will be expected to contribute  
 towards its delivery. This could include through direct provision or financial contributions towards the  
 delivery of local and strategic infrastructure, and may be provided alone or in combination with other  
 new developments. Consideration must be given to the likely timing of infrastructure provision. As such, 
 development may need to be phased either spatially or in time to ensure the provision of infrastructure 
 in a timely manner. 
 Conditions or planning obligations are likely to be required for many proposals to secure the provision  
 and phasing of infrastructure. 
 In negotiating such conditions and obligations, the Council will be mindful of viability constraints. 
 Decisions on securing conditions and obligations toward strategic infrastructure will reflect the 
 ‘prioritisation’ categories set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP). The IDP will be kept under 
 review to ensure an accurate schedule of infrastructure needs over the plan period is maintained.
 Providing Infrastructure
 Where planning permission is sought to deliver infrastructure, then such development will be supported  
 in principle, especially if it is demonstrated that such infrastructure is needed to support growth, quality  
 of life or economic prosperity in the district. Such infrastructure will include, but is not limited to transport, 
 telecommunications, community facilities, energy and water supply. Provision of new and improved 
 infrastructure within the district should be informed by the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
Accessibility and Transport 
18.15 Due to Fenland’s rural and dispersed character, residents frequently need to travel to access day- 
   to-day services and employment. For example, around half of Fenland’s working population   
   commute out of the district to access work61. 
18.16 This high need for travel is aggravated by Fenland’s poor accessibility, which in turn constrains   
   the local economy and hinders development. The district’s road network primarily consists of  
   rural, single-carriageway A-roads, many of which suffer from slow average journey times, particularly 
   associated with slower agricultural traffic, and with a poor safety record. Fenland is not linked to 
   the wider national highway network by dual carriageway. Several key junctions act as ‘pinch points’ 
   on the network and suffer from severe peak-time traffic congestion, which hinder potential growth. 
   Reflecting the low-lying Fenland landscape, some routes suffer from regular flooding, or require  
   specific maintenance due to being constructed on peat soils. 
18.17 For the majority of the district walking and cycling infrastructure is limited or entirely absent,   
   which means that walking and cycling are often unattractive. Reliance on private motor vehicles  
   increases congestion, harms air quality and health, and generates carbon emissions. 
18.18 The Council adopted the ‘Fenland Cycling, Walking and Mobility Improvement Strategy (Version  
   1)’ in September 2021 and is currently preparing Version 2 of the document. The aim of this   
   strategy is to develop a core network of routes that can be improved in the short and medium   
61 (Local Economic Assessment Technical Document 2013).75   term and built upon in the future. To achieve this, key walking and cycling routes linking densely 
   populated residential areas with safe, direct walking/cycling routes to places of education and   
   employment will be identified, along with routes to rail or bus stations for longer distance   
   multimodal journeys. 
18.19 Fenland has three railway stations (March, Manea and Whittlesey) which provide good access to  
   a large number of destinations. Each station saw significant growth in the 10 years prior to the 
   COVID-19 pandemic. All three stations serve a range of destinations directly and with one change 
   of train it is possible to reach destinations across England and into Scotland. March benefits from 
   an hourly service between Stansted Airport, Cambridge, Peterborough and Birmingham. March, 
   Manea and Whittlesey stations are served by a two-hourly service to Peterborough and Ipswich. 
   There are some additional services between Manea and Cambridge. The work of the Hereward 
   Community Rail Partnership ensures that continued lobby for improvements is ongoing.
18.20  The Fenland Rail Development Strategy 2011-2031 Action Plan62  identifies projects to enable
   the delivery of improvements to Fenland’s rail network and services. Such improvements include 
   providing better access to railway stations, through improved signage, interchange options to 
   connect to other forms of transport, and car parking facilities; and delivering investment to stations 
   through provision of a footbridge at Whittlesea Station and ticket machines and platform lengthening 
   at Manea and Whittlesea. The CPCA has committed £9 million of investment into March, Manea 
   and Whittlesea railway stations to aid their regeneration.
18.21 Although frequent bus services operate on some key inter-urban corridors (such as services 
   connecting Peterborough, Wisbech and Kings Lynn, and Peterborough to Whittlesey and March), 
   services elsewhere are less frequent and irregular.  In recent years, many bus services have been 
   reduced, withdrawn or replaced with new routes with longer, less frequent services as replacements, 
   making it harder for those without access to a car to travel easily around Fenland. Across Fenland, 
   provision of bus services is generally poor and declining.  
18.22 Provision of community transport, including dial a ride and community car schemes, is generally 
   good in Fenland. However, demand for community transport services is increasing. Dial-a-ride 
   services link areas not served directly by the bus network, such as supermarkets and town centres, 
   but there is limited integration between these services and the wider public transport network, 
   which limits the ease with which rural residents can make longer journeys elsewhere. 
   
18.23 Lack of integration between different bus, rail and community transport services make it difficult for 
   residents without access to a car to travel to key educational and healthcare services, such as 
   Peterborough City Hospital, which can act to increase the risk of social exclusion and reduce 
   opportunities for our young people to travel elsewhere for education or training. 
   
Local Transport Plan (LTP)
18.24 The LTP identifies that many rural areas have poor public transport connectivity, reducing the   
   opportunities to access employment opportunities, key services, and amenities. For people 
   without the use of a car, including young people, those on low income or for people with disabilities, 
   these challenges are exacerbated.
18.25 The LTP’s local strategy for Fenland identifies a number of transport challenges. As the most 
   rural and economically deprived district within Cambridgeshire and Peterborough, limited 
   accessibility to Fenland acts to constrain the local economy and hinders development. Fenland is 
   not linked to the wider national highway network by dual carriageway. The district’s road network 
   primarily consists of rural, single-carriageway A-roads, many of which suffer from slow average 
   journey times, particularly associated with slower agricultural traffic, and with a poor safety record.
62 https://www.fenland.gov.uk/media/6293/Fenland-Rail-Development-Strategy---Action-Plan/pdf/Rail_Action_Plan_Adopt -
ed_Version_19_April_2012.pdf7618.26 Several key junctions, particularly within Wisbech act as ‘pinch points’ on the network, and suffer  
   from severe peak-time traffic congestion, which hinder the town’s potential growth. Reflecting the 
   low-lying Fenland landscape, some routes suffer from regular flooding, such as North Bank near 
   Whittlesey, or require specific maintenance due to being constructed on peat soils. High-quality  
   walking and cycling infrastructure is limited or entirely absent, which means that walking and 
   cycling are often unattractive, contributing towards congestion from short car trips and poor air quality.  
18.27 Fenland also lacks good wider public transport accessibility, particularly by rail. While March 
   is directly served by the rail network, with an hourly service between Stansted Airport, Cambridge 
   and Peterborough (continuing to Birmingham) and more infrequent services to Ipswich, the largest 
   town of Wisbech lacks direct access to the rail network. Residents within Wisbech must therefore 
   either drive to March, or travel to Kings Lynn or Peterborough, to access the rail network, resulting 
   in additional car journeys on the highway network.  
18.28 Although frequent bus services operate on key inter-urban corridors between Peterborough,   
   Wisbech and Kings Lynn, and Peterborough, Whittlesey, March and Chatteris, services elsewhere 
   are less frequent and irregular, and recent reductions in financial support have significantly reduced 
   weekend and evening services, making it harder for those without access to a car to travel easily 
   around Fenland. Fenland Association for Community Transport (FACT), in partnership with the 
   Fenland Transport and Access Group, operate dial-a-ride services five days a week linking to 
   areas not served directly by the bus network, but there is limited integration between these services 
   and the wider public transport network, which acts to limit the ease with which rural residents can 
   make longer journeys elsewhere (such as to Peterborough). Lack of transport integration between 
   different bus, rail and community transport services can therefore make it difficult for residents 
   without access to a car to travel to key educational and healthcare services, such as Peterborough 
   City Hospital, which can act to increase the risk of social exclusion and reduce opportunities for 
   our young people to travel elsewhere for education or training. 
18.29 Improving accessibility to Fenland by both road and public transport is central to the LTP strategy. 
   Better links to Peterborough, Greater Cambridge and the rest of the country will help to make 
   Fenland a more attractive place to live and work, encouraging investment and much-needed 
   additional jobs, while creating new opportunities for residents to travel to employment, education 
   or training elsewhere.  
East / West Corridor 
18.30 The A47 is both a nationally and internationally strategic link, it is a key route into East Anglia, 
   connecting Norwich and Norfolk with the East Midlands and the A1, and carries a large amount 
   of heavy goods traffic.
18.31 On a more local scale, the section of the A47 within the CPCA region provides direct access 
   between Peterborough, Wisbech and Kings Lynn. Beyond these settlements, the area is lowly 
   populated and is largely agricultural. Consequently, the A47 is a key commuter route for people 
   travelling into and out of these settlements for employment.
18.32 The long-distance regional trips (and particularly heavy good vehicles) generate a consistent flow 
   of traffic along the route. Mixed with commuter traffic, the local network comes under substantial 
   strain and congestion is common, particularly on the approaches to key junctions such as the A47 
   / A141 Guyhirn Roundabout and the A47 / A1101 Elm High Road Roundabout. The high 
   proportion of heavy goods vehicles travelling along the single carriageway section between 
   Thorney and Wisbech often creates queues of vehicles unable to safely overtake, which reduces 
   journey time reliability and can lead to increased driver frustration and risk taking. The CPCA 
   is working in partnership with Highways England to assess the viability of the A47 dualling/capacity 
   improvements proposal between the A16 Peterborough and Walton Highway. A Strategic Outline 
   Business Case (SOBC) has been prepared by the CPCA. 7718.33 The A47 was not included in Highways England’s plans for road improvements between 2020 and 
   2025. However, Highways England has agreed to fund an assessment of the A47 between the 
   A16 and the Walton Highway east of Wisbech. The review will also be informed by other road 
   proposals including options for the A47/A1101 roundabout junction already being developed by 
   Highways England.
Wisbech Rail 
18.34 Construction of a new rail link to Wisbech has the potential to transform accessibility for the 
   town, enabling residents and businesses in Wisbech to reach Cambridge in approximately 45 
   minutes. Re-opening of the Wisbech rail connection would connect residents to opportunities 
   within Greater Cambridge, including skilled roles in the knowledge economy, and education and 
   training opportunities at The University of Cambridge, Anglia Ruskin University and Cambridge 
   Regional College. 
18.35 The Full Business Case for Wisbech Rail was completed in December 2020. Work on the rail link
   is likely to begin in 2023 and be functionally completed in 2026, with direct services to Cambridge 
   possible by 2028.
Wisbech Access Strategy
18.36 The Wisbech Access Strategy identifies a package of individual transport schemes which collectively 
   improve the transport network across Wisbech. The CPCA has provided funding to deliver the first 
   phase of short-term projects, including construction of the Southern Access Road, traffic signals  
   at New Bridge Lane/Cromwell Road, and improvements to junctions at Weasenham Lane, A47/
   Elm High Road roundabout, and A47/Broad End Road roundabout.
18.37 Medium and long term projects which form part of the Wisbech Access Strategy include provision
   of a Western Link Road, a new river crossing, upgrades to the A47/Cromwell Road roundabout, 
   improvements to the Freedom Bridge Roundabout, a new bus station, relocation of A47/Elm High 
   Road roundabout and Weasenham Lane/Elm High Road roundabout.
Whittlesey Relief Road
18.38 Whittlesey Town Council, with the support of Fenland District Council commissioned an inception 
   study for the purpose of assessing the rationale for providing a Whittlesey relief road. The A605 
   passes west to east through Whittlesey and is the main thoroughfare connecting Peterborough 
   and its Fenland hinterland, including Whittlesey, the principal Fenland town of March and a wide 
   swathe of smaller settlements and rural villages. The aspiration for a relief road for Whittlesey has 
   existed for a number of years. More recently, an ambitious growth strategy from planning targets 
   set by Government and the Cambridgeshire & Peterborough Combined Authority’s aspiration to 
   double the size of the economy.
18.39 The need for the inception report arose from concerns on the part of Whittlesey Town and Fenland 
   District Councils that immediate development pressures and the potential for long term growth 
   could place serious pressure on the road network in Whittlesey, leading to traffic congestion and 
   wider economic and social problems in the town, and form an obstacle to growth.
18.40 Local opinions on transport matters were highlighted and acknowledged in the 2012 Market Town 
   Transport Strategy (MTTS) (a part of the Local Transport Plan). The reasoning contained in this 
   strategy relating to a requirement for a relief road remains valid due to ongoing concerns with 
   traffic growth in the area and underpins the continuing arguments for delivering a relief road for 
   the town.7818.41 The Growing Fenland: Whittlesey - A Market Town fit for the Future63 report seeks to enhance 
   the economy of the market town. The report recognises the importance of the relief road in
   improving the local environment and physical appearance of Whittlesey’s historic town centre by 
   reducing congestion and removing HGV traffic from the town. 
18.42 The inception report identifies two potential indicative routes for the relief road - running north and 
   south of the town. Having examined the economic, social and environmental problems and 
   opportunities and evaluated scheme options against strategic objectives, the inception report 
   establishes a sound strategic case for a Whittlesey Relief Road proposal.
18.43 The inception report’s consideration of the benefit-to-cost ratio indicates that there is potential for 
   capital costs to be offset to demonstrate a viable scheme. The inception report therefore concludes 
   there is sufficient evidence to justify the scheme, and recommends it proceed to the Strategic 
   Outline Business Case stage of development.
Local Projects 
18.44 The LTP is accompanied by a Market Town Transport Strategy (MTTS) for each of Fenland’s towns. 
   The MTTSs include local projects to address transport issues in each town and are intended 
   to complement strategic projects. For example, plans to re-open the March to Wisbech rail line 
   will be complemented by bus, walk and cycle, and road improvements. Funding has been secured 
   from the Greater Cambridge Greater Peterborough Growth Deal to deliver this package. 
18.45 Such investment in local transport infrastructure will enable more journeys to be taken on foot and 
   by bike. This will help to alleviate traffic congestion and improve air quality, whilst allowing those 
   without access to a car more independence and opportunity to travel. Continued support for 
   electric vehicles, in partnership with local districts and national government, will help to reduce 
   carbon emissions towards net zero and improve local air quality. 
18.46 The CPCA is working to ensure that it is easier for passengers to make journeys involving a 
   combination of bus, rail and/or demand-responsive services. This will help ensure residents can 
   travel easily to destinations without having to rely on a car, and will simultaneously reduce pressure 
   on the highway network. New, high-quality active travel infrastructure, focused around new 
   development in Wisbech and along upgraded highway corridors, will help to make walking and 
   cycling a safer, more attractive option for local journeys. The Combined Authority is committed to 
   improving interchange between public transport and active modes, particularly for short-distance 
   journeys within and between Fenland market towns and villages. 
Priorities for Local Plan Policy
18.47 Reflecting the constraints and challenges the transport network experiences, this Local Plan places 
   great importance on the need to deliver improvements to transport infrastructure which improve 
   accessibility and offer cleaner and ‘greener’ travel choices.
18.48 To demonstrate how accessibility, mobility and transport related matters have been considered and 
   taken into account in the development of proposals, one or more of the following should be submitted 
   with planning applications, with the precise need dependent on the scale and nature of development:
    • a design and access statement (all proposals); and/or
    • a transport statement (typically required for developments of 50 - 80 dwellings); and/or
    • a transport assessment and travel plan (typically required for developments over 80 dwellings).
18.49  Advice on the level of detail required should be confirmed through early discussion with the local  
   planning or highway authority.
63 https://www.fenland.gov.uk/media/16893/Growing-Fenland-Whittlesey-Final-Report/pdf/Growing_Fenland_-_Whittlesey_
   Final_Report.pdf?m=637272072717070000 ed_Version_19_April_2012.pdf79 Policy LP20: Accessibility and Transport 
 New development must ensure that appropriate provision is made for the transport needs that it will   
 create. Proposals for new development or enhanced transport schemes should demonstrate that   
 appropriate, proportionate and viable opportunities have been taken to: 
  a) Ensure that all users have safe, convenient access to the existing highway network; 
  b) Ensure that the design and layout provides suitable pedestrian and cycle routes that are safe, 
   desirable and well connected to the existing network;
  c) Promote road safety and contribute to a reduction in road accidents, particularly in rural areas, by 
   ensuring transport infrastructure is safe and accessible to all;
  d) Ensuring that development is accessible, being well located in relation to existing or proposed 
   services and facilities; 
  e) Seek to improve walking and cycling links into and within market towns and other settlements and 
   improve links between settlements.  
 Developers will be required to ensure proposals for major new developments are assessed, using   
 appropriate methodologies (such as Travel Plans, Transport Assessment sand Transport Statements) for  
 their likely transport impacts. All development proposals should have regard to the IDP .
 Any development that has severe transport implications will not be granted planning permission unless  
 deliverable mitigation measures have been identified, and arrangements secured for their implementation, 
 which will make the development acceptable in transport terms.
Public Rights of Way
18.50 Walking and cycling can have wide ranging benefits, from contributing to the improved health and 
   physical fitness of the population to reducing congestion and pollution from exhaust emissions. 
18.51 There is a network of public rights of way (PRoW) within Fenland and three nationally recognised 
   long-distance walking trails: the Hereward Way, Nene Way and Meridean Way traverse the district 
   and meet near March. National Cycle Route 63 links Wisbech, March and Whittlesey with 
   Peterborough and Leicester to the west. 
18.52 However, despite Fenland’s rural character and relative size the PRoW network including useable 
   horse-riding routes, is less well developed than in other parts of Cambridgeshire with only about 
   ten percent of the total length of public rights of way in the county falling within the district. In 
   addition, many of the public footpaths tend to ‘peter-out’ leaving the user without any legal backing 
   to continue the journey and consequently in the recent past these have tended not to be well used.
18.53 The Covid 19 pandemic has however highlighted the importance of the network for health and 
   well-being and general recreation and the economic benefits of an extensive and comprehensive 
   PRoW network which can attract people to an area are widely acknowledged. The Council will 
   therefore seek to protect and enhance the public rights of way network including through the 
   provision of permissive pathways and additional cycle and horse-riding routes.
 Policy LP21: Public Rights of Way 
 The existing public rights of way network will, in principle, be protected from development. New   
 development that will result in the loss or cause demonstrable harm to any public right of way will not be 
 supported.
 The Council will work with Cambridgeshire County Council, developers, landowners and other key   
 stakeholders to enhance the network including for new cycle and horse-riding routes and permissive   
 pathways and positively support such proposals through the development management process where  
 there is no unacceptably adverse impact on amenity, safety, ecology or heritage assets. 80Parking Provision
18.54 Fenland is a predominantly rural area and therefore residents are reliant on private cars to access 
   local services and facilities. Residential developments face pressure in respect of car parking and 
   the impacts on highway safety. An over-provision of car parking can lead to unattractive and car 
   dominated environments that are unsafe for non-car users, whilst an under-provision can lead to 
   unsuitable or unsafe on-street parking.
18.55 Appendix 6 sets out the parking standards for development based on use classes.   
18.56 All development, not just residential development, should carefully assess its parking needs taking 
   into account the location and access to local services and facilities; the type, mix and use of 
   development; the availability of and opportunities for public transport; the existing available car 
   parking provision close to the development site.
18.57 Proposals for development should include clear reasoning on the level and type of provision 
   (whether that be in a Design and Access Statement, Transport Statement/Transport Assessment
   and/or Travel Plan as appropriate, depending on the nature and scale of development proposed). 
   Parking court style provision not associated with flatted development and tandem car parking 
   space will be acceptable if based on suitable design solutions.
18.58 All development should consider users’ needs, impact on neighbouring users and the safe and 
   efficient use of the highway network for all users including pedestrians, cyclists and those with 
   limited mobility. 
18.59 Unallocated cycle parking for residents should be secure and covered, located in easily accessible 
   locations throughout the development. The Manual for Streets (2007) and Manual for Streets 2 
   (2010) provide guidance on the principles that should normally be followed. All development 
   should justify the level of parking provided and the design of such parking.
18.60 For major developments parking provision should be informed by the outcomes of the transport 
   statement or transport assessment and the travel plan (where required). The rationale for the final 
   parking scheme should then be set out in a parking statement or within the design and access 
   statement.
18.61 Advice on the level of detail required should be confirmed through early discussions with the local 
   planning and highway authority. 
18.62  Government is planning on banning the sale of diesel and petrol cars from 203064- 10 years ahead 
   of its original target of 2040. To support this transition to Electric Vehicles, in December 2021 
   the Building Regulations were updated: a new ‘Part S’ was introduced which addressed ‘Infrastructure 
   for charging electric vehicles’. These Building Regulations come into effect in June 2022 and will 
   require the provision of charging points in both residential and non-residential developments.
18.63 As a result of these new Building Regulations, Policy LP22 seeks to ensure that the location of 
   electric vehicle charging points will be well situated and accessible. 
64 https://www.gov.uk/government/news/government-takes-historic-step-towards-net-zero-with-end-of-sale-of-new-petrol-and- 
   diesel-cars-by-203081    
   Policy LP22: Parking Provision
 Planning permissions for new development will only be granted if the proposal makes appropriate and  
 deliverable parking provision in accordance with the standards set out in Appendix 6.
 Part A: Residential Development
 The number of spaces provided, and their location and access, should be informed by the site context 
 and location. Proposals for development should include clear reasoning on the level and type of provision 
 (whether that be in a Design and Access Statement, Transport Statement/Transport Assessment and/
 or Travel Plan as appropriate, depending on the nature and scale of development proposed). Wherever 
 possible, parking provision should be provided ‘on plot’. 
 A single garage does not count as a car parking space. A double garage will count as one space. 
 Part B: Non-Residential Development
 Non-residential developments should incorporate a level of car parking and servicing that is suitable 
 for the operational needs of the proposal taking into account its location, its size and its proposed use, 
 including the expected number of employees, customers and visitors.
 Part C: Other Parking Requirements
 Proposals should ensure that appropriate vehicle, powered two-wheeler, cycle parking and disabled   
 parking provision is made for residents, visitors, employees, customers, deliveries and for people with  
 impaired mobility.
 Adequate provision should be made for parking and turning of service vehicles that serve the site. 
 Part D: Electric Vehicle Charging points
 All applications that include provision of parking spaces will be required to meet the requirements for  
 infrastructure for charging electric vehicles as set out in Building Regulations Part S.
 Proposals which go beyond the requirements of Part S will be supported, in principle.
 The location of charging points in development proposals should be appropriately located to allow for   
 easy and convenient access from the charge point to the parking space(s), and be designed and located 
 in a way which:
  a. Minimises the intrusion of the charge point on the wider use and access of the land;
  b. Minimises the risk of vehicle collision with the charge point; 
  c. Has ease of access for maintenance and replacement of electric vehicle charging infrastructure.
19. Historic Environment 
19.1 The NPPF states that the Local Plan should set a positive strategy for the conservation and enjoyment 
  of the Historic Environment. 
19.2 The Fens are defined as a National Character Area65 with its distinctive wetland landscape. It is 
  characterised as an extensive and flat expanse with big skies which convey a strong sense of place, 
  tranquillity and inspiration. Development and growth is focused on those high points of land. 
19.3 In Fenland the market towns and villages have their own individual historic character. Wisbech
  benefited from expansion due to its status as an inland river port, and during the Georgian era, 
  proliferated with polite architecture, particularly along the Brinks, becoming nationally significant, 
  with a strong concentration of listed buildings along the Brinks and within the town.  Further afield, 
  some brick buildings with crow-stepped gables, or tumbled brick gables, show traces of a Dutch 
  influence from the draining of the Fens in the 17th century and a handful of isolated 18th century farm 
  complexes survive.
 65 NCA Profile 46. The Fens - http://publications.naturalengland.org.uk/publication/6229624?category=587130 8219.4  March displays the characteristics of Victorian suburban middle-class wealth and expansion, due  
   to its role within the railway network becoming one of the largest and busiest junctions in the 
   country. With the coming of the railways Welsh slates and other materials began diluting the palette 
   of local materials and styles.
19.5  Chatteris retains its characteristic of a small market town, serving a local population, with surviving 
   medieval burgage plots and properties facing the high street, with later Victorian expansion.
19.6  Whittlesey developed from an Anglo-Saxon grid-street pattern, with property fronting the street, 
   with expansion predominantly in the 17th, 18th and 19th centuries. The Whittlesey Mud Walls due 
   to the presence of surface clays in the area are a unique characteristic within Fenland and 
   Cambridgeshire and their survival represents a local building tradition using local materials.
19.7  Surrounding villages follow largely linear development patterns, with an open and rich 
   agricultural  landscape surrounding these settlements and giving the district its defining context and 
   characteristics.
19.8  The Council is committed to the positive conservation of heritage assets in the district as they make 
   an important contribution to the identity, distinctiveness and character of Fenland.
 
19.9  The NPPF defines the term heritage asset as a building, monument, site, place, area or   
   landscape identified as having a degree of significance meriting consideration in planning   
   decisions, because of its heritage interest.
19.10 In Fenland designated heritage assets includes 20 scheduled monuments, 10 conservation areas 
   and over 646 listed buildings of special architectural or historic interest. The gardens of Peckover  
   House in Wisbech are included in Historic England’s register of parks and gardens of special 
   historic interest. These heritage assets are irreplaceable and therefore every effort should be made 
   to ensure appropriate protection and enhancement.
Scheduled Monuments 
19.11 Application for Scheduled Monument Consent (SMC) must be made to the Secretary of State for  
   Digital, Culture, Media and Sport before any work can be carried out which might affect a   
   monument either above or below ground level.
Listed Buildings 
19.12 A proposal to demolish a listed building, or to alter or extend it in a way that would affect its special 
   character, requires listed building consent. If the proposal also involves ‘development’, planning 
   permission is required and, in that case, the Council will wish to consider applications for listed 
   building consent and planning applications concurrently.
19.13 Proposals to alter or extend any listed building will be assessed against the duty in law to preserve 
   the special architectural or historic interest which led to the building being listed. There is a general 
   presumption in favour of the preservation of listed buildings, and consent to demolish or partly 
   demolish such buildings will only be granted in exceptional circumstances.
19.14 The setting of a listed building may be affected by development. It is important that applications 
   for planning permission for development affecting listed buildings, or their settings, include an 
   assessment of impact on their significance so that an informed decision can be reached.
Conservation Areas
19.1  The effect of a proposed development on the special architectural or historic character or appearance
   of a Conservation Area is a material consideration in the determination of planning applications.   
   There is a duty in law that requires development to preserve or enhance that character or appearance.83    
  19.16 Development within Conservation Areas must respect the local character and be carefully designed 
   to respect the setting, through consideration of scale, height, massing, alignment, and use of 
   appropriate materials. Keeping valued historic buildings in active and viable use is important 
   for both the maintenance of the building concerned and the overall character of the Conservation 
   Area. Proposals to change the use of a building might therefore be supported, where features 
   essential to the special interest of the individual building are not lost or altered to facilitate the 
   change of use.
Registered Parks and Gardens
19.17 Historic parks and gardens are an important historic, cultural and environmental asset. The Local 
   Plan should protect them from development that would harm their character. Historic England is 
   responsible for compiling and maintaining the ‘Register of Parks and Gardens of special historic 
   interest in England’. Registration of a site means that its significance must be taken into account 
   when considering any proposed development that may affect the site or its setting. 
Archaeology
19.18 Archaeological remains are an important part of Fenland’s historic environment and identity. They 
   constitute an important resource for understanding our past, and often survive as significant 
   landscape feature and character areas. It is highly probable that many significant archaeological 
   sites remain undiscovered and unrecorded. Archaeological remains are a finite and non-renewable 
   resource and, in many cases, are highly fragile and vulnerable to damage and destruction. 
   Specialist advice regarding archaeological matters is provided by the Cambridgeshire County 
   Council Archaeology Team.
19.19 The Council may require developers to assess the potential impacts of their development on 
   archaeological remains in order to reach a decision on a development proposal. Where 
   archaeological impacts are indicated, developers are expected to work with the Council to devise 
   a scheme for mitigating such impacts. There is a presumption in favour of physical preservation of 
   remains in situ wherever possible. In advance of the loss of a potential heritage asset at a post-
   determination stage, further archaeological mitigations may be attained through the implementation 
   of a programme of suitable archaeological investigations.
The Setting of Heritage Assets
19.20 The setting of a heritage asset is the surrounding area in which a heritage asset is experienced. All 
   heritage assets have a setting, whether they are designated or not. Its extent is not fixed and may 
   change as the asset and its surroundings evolve. Elements of a setting may make a positive or 
   negative contribution to the significance of an asset, may affect the ability to appreciate that 
   significance or may be neutral. The contribution of setting to significance is often expressed by 
   reference to views. This is likely to include a variety of views of, across, or including the asset and 
   views of the surrounds from or through the asset. The importance of a setting lies in what it 
   contributes to the significance of the heritage asset.
 Policy LP23:  Historic Environment 
 The Council recognises that the historic environment plays an important role in the identity of the area  
 and the quality of life experienced by local communities in Fenland.  It will protect, conserve and seek  
 opportunities to enhance the rich and diverse heritage assets and their settings, for the enjoyment of   
 current and future generations.
 Development must respect, and enhance or reinforce where appropriate, the local character and   
 distinctiveness of the area in which it would be situated, particularly in areas of high heritage value.   
 There will be particular emphasis on the following:84    
    • Protecting the significance of designated heritage assets and their settings;
  • The use of Conservation Area Appraisals and associated Management Plans to ensure the
   preservation and where possible enhancement of the special character or appearance of each
   of Fenland’s Conservation Areas; and
  • The identification and protection of significant non-designated heritage assets and their settings. 
 Identifying heritage at risk and seeking solutions that achieve positive outcomes for such buildings are  
 areas. 
 Heritage Statement
 All development proposals that would directly affect any heritage asset (whether designated or
 non-designated), including any contribution made by its setting, will need to be accompanied by
 a Heritage Statement. The level of detail required should be proportionate to the asset’s importance
 and sufficient to understand the potential impact of the proposal. As a minimum, it should cover
 the following:
  a) Clearly identify all heritage assets affected by the proposal. 
  b) Clearly describe and assess the significance of the asset and its setting.
  c) Identify the impact of the development on the special character of the asset.
  d) Provide clear justification for the works, especially if these would harm the significance of the
   asset or its setting, so that the harm can be mitigated and weighed against public benefits.
 Development proposals will be supported where it is demonstrated that they have a positive regard   
 to preserving the significance of heritage assets and their settings or better reveal the significance
 of heritage assets.  Where a development proposal will lead to harm this will be weighed against the  
 public benefits of the proposal, including securing its optimum viable use.
 Proposals that will secure the future conservation of heritage assets (and their settings) which are at risk  
 through neglect, decay or other threats along with proposals that bring vacant or derelict heritage assets 
 back into use, will be encouraged.
 Conservation Areas 
 Development within, affecting the setting of, or affecting views into or out of, a Conservation Area   
 should preserve (and enhance or reinforce it, as appropriate) features that contribute positively to the  
 area’s character, appearance and setting. 
 Proposals should: 
  a) Retain buildings, features and details of the built environment which contribute to the historic   
   character and appearance of the area including having regard to roofscapes, rooflines and
   public realm. 
  b) Retain and reinforce local distinctiveness with appropriate regard to height, massing, scale, form, 
   plot width and materials of the existing built environment; 
  c) Protect trees, or where losses are proposed, demonstrate how such losses are appropriately 
   mitigated against.
 Archaeology
 In the case of application sites which include, or could potentially include, heritage assets with
 archaeological interest, designated or non-designated, the Council will require the developer to
 carry out a preliminary desk-based assessment. If this does not provide sufficient information,
 developers will be required to undertake a programme of field evaluations.8520. Natural Environment  
Biodiversity and Geodiversity
20.1 Fenland’s natural environment is a valuable resource, rich in internationally, nationally and locally  
  designated nature sites, as well as those without formal designation such as the extensive drainage
  and waterways network. Ecological networks comprising designated sites, other habitats, and wildlife 
  corridors are necessary to maintain and enhance biodiversity and prevent fragmentation and loss of
   connectivity. This is essential if species are to adapt to climate change and if a net gain in biodiversity 
  is to be achieved.
 
20.2 The Council is part of Natural Cambridgeshire, the Local Nature Partnership (LNP), which has 
  ambitious plans for doubling land for nature across the Greater Cambridgeshire area (from 8% to  
  17%) by 2050.  Amongst its objectives are to ensure new housing and work place developments 
  incorporate high quality green and blue infrastructure providing multiple benefits for people and the 
  environment, secure access to high quality natural green spaces within 300 metres of everyone’s 
  home, and increase tree cover and networks of woodlands and hedgerows within and around   
  settlements.
20.3 The Council wishes to contribute to the aims of the Doubling Nature ambition by ensuring that   
  there is no net loss in biodiversity over the plan period and a net gain is achieved. In preparing
  planning applications developers should refer to the LNP Toolkit and its list of ‘10 Things to do for 
  Nature’ and any successor documents and related guidance and advice including supplementary 
  planning documents.  
Designated Nature Sites
20.4 Designated sites for nature conservation importance are classified into a hierarchy according to   
  their status and the level of protection they should be afforded. International sites form the top tier 
  with the highest level of protection, followed by national and then locally designated sites. This policy 
  seeks to ensure that appropriate weight is given to their importance and the contribution that they
   make to the wider ecological network. All designated nature sites are shown on the Policies Map 
  whilst Table 7 (below) explains the hierarchy of sites in Fenland.
Table 7: Hierarchy of Designated Sites for Nature Conservation in Fenland
International 
Sites• Ramsar sites
• Special Areas of Conservation (SAC)
• Special Protection Areas (SPA)
National Sites• Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)
• National Nature Reserves (NNR)* 
Local Sites• Local Nature Reserves (LNR)
• County Wildlife Sites (CWS)
• Local Geological Sites (LGS)
*none in Fenland 
20.5 Fenland has two internationally designated sites that fall within the district, namely the Nene Washes  
  and the Ouse Washes. These are Ramsar sites designated under the 1971 Ramsar Convention on
   Wetlands of International Importance. The Nene Washes and Ouse Washes also benefit from 
  designation, in whole or in part as Special Areas of Conservation (SAC) and Special Protection Areas 
  (SPA) (former European Sites) and since leaving the European Union form part of the national
   sites network. These sites are protected by the Habitats Regulations 2019. The presumption in favour 
  of sustainable development does not apply to development assessed as likely to have a significant 
  effect on such sites. 8620.6  The district also has four Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI):
    1. Adventurers’ Land (a geological SSSI just north of the Nene Washes near Guyhirn)
    2. Bassenhally Pit (a large pit near Whittlesey designated mainly for its rare fenland flora)
    3. Nene Washes - designated for its large area of washland habitat
    4. Ouse Washes - designated for its large area of washland habitat (most of the Ouse Washes
     falls outside the district)
20.7  SSSIs form a network of nationally designated sites which also underpin sites designated to meet  
   international obligations. Development that is likely to have an adverse effect on these sites, alone 
   or in combination with other developments, will only be permitted in exceptional circumstances, in  
   accordance with the NPPF .
20.8  There are also two Local Nature Reserves in Fenland: Lattersey Field in Whittlesey and Rings End 
   north of March as well as a further thirty County Wildlife Sites (CWS). CWS have no statutory 
   protection but are recognised in the planning system as Local Sites. 
20.9  Local sites are an important component of the ecological network and are highly valued locally,
   providing benefits for both people and wildlife, and recognising the importance of our geology 
   in underpinning the landscape and existing habitats. Developments should help enhance this 
   network and avoid adverse impact on local sites. Where significant harm cannot be avoided, the 
   mitigation hierarchy should be followed (see the Biodiversity and Geodiversity in Development   
   section). In line with the Government’s 25 Year Environment Plan the Council is aiming to have 
   three quarters of Local Sites in positive management by 2043.
Goose & Swan Functional Land Impact Risk Zone (IRZ)
20.10 In addition to the land specifically designated, functionally linked land beyond the designated site 
   boundaries also provides important habitat for qualifying bird species. The term ‘functionally linked 
   land’ is used to describe an undesignated area beyond the boundary of a protected site which is 
   used by the designated bird populations associated with the site.
20.11 Such areas typically provide habitat for foraging or other ecological functions essential to the   
   maintenance of the designated population. The Nene Washes and Ouse Washes ‘Goose & Swan 
   Impact Risk Zone (IRZ)’ indicates the extent of potential functionally linked land for Nene Washes 
   and Ouse Washes Special Protection Area (SPA) and Ramsar qualifying bird species, including 
   Bewick’s and Whooper Swans. Since these areas are considered to be potentially functionally 
   linked to the European designated sites, they require appropriate consideration under the Wildlife 
   and Countryside Act 1981 (as amended) and Conservation (of Habitats and Species) Regulations 
   2017 (as amended) (the Habitats Regulations). 
20.12 As such, any greenfield ‘major development’ (see glossary) within the IRZ must undertake a project-
   level HRA to demonstrate that proposed development will not have any adverse effects on Nene 
   Washes or Ouse Washes functional land in accordance with the requirements of the Habitats 
   Regulations. Part D of this Plan identifies if an allocated site is located within the IRZ and that 
   consultation with Natural England is required. 
20.13 Land comprising the Goose and Swan Functional Land IRZ area has been identified through a 
   British Trust for Ornithology (BTO) research project. The area is extensive and can be found on the 
   DEFRA ‘Magic’ website and is shown indicatively in Figure 2. For the Nene Washes it covers a large 
   area of land around Whittlesey, Coates and Eastrea stretching almost to March. Around the Ouse 
   Washes the area covers Manea, Christchurch and stretches westwards to the east of Chatteris and 
   eastwards towards and around Littleport and Ely. 
20.14 As well as greenfield sites and naturalised sites which provide assets in terms of biodiversity and 
   geodiversity, the urban areas of Fenland contain brownfield sites with potentially high environmental 87   value.  Whilst providing an important source of land for redevelopment, these sites may also be 
   valuable for biodiversity and support open mosaic habitats (a habitat of principal importance), 
   which in turn support many threatened and declining species.
20.15 In addition to the statutory and non-statutory sites, the extensive network of Fenland waterways and 
   drainage channels provides significant habitat for a wide range of wildlife species including water 
   voles, otters and kingfishers. Species numbers have increased in recent years as a result of 
   Biodiversity Action Plans produced by Internal Drainage Boards (IDB) within the district. The Middle 
   Level Commissioners and the North Level IDB have a statutory duty to further nature conservation 
   in carrying out their functions and operate specific conservation strategies, which form the basis 
   for all their river maintenance operations.  It is therefore important that the ecological habitats and 
   water quality of the waterway and drainage network are maintained and enhanced despite being 
   faced with development pressures from an increasing population.  
 
Figure 2: Goose and Swan Functional Land IRZ  
88    
  Protected Species
20.16 Many wildlife species benefit from statutory protection under a range of legislative provisions.   
   Section 41 (S41) of the Natural Environment and Communities Act 2006 contains a list of habitats 
   and species of principal importance. The current list (August 2010) contains 56 habitats of principal 
   importance and 943 species of principal importance. The Council has a duty to promote the 
   protection and recovery of these species’ populations, linked to national and local targets, and 
   identify suitable indicators for monitoring biodiversity.
20.17 Developers are strongly advised to contact the Council at the pre-application stage to determine if 
   their proposal would affect any habitat or species of principal importance. Planning pre-application 
   service - Fenland District Council. The Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Biodiversity Partnership 
   has published lists of priority species and additional species of interest that are locally important. 
   The Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Environmental Records Centre (CPERC) also holds records 
   of locally recorded species and is therefore a useful source of biodiversity information.
Biodiversity and Geodiversity in Development
20.18 All new development should ensure no net loss in biodiversity and in the vast majority of cases
   provide a net gain through the planned retention, enhancement and creation of habitats and 
   wildlife features. This should be appropriate to the scale, type and location of development, and 
   the long-term maintenance and management of these features should be considered early in the 
   planning process.
20.19 Development should avoid any adverse impact on biodiversity and geodiversity. Where significant 
   adverse impacts would result the mitigation hierarchy should be followed. The priority should be 
   relocation of the development to an alternative site. If impacts cannot be avoided, then suitable 
   mitigation is required. If that is not possible, then full compensation must be provided. 
20.20 Most development near a river or watercourse will have the potential to impact on water quality 
   and biodiversity. A requirement of the Water Framework Directive is that there should be no
   deterioration in water body status. In addition to water quality, landscaping along watercourses is 
   also a primary factor contributing to ecological status. Naturalisation of riverbanks can therefore 
   make a significant contribution to biodiversity and in turn improve water quality.
20.21 For all developments requiring planning permission applicants will be expected to complete the 
   Council’s biodiversity checklist and provide an accompanying ecology report, if required, as 
   indicated on the checklist. www.fenland.gov.uk/planningforms Applicants should refer to the   
   Council’s website which includes links to standing advice from Natural England. When preparing  
   a scheme, the Council encourages developers to complete Natural Cambridgeshire’s ‘Developing 
   with Nature Toolkit’ to demonstrate how their proposal will deliver a net gain in biodiversity.
   https://naturalcambridgeshire.org.uk/projects/developing-with-nature-toolkit/
 Policy LP24: Natural Environment
 Through the development management processes, management agreements and other positive   
 initiatives, the Council will:
  
  • aid the management, protection, enhancement and creation of priority habitats, including   
   washlands, rivers and flood meadows, woodlands and hedgerows;
  • promote the creation of an effective, functioning ecological network throughout the district,   
   consisting of core sites, buffers, wildlife corridors and stepping stones that link to green infrastructure 
   in adjoining local authority areas to respond to and adapt to climate change;
  • safeguard the value of previously developed land where it is of significant importance for biodiversity 
   and/or geodiversity;
  • work with developers and Natural England to identify a strategic approach to great crested newt 
   mitigation where required.89    
   Part A:  Designated Sites
 a) International Sites
 The highest level of protection will be afforded to international sites designated for their nature   
 conservation importance. Proposals having an adverse impact on the integrity of such areas, either   
 alone or in combination, that cannot be avoided or adequately mitigated to remove any adverse effect, 
 will not be permitted other than in very exceptional circumstances. These circumstances will only apply 
 where a Habitats Regulations Assessment has been undertaken and it has not been possible to conclude 
 no adverse effect on integrity (either alone or in combination) and: 
   i. there are no suitable alternatives; 
   ii. there are imperative reasons of overriding public interest; and 
   iii. necessary compensatory provision can be secured. 
 Development will only be permitted where the Council is satisfied that any necessary avoidance and/  
 or mitigation measures are included to ensure there are no adverse effects on integrity either alone or in 
 combination. 
 Development proposals that are likely to, or have the potential to, have an adverse effect, either alone   
 or in-combination, on European designated sites must satisfy the requirements of the Habitats Regulations 
 (or any superseding similar UK legislation, post the UK leaving the EU), determining site specific impacts 
 (which could be off-site as well as on-site) and avoiding or mitigating against impacts where identified. 
 Mitigation may involve providing or contributing towards a combination of the following measures: 
   iv.  Access and visitor management measures within the designated site; 
   v.  Improvement of existing greenspace and recreational routes; 
   vi.  Provision of alternative natural greenspace and recreational routes; 
   vii. Remove monitoring as this cannot be considered as mitigation; 
   viii. Other potential mitigation measures to address air pollution impacts e.g. emission
     reduction measures, on site management measures. 
 Where avoidance or mitigation measures are necessary there is likely to be a requirement to undertake  
 monitoring of the effectiveness of such measures to inform the necessary mitigation requirements and  
 any future refinements.
 b) National Sites
 Development proposals within or outside a SSSI, likely to have an adverse effect on a SSSI (either   
 individually or in combination with other developments), will not normally be permitted unless the   
 benefits of the development, at this site, clearly outweigh both the adverse impacts on the features of
 the site and any adverse impacts on the wider network of SSSIs.
 c) Local Sites
 Development likely to have an adverse effect on locally designated sites, their features or their function
 as part of the ecological network including County Wildlife Sites, Local Geological Sites and sites 
 supporting Biodiversity Action Plan habitats and species, will only be permitted where the need and 
 benefits of the development clearly outweigh the loss and the coherence of the local ecological network 
 is maintained. 
 d) Goose and Swan Functional Land Impact Risk Zone (IRZ) 
 Proposals for major, greenfield development within the Goose and Swan Functional Land IRZ of the   
 Nene Washes and Ouse Washes must undertake a project-level Habitats Regulations Assessment to   
 demonstrate that the proposed development will not have any adverse effects on Nene Washes or Ouse 
 Washes functional land in accordance with the requirements of the Habitats Regulations. 
 e) Habitats and Species of Principal Importance 
 The Council will consider all development proposals in the context of its duty to promote the protection 
 and recovery of priority species and habitats. Where adverse impacts are likely, development will
 only be permitted where the need for and benefits of the development clearly outweigh these impacts.
 In such cases, appropriate mitigation or compensatory measures will be required.90    
   Part B:  Biodiversity and Geodiversity in Development
 All development proposals should:
  i. Conserve and enhance the network of habitats, species and sites (both statutory and non-statutory) 
   of international, national and local importance commensurate with their status and give 
   appropriate weight to their importance;
  ii. Avoid negative impacts on biodiversity and geodiversity;
  iii. Deliver a net gain in biodiversity, by creating, restoring and enhancing habitats for the benefit of 
   species;
  iv. Where necessary, protect and enhance the aquatic environment within or adjoining the site,   
   including water quality and habitat. For drain and riverside development this includes the need 
   to consider options for riverbank naturalisation. In all cases regard should be had to the   
   Cambridgeshire Flood and Water SPD.
 All development proposals should complete the Council’s biodiversity checklist to identify features of   
 value on and adjoining the site. Where there is the potential for the presence of protected species and/
 or habitats, survey work should be carried out and a report or statement by a suitably qualified ecologist 
 must accompany the planning application. The development proposals must be informed by the results 
 of both the checklist and survey.
 Part C:  Mitigation of Potential Adverse Impacts of Development
 Development should avoid adverse impact on existing biodiversity and geodiversity features as a   
 first principle. Where adverse impacts are unavoidable, they must be adequately and proportionately  
 mitigated. If full mitigation cannot be provided, compensation will be required as a last resort where   
 there is no alternative.
Biodiversity Net Gain
20.22 Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) is a requirement recently introduced through the Environment Act 
   (2021)66 that requires a 10% increase in biodiversity after development, compared to the level of 
   biodiversity prior to development taking place. 
20.23 The Environment Act 2021 strengthens Section 40 of the Natural Environment and Rural 
   Communities Act 2006 by placing a legal duty on public authorities, including Fenland District 
   Council, to both enhance as well as conserve biodiversity. This is known as the ‘general biodiversity 
   objective’.
20.24 Evidence in the ‘Mapping natural capital and opportunities for habitat creation in Cambridgeshire’ 
   study (2019) highlights that there has been a significant habitat change in the area over the last 80 
   years. Large amounts of semi-natural habitats have been lost, replaced predominantly by arable, 
   improved grassland and built-up areas. 
20.25 Significant losses of semi-natural habitats are almost certain to have had an impact on biodiversity 
   in Fenland. As well as direct loss of habitat, remaining habitat patches are smaller and more 
   fragmented with reduced connectivity between wildlife populations. This reduces dispersal between 
   populations making small and isolated populations more prone to local extinction.
 
20.26 BNG describes an approach to development that leaves the natural environment in a measurably 
   better state than it was beforehand. Therefore, if development is to take place on, say, a current 
   agricultural field with perhaps a hedgerow around it, by the time the development is complete, 
   there should be more land set aside for wildlife to thrive than there was before development took 
   place. This will require new habitats to be created, such as woodlands and ponds, as well as   
   homes that incorporate wildlife friendly measures. 
66 https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2021/30/contents/enacted9120.27 Through implementation of BNG, it is intended that the current loss of biodiversity through   
   development and land use changes will be halted and ecological networks can be restored. 
20.28 Net gain requirements will not undermine the existing range of protections in planning policy
   and legislation for irreplaceable habitats and protected sites such as Ramsar sites, SSSIs and 
   Local Nature Reserves. It is also not a replacement of Environmental Impact Assessment, protected 
   species surveys and other forms of biodiversity assessment that are required for many projects. 
   Rather, it should be used in combination with these and other approaches to provide a holistic 
   assessment. 
20.29 Development proposals will need to follow the ‘mitigation hierarchy’ of avoid, mitigate, compensate. 
   It is intended that biodiversity improvements will be provided on-site for qualifying development 
   proposals67. However, in some circumstances off-site mitigation may be possible. Opportunities to 
   achieve net gain on-site must be fully explored to ensure that loss of biodiversity is avoided or 
   minimised before options for off-site compensation are considered. Where not possible to provide 
   on-site, the improvements should be made to ‘local nature recovery strategies’ which the Council 
   will help develop with the appointed responsible authority68 with the delivery mechanism of net 
   gain in these areas set out potentially through a Cambridgeshire-wide mechanism. If net gain 
   cannot be delivered locally then developers will be able to invest in ‘nationally strategic habitats’ 
   with the purchase of government-provided biodiversity credits.
  
20.30 DEFRA and Natural England have developed a biodiversity metric tool which measures biodiversity 
   before and after development.  The metric is concerned with broad habitat types and not associated 
   species. Four factors or ‘multipliers’ are used to assess the habitat pre- and post-development: 
   size, type, condition and spatial location.
    • Extent - the size of the area of the habitat (tree lines, hedgerows and rivers are assessed by 
     their length) 
    • Distinctiveness - whether the type of habitat is of high, medium or low value to wildlife 
    • Condition - whether the habitat is a good example of its type 
    • Spatial location - whether the development and current/proposed habitat are recognised as 
     significant for nature   
20.31 The multipliers are applied to habitats before and after development to calculate the number of 
   biodiversity units in each case, and the difference in number of units pre- and post-development 
   determines whether net gain can be achieved. 
20.32 The mechanism for delivering the agreed biodiversity net gains will come through a planning 
   condition and a legal agreement in the form of a S106 obligation or unilateral undertaking, or a 
   conservation covenant. It will be important to ensure that any benefits suggested will lead to   
   genuine and demonstrable gains for biodiversity. The Council will need to be satisfied that a 
   suitable management and assessment plan is in place to make sure that the new habitats proposed 
   become established and thrive. Once in place habitat creation or enhancement as part of delivering 
   the biodiversity net gain must be maintained for a minimum of thirty years. 
20.33 To accord with the Environment Act and to help species recover the Council will be seeking a 10% 
   biodiversity net gain for all qualifying developments with details to be submitted in a biodiversity 
   gain plan. Development viability is marginal in Fenland but the Council will seek to play its part 
   in realising Natural Cambridgeshire’s and the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Combined 
   Authority’s ambitions to double nature in the area by 2050. Wherever possible, it will therefore 
   encourage all qualifying developments to provide a higher amount of BNG than the minimum 
   10% including in off-site locations where practical.
67 Details of qualifying development proposals will be provided by secondary legislation and regulations due to be published 
   by Winter 2023.
68 The ‘responsible authority’ is to be appointed by the Secretary of State in due course.92    
      
   Policy LP25: Biodiversity Net Gain
 All qualifying development proposals must consider how they can contribute to biodiversity net gain. 
 In all cases a minimum 10% biodiversity net gain set out in a biodiversity gain plan should be provided 
 to help species recover.
 Biodiversity net gain should follow the mitigation hierarchy and be provided on-site for most proposals 
 in the first instance. In some circumstances off-site mitigation may be possible but opportunities to achieve 
 net gain on-site must be fully explored to ensure that loss of biodiversity is avoided or minimised before 
 options for off-site compensation are considered. Where not possible to provide on-site, improvements 
 should be made to ‘local nature recovery strategies’ which the Council will develop with the appointed 
 responsible authority. In a very few instances, developers will be able to invest in the government’s 
 biodiversity credits for habitat enhancement.
 The amount of biodiversity net gain should be established using DEFRA’s and Natural England’s 
 biodiversity metric and submitted with the planning application as part of the biodiversity gain plan.
 Delivery of the agreed biodiversity net gains will be through a planning condition and S106 obligation 
 or unilateral undertaking, or a conservation covenant to include suitable management and assessment 
 measures to ensure that the new habitats proposed become established and thrive. Once in place the 
 habitat creation or enhancement will need to be maintained for a minimum of thirty years.
 Where circumstances permit biodiversity net gain above the minimum 10% will be encouraged with 
 support given to provide this either on-site or off site in line with local nature recovery strategies in the 
 first instance, and for national habitat enhancement if not possible to provide locally.
Carbon Sinks and Carbon Sequestration
20.34 Peat and peat soil are increasingly being recognised as major carbon storage resources and when 
   these are damaged or lost, they can become a major source of greenhouse gas emissions. Less 
   than 1% of England’s deep peat has been identified as undamaged, with almost a quarter being 
   under cultivation. However, this cultivation is a major contributor to UK food production and a key 
   part of the Fenland agricultural economy. As a result, countries are being encouraged to include 
   peatland restoration as part of their commitments to global international agreements such as the 
   Paris Agreement on climate change but this needs to be balanced against food production security 
   and the needs of the local economy. As well as storing carbon, peat also provides important 
   habitats for biodiversity and increasingly plays a major role in managing flood risk as part of 
   natural flood management processes. 
20.35 Fenland is characterised by its open landscape interspersed with settlements on higher ground. 
   Many parts of that landscape include limited tree cover, a consequence of its history of land 
   reclamation through extensive drainage and water management. Trees can help to stabilise soils, 
   mitigate flood risk, and provide biodiversity net gain and this will be given consideration when 
   development proposals are being considered, and balanced against impact on wider landscape 
   character and peat soil protection. 
 Policy LP26: Carbon Sinks and Carbon Sequestration
 Part A: Carbon Sinks 
 Existing carbon sinks, such as peat soils, must be protected, and where opportunities exist they should 
 be enhanced in order to continue to act as a carbon sink. 
 Where development is proposed on land containing peat soils or other identified carbon sinks, including 
 woodland, trees and scrub; open habitats and farmland; blanket bogs, raised bogs and fens; and 
 rivers, lakes and wetland habitats*, the applicant must submit a proportionate evaluation of the impact 93    
   of the proposal on the carbon content of either the peat soil or other form of identified carbon sink as 
 relevant, and in all cases an appropriate management plan must be submitted. There will be a   
 presumption in favour of preservation of peat and other carbon sinks in-situ. Proposals that will result  
 in unavoidable harm to, or loss of, peat soils or other identified carbon sinks will only be permitted if  
 it is demonstrated that: 
  a. the site is allocated for development; or
  b. there is not a less harmful viable option to development of that site. 
 
 In any such case, the harm caused must be shown to have been reduced to the minimum possible and 
 appropriate, satisfactory provision will be made for the evaluation, recording and interpretation of the 
 peat soils or other form of carbon sink before commencement of development. 
 For peat soils that are to be removed, the soils must be temporarily stored and then used in a way that 
 will limit carbon loss to the atmosphere. 
 Proposals to enhance peat soils and protect its qualities will be supported. Proposals to help strengthen 
 existing, or create new, carbon sinks will be supported.
 Part B: Carbon Sequestration
 The demonstration of meaningful carbon sequestration through nature-based solutions within a 
 proposal will be a material consideration in the decision-making process. Material weight in favour 
 of a proposal will be given where the net situation is demonstrated to be a significant gain in nature-
 based carbon sequestration as a consequence of the proposal. Where a proposal will cause harm to 
 an existing nature-based carbon sequestration process, weight against such a proposal will be given 
 as a consequence of the harm, with the degree of weight dependent on the scale of net loss. 
 *Please refer to Carbon Storage and Sequestration by Habitat 2021 (NERR094) (Natural England), 
 which identifies ‘reliable’, ‘long term’ and ‘important’ carbon sinks.
Trees and Hedgerows 
20.36 The Council has a legal duty under section 197 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990, to 
   consider the protection and planting of trees when granting planning permission for new 
   development. The Hedgerow Regulations 1997 also provide for the retention of hedgerows in 
   some circumstances. The potential effect of development on trees, whether statutorily protected 
   (e.g. by a Tree Preservation Order or by their inclusion within a Conservation Area) or not, is a 
   material consideration that must be considered in assessing planning applications. 
20.37 Trees and other planting provide a broad range of benefits from providing wildlife habitat, adding 
   maturity to new sites, softening and enhancing the built form, screening, shading, storm water 
   attenuation, visual amenity, and contributing to health and well-being. 
20.38 New trees and planting can contribute to the Government’s 25 Year Environment Plan and the 
   UK’s efforts to hit net zero carbon emissions by 2050, contribute to biodiversity net gain as outlined 
   in Policy LP26, and assist in the target of doubling nature in Cambridgeshire by 2043. 
20.39 In terms of existing trees and woodlands, where trees are present on a proposed development 
   site a British Standard 5837 Tree Survey ‘Trees in relation to Construction survey’, and any related 
   survey information, should be submitted along with the planning application. This should ensure 
   it is clear that a proper consideration of trees and woodlands has taken place and into account in 
   the preparation of proposals for the site.
20.40 In addition, an Arboricultural Method Statement will also be required where there is a likely adverse 
   impact on the health and well-being of trees, either through the pressure to prune or fell, or 
   through excavation works which could harm the root systems. The statement should set out the 
   measures that will need to be taken to protect the health of the trees prior, during and after the   
   construction period.94    
  20.41 There are no designated Ancient Woodlands within the district but Ancient and Veteran trees 
   may exist. On a development site, or on land near the site, which includes an Ancient or Veteran 
   tree, any proposal that may result in the loss or damage to such a tree will be particularly scrutinised, 
   and only exceptionally approved. Similarly, any loss of a tree(s) or areas which are protected by 
   a Tree Preservation Order (TPO) will be resisted and is unlikely to be approved if it results in a net 
   loss of amenity. In all instances, clear demonstration of overriding public interest in the loss of such 
   tree(s) or woodland would need to be provided.
20.42 Any unprotected trees (especially those as defined as Category A or B trees within BS 5837) will be 
   expected to be retained in the first instance wherever possible and included in the scheme’s design. 
20.43 In terms of mitigation, where loss of trees and woodland is proposed (and where it is deemed 
   acceptable for such trees to be lost, taking account the status of the tree), then suitable proposals 
   for mitigation, via compensation in replacements, should be provided. The tree compensation 
   standard set out in this policy provides a suitable mechanism to determine the appropriate level 
   of mitigation. The Council’s first preference is for on-site replacement in suitable locations which 
   will be secured through a planning condition. 
20.44 In exceptional circumstances, where planting cannot be achieved on-site without compromising 
   achievement of a good design, new tree planting proposals may be considered off-site as mitigation 
   (including on public land and for example in locations identified through a local nature recovery 
   strategy linked to biodiversity net gain) and secured through a planning obligation.
 
20.45 The Council is committed to increasing the overall tree cover in the district wherever possible, and 
   therefore opportunities for new tree planting should be explored as part of all development 
   proposals.  Planting schemes for public spaces and roadsides should include only native species
   that occur naturally in the locality, unless arboricultural considerations mean native species are not 
   appropriate.
20.46 Where new tree planting is proposed (irrespective of whether this is to compensate for losses on-
   site), then the quantity, location and species selection of new trees will be expected to take 
   practicable opportunities to meet the following five Tree Planting Principles:
    • Create habitat and, if possible, connect the development site to the Strategic Green 
     Infrastructure Network; and
    • Assist in reducing or mitigating run-off and flood risk on the development site; and
    • Assist in providing shade and shelter to address urban cooling, and in turn assist in mitigating 
     against the effects of climate change; and
    • Create a strong landscaping framework to either (a) enclose or mitigate the visual impact of 
     a development or (b) create new and enhanced landscape, or both; and
    • Be of an appropriate species for the site. 
 Policy LP27:  Trees and Planting   
 Planning permission will only be granted if the proposal provides evidence that it has been subject to 
 consideration of the impact of the development on any existing trees and woodland found on-site, 
 and off-site if there are any trees on adjacent land near the site. In these circumstances a British 
 Standard 5837 Tree Survey and, if applicable, an Arboricultural Method Statement will be required.
 Where the proposal will result in the loss or deterioration of a Veteran or Ancient tree permission will 
 be refused, unless and on an exceptional basis the need for, and benefits of, the development in that 
 location clearly outweigh the loss.
 95    
   Where the proposal will result in the loss or deterioration of a tree protected by a Tree Preservation 
 Order or a tree within a Conservation Area, then permission will be refused unless:  
  a. there is no net loss of amenity value which arises as a result of the development; or
  b. the need for, and benefits of, the development in that location clearly outweigh the loss.
 Where a proposal may result in the loss of any other tree or woodland not covered by the above 
 and which make a positive contribution to the landscape or biodiversity value of the area, the Council 
 will expect the proposal to retain these features in its design layout as an integral part of a high-quality 
 scheme for the site. Where a loss of trees or woodland is unavoidable the following strategy should be 
 used:
 Mitigating for Loss of Trees and Woodland
 Where it is acceptable for higher value tree(s) (category A or B trees as specified in BS5837)) and/or  
 woodland to be lost as part of a development proposal, then appropriate mitigation, via compensatory 
 tree planting, will be required. Such tree planting should:
  a. take all opportunities to meet the five Tree Planting Principles (see supporting text); and
  b. unless demonstrably impractical or inappropriate, provide the following specific quantity of   
   compensatory trees:
Trunk diameter(mm) at 1.5m above 
ground of tree lost to development Number of replacement trees 
required, per tree lost*  
75 - 200 1
201 - 400 4
401 - 600 6
601 - 800 9
801 - 1000 10
1000+ 11
 * replacement based on selected standards 10/12 cm girth at 1.0m
 New Trees and Planting
 Where appropriate and practical, opportunities for new tree planting should be explored as part of all  
 development proposals (in addition to, if applicable, any necessary compensatory tree provision). Where 
 new trees are proposed, they should be provided on the basis of the five Tree Planting Principles. 
 Proposals which fail to provide practical opportunities for new tree planting will be refused.
 Planting schemes for public spaces and roadsides should include only native species that occur naturally 
 in the locality, unless arboricultural considerations mean native species are not appropriate.
 Management and Maintenance 
 In instances where new trees and/or woodlands are proposed, it may be necessary for the Council to 
 require appropriate developer contributions to ensure provision is made for appropriate management 
 and maintenance of the new trees and/or woodland.
Landscape 
20.47 Fenland is a predominantly rural landscape interspersed by the market towns and smaller settlements 
   with a unique environmental character, with its flat, open landscapes and big skies. There are no 
   National Parks or Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty within the district, but that does not mean 
   that the character and beauty of the countryside is not valued in its own right.
20.48 Key views within the landscape, as well as in to and out of settlements, are valued by the local 
   community, contribute to the distinctive local identity of a place and assist in way finding.9620.49 As discussed in Policy LP23 (Historic Environment) the district falls within National Landscape 
   Character Area 46 - The Fens. The Fenland countryside is characterised by the following five 
   distinctive Landscape Character Areas and Table 8 below provides a summary of the key
    characteristics. Please also see the map in Appendix 4.
Table 8: Landscape Character Areas 
The Fens • This area is located in the central area forms the majority of the district.
• Largely unsettled, arable landscape with isolated villages and scattered 
individual properties
• Characterised by large scale, flat and open landscape with extensive views and 
large skies. 
• With very few hedgerows in the landscape and long straight roads elevated 
above the surrounding fields.
Wisbech Settled 
Fen• This area is located in the north east of Fenland District. 
• A relatively flat landscape that is heavily settled compared to the surrounding 
peaty Fens. 
• Settlement pattern includes a number of nucleated villages with 20th century 
ribbon development along the local roads. 
• Fruit orchards and other plant nurseries form a sub area west of Wisbech.
• Linear waterways, river and ditches.
March Clay 
Island• This area is located towards the centre of Fenland District. 
• Has open panoramic views across Fens. 
• This area is a slightly elevated clay island set within the surrounding peaty 
Fens.
• Hedgerows and poplar belts present, particularly along the sides of roads.
Chatteris Clay 
Island• This area is located to the south of District. 
• Slightly elevated clay island set within the surrounding peaty Fens. 
• Highly visible settlement edge with several dominant storage and agricultural 
packing plants. 
• Field units smaller than in surrounding Fens and more organic in shape, with 
remnant hedgerows. 
• Road levels less pronounced than in surrounding Fens.
Whittlesey Island • This area is located to the north west of Fenland District.
• Slightly elevated clay island within the surrounding Fens.
• Highly visible settlement edge, particularly to the north and east of Whittlesey
• Degraded landscape in association with Hanson brickworks west of Whittlesey
 
20.50 Policy LP28 states that proposals must demonstrate to a degree proportionate to the proposal 
   that their location, scale, form and design will create positive, complementary relationships with 
   existing development. Policy LP7 (Design) includes requirements relating to landscape and boundary 
   treatments. 
20.51 The Council is committed to ensuring that development protects, and wherever possible enhances, 
   the intrinsic value of our landscape whilst enabling growth for Fenland communities and economies 
   to thrive. 97    
   Policy LP28: Landscape
 Proposals for development should be informed by, be sympathetic to, and respect the capacity of the 
 distinctive landscape character area in which it sits.
 Development proposals must demonstrate that their location, scale, form and design will create
 positive, complementary relationships with existing development and will protect and where
 possible enhance:
  a) The pattern of distinctive historic and traditional landscape features, such as watercourses,
   characteristic vegetation, individual and woodland trees, field patterns, hedgerows and
   walls;
  b) The settlement edge, space between settlements, and their wider landscape setting;
  c) Key views into and out of settlements and of distinctive buildings and features; 
  d) The tranquil nature and nocturnal character of rural areas, free from light pollution. 
Green Infrastructure    
20.52 ‘Green Infrastructure’ is the strategic network of multi-functional, linked green spaces, both existing 
   and new, urban and rural, which delivers a range of benefits for people and wildlife. The network 
   is formed by individual green infrastructure components at different scales, from street trees, green 
   roofs, and sustainable drainage, to allotments, parks and nature conservation sites.
20.53 ‘Blue Infrastructure’ includes such things as streams, ponds, drains, rivers and other water bodies  
   and for ease of reference should be taken to be part of Green Infrastructure.
20.54 These assets may be physically or visually connected to one another by linear features, such as 
   hedgerows, public rights of way, cycle routes, rivers and other watercourses to form a green   
   infrastructure network.
20.55 The strategic green infrastructure network in Fenland provides a number of benefits, including:
    • Enhancing landscape, character and built heritage;
    • Enhancing biodiversity;
    • Supporting healthy ecosystems;
    • Providing climate change solutions (mitigation and adaptation);
    • Supporting well-being, healthy lifestyles and thriving communities;
    • Contributing to long term wealth;
    • Providing active access to the outdoors.
20.56 Individual elements of the green infrastructure network can serve a useful purpose at a range 
   of scales without being connected. However, when green infrastructure components are linked 
   together to form green networks, further combined benefits can be achieved at a strategic level. 
   These direct and indirect benefits of green infrastructure have been termed ‘ecosystem services’ 
   and are derived from physical natural assets known as ‘natural capital’. Development can impact 
   on the extent and ability of natural capital to provide ecosystem services. To ensure that these 
   benefits are delivered, green infrastructure must be protected, well planned and managed.
20.57 Where large scale developments are to be created to accommodate the growth of Fenland 
   settlements, it is important that multi-functional green infrastructure is included as an integral 
   element of their design and layout which maximises the delivery of ecosystem services. It is also 
   important that such proposals look beyond the site boundary for opportunities to connect to the  
   wider green infrastructure network in the immediate locality and beyond.98    
  20.58 The Council expects all development proposals to make a contribution to providing, enhancing
   and/or managing green infrastructure proportionate to the scale of the development proposed. 
   In developing proposals, the green infrastructure network for Fenland should be viewed and 
   considered alongside other relevant policies in this Local Plan to identify opportunities for protecting, 
   enhancing and connecting green infrastructure assets as part of new development. Proposals 
   should also consider Natural England’s Green Infrastructure Framework - Principles and Standards 
   for England69 which sets out 15 principles for Green Infrastructure.
 Policy LP29: Green Infrastructure   
 Working in partnership with conservation and environmental organisations, local communities,   
 landowners, developers and statutory agencies, the Council will seek to maintain and improve   
 the existing green infrastructure network in Fenland. This will be achieved by enhancing, creating and 
 managing multi-functional green infrastructure, within, around, and between settlements, that are well 
 connected to each other and the wider countryside.
 The Council will take into account any appropriate local evidence to guide applicants on what new 
 green infrastructure will be required and how it should be delivered. 
 All development proposals should ensure that existing and new green infrastructure is considered 
 and integrated into the scheme’s design from the outset. Where new green infrastructure is proposed, 
 the design should maximise the delivery of ecosystem services and support healthy and active lifestyles, 
 including, for example, by joining to existing areas of green infrastructure.  
 Strategic and major development proposals should incorporate opportunities for green infrastructure 
 provision within the site to reverse the decline in biodiversity and restore ecological networks at a
  landscape scale, reverse habitat fragmentation and increase connectivity of habitats, and preserve,   
 restore and create priority and other habitats within and adjacent to new developments.
 Proposals will be expected to provide clear arrangements for the long-term maintenance and 
 management and/or enhancement of green infrastructure assets. Where appropriate, the Council
 may utilise planning conditions, planning obligations or unilateral undertakings to deliver green 
 infrastructure projects.
 Development must protect the existing linear features of the green infrastructure network that provide 
 connectivity between green infrastructure assets, including public rights of way, bridleways, cycleways 
 and waterways, and take opportunities to improve such features including for example by providing   
 ‘stepping stones’ for nature. 
 Development proposals that cause loss or harm to the green infrastructure network will not be permitted, 
 unless the need for and benefits of the development demonstrably outweigh any adverse impacts. 
 Where adverse impacts on the green infrastructure network are unavoidable, development will only be 
 permitted if suitable mitigation measures for the network are provided. 
69 https://designatedsites.naturalengland.org.uk/GreenInfrastructure/Home.aspx99    
  Local Green Spaces and Existing Open Space 
Local Green Space (LGS) 
20.59 Local Green Space (LGS) is a national designation, as defined in the NPPF , which aims to protect 
   green areas or spaces that are demonstrably special to a local community and hold a particular 
   significance. LGS designation can be used where the green space is:
    • In reasonably close proximity to the community it serves; and
    • Demonstrably special to a local community and holds a particular local significance, for 
     example because of its beauty, historic significance, recreational value (including playing 
     fields), tranquillity or richness of its wildlife; and 
    • Local in character and not an extensive tract of land.
20.60 Planning permission will only be granted for development proposals in a designated LGS in very 
   special circumstances. These circumstances are set out in the NPPF and align with Green Belt status. 
20.61 Designated LGS sites are shown on the Policies Map and justification for their inclusion are outlined 
   in the supporting LGS Evidence Report (May 2022).  
Existing Open Space
20.62 Overall accessible public open space provision in the district is low when compared with the 
   national average but there are many existing open spaces across Fenland that are valued locally 
   and contribute to the quality of life of communities living in the area. Examples include local parks, 
   play areas and amenity space.
20.63 These open spaces make a positive contribution to the individual character of a settlement and 
   may also provide a visual or amenity function. Open undeveloped spaces within a settlement can 
   be as important as the buildings in giving a settlement its unique character and form. Some open 
   spaces, especially towards the edge of a settlement, are important in preserving the setting and
    character of a settlement. Other open spaces provide breaks in the street scene and may allow 
   views of the surrounding countryside to be enjoyed from within the settlement.
20.64 Although not identified on the Policies Map, these open spaces perform an important role in terms 
   of visual amenity, sport, community use, recreation and play, and contribute to the green 
   infrastructure network. 
20.65 A broad range of open spaces exist, and typologies have been established through the Council’s 
   Open Space Study July 2022. The NPPF70 clearly states that open space should not be built on 
   unless strict tests are met. The Council will protect all of these open spaces from development 
   unless the particular circumstances set out in the policy apply.
 Policy LP30: Local Green Spaces and Other Existing Open Spaces
 Part A: Local Green Space
 An area identified as a Local Green Space on the Policies Map or within a made Neighbourhood Plan
 will be protected from development in line with the NPPF , which rules out development on these sites 
 other than in very special circumstances. 
 Part B: Other Existing Open Space
 Existing non-designated open spaces will, in principle, be protected from development. New 
 development that will result in the loss of existing open space will not be supported, unless the criteria 
 in the NPPF are met.
70 paragraph 99100    
   In addition, if the requirements of the NPPF can be satisfied, the proposal must also demonstrate that: 
  a) The open space does not make a contribution to the green infrastructure network or connectivity 
   of habitats, and the development would not result in landscape or habitat fragmentation or   
   incremental loss; and 
  b) The proposed development can be accommodated on the open space without causing significant 
   detrimental impact on the character and appearance of the area, ecology or any heritage assets.
Open Space and Recreational Facilities
20.66 Provision of good quality and publicly accessible open space is a key determinant of health and 
   well-being and can contribute to long term wealth. As well as offering important opportunities for 
   recreation, sport and play, it can deliver a range of multi-functional green infrastructure benefits 
   including wildlife habitat, flood alleviation and reduced air pollution. 
 
20.67 The Council recognises the wide range of benefits that well planned, designed and maintained 
   open space and green infrastructure can bring, and aims for high quality provision to keep pace 
   with the forecasted growth of the area. The Council also recognises that initiatives outside of 
   the planning system will be required to bring its publicly accessible open space provision in line 
   with the national average.
20.68 Most settlements in Fenland have an area of open space for public use and recreation. However, 
   despite being a predominantly rural area the amount of accessible and useable open space 
   available per head of population is below the national standard as highlighted in the Council’s 
   Open Space Study 2022.
20.69 As the population of Fenland continues to grow, new residential development will create additional 
   demand and pressure on existing open spaces, and potentially recreational pressure on designated 
   nature conservation sites. Therefore, given their importance of providing benefits for the overall 
   quality of life in the district, new development will be expected to include a level of new open 
   space, sports and recreation provision to meet the development’s needs and where applicable 
   mitigate against any recreational pressure on designated nature sites. 
20.70 The Council will apply the open space standards set out in Appendix 5 to secure adequate provision 
   of open space with the capacity to meet the additional demand arising from new residential 
   development. The standards have been informed by the Council’s Open Space Study (2022), 
   Leisure and Indoor Sports Facilities Study (2017), Playing Pitch Strategy (2017) and the Fenland
   Local Football Facility Plan (2019). These provide the basis for assessing the notional open space  
   requirements of any proposed residential development. 
20.71 The Council will apply the standards to residential proposals of 20 dwellings or more. The 
   standards have been developed taking into account findings relating to viability in the Council’s  
   Local Plan CIL & Viability Report (2019).The open space requirements for a specific development 
   proposal will be based on the application of the standards, taking into account the current average 
   household size for Fenland, the type and size of dwellings proposed in the development and any 
   particular needs identified in a neighbourhood plan for the area in which the development would 
   take place. It will also take account of any potential recreational pressure on designated nature 
   conservation sites. 
20.72 The Open Space Study 2022 identifies those areas in the district deficient in different types of open 
   space in terms of quantity, quality and accessibility. These areas will be used by the Council as 
   a starting point for identifying where on-site open space provision should be prioritised. Where 
   on-site provision cannot be achieved, the Council will seek improvements to existing open space 
   elsewhere within the area of deficiency, so long as it serves the development in question.101    
  20.73  The standards for the different types of open space will not necessarily be applied in a cumulative  
   way, as one type of open space may be capable of performing more than one function. For 
   example, a developer may be able to meet the neighbourhood park and children’s play standards 
   by incorporating a children’s play area within a neighbourhood park. 
20.74 The Council will normally encourage the creation of a consolidated open space structure for major 
   new housing developments with open space provided on-site and accessible to all residents. The 
   Council will expect new open space to complement and join with existing areas of open space 
   wherever possible to contribute to enhancing the green infrastructure network and may seek 
   variations in the composition of the open space in order to secure the best outcome for the 
   development and the surrounding area.  
20.75 In assessing whether any open space that is provided in accordance with the policy will be 
   acceptable, the Council will take into account the need to ensure that the open space is easy to 
   use by people of all ages, has considered the particular barriers that can be experienced by people 
   with physical and sensory disabilities, and whether it is safe and secure for everyone.
20.76 The Council will normally be prepared to adopt and maintain the new open space provided that 
   its size, location and site characteristics are acceptable, it has been fully laid out in accordance 
   with the Council’s requirements and is in a good condition. For adoption purposes, developers will 
   be required to enter into an agreement with the Council which will include payment of a commuted 
   sum to cover the costs of future maintenance of the open space. 
20.77 The following policy is also a vital component of ensuring that there is no significant adverse 
   effect on the integrity of international, national and locally designated nature sites as a result of 
   additional recreational pressure, and therefore complements Policy LP24 Natural Environment.
20.78 There are four leisure centres in Fenland in each of the market towns which are currently run 
   by Freedom Leisure, a not-for-profit leisure trust, as well as a variety of local sports and leisure 
   clubs and pitches. Provision of facilities varies and future capacity required to cater for existing 
   population and new growth is highlighted in the Council’s Leisure and Indoor Sports Facilities
   Study (2017), Playing Pitch Strategy (2017) and the Fenland Local Football Facility Plan (2019). 
   Requirements to contribute to this type of facility will be in addition to any open space requirements 
   and, subject to legislation and viability, provided through a S106 obligation or unilateral   
   undertaking.
 Policy LP31: Open Space and Recreational Facilities
 The Council will seek to:
  • Reduce deficiency in publicly accessible open space, sports and leisure facilities.
  • Ensure new development provides an appropriate amount of open space, sports and leisure   
   facilities to meet need; and
  • Improve the quality of, and access to, existing open spaces, sports and leisure facilities. 
 Part A: New Open Space 
 In all new residential developments of 20 dwellings or more, development proposals will be
 required to provide new or enhanced publicly accessible open space to meet the needs of their 
 occupiers in accordance with this policy and the standards set out in Appendix 5.
 a) On-site Provision
 The preference is for on-site provision in a suitable location where this is practicable and would be the 
 most effective way of meeting the needs generated by the development.102    
   The precise type of on-site provision that is required will depend on the nature and location of the 
 proposal and the quantity and type of open space needed in the local area. This should ideally be the 
 subject of discussion and negotiation with the Council at the pre-application stage.
 New open space provision created on-site as part of the development should:
  a) be of an appropriate size and quality in accordance with the standards in Appendix 5;
  b) be designed to be safe and accessible to all potential users;
  c) be designed to maximise green infrastructure benefits and functions, and in particular, take 
   opportunities to also link into the wider green infrastructure network and where possible deliver  
   a biodiversity net gain (Policy LP25);
  d) consider the context of any existing provision and maximise any opportunities for
   improvement within the wider area where these are relevant to the development of the site; and  
  e) have a clear funding strategy and appropriate mechanisms secured which will ensure the future 
   satisfactory maintenance and management of the site.
 b) Off-Site Provision
 In certain circumstances, it may be acceptable for a developer to make a financial or in-kind contribution 
 towards open space provision off-site. Such proposals, which should ideally be agreed at pre-application 
 stage, will only be considered if: 
  a) the provision of open space on-site is not feasible or suitable due to the nature of the proposed 
   development, by virtue of its size and/or other site-specific constraints; and/or 
  b) the open space needs of the proposed residential development can be met more
   appropriately by providing either new or enhanced provision off-site.
 Part B: Playing Pitches
 To secure the level of playing pitch provision and associated changing rooms required to meet the 
 scale of additional demand generated from development, contributions will be based on calculations 
 using the Sport England Playing Pitch Calculator. The most up-to-date published cost at the point of an 
 application’s determination will be used.
 Part C: Indoor Sports and Recreation Facilities
 All residential development of 20 or more dwellings will contribute to the provision of ‘off-site’ 
 strategic indoor sports and recreation facilities by way of a S106 obligation or unilateral undertaking. 
 For sites of 20 or more dwellings, a S106 planning obligation will be sought to secure on-site or off-site 
 delivery. The precise contribution/obligation will be negotiated on a case-by-case basis.
 Part D: Designated Nature Sites – Mitigation of Recreational Impacts of Development
 Where a new development has the potential to have a significant adverse effect on the integrity of a 
 designated international, national or local site for nature conservation as a result of additional 
 recreational pressures on that designated site, the development may be required to provide open 
 space of sufficient size, type and quality over and above the standard requirements set out in Appendix 
 5 in order to mitigate that pressure. 
 Mitigation may also involve providing or contributing towards a combination of the following measures: 
  a) Access and visitor management measures within the designated site;
  b) Improvement of existing greenspaces and recreational routes;
  c) Provision of alternative natural greenspaces and recreational routes;
  d) Monitoring the impacts of new development on international designated sites to inform the   
   necessary mitigation requirements and future refinement of any mitigation measures.
 10321. Flood and Water Management   
Flood Risk 
21.1 The topography of the district is flat and low lying with sizeable areas below sea level and falling within 
  the fluvial and/or tidal flood risk zone. The predicted rise of sea levels and increase in river flows 
  associated with climate change could therefore have a significant impact on Fenland.
21.2 The settlements of Wisbech, March, Whittlesey, Chatteris and many of the villages are however 
  predominantly located on ‘islands’ of higher ground with much of the surrounding countryside and a 
  number of villages falling within higher risk flood zones. As the drainage of developments on higher 
  ground can impact on lower areas flood risk is an important issue that needs to be considered at a 
  strategic level as well as locally.
21.3 Fenland has an extensive network of artificial drainage channels which is mostly pumped drained and 
  is predominantly under the control and management of Internal Drainage Boards. It is therefore
  reliant on flood defence infrastructure to minimise flood risk to existing development and agricultural 
  land. Due to the historical drainage of the area and land shrinkage, most of the district lies below 
  embanked higher level drainage channels which represent a residual risk if these defences are 
  breached or overtopped. 
21.4 In addition, parts of the River Nene and River Great Ouse are located within the administrative area 
  of Fenland. These main river systems also pose a potential flood risk and are explored at a strategic 
  level in the Environment Agency’s Catchment Flood Management Plans71 (CFMPs).  
21.5 The NPPF and associated technical guide requires the Council to review flood risk from all sources 
  and through the sequential approach steer development towards areas of lowest risk at all stages of 
  the planning process. Development is only permissible in areas at a higher risk of flooding in exceptional 
  circumstances where it can be demonstrated that there are no reasonably available sites in areas of 
  lower risk, that the development provides wider sustainability benefits that outweigh the risk of flooding, 
  that it will not result in flooding elsewhere and where possible flood risk can be reduced overall.  Such 
  development should incorporate mitigation/management measures to minimise risk to life and 
  property should flooding occur.
21.6 The suitability of any new land for development in this Local Plan has been considered in accordance 
  with the sequential approach detailed in the NPPF72 and associated NPPG (Flood Risk and Costal 
  Change)73  and the Council’s Level 1 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) 2022. Windfall 
  developments that subsequently come forward will also be subject to these and any successor 
  documents. The most up-to-date and widely available evidence which has the support of the 
  Environment Agency will be used to inform planning decisions.
21.7 Development proposals should incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) into their schemes 
  which should be considered at the outset of the design stage. The cumulative impact of fairly minor 
  developments can increase flood risk in an area and there are a range of SuDS techniques that 
  can be used for all developments. For larger developments within the district attenuation as opposed 
  to infiltration may be more appropriate due to the largely impermeable nature of some of the superficial 
  and underlying geology. 
21.8 Cambridgeshire County Council is the Lead Local Flood Authority (LLFA) responsible for co-ordinating 
  local flood risk issues. The LLFA has worked with the Environment Agency, Anglian Water, Internal 
  Drainage Boards (IDBs), local community groups and the Council to prepare a Local Flood Risk   
  Management Strategy including an action plan for managing flood risk.
71 https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/catchment-flood-management-plans
72 NPPF paragraph 161
73 https://www.gov.uk/guidance/flood-risk-and-coastal-change104    
  21.9  The Cambridgeshire Flood and Water SPD (2016)74 provides further guidance and advice to 
   developers and decision-makers to help reduce flood risk and improve water quality through the 
   location of development and through on-site drainage and management. This includes Sustainable 
   Drainage Systems (SuDS) to allow the delivery of high-quality surface water drainage whilst creating 
   and enhancing the public realm, streets and open spaces.
Water Quality and Efficiency
21.10 Management of water is important not only from a flood risk point of view but because of the need 
   to protect and improve Fenland’s water bodies with regards to water quality, quantity, water habitats 
   and biodiversity under the requirements of the Water Framework Directive (WFD). 
21.11 In terms of water usage, existing sources of evidence, including Anglian Water’s Water Resource 
   Management Plan (2019) and the Council’s Water Cycle Study (WCS) 2022, highlights that the 
   district falls within the driest and most environmentally sensitive region of the UK. Increasing 
   demands from growth, along with reductions in abstraction to improve the quality of the water 
   environment, could result in an imbalance between supply and demand. Minimising the demand 
   for water in buildings is therefore crucial to protecting the water environment. 
21.12 Where justified through evidence, the Council has the option to set, through the Local Plan, 
   additional technical requirements exceeding the minimum ‘Building Regulation’ standards in 
   respect of access, water usage and space standards of dwellings.
21.13 To reduce impact on the water environment, the following policy requires new development to 
   achieve the nationally set optional technical housing standard for greater water efficiency. This 
   standard is intended to reduce water consumption in new dwellings to a level equivalent to 110 
   litres per person per day (rather than the standard 125 litres). It is described in Building Regulation 
   G2 and is to be secured by a planning condition for new (residential) developments. This will 
   support Policy LP4 (Securing Fenland’s Future). 
 Policy LP32: Flood and Water Management
 Part A: Flood Risk
 Development proposals should adopt a sequential approach to flood risk management, taking into 
 account the requirements of the NPPF and the further guidance and advice set out in the Cambridgeshire 
 Flood and Water SPD.
 Development located in areas known to be at risk from any form of flooding will only be permitted 
 following:
  a. the successful completion of a sequential test (if necessary as described in national guidance) 
   and an exception test if required;
  b. the submission of a site-specific flood risk assessment, setting out appropriate flood risk   
   management and demonstrating no increased risk of flooding to the development site or to   
   surrounding properties or elsewhere, and where possible should seek to reduce flood risk   
   overall;
  c. the incorporation of Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) into the proposals; and
  d. the consideration of any necessary ongoing maintenance, management of mitigation measures  
   and adoption and that any relevant agreements are in place.
 A site-specific Flood Risk Assessment appropriate to the scale and nature of the development and risks 
 involved, taking into account future climate change, will be required for development proposals:
  • in Flood Zones 2 and 3; and
  • in Flood Zone 1 where there are critical drainage problems; and
74 https://www.fenland.gov.uk/article/15049/Cambridgeshire-Flood-and-Water-SPD  105    
    • on sites of 1.0 hectare or greater in Flood Zone 1; and
  • sites where development or change of use to a more vulnerable use may be subject to other   
   sources of flooding; and
  • sites of less than 1.0 hectare in Flood Zone 1 where they could be affected by sources of flooding 
   other than from rivers and the sea.
 SuDS will be required for all major developments, unless there is clear evidence that this would be   
 inappropriate, irrespective of whether the site is subject to a risk of flooding or otherwise and should   
 form a basis of the scheme’s design. All development proposals should seek to minimise impervious   
 hard landscaping, and maximise porous surfaces.
 Part B: Water Quality and Efficiency
 Development proposals should also protect the water environment and must demonstrate that:
  a. water is available to support the development;
  b. the development contributes positively to the water environment and its ecology where possible  
   and does not adversely affect surface and ground water;
  c. adequate foul water treatment and disposal already exists or can be provided in time to serve the 
   development;
  d. in areas served by combined sewers, surface and foul flows should be separated and no new 
   combined sewers created. Connections to the existing combined sewer should only be made in 
   exceptional circumstances where it can be demonstrated that there are no feasible alternatives,  
   such as (and in this priority order): into the ground (infiltration); to a surface water body; or to   
   a surface water sewer, highway drain, or another drainage system (this applies to new developments 
   and redevelopments). Where an existing combined or surface water sewer is utilised, there must 
   be no detriment to existing users of such a sewer;
  e. suitable access is safeguarded for the maintenance of water supply and drainage infrastructure.
 To minimise impact on the water environment all new dwellings should achieve the Optional Technical 
 Housing Standard of 110 litres per day for water efficiency as described by Building Regulation G2.
22. Environmental Pollution
Development on Land Affected by Contamination
22.1 Contamination of a site can arise from a wide variety of activities and sources, both from people 
  and naturally. Contamination by previous land uses on or adjacent to a site as well as natural 
  hazardous geological units and invasive/harmful plants, can present a potential source of contamination 
  to land and/or pollution of groundwater.
22.2 Land affected by contamination can pose an unacceptable risk to human health, the natural 
  environment, the built environment and economic activities, through its impacts on the users of the 
  land and on neighbouring users. Land contamination, or the possibility of it, is therefore a material 
  planning consideration in taking decisions on planning applications.
22.3 Where pollution issues are likely to arise, developers should hold pre-application discussions with 
  the Council, the relevant pollution control authority and stakeholders with a legitimate interest. 
  In these circumstances, the submission of a preliminary risk assessment is a requirement for validating 
  relevant planning applications.
22.4 Preliminary assessments and any subsequent additional information should be carried out in 
  accordance with the Environment Agency’s ‘Land Contamination Risk Management (LCRM)’, which 
  is available at: www.gov.uk/government/publications/land-contamination-risk-management-lcrm106    
  22.5 There is additional advice regarding land affected by contamination at
  www.gov.uk/contaminated-land and also the NPPG (Land affected by Contamination)75.
22.6 If additional technical guidance is produced by the Government or any recognised independent body 
  with the relevant expertise, the Council will take that into account in making decisions.
22.7 In cases where planning permission is granted for development of a site on which the presence of 
  contamination is known or suspected, the responsibility for safe development and secure occupancy 
  of the site rests with the developer and/or landowner.
22.8 The Council will determine planning applications on the basis of the information available to it but 
  cannot be held liable if that information is subsequently proved to be inaccurate or inadequate.
 Policy LP33: Development on Land Affected by Contamination
 All new development must take into account:
  a. the potential environmental impacts on people, buildings, land, air and water arising from the   
   development itself; and
  b. any former use of the site, including, in particular, adverse effects arising from pollution.
 Where development is proposed on a site which is known to have or has the potential to be affected  
 by contamination, a preliminary risk assessment should be undertaken by the developer and submitted 
 to the Council as the first stage in assessing the risk.
 Planning permission will only be granted for development if the Council is satisfied that the site is 
 suitable for its new use, taking account of ground conditions, pollution arising from previous uses 
 and any proposals for land remediation. If it cannot be established that the site can be safely and viably 
 developed with no significant impacts on future users or ground and surface waters, planning permission 
 will be refused.
Air Quality 
22.9  Fenland is in a region affected by particulate pollution from mainland Europe which can cause an 
   adverse impact on background (ambient) air quality. There tends to be higher levels of nitrogen 
   dioxide in the winter months and peaks of larger particulate matter in the spring, which can 
   contribute to seasonal health impacts. Traffic-related pollution is a particular issue on main routes 
   and trunk roads, especially in busy urban areas such as Wisbech. Small particulates from traffic 
   and other sources such as manufacturing can also enter buildings contributing to poor indoor air  
   quality.
22.10 The Council assesses air quality as required by the Air Quality Standards Regulations 2010. There 
   re around 25 air quality monitoring sites in the district and four Air Quality Management Areas 
   (AQMA). Three of the AQMAs are in Wisbech and one in Whittlesey. The main pollutants present 
   are sodium dioxide, nitrogen dioxide and PM10 particles.
22.11 Air pollution can have a disproportionate effect on the elderly, weak and young and the AQMAs 
   in Wisbech fall within some of the most deprived wards in the district. As a result the Council has 
   developed an Air Quality Action Plan76 to guide its future priorities.
22.12 Air quality will be a material consideration if a proposed development would be particularly 
   sensitive to poor air quality in its vicinity. Where a transport statement/assessment shows that it is 
75 https://www.gov.uk/guidance/land-affected-by-contamination
76 https://www.fenland.gov.uk/media/16752/Air-Quality-Action-Plan-2018-/pdf/Air_Quality_Action_Plan_-_2018.pd -
f?m=637209017923330000 107    
     likely that a significant proportion of road trips generated by a proposed development will go 
   through an AQMA, an air quality assessment will be required. An air quality assessment will also 
   be required where the annual mean level of nitrogen dioxide exceeds 35μg/m3 as adverse impacts 
   could lead to a new AQMA being designated.
22.13 Where an air quality assessment shows that the effect on air quality as a result of the proposed 
   development could be significant, the proposal will need to be supported by a low emissions 
   strategy.  Such a strategy should concentrate on identifying measures that will tackle the air quality 
   issues identified in the assessment. Actions with permanent or long-lasting effects should be 
   prioritised as well as actions identified in applicable air quality action plans. Maximising 
   opportunities for walking and cycling in planning proposals will contribute to reducing vehicular 
   pollution. The government’s Clean Air Strategy77 (January 2019) explains how it will tackle all 
   sources of air pollution, thereby making air healthier to breathe, protecting nature and boosting 
   the economy. Development proposals must seek to ensure that they accord with this Clean Air 
   Strategy. 
 Policy LP34: Air Quality 
 A proposal will need to be accompanied by an Air Quality Assessment where: 
  a. it is for large scale major development, defined in the ‘Glossary’; 
  b. it would potentially conflict with an Air Quality Action Plan; 
  c. any part of the site is located within 50m of an Air Quality Management Area (AQMA); 
  d. a significant proportion of the traffic generated would go through an AQMA; or 
  e. any part of the site is located within 100m of a monitoring site where the annual mean level of   
   nitrogen dioxide exceeds 35μg/m3. 
 The Air Quality Assessment should be proportionate to the nature and scale of the proposal and the   
 level of concern about air quality, but should assess: 
  f.  the existing state of air quality surrounding the site; 
  g.  how the proposal could affect air quality during construction and operational phases; 
  h.  the extent to which people could be exposed to poor air quality; and 
  i.  how biodiversity could be affected by changes in air quality as a result of the proposal. 
 A proposal will need to be accompanied by a Low Emissions Strategy where the air quality assessment 
 shows that the proposal would: 
  j.  have a significant adverse effect on air quality; 
  k.  have an adverse effect on the air quality factors that led to the affected AQMA being designated; 
  l.  cause a significant increase in the number of people that would be exposed to poor air quality; or 
  m. lead to a designated nature conservation site or protected species that is sensitive to poor air   
   quality being adversely affected by changes in air quality. 
 The Low Emissions Strategy should include measures that mitigate the impacts of the proposed   
 development by contributing to the improvement of air quality and/or the reduction of emissions 
 relating to the designation of the affected AQMA, prioritising actions identified in relevant Air Quality 
 Action Plans or equivalent documents. In other circumstances, where identified as necessary based 
 on a transport assessment/statement, measures to reduce air pollution arising from traffic and traffic   
 congestion may also be required.
77 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/clean-air-strategy-2019/clean-air-strategy-2019-executive-summary#chapter-
    3-protecting-the-environment 108Part D – Policies for Sites and Settlements
23. Introduction 
23.1  This part makes site allocations to enable Fenland’s towns and villages to grow. Collectively, the 
   distribution of new development identified through site allocations reflects the Spatial Strategy in Part B.
23.2  Within this section, settlements are grouped by Settlement Hierarchy tier (see Policy LP1), unless 
   there is no specific policy for that settlement i.e. no site allocations or other requirements. The 
   Market Towns are arranged in order of size e.g. Wisbech is Fenland’s largest settlement and is 
   listed first, followed by March, the second largest settlement. Fenland’s villages are arranged 
   alphabetically within the relevant Settlement Hierarchy chapter.
23.3  Each settlement sub-section includes a policy which makes site allocations. These site allocations 
   are illustrated on the Policies Map (Part E). Each site allocations policy provides details of each site, 
   including an estimate of the site’s dwelling capacity and any additional requirements which 
   development proposals are expected to satisfy.
23.4  The dwelling capacity cited in the site allocations policy is an estimate and should be treated as an 
   approximate value. The precise capacity of each site will be a matter to be resolved through the 
   planning application process. In practice, development proposals for site allocations may deliver 
   greater or fewer dwellings than indicated in the policy.
23.5  Where there are sites and land safeguarded for employment, retail or other non-residential uses, 
   those sites are allocated in a separate policy from site allocations which are solely or mainly for 
   housing development.
23.6  For certain sites, a site-specific policy is included within the relevant settlement section. Such sites 
   are more complex in their nature and require a bespoke policy to inform its development.
23.7  The site allocations policies for settlements identify policy requirements for the development of 
   individual sites. These policy requirements are based on the Council’s assessment of the site and  
   relevant evidence. Applicants should also have regard to Fenland’s Strategic Housing & Economic 
   Land Availability Assessment (SHELAA) report (August 2022) which identifies constraints and   
   characteristics of each site, when drawing up their development proposals. Each site allocation  
   policy includes references to the corresponding SHELAA record.
23.8  Delivery of growth will require investment in infrastructure. Details of infrastructure required to meet 
   needs arising from growth are set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan which accompanies this 
   Local Plan, and will be secured through relevant strategic policies in this Local Plan.
23.9  In addition to the site allocations, there are many other opportunities for development to take place 
   across Fenland (where proposals accord with relevant policies in this plan). Such development 
   opportunities are described in Part B - Spatial Strategy.
 
Summary of Distribution of Growth
23.10 Policies LP2 and LP3 identify Fenland’s development needs for housing and employment growth, 
   and provide a spatial strategy to inform the distribution of growth.
Housing Growth
23.11 The following settlement chapters make site allocations. Collectively these site allocations, along 
   with other opportunities for development, provide sufficient land to meet and exceed Fenland’s  
   housing needs. 10923.12 During the preparation of this Local Plan, Fenland District Council held two ‘Call for Sites’ exercises, 
   providing landowners and agents opportunity to put forward available land. The Council assessed 
   these site submissions and has allocated land through this Local Plan, where sites are suitable for 
   development and where such growth would accord with the spatial strategy. 
23.13 Fenland District Council monitors the progress of sites with planning permission for housing 
   development, and publishes this information in the Council’s annual Five-Year Housing Land   
   Supply Report (FYLS Report)78. In addition to the ‘new’ site allocations allocated by this Local Plan, 
   sites which have existing planning approval will provide a significant portion of the supply of new 
   homes - particularly in the first five years of the plan period. 
23.14 To provide clarity on the nature and scale of future development, and to secure the principle of 
   development over the plan period, this Local Plan allocates sites which had extant planning 
   permission79 for the development of 5 or more homes at the ‘base date’ of Fenland’s most recent 
   FYLS Report. At the time of preparing this Draft Local Plan, the ‘base date’ of the FYLS report is 
   01 April 2021. Therefore, the location and net dwelling capacity of committed sites proposed 
   allocation reflects the site’s status at 01 April 2021.
23.15 In addition to ‘large’ housing development sites allocated by this Local Plan, there are other 
   committed sites which had planning permission at the base date which will deliver new homes over 
   the plan period. Such additional commitment includes sites with planning permission for fewer   
   than five dwellings; and other sites deemed not suitable for allocation, such as sites with planning 
   permission for the change of use or conversion of existing buildings to dwellings, and holiday   
   accommodation. 
23.16 Over the course of the plan period, further small sites of fewer than five dwellings are likely to be 
   granted planning permission and developed. Such sites will be considered as ‘windfall’ development. 
   An allowance for windfall development has been included in the housing trajectory (Table 10).
23.17 During the course of preparing this Local Plan, the Council will continue to monitor land-uses 
   within the district and will publish updates to the FYLS Report on an annual basis. Prior to submitting 
   the Draft Local Plan to the Planning Inspectorate for examination, the Council intends to update
   the Local Plan to ensure it is aligned with the latest available FYLS Report. The consequences of 
   such updates are likely to include:
    • The omission of proposed site allocations for committed sites where, at the new base date,  
     the site is no longer expected to deliver 5 or more dwellings. For example, where development 
     of the site has completed or planning permission has lapsed.
    • The inclusion of additional sites which have been granted planning permission since the 
     previous base date. For example, at time of preparing this Draft Local Plan land-use 
     monitoring data for the 2021/22 reporting year is not yet available. The Council is aware 
     of a number of additional committed sites which were granted planning permission for major 
     residential development in the 2021/22 reporting year, but which have not been included 
     in Part D of this Local Plan since these sites had no planning status at the base date. The 
     Council intends to allocate new committed sites prior to the submission stage. The Council 
     has undertaken a review of planning permissions granted in the 2021/22 reporting year and 
     has identified 12 sites which it intends to include as site allocations prior to plan submission. 
     Details of these additional sites are provided at Appendix 7: Additional Committed Sites 
     (2021/22).
78 Current report available at: https://fenland.gov.uk/article/15027/Monitoring-Reports-and-Land-Supply
79 Or had a resolution by Fenland’s Planning Committee to grant planning permission for the development of 5 or more homes. 110    • Total supply from ‘Additional net commitment’ (see Tables 9 & 10), from small sites with 
     planning permission and other committed sites, will change as a result of new planning 
     applications being granted, existing planning permissions lapsing, and construction of sites 
     reaching completion.
23.18 Table 9 provides a summary of dwelling supply for each settlement by site type. The settlements 
   listed are those listed in the Settlement Hierarchy (LP1) with existing commitment or new allocations 
   for housing. Where a site is entirely remote from any settlement, this supply is indicated as ‘open 
   countryside’ in Table 9. For example, such sites could include barn conversions or construction of 
   agricultural workers dwellings at existing farms in the rural area.
23.19 Column ‘a’ provides an estimated dwelling supply by settlement from site allocations which, in the 
   absence of the Local Plan, would have no planning status.
23.20 Column ‘b’ indicates dwelling supply from site allocations with extant planning permission at the  
   base date for this Local Plan (01 April 2021).
23.21  Column ‘c’ includes additional net commitment from sites which are not allocated, such as small  
   sites with extant planning permission.
23.22 For details of site allocations for a specific settlement, refer to the site allocations policy contained 
   in the relevant settlement chapter.
 
Table 9: Summary of Distribution of Housing Growth 
SettlementDwellings (units)
a) Site 
Allocationsb) Committed 
Large Sitesc) Additional net 
commitmentd) Total
Benwick 0 0 7 7
Benwick, Open 
countryside0 0 5 5
Chatteris 321 1,377 39 1,737
Chatteris, Open 
countryside0 0 9 9
Christchurch 33 25 6 64
Christchurch, Open 
countryside0 0 2 2
Church End 0 0 2 2
Coates 349 80 1 430
Coldham 11 0 0 11
Collett’s Bridge 10 0 0 10
Doddington 321 13 21 355
Doddington, Open 
countryside0 0 6 6
Eastrea 0 6 6 12
Elm 215 55 17 287
Elm, Open 
countryside0 0 10 10
Friday Bridge 230 0 8 238
Gorefield 30 19 4 53111Gorefield, Open 
countryside0 0 2 2
Guyhirn 35 0 24 59
Leverington 196 0 6 202
Leverington, Open 
countryside0 0 2 2
Manea 115 79 26 220
Manea, Open 
countryside0 0 8 8
March 2,182 470 94 2,746
March, Open 
countryside0 0 10 10
Murrow 7 0 5 12
Newton 6 0 0 6
Newton, Open 
countryside0 0 3 3
Parson Drove 38 5 5 48
Parson Drove, Open 
countryside0 0 2 2
Pondersbridge 0 0 2 2
Ring’s End 8 0 1 9
Tholomas Drove 10 0 3 13
Turves 0 0 8 8
Tydd St Giles 7 0 2 9
Tydd St Giles, Open 
countryside0 0 35 35
Whittlesey 167 708 11 886
Whittlesey, Open 
countryside0 0 14 14
Wimblington 143 67 13 223
Wimblington, Open 
countryside0 0 3 3
Wisbech 514 686 87 1,287
Wisbech, Open 
countryside0 0 9 9
Wisbech St Mary 150 87 11 248
Wisbech St Mary, 
Open countryside0 0 24 24
Total 5,098 3,677 553 9,328112Housing Trajectory
23.23 The housing trajectory (Table 10) sets out the rate at which new dwellings are expected to be 
   delivered over the course of the plan period. The housing trajectory indicates the number of 
   dwellings to be delivered in each year of the plan period by site type. 
23.24 Supply from new site allocations is indicated at row ‘a’ of the housing trajectory. The delivery rate 
   of individual sites has been based on information supplied by the site promoter. 
23.25 A Local Plan Five-Year Land Supply Report (July 2022) has also been prepared to support this Draft 
   Local Plan and to show that the proposed sites identified in Part D of the Plan are deliverable and 
   can meet the five-year requirement for 2,585 dwellings between 1 April 2021 and 31 March 
   2026. 
23.26 The delivery rates of sites with extant planning permission, including site allocations with planning 
   approval (i.e. Committed Large Sites (row ‘b’) and Additional net commitment (row ‘c’), reflect the 
   sites trajectory contained in the ‘Fenland Local Plan Five Year Housing Land Supply Report (July 
   2022)’.
23.27 The housing trajectory also includes an allowance for windfall development. ‘Windfall’ includes 
   development on non-allocated sites, such as infill development within settlement boundaries, and 
   the conversion and change of use of existing buildings. The justification for the windfall allowance 
   is set out in the ‘Fenland Local Plan Five Year Housing Land Supply Report 2022’ and is informed  
   by past delivery of windfall development. 113Table 10: Housing Trajectory
Year21/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/2727/2828/2929/3030/3131/3232/3333/3434/3535/3636/3737/3838/3939/40
Total
a) Site 
Allocations0 0 0 0365 948 898 823 508 403 207 86 50 140 250 250 170 0 05,098
b) Committed 
Large Sites97 747 691 351 364 461 240 146 95 95 95 95 95 80 25 0 0 0 03,677
c) Additional 
net 
commitment152 297 104 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 553
d) Windfall 0 0 94 188 188 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 55 1,500
e) Total 249 1,044 889 539 917 1,484 1,213 1,044 678 573 377 256 220 295 350 325 245 755510,82811423.28  The chart below provides a graphical illustration of the housing trajectory, showing the number of  
   dwellings by site type expected to be delivered in each year.
Figure 3 Housing Trajectory Chart
 
 
115Employment Growth
23.29 The settlement chapters include site allocations policies for employment development in Use 
   Classes B2, B8 and E(g). This Local Plan allocates a supply of available land which exceeds the
   district’s employment land requirement identified by Policy LP3, and is distributed in accordance 
   with the policy’s spatial strategy. 
23.30 Site allocations for employment development include site allocations from assessed site submissions 
   (i.e. sites which in the absence of the Local Plan have no planning status), and sites with planning 
   approval for employment development exceeding 0.15ha.
Table 11: Summary of Distribution of Employment Growth
SettlementAvailable Employment Land (Hectares)
Site Allocations Committed Large Sites Total
Chatteris 40.96 10.63 51.59
Coates 4.78 0 4.78
March 50.72 3.19 53.91
March, Open 
countryside0 2.28 2.28
Newton-in-the-Isle, 
Open countryside0 0.35 0.35
Whittlesey 0 9.71 9.71
Whittlesey, Open 
countryside8.59 4.46 13.05
Wisbech 75 14.72 89.72
Total 180.05 16.45
23.31 This Local Plan also creates opportunity for a further 100ha of employment land at broad locations 
   for employment growth at Chatteris.11624. Market Towns
24.1 Fenland’s four market town have a significant influence on the area’s character and how it functions. 
  The market towns provide Fenland’s main population centres, and are the main locations for 
  employment, education, retail, leisure and other community facilities and services. Each town therefore 
  serves not only its own residents, but also residents across Fenland’s villages and countryside. Housing, 
  jobs, retail and services are therefore not concentrated in a single centre (as in some Cambridgeshire 
  authorities) but are distributed across the four market towns.
24.2 The spatial strategy (Part B) directs the majority of new development to the market towns. Likewise, 
  most investment in infrastructure will take place in the market towns and will form the focus of corporate 
  objectives for regeneration and renewal.
 
Wisbech
24.3 Wisbech is the largest settlement in Fenland with a population of approximately 23,700 (mid 2018). 
  A historic inland port located on the River Nene, Wisbech has long played an important role as a 
  trading centre serving a wide rural catchment. Today it remains an important destination for comparison 
  retail and services for the surrounding rural communities. 
24.4 Key sources of employment include food processing industries, as well as manufacturing, logistics and 
  storage. The town offers significant opportunities for employment development, particularly to the 
  south.
24.5 The town centre boasts an exceptional built heritage and a historic waterfront, although it has suffered 
  from decline. Wisbech is the town with the greatest need for regeneration and where the benefits 
  of growth could be most keenly felt. It is therefore vital that this Local Plan facilitates opportunities for 
  regeneration within the town.
24.6 Fenland District Council is developing a masterplan for the regeneration of Wisbech town centre, 
  in parallel to preparation of this Local Plan. This builds on the Growing Fenland - Wisbech: Market 
  Town Masterplan prepared in partnership with the Cambridgeshire & Peterborough Combined 
  Authority.
24.7 As Fenland’s largest settlement, and a key centre for employment, education, retail and other facilities, 
  this Local Plan identifies opportunities for major and strategic growth at Wisbech.   To support this 
  growth, additional investment in infrastructure will be required – notably through improvements to the 
  transport network.
24.8 Such investment is expected to be provided by the development industry, and by service providers 
  and public bodies including Cambridgeshire County Council and the Cambridgeshire & Peterborough 
  Combined Authority.
24.9 A number of projects to improve Wisbech’s transport infrastructure have been proposed (such as the 
  Wisbech Access Strategy). Notably, during the plan period Wisbech will potentially see the
  re-establishment of a rail service and provision of a new railway station. This will positively enhance 
  the town through increasing travel choices, and significantly improving connectivity to important 
  centres of employment and education, such as Cambridge.
Regeneration of Wisbech
24.10 Whilst Wisbech is by some margin the largest of the Fenland market towns and is the main centre 
   for employment, it faces a unique set of challenges, including notable constraints to development 
   such as low land values and flood risk.117    
  24.11 Wisbech has high employment, but work tends to be in lower-skilled occupations with generally 
   lower wages. Poor transport connectivity constrains access to higher-paid employment. Commuting 
   to Peterborough (Wisbech’s nearest city) is limited and there is virtually no commuting to Cambridge. 
24.12 Wisbech High Street has seen conversions from shops to restaurants, cafés, pubs and bars over 
   the last fifteen years. This increase in cafés, restaurants and pubs has not yet translated into a busy 
   evening economy for the town, which generally feels quiet after 7pm.
24.13 Health outcomes are generally worse in Wisbech than England averages, with higher instances of 
   diseases associated with lifestyle. 
24.14 Fenland District Council is currently preparing a masterplan for the regeneration of central Wisbech, 
   which will support delivery of the following objectives.
    • Identifying key opportunity sites for redevelopment across the town
    • Public realm improvements and improved connectivity and legibility
    • Maximising the value and benefits of the town’s heritage assets such as Wisbech Castle
    • Bringing vacant sites and buildings back into use 
    • The development of creative and flexible work space
    • New multifunctional community space to cater for the needs of local residents
24.15 Policy LP35 enables the implementation of development which contributes to the regeneration of  
   Wisbech.
 Policy LP35: Regeneration of Wisbech 
 Wisbech is set for widespread improvements, growth and regeneration as set out in the Wisbech 
 Masterplan. This will include the renewal and redevelopment of opportunity areas.
 
 Site allocation: Nene Waterfront, Chase Street
Site 
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP35.01 40338 178 1.58
 Development proposals should:
  • Provide an active frontage to the river;
  • Deliver high-density mixed-use development reflecting the town centre location;
  • Demonstrate that development is compatible with the Transport Safeguarding Area designation 
   and operation of Wisbech Port;
  • Be accompanied by an assessment of Flood Risk which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA 
   Level 2 assessment.
Housing development
24.16 New housing development in Wisbech will be located within the settlement boundary, at opportunity 
   areas and at site allocations. Policy LP36 designates site allocations for new residential development 
   in Wisbech. 118    
   Policy LP36: Residential site allocations for Wisbech
 The following sites are allocated for housing development:
 Site allocation: Land off Halfpenny Lane Land between New Drove and the A47, East of   
       Halfpenny Lane, West of Elm Low Road
Site 
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP36.01 40371 316 14.75
 Development proposals should include:
  • A Transport Assessment and provide a suitable access and provision of footway/cycleways to   
   create links to Elm Low Road and Halfpenny Lane;
  • Appropriate mitigation of potential land contamination;
  • Noise mitigation measure along the southern and western boundaries of the site as appropriate; 
   and
  • Appropriate landscaping and boundary treatment to reduce impacts on the countryside landscape 
   and create separation from adjacent employment land.
 Site allocation: Land at Meadowgate
Site 
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP36.02 40158 10 1.23
 The site was granted outline planning permission after the base date (application ref: F/YR20/0054/O, 
 decision issued 17 November 2021). It is expected that the site will be developed in accordance with 
 the planning permission.
 Site allocation: Site at 5 North Street
Site 
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP36.03 40337 10 0.11
 The site is located within Wisbech’s town centre, providing a suitable location for high-density 
 development. The scheme should deliver positive regeneration and enhancement of the street-scene, 
 and should be designed in a manner which is sensitive to the site’s location within the Conservation 
 Area and proximity to several listed buildings and the River Nene.
 Development proposals should provide:
  • An assessment of Flood Risk which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 assessment; 
  • A suitable access and footway and cycleway connectivity; and
  • Appropriate mitigation of potential land contamination.
 Sites for housing development with extant planning permission
 The following sites had extant planning permission at time of preparing this Local Plan*. These sites are 
 allocated for the purpose of providing clarity on the nature and scale of development and to secure 
 the principle of development over the plan period.
 No specific policy requirements are set as it is expected that sites will be developed in accordance with 
 their planning permission. 119        
  Site 
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings** Site Name
LP36.04 40017 11 Land at 35 North End
LP36.05 40022 10Aware House Learning 
Development Aids Ltd Duke Street
LP36.06 40025 149 Land East Of 46 Old Lynn Road
LP36.07 40056 137The College of West Anglia Elm 
High Road
LP36.08 40067 220 Land East Of 88 Sutton Road
LP36.09 40163 77 ***Chrysanthemum House Land to 
south of Barton Road and north of 
Magazine Lane
LP36.10 40366 21Former Pike Textiles Land at North 
End
LP36.11 40503 9 Land north East of 53 The Chase
LP36.12 40506 15 11-12 High Street
LP36.13 40509 9Wisbech Vehicle Exchange Old 
Lynn Road
LP36.14 40513 19Site of Old British Gas Depot 
Chase Street
LP36.15 40530 9134A Ramnoth Road Wisbech 
Cambridgeshire PE13 2SW
 *   Sites with extant planning permission or resolution to grant planning permission at 01 April 2021 
   with total site capacity of 5 or more dwellings.
 **   Number of dwellings reflects net commitment at 01 April 2021.
 ***  Dwelling equivalent of 100-bed care home
Employment development
24.17 Economic growth is fundamental to Wisbech’s regeneration. Policy LP37 makes site allocations 
   for new employment development in Wisbech, and will contribute to achieving Fenland’s jobs 
   growth requirement.
 Policy LP37: Site allocations for non-residential development in Wisbech
 The following sites are allocated for non-residential development:
 Employment allocation: South Wisbech
Site 
AllocationSHELAA Area (Ha)
LP37.01 40002*** 66.88
 The site provides an extensive area suitable for employment development. There is some existing 
 employment development at the east of site. It is estimated that approximately 60 hectares of land is 
 available, which is expected to be developed incrementally over the course of the plan period. 
 Development proposals should:
  • Provide a mix of employment uses, including uses within classes B and E(g));
  • Land to the west of Halfpenny Lane could accommodate live/work units.120    
    • Be designed in a coherent and coordinated manner which does not prejudice development of   
   the wider site;
  • Support the delivery of improvements to the transport network;
  • Undertake an assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 
   Assessment;
  • Provide appropriate mitigation of contaminated land;
  • Due to the site’s location within a HSE Consultation Zone, demonstrate that the proposal is   
   compatible with Health and Safety Executive advice; and
  • Minimise the loss of high-quality habitats and adverse impacts on protected species, providing   
   mitigation and biodiversity net gain in accordance with Policy LP23; and
  • Provide appropriate landscaping and planting to reduce visual impacts on the landscape,   
   particularly at the southern boundary with the A47.
 Employment allocation: Nene Waterfront
Site 
AllocationSHELAA Area (Ha)
LP37.02 40004*** 30.04
 The site is an existing area of employment development at Nene Waterfront and Port area which is 
 suitable for regeneration, renewal and intensification. It is estimated that 15 ha of land is available
  for development over the plan period. Development proposals should provide:
  • A mix of employment uses, including uses within classes B and E(g));
  • An assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2;
  • Appropriate mitigation of contaminated land;
  • A site layout and design which encourages pedestrian and cycle connectivity, which creates   
   connections to public rights of way within the site boundary;
  • Mitigation and biodiversity net gain in accordance with Policy LP23, and avoid adverse impacts  
   on the River Nene County Wildlife Site and protected species; and
  • An assessment of the proposals’ effects on the significance of heritage assets within and in proximity 
   of the site.
 Extant sites for major employment development
 The following sites had extant planning permission at time of preparing this Local Plan. These sites are  
 allocated for the purpose of providing clarity on the nature and scale of development and to secure the 
 principle of development over the plan period.
 No specific policy requirements are set as it is expected that sites will be developed in accordance with  
 their planning permission.
Site 
AllocationSHELAAArea 
(Ha)Site NamePermitted 
Use
LP37.03 40398 0.23Plot 4 Land South West of 47 
Algores WayB2 General 
industrial
LP37.04 40402 1.74Land South of Foster Business 
Park, 79, Boleness RoadOther
LP37.05 40415 0.56H L Hutchinson Ltd, 
Weasenham LaneB1a Office
LP37.06 40534 7.48Land South East of Burrall Plas 
Tec Limited Cromwell Road 
Wisbech CambridgeshireB8 Storage & 
distribution121    
  LP37.07 40536 1.99Land North East Of 25 
Cromwell Road Wisbech 
CambridgeshireOther
LP37.08 40537 1.95Storage Building at Dagless 
Limited Land North of Brigstock 
Road Wisbech CambridgeshireB2 General 
industrial
LP37.09 40538 0.7711 Europa Way Wisbech 
Cambridgeshire PE13 2TZB2 General 
industrial
 *** Amended site boundary see Sites Evidence Report
March
24.18 March is Fenland’s second largest town by population (22,220 persons at mid 2018), and is an 
   attractive and popular place in which to live. The Spatial Strategy (Part B) directs the greatest 
   amount of housing to growth.
24.19 March is an important location for employment, such as at the number of food production
   businesses, and is an important centre for public administration with the District Council and HMP 
   Whitemoor located in the town. March’s rail station provides access to the rail network.
24.20 March’s town centre offers shops and access to a range of services and facilities. The town’s central 
   shopping parade boasts some beautiful, historic architecture, the iconic war memorial and some 
   popular, long-standing stores. However, the retail offer as a whole is not as strong as it could be.
24.21 Whilst March is an important centre for education and employment, it has limited educational and 
   employment opportunities, resulting in young people leaving the town to achieve their ambitions.
24.22 The Growing Fenland - March: Market Town Masterplan, prepared in partnership with the  
   Cambridgeshire & Peterborough Combined Authority, identifies initiatives to:
    • Improve the town centre; 
    • Development programme for small and medium sized enterprise; and
    • Increase the supply and availability of dwellings. 
24.23 Fenland District Council is leading a project to regenerate March’s town centre through the Future 
   High Street Business Case, reflecting the bid to central government. 
24.24 Fenland District Council (FDC) has secured funding, from a range of sources, including Cambridge 
   and Peterborough Combined Authority and the DLUHC for an ambitious £8.4 million investment 
   in March town centre. The investment will deliver five projects, transforming the heart of the town 
   into a welcoming new destination which benefits local people, businesses, and visitors. These are:
    • A dramatic intervention to transform Broad Street
    • Opening up the Riverside areas to improve visibility and access
    • Redeveloping the historic Market Place
    • Acre Road Regeneration
    • Reactivating vacant units & Flats Over Shops programme
24.25 March’s Neighbourhood Plan was made in 2017. The March Neighbourhood Plan addresses a 
   broad range of planning issues. Notably the plan aims to make March’s town centre a shopping 
   destination of choice for residents, businesses and visitors, and increase and improve the level of 
   provision and quality of recreational land facilities.122    
  24.26 Policy LP38 seeks to complement the March Neighbourhood Plan through supporting the 
   regeneration of March town centre and increasing provision of open space and sports facilities. 
   The policy identifies an opportunity area for mixed-use development, including the development of 
   new homes.
 Policy LP38: March Community Regeneration
 March Town Centre Opportunity Area
Site 
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP38.01 40262 55 4.47
 Land located behind high street shops, and directly south of the river, provides an ‘Opportunity Area’ 
 to enable town centre regeneration.
 The area is under-utilised and could deliver regeneration through intensification, re-development   
 and renewal. Development should provide a mix of uses which are compatible with and enhance the  
 vitality of the town centre. This should include an element of residential development and   
 employment development, in addition to town centre uses. It is anticipated that the site could deliver a 
 minimum of 55 homes and a minimum of 1 ha of employment land. 
 The site is partially located within the March Conservation Area and includes listed buildings and   
 buildings of local interest. A heritage-led approach to regeneration is encouraged. Detailed assessment 
 will be required to conserve and enhance valued heritage assets, routes, trees, and key views of 
 landmarks. 
 Proposals should demonstrate how any adverse impacts on the local highway network, notably on   
 town centre junctions and parking, will be mitigated.
 Pedestrian and cycle connectivity should be enhanced, and in particularly should deliver improvement 
 to the riverbank footpath.
 Open Space and Sports Provision
 March experiences a deficit of open space and sports provision. There is a clear community aspiration 
 to deliver new and enhanced open spaces and facilities which provide opportunities for play, sport, 
 recreation and access to the countryside and natural spaces.
 Delivering these aspirations will involve a coordinated, multi-agency response, requiring collaboration 
 between public and private sector partners. It is vital that proposals for new development prioritise 
 open space and sports provision within their schemes.
 The Policies Map identifies a broad location for the provision of open space, sports recreation, and  
 leisure facilities, located to the west of March and south of the River Nene. Proposals which will 
 significantly increase open space, sports, recreation or leisure provision within, this broad location, 
 will generally be supported. This area includes permitted employment uses (see Policy LP40 and site 
 LP40.08). Additional employment would be particularly supported where this contributes to the delivery 
 of open space and recreation uses. 
Housing development
24.27 New housing development at March will be located within the settlement boundary, at the town 
   centre opportunity area and at site allocations. Policy LP39 makes site allocations for new residential
   development in March. 123    
   P olicy LP39: Site allocations for March
 The following sites are allocated for development:
 Site alloca tion: Land north of Knight’s End Road and east of the A141
Site 
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP39.01 40285 1,200 50.56
 F or policy requirements, refer to site-specific Policy LP41.
 Site alloca tion: Land Southeast of 433 Wisbech Road
Site 
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP39.02 40252 294 13.7
 Development proposals should provide:
  •  Suitable vehicular access, and footway and cycleway along the Estover R oad frontage with   
   connections to Alder Close/Elm R oad and the Estover Road Playing Fields;
  •  Undertake an assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 
   assessment;
  •  An archaeological evaluation, including a pre -determination geophysical survey and trial   
   trenching , with mitigation measures secured through planning condition;
  •  Safeguarding of protected trees located on site and appropriate landscaping and planting to   
   reduce visual impacts on the landscape, and create a gentle transition from the built area to   
   countryside. 
 Site alloca tion: Land south of Knight’s End Road and West of Wimblington Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP39.03 40382 (N. parcel) 189 8.81
 Development should provide:
  •  A suitable vehicular access, and footway and cycleway connections including to W imblington   
   R oad, Knight’s End Road and the March Public Byway No. 18;
  •  A sensitively designed scheme which conserves the setting of listed buildings in proximity of the   
   site including key views of St W endreda’s Church;
  • An assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA L evel 2 assessment; and
  •  R etention of existing hedgerows and trees on the site where possible, with appropriate landscaping 
   and planting to reduce visual impact on the open countryside.
 Site alloca tion: Land west of Wimblington Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP39.04 40382 (S. parcel) 152 7.07
 Development should provide:
  •  A suitable vehicular access, and footway and cycleway connections including to W imblington   
   R oad, Knight’s End Road and the March Public Byway No. 18;124    
    • A sensitively designed scheme which conserves the setting of listed buildings in proximity of the site 
   including key views of St Wendreda’s Church, and which is well-related to adjacent site allocations 
   in terms of site layout, form, scale and materials;
  • Connectivity with adjacent site allocations, including vehicular and pedestrian/cycle access;
  • An assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 assessment; 
   and
  • Retention of existing hedgerows and trees on the site where possible, with appropriate landscaping 
   and planting to reduce visual impact on the open countryside.
 Site allocation: Land to the rear of 81Upwell Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP39.05 40190 98 3.94
 Development proposals should provide:
  • Suitable vehicular access, and footway and cycleway connections to adjacent Public Rights of Way 
   to the south and disused railway to the west of the site;
  • Undertake an assessment of Flood Risk which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2;
  • A heritage statement, archaeological desk-based assessment and geophysical survey to inform a 
   mitigation strategy; and
  • Appropriate landscaping and planting including on the southern boundary to reduce visual impacts 
   on the open countryside.
 In addition, proposals should consider the potential to provide habitat restoration, as part of a wider  
 habitats network.
 Site allocation: Westry Hall. Wisbech Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP39.06 40430 62 2.49
 Development proposals should: 
  • Demonstrate that the proposed scheme will not prejudice the existing or future planned waste 
   management uses;
  • Be supported by a Transport Assessment and Travel Plan;
  • Undertake an assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2; and
  • Provide an assessment of the scheme’s impact on the significance of heritage assets within and in  
   proximity of the site, notably the setting of the Church of St Mary. 
 Site allocation: Land at Mill Hill
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP39.07 40115*** 48 1.72
 Development proposals should provide:
  • Suitable vehicular access and pedestrian and cycleway connectivity to the existing transport network 
   and adjacent site allocations;
  • A sensitively designed scheme which is well-related to adjacent site allocations in terms of site   
   layout, form, scale and materials;125    
    • Assessment and mitigation of contaminated land;
  • Mitigation of habitat loss and biodiversity net gain in accordance with policy LP23;
  • A programme of archaeological investigation;
  • Appropriate landscaping and planting to reduce visual impacts on the landscape.
 Site allocation: Land east of Berryfield
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP39.08 40126 24 0.97
 Development proposals should:
  • Include an assessment of Flood Risk which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2   
   assessment; 
  • Relate well to adjacent site allocations through employing good design, notably in terms of site  
   layout, form, scale and materials;
  • Provide connectivity with adjacent site allocations, particularly for pedestrians, cyclists and   
   emergency vehicles; and
  • Provide landscaping and planting at eastern and northern boundaries to reduce visual impacts   
   from development. 
 Site allocation: Hereward Hall
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP39.09 40315 19 1.35
 Development of the site should:
  • Include a mix of housing and employment uses, providing intensification of the use of the site.
  • Retain valuable boundary hedgerows and trees where possible to enhance biodiversity and amenity 
   value.
  • Provide a foot/cycle link which is kept permanently open to the public open space to the north of  
   the site.
 Site allocation: Land west of 85 Wimblington Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP39.10 40446 18 0.85
 
 Development proposals should:
  • Relate well to the adjacent site allocation through employing good design, notably in terms of site 
   layout, form, scale and materials;
  • Enable connectivity with adjacent site allocation, particularly for pedestrians, cyclists and emergency 
   vehicles; 
  • Proposals should be accompanied by an assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the 
   recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 assessment; and
  • Provide landscaping and planting northern boundary to reduce visual impacts of development.126   Site allocation: Land fronting Elm Road and south and west of Highfield House
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP39.11 40434 9 0.28
 Development proposals should:
  • Include an assessment of Flood Risk which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2   
   assessment; 
  • Provide an archaeological evaluation; and
  • Where possible, retain existing mature trees to enhance biodiversity and amenity value.
 Site allocation: Land south-east of 433 Wisbech Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP39.12 40194 8 0.53
 Development proposals should:
  • Provide a suitable vehicular access and footway and cycleway connections; and
  • Respond sensitively to the Fen Causeway Roman Road which crosses the site.
 Site allocation: Queen’s Street Close Car Park
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP39.13 40316 6 0.17
 Development of the site will involve the re-development of an existing car park within March’s built area. 
 Development proposals should:
  • Provide a turning head at Queen Street Close;
  • Include an assessment of potential land contamination; and 
  • Where possible, retain existing hedgerows and mature trees.
 Sites for housing development with extant planning permission
 The following sites had extant planning permission at time of preparing this Local Plan*. These sites are 
 allocated for the purpose of providing clarity on the nature and scale of development, and to secure the 
 principle of development over the plan period.
 No specific policy requirements are set as it is expected that sites will be developed in accordance with 
 their planning permission. 
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings** Site name
LP39.14 40020 14 Land West of Old Council Depot
LP39.15 40031 24Site of Former Kingswood Park Residential 
Home
LP39.16 40036 12 Land East of Davern Workwear Ltd
LP39.17 40037 18 Davern Workwear Ltd
LP39.18 40041 28 Land East of Berryfield127    
      
  LP39.19 40043 7 Land Rear Of 36 High Street
LP39.20 40050 34 Former Highways Depot
LP39.21 40052 9 Land north of Woodville
LP39.22 40073 19 Site of Former Gas Distribution Centre
LP39.23 40077 118Land North of The Green and North Of 
145-159 Wisbech Road
LP39.24 40082 13 Land North and West of Elliott Lodge
LP39.25 40093 9 Land North West Of 12 Knights End Road
LP39.26 40105 9 Rear of 131-137 Upwell Road
LP39.27 40263 19 Land to the west of Hereward Hall
LP39.28 40264 48 Land to the east of Norwood Road
LP39.29 40511 5 Nelson House, 22 Norwood Road
LP39.30 40517 26 15 Station Road
LP39.31 40523 972 - 74 High Street March 
Cambridgeshire
LP39.32 40524 9W H Feltham and Son Cawood Close 
March Cambridgeshire
LP39.33 40525 40Land South West Of 1 To 23 Springfield 
Avenue March Cambridgeshire
 *  Sites with extant planning permission or resolution to grant planning permission at 01 April 2021 with 
  total site capacity of 5 or more dwellings.
 ** Number of dwellings reflects net commitment at 01 April 2021.
 *** Amended site boundary see Sites Evidence R eport.
Employment and other non-residential development
24.28  P olicy LP40 makes site allocations for new employment development and other non-residential   
   uses in March. Employment growth will contribute to achieving jobs growth aspirations for Mar ch 
   and Fenland.
 Policy LP40: Site allocations for non-residential development in March
 The following sites are allocated for non-residential development:
 Employment allocatio n: March Trading Estate
Site
AllocationSHELAA Area (Ha)
LP40.01 40008 78.4
 The site is partly developed, providing employment and some retail uses. It is estimated that 
 approximately 40 ha of land is available for employment development. Development proposals
 should:
  •  P rovide development within Use Classes B and E;
  •  Be accompanied by an assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the 
   SFRA Level 2;
  •  P rovide appropriate mitigation of contaminated land; and
  •  Appropriate landscaping and planting should be provided at the north west of the site to avoid   
   harm to the amenity of dwellings located east of the A141.128    
   The Fen Causeway Roman Road crosses the site. A full archaeological evaluation of the site is required. 
 Should proposed schemes include any part of the Fens Causeway, this will be demarcated and if 
 necessary safeguarded. 
 Employment allocation: Land to the north-west of the Mill Hill Roundabout
Site
AllocationSHELAA Area (Ha)
LP40.02 40351 5.30
 
 Development proposals should:
  • Include a mix of employment uses, such as uses within classes B and E(g));
  • Provide a new access from the A141 and/or via adjacent site allocation; 
  • Appropriate landscaping and planting to reduce visual impacts on the landscape; and
  • Provide walking routes which connect to March Public Byway No. 22 located to the east of the site.
 Employment allocation: Land north of Isle of Ely Way
Site
AllocationSHELAA Area (Ha)
LP40.03 40286 4.02
 Development proposals should:
  • Include a mix of employment uses, such as uses within classes B and E(g));
  • Be accompanied by a Transport Statement to understand traffic impact across highway network;
  • Provide a suitable access, footway and cycleway connections;
  • Proposals should be accompanied by an assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the   
   recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 assessment; and
  • Provide appropriate landscaping and planting to reduce visual impacts on the landscape.
 Employment allocation: Land north of Mill Hill Garage
Site
AllocationSHELAA Area (Ha)
LP40.04 40276 0.4
 Development proposals should provide:
  • Employment uses, such as uses within classes B and E(g));
  • A sensitively designed scheme which is well-related to adjacent site allocations in terms of site   
   layout, form, scale and materials;
  • Connectivity with adjacent site allocations, including vehicular access to adjacent employment site 
   allocation where required; 
  • Landscaping and planting should be provided at the north west of the site to avoid harm to the 
   amenity of dwellings located east of the A141; and
  • Significant habitat compensation measures to achieve biodiversity net gain.
 Extant sites for major employment and non-residential development
 The following sites had extant planning permission at time of preparing this Local Plan. These sites are 
 allocated for the purpose of providing clarity on the nature and scale of development, and to secure the 
 principle of development over the plan period.
 No specific policy requirements are set as it is expected that sites will be developed in accordance with  
 their planning permission.129Site 
AllocationSHELAAArea 
(Ha)Site name Permitted use
LP40.05 40290 6.47 Westry Retail ParkA3 Restaurants & 
cafes 
LP40.06 40386 0.19 Freedom Motorcycles, Mill ViewB8 Storage & 
distribution
LP40.07 40420 3.00March Cold Stores Limited 20 - 
24 Marwick RoadB8 Storage & 
distribution
LP40.08 40535 1.03Gaul Farm Industrial Units Gaul 
Road March CambridgeshireOther
LP40.09 40540 0.6738 Whittlesey Road March 
Cambridgeshire  B1c Light industry
LP40.10 40541 0.58Coleseed Business Complex 
Upwell Road March 
Cambridgeshire PE15 0DJ B8 Storage & 
distribution
   
Site-specific policies
24.29 The following policy provides bespoke guidance and requirements for the development of site 
   allocation LP39.01.
 Policy LP41: Land north of Knight’s End Road and East of the A141
 (Site allocation LP39.01)
 The site provides opportunity for the development of approximately 1,200 new dwellings. The inclusion 
 of other uses, such as local employment and retail, are encouraged to enhance the quality of the 
 scheme through creating variety and activity.
 New on-site community facilities, public open spaces, and other infrastructure will be required to meet 
 the needs of residents of the site. Notably, additional education infrastructure will be required, including 
 provision of a new primary school as indicated in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
 The precise nature of community facilities should be informed by consultation with the community and 
 an audit of existing local infrastructure.  
 A concept plan will need to be prepared for the whole site, informed by pre-application consultation   
 with the local community and all landowners, and submitted to the Council for approval as part of a  
 planning application. The concept plan should show how development will relate acceptably to the 
 strategic and local highway network and provide pedestrian and cycle links to the town centre, Neale 
 Wade Academy, adjoining neighbourhoods, and existing public rights of way - notably March Public   
 Footpath No. 12. 
 New vehicular accesses and improvements to the highway network will be required to mitigate transport 
 impacts arising from the site. A Transport Statement will be required to understand the scheme’s traffic 
 impacts across the wider highway network.
 The design solution for the site should pay particular attention to the need to protect and enhance 
 the setting of St Wendreda’s Church and the cluster of listed buildings around it, maintaining the rural 
 character of the immediate area and preserving views of the church. 
 Archaeological evaluation and mitigation measures will be required. The most significant archaeological 
 assets should be retained in situ and managed either for informal open space or by other means that  
 will preserve their integrity in the long term.  130 To mitigate visual impact and create a high-quality environment, landscape and noise mitigation 
 measures should be provided along the A141. 
 Appropriate landscaping and planting should be provided along the site’s western and southern 
 boundaries to reduce visual impacts on the landscape, and create a gentle transition from the built 
 area to countryside.
 Proposals should be accompanied by an assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations 
 of the SFRA Level 2 assessment. 
Whittlesey
24.30. Whittlesey is a popular and attractive place to live with a strong community spirit. It is home to a  
   number of important local employers, including Hanson Brick and McCain Foods. The rail station 
   offers links to local employment centres such as Peterborough and Cambridge. The town benefits 
   from its close proximity to Peterborough, which creates opportunities for residents to work, study, and shop.
24.31. Whittlesey has a rich heritage and culture. At the centre of the historic town centre is the 17th 
   Century Buttercross. To the west of the town lies the Must Farm excavation site, described by the 
   BBC as “Britain’s Pompei”, which contains the best-preserved Bronze Age dwellings ever found. 
   The Mud Walls, dotted across town, date back 200 years and were an innovative local way to   
   avoid the unpopular Brick Tax. The rich history inspires a vibrant local culture, with regular cultural 
   events including the “Straw Bear Festival”, ‘BusFest’ vintage vehicle gathering, and Christmas Extravaganza.
24.32. The relocation of the bus station has brought new life to the centre of town. However, there are not 
   enough shops in and around the town centre, and the overall retail offer is not diverse or distinctive 
   enough to compete with the wider range of shops available elsewhere, particularly in Peterborough.
24.33. The Growing Fenland: Whittlesey - A Market Town fit for the Future80 report identifies the following 
   proposals for Whittlesey:
    • Re-locate and provide an enhanced market, provide additional support to traders and better 
     promote the market to residents and visitors.
    • Encourage more events and activities on the square, especially in spring and summer, to   
     create a more vibrant ‘piazza’ feel.
    • Develop a new visitor centre that showcases local artefacts and tells the story of Whittlesey,  
     and Fenland more generally, from the Bronze Age to the modern day.
    • Developing a Heritage Walk to provide residents with a fascinating guided tour through key  
     landmarks in the town and beyond.
    • Promote new activities and assets, plus existing events like the Straw Bear festival, through a  
     new website.
    • Improve access to educational opportunities to make it easier for people to access educational 
     institutions.
    • Create a new forum for all those with an interest in skills in the town, including businesses, to 
     ensure that provision matches future skills demands.
    • Deliver a coordinated set of transport improvements in and around the town that will facilitate 
     greater mobility and connectivity.
24.34. The A605 passes west to east through Whittlesey and is a main thoroughfare connecting 
   Peterborough to towns and rural villages within Fenland. Delivery of a relief road for Whittlesey 
   has been a long-held aspiration for the town, which would improve the local environment and 
   physical appearance of Whittlesey’s historic town centre by reducing congestion and removing 
80 https://cambridgeshirepeterborough-ca.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/documents/market-towns/masterplans/Whittlesey-Mas -
terplan.pdf131   HGV traffic from the town. Recently, an inception report commissioned by Whittlesey Town Council, 
   with the support of Fenland District Council, provides justification for the scheme and recommends 
   it proceed to the Strategic Outline Business Case stage of development.
24.35. At time of writing this Draft Local Plan, Whittlesey Town Council is preparing a Neighbourhood
   Plan which, if made, will set additional policies for Whittlesey. Delivery of the relief road is a key 
   aspiration of the emerging Neighbourhood Plan. Policy LP42 seeks to complement the 
   emerging Whittlesey Neighbourhood Plan and supports implementation of the Growing Fenland 
   report’s recommendations. 
 Policy LP42: Whittlesey - A Market Town fit for the Future
 To improve the Whittlesey’s historic local environment, the Council with the support of its partners, will 
 work to reduce vehicular traffic, congestion and the number of HCVs travelling through Whittlesey. This 
 will include deliver of projects identified in the Whittlesey Market Towns Transport Strategy (or subsequent 
 replacement document). 
 At the core of meeting Whittlesey’s transport needs is the delivery of the Whittlesey Relief Road. 
 Development proposals should support, and not prejudice, delivery of the Whittlesey Relief Road. 
Residential site allocations
24.36 As a market town, Whittlesey provides a focus for new housing development. The following sites 
   are allocated for the construction of new dwellings.
 Policy LP43: Residential site allocations in Whittlesey
 The following sites are allocated for development:
 SIte allocation: Land at Eastrea Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP43.01 40300 156 7.26
 Development should provide:
  • A new junction or roundabout and footway/cycleway at the A605;
  • A foot/cycleway connection to the Whittlesey Public Byway No. 42 at the southern boundary of 
   the site and, if possible, connections to the adjacent lane and residential development to the west;
  • A Transport Assessment and Travel Plan, which take into account the effects of existing planning 
   consents in the area;
  • Appropriate mitigation of potential land contamination; and
  • Retention of existing hedgerows and trees on the northern, eastern and southern boundaries 
   other than for highway and utility services access.
 
 Proposals will be required to mitigate any evidenced recreational impacts on the Nene Washes SPA.
 Site allocation: Land rear of 98-112 Drybread Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP43.02 40335 11 0.32
 
 132Development should provide:
  • Single storey dwellings only;
  • Pedestrian and cycle links from the north and south of the site; and
  • Assessment of potentially contaminated land.
 The Council will require the submission of sufficient information from the applicant to enable the 
 completion of a project-level screening exercise under the Habitats Regulations Assessment process   
  and, if that screening concludes that full Appropriate Assessment is needed, sufficient information 
 to enable it to complete that Appropriate Assessment. This process will need to demonstrate that the   
 development will not have a significant adverse effect on the integrity of the Nene Washes SAC, SPA   
 and Ramsar. Proposals will be required to mitigate any evidenced recreational impacts on the Nene   
 Washes SPA.
 Sites for housing development with extant planning permission
 The following sites had extant planning permission at time of preparing this Local Plan*. These sites are 
 allocated for the purpose of providing clarity on the nature and scale of development, and to secure 
 theprinciple of development over the plan period.
 No specific policy requirements are set as it is expected that sites will be developed in accordance   
 with their planning permission.
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings** Area (Ha)
LP43.03 40012 452North and South of Eastrea Road (Local Plan 
2014 strategic allocation with multiple extant 
planning permissions)
LP43.04 40042 220 Land North of Whittlesey East of East Delph
LP43.05 40526 18158 Stonald Road Whittlesey Peterborough 
Cambridgeshire PE7 1QP
LP43.06 40527 9Land North and South of Grosvenor House 
Grosvenor Road Whittlesey Cambridgeshire
LP43.07 40528 9Land West Of 36 Peterborough Road Whittlesey 
Cambridgeshire
 *  Sites with extant planning permission or resolution to grant planning permission at 01 April 2021
  with total site capacity of 5 or more dwellings.
 ** Number of dwellings reflects net commitment at 01 April 2021.
Employment and other non-residential development
24.37 Policy LP44 makes site allocations for new employment development in Whittlesey. Employment  
   growth will contribute to achieving jobs growth aspirations for the area.
 Policy LP44: Site allocations for non-residential development in Whittlesey
 The following sites are allocated for non-residential development:
 Employment allocation: Land to the south-west of the proposed realignment of the A605 at Kings Dyke
Site
AllocationSHELAA Area (Ha)
LP44.01 40270 (S. parcel) 8.59
 133Development proposals should provide:
 • Include a mix of employment uses, such as uses within classes B and E(g));
 • Provide a suitable access from bypass, and footway and cycleway connections;
 • Investigate potential for contaminated land and provide remediation where necessary;
 • Proposals should be accompanied by an assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations 
  of the SFRA Level 2 assessment; and
 • Significant compensation measures to achieve biodiversity net gain. 
 The Council will require the submission of sufficient information from the applicant to enable the  
 completion of a project-level screening exercise under the Habitats Regulations Assessment process 
 and, if that screening concludes that full Appropriate Assessment is needed, sufficient information 
 to enable it to complete that Appropriate Assessment. This process will need to demonstrate that the 
 development will not have a significant adverse effect on the integrity of the Nene Washes SAC, SPA 
 and Ramsar.
 Extant sites for major employment development
 The following sites had extant planning permission at time of preparing this Local Plan. These sites 
 are allocated for the sake of providing clarity on the nature and scale of development, and to secure 
 the principle of development over the plan period.
 No specific policy requirements are set as it is expected that sites will be developed in accordance with 
 their planning permission. 
Site
AllocationSHELAA Area (Ha) Site name Permitted use
LP44.0240270 (N. 
parcel)11 Churchfield Farm, Kings DykeB1(c) and B8 
floor space
LP44.03 40417 9.3 Lattersey Field, Benwick Road Other
LP44.04 40502 1.23 Vacant site, Kings Dyke Other
LP44.05 40532 0.41Land North East Of 1 
Ashley Industrial Estate 241 
Station Road Whittlesey 
CambridgeshireB2 General 
industrial
Chatteris
24.38 Chatteris brings together high-tech manufacturing, glorious countryside, nationally significant 
   agriculture, and a new national museum in one place. A strong sense of community spirit is a 
   defining feature of Chatteris. This can be seen most obviously at some of the bigger community 
   events, like the Christmas light switch on, midsummer festival and Remembrance Parade, and 
   also in the many interest groups and clubs in the town. Local businesses are community-spirited 
   with two business groupings - Chatteris in Business and the Chatteris Business Cluster. 
24.39 Chatteris “looks in all directions” with workers commuting to March, Ely, Huntingdon, and to 
   a lesser extent, Cambridge and Peterborough. This central location is a real strength for the town,
   but currently public transport options let Chatteris down. Buses are infrequent, and some key 
   destinations (such as Peterborough) require changing, leading to lengthy journeys (over two hours). 
   This makes commuting via public transport an impossibility in many ways. As a result, Chatteris is 
   very car dependent.
24.40 Chatteris is itself an important location for employment with some high-tech businesses, including 
   the emerging Advanced Manufacturing Cluster of high-end firms. However, the High Street at the 134   heart of the town has seen decline in recent years. Local retailers have noticed decline in footfall, 
   particularly since Budgens left the town. The weekly markets have become smaller, though 
   committed traders remain. Banks have also moved away, now only visiting with temporary pop-up 
   shop style provision.
 
24.41 There are many opportunities for outdoor pursuits in and around Chatteris, including fishing, 
   boating, and walking. The recent Pocket Park initiative at Little Acre Fen is a great new space, which 
   has had community involvement in its creation. However, there are some challenges in accessing 
   the local countryside. Generally, the number of public rights of way is somewhat limited. 
24.42 The Growing Fenland - Chatteris: An Aspirational Community report seeks to combine Chatteris’s 
   many strengths to boost the town’s prosperity, providing good jobs, excellent education and green 
   access. The report identifies the following interventions which will make a transformative difference 
   in Chatteris:
    • Grow Chatteris’s business base with an Advanced Manufacturing Launchpad and a potential 
     Agri-tech Launchpad facility with scope to support and grow our existing businesses and 
     increased resource for economic development to bring more high-quality employment to the 
     town.
    • Develop the provision of skills training for residents through local provision associated with 
     industrial development, adult courses, and connections to other skills providers.
    • Promote mixed housing development to enable the town to grow and develop with homes for 
     people to live at different stages of their lives. 
    • Establish a commuter shuttle bus to address Chatteris’s poor public transport provision, 
     particularly to centres of employment. 
    • Develop the ‘Chatteris Outdoors platform’ to improve access to and use of our countryside, 
     and develop this as a key attractor for our town.
    • Develop a stronger cultural offer and evening economy, through an adaptive High Street 
     and  by encouraging business to trial early evening opening, and encouraging more creative 
     uses in the town, to restore the popularity of our high street.
    • Create new cycle infrastructure, creating links to Somersham and Ely to encourage people to 
     exercise more, tackling our town’s health challenges.
    • Provide better car and bike parking management to make the high street more attractive and 
     encourage cycle commuting.
    • Create a community project funding pot to support local projects, including improvements to 
     the visual amenity of the town.
24.43 Policy LP45 supports the Growing Fenland report aspirations for economic growth, through the  
   delivery of major employment development at locations adjoining the town. 
 Policy LP45: An aspirational community
 To deliver on aspirations to significantly boost employment growth and job creation at Chatteris, this 
 Local Plan identifies two Broad Locations for Employment Growth (BLFEG) adjacent to the town. The 
 location of the BLFEGs are indicated on the Policies Map and includes areas:
  • South-West of Chatteris, north and south of the A141; and
  • North-East of Chatteris and east of the A141.
 From the Council’s evidence of available land in those areas, it is estimated that the BLFEGs could  
 provide in the region of 100 ha of employment land. Proposals for major employment development  
 within a BLFEG must be planned and implemented in a coordinated way which accords with an  
 agreed overarching Master Plan, and be linked to the timely delivery of key infrastructure. 135 A separate Master Plan should be prepared for each BLFEG, and should be informed by joint-working 
 with Fenland District Council and other relevant stakeholders. Each Master Plan should make clear 
 if all significant landowners are supportive, and should be submitted to the Council for approval by 
 its Planning Committee. If one or more landowners are not supportive of the Master Plan, then it will 
 need to be demonstrated that a Master Plan can still be delivered for the considerable majority of the 
 BLFEG without their involvement. In the absence of a Master Plan, major employment proposals will 
 be refused. All other development proposals in those areas will be determined in the context of Policy 
 LP18: Development in the Countryside, and other relevant policies.
 Whilst phasing may be agreed, the Council will need to be satisfied that the key aspects of the Master 
 Plan will be delivered. Therefore, prior to any planning permission being granted, appropriate 
 safeguards must be demonstrably in place to prevent ‘cherry-picking’ of profitable elements of the 
 BLFEG being built first and the provision of appropriate infrastructure either delayed or never 
 materialising.
 In addition to the requirements of other policies of this Local Plan, the Council will seek the following, 
 unless demonstrably inappropriate or unviable to do so:
  • Make efficient use of land;
  • Contribute to providing for a wide range of local employment opportunities that offer a choice 
   of jobs in different sectors of the economy, and especially jobs that align with an up-to-date 
   Fenland Economic Development Strategy;
  • Provide a network of green infrastructure to increase the biodiversity value of the site, which 
   where possible, protects and enhances existing habitats present on-site;
  • Incorporate design solutions to maximise energy and water efficiency and the use of energy from 
   on-site renewable and/or decentralised renewable or low carbon energy sources;
  • Provide details of a viable transport strategy to ensure the BLFEG is accessible to residents of  
   Chatteris and other communities;
  • Incorporate appropriate landscape treatment which minimises the amount of hard landscaping  
   and ensures that the development can be satisfactorily assimilated into the surrounding area;
  • Incorporate an appropriate flood risk management strategy and measures for its implementation; 
  • Demonstrate availability and deliverability of the proposed scheme; and 
  • Ensure Public Rights of Way are protected and enhanced where possible. 
Residential site allocations
24.44 As a market town, Chatteris provides a focus for new housing development. The following sites are 
   allocated for the construction of new dwellings.
 Policy LP46: Residential site allocations in Chatteris
 
 The following sites are allocated for housing development:
 Site allocation: Land south of Sailsbury House, Blackmill Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP46.01 40211*** 100 4.18
 Development should provide:
  • Widening and reconstruction of Blackmill Road, with provision of footways and cycleways;
  • Upgrading of existing Footpath No.4 to a bridleway to create a link between Chatteris and Long-
   Distance Bridgeway No. 30;
  • Investigation of effects on the transport network through a Transport Assessment and Travel Plan;136  • A sensitively designed scheme which is well-related to adjacent site allocations in terms of site   
   layout, form, scale and materials;
  • Connectivity with adjacent site allocations, including vehicular access to adjacent site allocations;
  • An assessment of Flood Risk which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 assessment; 
  • An assessment of potential land contamination with appropriate mitigation measures; and
  • Archaeological investigation to determine the need for archaeological mitigation works; and
  • Appropriate landscaping and planting to reduce visual impacts.
 Site allocation: Land east of 80 The Elms
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP46.02 40326 90 3.66
 Development should:
  • Provide a vehicular access at The Elms, and provide footways/cycleways to create connections   
   for pedestrians and cyclists to schools, to Green Park and Public Rights of Way in the locality;
  • Retain the Birch Fen awarded watercourse and provide suitable maintenance measures;
  • Make best use of the Birch Fen awarded watercourse in the site layout design;
  • Provide significant compensation measures, which are necessary to achieve biodiversity net gain;
  • Retain existing hedgerows and planting on the southern and eastern boundaries, where possible, 
   and retain trees which are subject to a TPO;
  • Undertake a programme of archaeological investigation and provide a management plan for 
   medieval ridge and furrow located on site;
  • Mitigate impacts on setting of the Conservation Area and listed buildings in proximity of the site;
  • Provide appropriate noise mitigation measures along the eastern and southern boundaries;
  • Relocate or re-route underground the existing overhead powerline;
  • Safeguarding of the existing public right of way incorporated positively into the site layout;
  • Retain the existing area of open space including informal football pitch to be incorporated into 
   a comprehensive open space layout for the site; and
  • Undertake an assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 
   assessment.
 Site allocation: Womb Farm (North-West), Doddington Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP46.03 40447 53 1.88
 Development should:
  • Through the site design, maximise the benefits of Fenton Lode drain, including through the   
   orientation of buildings, outlook and location of access;
  • Provide a suitable vehicular access and pedestrian/cycle links to land to the south-east and to the 
   north to allow connections to Albert Way;
  • A sensitively designed scheme which is well-related to adjacent site allocations in terms of site 
   layout, form, scale and materials;
  • Connectivity with adjacent site allocations, including vehicular access to adjacent site allocations;
  • Undertake a programme of archaeological investigation to determine the need for archaeological 
   mitigation works; and
  • Undertake an assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 
   assessment.137 Site allocation: Land on the west side of 92 London Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
46.04 40499 52 1.87
 Development should provide:
  • A suitable vehicular access from London Road, capable of serving the site and adjacent site 
   allocations;
  • Connectivity with adjoining site allocations, particularly to create accessibility and permeability 
   for pedestrians and cyclists;
  • A Transport Statement to identify the transport issues and benefits of the scheme;
  • A sensitively designed scheme which is well-related to adjacent site allocations in terms of site   
   layout, form, scale and materials;
  • Archaeological investigation to determine the need for archaeological mitigation works; and
  • Appropriate landscaping and planting to reduce visual impacts.
 Site allocation: Land west side of Fenland Way
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP46.05 40288 20 14.16
 Development should provide:
  • A mix of residential and employment development, to provide approximately 20 dwellings and   
   8.5 ha of employment land;
  • Through the site design, maximise the benefits of Fenton Lode drain, including through the   
   orientation of buildings, outlook and location of access;
  • For the construction, access and maintenance of moorings and a turning area on Fenton Lode   
   drain with the location, extent and details to be agreed with the Middle Level Commissioners;
  • Footway/cycleway connections to the existing network, and to The Gault Public Right of Way and 
   Fenland Way;
  • Appropriate mitigation of contaminated land;
  • Archaeological investigation to determine the need for archaeological mitigation works;
  • Extensive avoidance, mitigation and enhancement measures to achieve biodiversity net gain, as 
   the site is known to support populations of protected species as well as rare plants and areas of 
   semi-natural grassland habitat. 
  • An assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 assessment; 
   and
  • Appropriate landscape screening on the southern and western boundaries.
 Site allocation: Land rear of 2-8 Gibside Avenue
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP46.06 40325 6 0.18
 Development should provide:
  • A suitable vehicular access from Gibside Avenue;
  • Car parking for the existing and proposed dwellings;
  • Single storey dwellings only;
  • Pedestrian and cycle links to the existing network; and
  • Retention of the mature Ash tree, appropriately incorporated into the site layout.138 Sites for housing development with extant planning permission
 The following sites had extant planning permission at time of preparing this Local Plan*. These sites are 
 allocated for the purpose of providing clarity on the nature and scale of development, and to secure 
 the principle of development over the plan period.
 No specific policy requirements are set as it is expected that sites will be developed in accordance with 
 their planning permission.
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings** Site name
LP46.07 40054 5 26 Bridge Street
LP46.08 40057 50 Land West Of 15 Fairbairn Way
LP46.09 40072 58 Land West and South Of 74 West Street
LP46.10 40367 248 Womb Farm
LP46.11 40384 1,000 Land South East of Chatteris, London Road
LP46.12 40505 7 22 London Road
LP46.13 40519 9 Land East Of 133 High Street
  *  Sites with extant planning permission or resolution to grant planning permission at 01 April 2021 
  with total site capacity of 5 or more dwellings.
 ** Number of dwellings reflects net commitment at 01 April 2021.
 *** Amended site boundary see Sites Evidence Report
Employment and other non-residential development
24.45 Policy LP47 makes site allocations for new employment development in Chatteris. Employment 
   growth will contribute to achieving jobs growth aspirations for the area.
 Policy LP47: Employment allocations in Chatteris
 The following sites are allocated for employment development:
 Employment allocation: Metalcraft Business Park
Site
AllocationSHELAA Area (Ha)
LP47.01 40497 14.60
 The site is partly developed, providing employment uses. It is estimated that approximately 12 ha of 
 land is available for employment development. Development proposals should:
  • Include a mix of employment uses, such as uses within classes B and E(g)), to provide a modern 
   business park and enable the expansion of existing businesses on site;
  • Provide an attractive ‘gateway’ to Chatteris, such as through the development of landmark   
   buildings;
  • Be accompanied by a Transport Assessment and Travel Plan, and provide pedestrian and cycle  
    connectivity; 
  • Undertake an assessment of Flood Risk which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 
   assessment; and
  • Be supported by an archaeological evaluation.
 Employment allocation: Honeysome Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Area (Ha)
LP47.02 40455 11.16139 Development proposals should:
  • Include a mix of employment uses, such as uses within classes B and E(g));
  • Be well-related to the adjacent employment allocation, both in terms of design and connectivity;
  • Undertake an assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 
   assessment;
  • Be supported by a Transport Assessment and Travel Plan; 
  • Deliver improvements to Honeysome Road including widening and provision of a footway; and
  • Include appropriate landscaping and planting to reduce visual impacts. 
 Employment allocation: Fenton Way Mandleys
Site
AllocationSHELAA Area (Ha)
LP47.03 40458 8.38
 Development proposals should:
  • Include a mix of employment uses, such as uses within classes B and E(g));
  • Demonstrate that the proposal will not prejudice the operation of the water recycling centre;
  • Be accompanied by an odour assessment report which considers existing odour emissions of the 
   waste water treatment works at different times of the year and in a range of different weather conditions;
  • Be informed by a Transport Assessment and Travel Plan; 
  • Contribute to the provision of a pedestrian crossing at the A142 and improvements to Slade End 
   roundabout; 
  • Undertake an assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 
   assessment; and
  • Include appropriate landscaping and planting to reduce visual impacts. 
 Employment allocation: South Fens Enterprise Park
Site
AllocationSHELAA Area (Ha)
LP47.04 40327 0.92
 Development proposals should provide:
  • Provide employment development, such as uses within classes B and E(g));
  • Undertake an assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 
   assessment; and
  • Support the delivery of pedestrian crossing improvements at the A142, and provide footway 
   improvements along Fenton Way. 
 Extant sites for major employment development
 The following sites had extant planning permission at time of preparing this Local Plan. These sites are 
 allocated for the purpose of providing clarity on the nature and scale of development, and to secure 
 the principle of development over the plan period.
 No specific policy requirements are set as it is expected that sites will be developed in accordance with 
 their planning permission. 
Site
AllocationSHELAA Area (Ha) Site name Permitted use
LP47.05 40403 0.74 Eclipse Scientific GroupB1b Research &  
development140Site
AllocationSHELAA Area (Ha) Site name Permitted use
LP47.06 40408 8.86Land west of Fenton Way and 
East of Iretons WayOther
LP47.07 40409 0.15South West of Doddington 
RoadB1a Office
LP47.08 40539 1.06Unit West of Jacks Fenland 
WayB8 Storage & 
distribution
 
25. Large Villages
25.1 Large Villages act as a service centre for surrounding rural areas, offering a good range of services  
  and facilities to meet daily needs. For example, this can include a primary school, a convenience 
  shop, post office, a doctor’s surgery, a regular bus service and employment opportunities. A village 
  of this scale typically has a population over 1,500 residents.  
Doddington
25.2 The village of Doddington is located adjacent to the A141, approximately half way between the   
  towns of March and Chatteris. It is closely related to the neighbouring village of Wimblington to the 
  North.  Doddington has an estimated population of 2,340 persons (mid-2018).
25.3 The village has a good range of local services and facilities, including a primary school, shop post  
  office and doctors’ surgery. 
Residential site allocations
25.4 As a large village, Doddington provides opportunities for new housing development. The following  
  sites, set out in Policy LP48, are allocated for the construction of new dwellings.
 Policy LP48: Residential site allocations in Doddington
 The following sites are allocated for housing development:
 Site allocation: Land west of Turf Fen Lane and south of Newgate Street
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP48.01 40140*** 145 6.64
 Development should provide:
  • Significant highway improvements at Turf Fen Lane, including widening and enhancement of footway;
  • Pedestrian and cycle links through to Cooks Green and Turf Fen Lane, including to Doddington  
   Public Footpath No. 19. 
  • Safeguarding of the setting and character of the nearby Doddington Conservation Area, listed   
   buildings and non-designated heritage assets in the vicinity including the retention of key views   
   following detailed assessment;
  • Archaeological investigation to determine the need for archaeological mitigation works;
  • Retention of potential valuable grassland habitat at eastern section of site, and provision of 
   mitigation and compensatory habitats to achieve biodiversity net gain; 
  • Appropriate assessment and mitigation of potential land contamination;
  • An assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 assessment; and
  • Landscaping and screen planting along southern site boundary to mitigate visual impacts.141 Site allocation: Land south of Benwick Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP48.02 40426 55 1.97
 Development should provide:
  • Safeguarding of the setting and character of the adjacent Doddington Conservation Area, listed 
   buildings and non-designated heritage assets in the vicinity.
  • A housing mix which takes account of the proximity of Doddington Hospital and the opportunity 
   to provide accommodation for key workers;
  • Archaeological investigation to establish the need for archaeological mitigation works; 
  • Undertake an assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 
   assessment;
  • Retention of existing hedgerows and trees where possible; and
  • Landscaping and screen planting to be provided along the site boundaries to mitigate visual 
   impacts on open countryside.
 Site allocation: Land south of Wimblington Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP48.03 40427 40 3.16
 Development should provide:
  • Safeguarding the setting and character of the nearby scheduled monument, listed buildings and 
   non-designated heritage assets in the vicinity;
  • Pedestrian/cycle connections to the adjacent public footpath on the southern boundary of the 
   site, and to adjacent allocated land;
  • A sensitively designed scheme which is well-related to the adjacent site allocation in terms of site 
   layout, form, scale and materials;
  • Archaeological investigation to be subject to pre-determination or possibly a condition to 
   determine the need for archaeological mitigation works; and
  • Retain existing hedgerows, trees and orchard within the site.
 Site allocation: Land north of Benwick Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP48.04 40235 31 1.1
 Development should provide:
 
 • Safeguarding of the setting and character of the Doddington Conservation Area, listed buildings 
   and non-designated heritage assets in the vicinity;
  • Pedestrian/cycle links to Public Footpath No.10 at the west;
  • Appropriate mitigation of potential land contamination;
  • Retention of existing hedgerows and trees, and provide landscaping and planting at northern 
   boundary to mitigate visual impacts; and
  • Significant mitigation and compensation will be required to achieve biodiversity net gain, due to 
   the extensive areas of mature trees, shrubs and grassland habitats.142 Site allocation: Land west of Turf Fen Lane and south of Newgate Street
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP48.05 40140*** 10 0.81
 Development should provide:
  • Pedestrian and cycle links to Doddington Public Footpath No. 19 and footway improvements 
   along Newgate Street with potential requirement for pedestrian crossing improvements;
  • A ‘frontage’ development, with dwellings oriented to face Newgate Street;
  • Safeguarding of the setting and character of the nearby Doddington Conservation Area, listed 
   buildings and non-designated heritage assets in the vicinity including the retention of key views   
   following detailed assessment;
  • Archaeological investigation to determine the need for archaeological mitigation works;
  • Appropriate assessment and mitigation of potential land contamination;
  • An assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 assessment; and
  • Landscaping and screen planting along southern site boundary to mitigate visual impacts.
 Site allocation: Land off Wood Street Ph3
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP48.06 40143 17 0.62
 Development of the site would provide a continuation of the current development on Wood Street. 
 
 Development should provide:
  • Vehicular access from land to the north including, connections for pedestrians and cyclists;
  • Provide a pedestrian/cycle link to Doddington Public Footpath No. 10 located north-west of the site;
  • Safeguarding of the setting and character of the adjacent Doddington Conservation Area, listed 
   buildings including the adjacent listed Doddington Windmill, and non-designated heritage assets 
   in the vicinity;
  • A sensitively designed scheme which is well-related to the adjacent site allocation in terms of site 
   layout, form, scale and materials;
  • Retention of existing hedgerows and trees within the site; and
  • Significant mitigation and compensation will be required to achieve biodiversity net gain, due to 
   the extensive areas of mature trees, shrubs and grassland habitats.
 Site allocation: 28 Wimblington Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP48.07 40444 13 0.38
 Development should provide:
  • Pedestrian/cycle connections to the adjacent site allocation;
  • A sensitively designed scheme which is well-related to the adjacent site allocation in terms of site 
   layout, form, scale and materials;
  • Safeguarding of the setting and character of the nearby scheduled monument, listed buildings 
   and non-designated heritage assets in the vicinity;
  • An assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 assessment;
  • Archaeological investigation to determine the need for archaeological mitigation works; and
  • Retention of existing hedgerows, trees and the pond within the site, where possible.143 Site allocation: Land off Wood Street Ph2
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP48.08 40173 10 0.45
 Development should provide:
  • Vehicular access via the adjacent site allocation to the north, with connections for pedestrians   
   and cyclists;
  • A sensitively designed scheme which is well-related to the adjacent site allocation in terms of site 
   layout, form, scale and materials;
  • Safeguarding of the setting and character of the nearby scheduled monument, listed buildings 
   and non-designated heritage assets in the vicinity;
  • Safeguarding of the setting and character of the nearby Doddington Conservation Area, listed 
   buildings including the adjacent listed Doddington Windmill, and non-designated heritage assets
   in the vicinity.
  • Retention of existing hedgerows and trees within the site, where possible; and
  • Significant mitigation and compensation will be required to achieve biodiversity net gain, due to 
   the extensive areas of mature trees, shrubs and grassland habitats.
 Sites for housing development with extant planning permission
 The following sites had extant planning permission at time of preparing this Local Plan*. These sites are 
 allocated for the purpose of providing clarity on the nature and scale of development, and to secure 
 the principle of development over the plan period.
 No specific policy requirements are set as it is expected that sites will be developed in accordance with 
 their planning permission.
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings** Site name
LP48.09 40079 13 Land North and East Of 1-3 Wimblington Road
 *  Sites with extant planning permission or resolution to grant planning permission at 01 April 2021 
  with total site capacity of 5 or more dwellings.
 ** Number of dwellings reflects net commitment at 01 April 2021.
 *** Amended site boundary see Sites Evidence Report
Manea
25.5 Manea is situated eight miles (c.13km) to the south east of March on the B1093. Manea has an   
  estimated population of 2,650 persons (mid-2018).  The railway line, runs to the north of the village 
  and includes a railway station.  To the south east of the village is the Ouse Washes Site of Special   
  Scientific Interest (SSSI) and the Ouse Washes Nature Reserve at Welches Dam. 
25.6 The village contains a good range of services and facilities including a primary school, local shop, 
  post office and doctors’ surgery.
Residential site allocations
25.7 As a large village, Manea provides opportunities for new housing development. The following sites,  
  set out in Policy LP49, are allocated for the construction of new dwellings144 Policy LP49: Residential site allocations in Manea
 The following sites are allocated for housing development:
 Site allocation: West Field
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP49.01 40223 105 4.25
 Development should provide:
  • Footway/cycleway connections along the Westfield Road frontage;
  • Connections to Manea Public Footpath No.6 at eastern boundary of site;
  • Archaeological investigation and mitigation, where required;
  • An assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 assessment;
  • Landscaping and screen planting along the south-east boundary of the site; and
  • Proposals will be required to mitigate any evidenced recreational impacts on the Ouse Washes SPA.
  
 To demonstrate no adverse effect on the Ouse Washes SPA and Ramsar, planning applications must   
 include a non-breeding bird survey to assess whether the land affected by the proposed development
 is regularly used by qualifying bird species (especially foraging and roosting swans). If the land is 
 identified to be functionally linked to the SPA and Ramsar, avoidance measures and mitigation will 
 be required, and the planning application will need to be assessed through a project level Habitats 
 Regulations Assessment to ensure that the development does not result in adverse effects on site integrity.
 Site allocation: Land to rear of No.15 Westfield Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP49.02 40185 10 0.65
 Development should provide:
  • Suitable access from Valentine’s Close;
  • Retention of the existing detached dwelling on the road frontage;
  • Archaeological investigation and mitigation works, as required;
  • A pedestrian/cycle link to the residential development to the north-east should this be feasible 
   following investigation; 
  • An assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 assessment; 
  • Significant mitigation and compensation will be required to achieve biodiversity net gain; and 
  • Proposals will be required to mitigate any evidenced recreational impacts on the Ouse Washes SPA.
 Sites for housing development with extant planning permission
 The following sites had extant planning permission at time of preparing this Local Plan*. These sites are 
 allocated for the purpose of providing clarity on the nature and scale of development, and to secure 
 the principle of development over the plan period.
 No specific policy requirements are set as it is expected that sites will be developed in accordance with 
 their planning permission.
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings** Site name
LP49.03 40038 32 Land North Of 28 - 30 High Street
LP49.04 40048 29 Lavender Mill Bungalow145LP49.05 40076 13 Land East Of 11 - 21 Park Road
LP49.06 40522 5 18 Westfield Road 
 *  Sites with extant planning permission or resolution to grant planning permission at 01 April 2021   
  with total site capacity of 5 or more dwellings.
 ** Number of dwellings reflects net commitment at 01 April 2021.
Wimblington
25.8 Wimblington is situated two miles (c. 3km) south of March. Wimblington’s population is estimated 
  to be 1,750 persons (mid-2018). The village contains a range of services and facilities to meet day 
  to day needs, including a primary school, convenience shop, post office, doctors’ surgery and 
  employment opportunities.
Residential site allocations
25.9 As a large village, Wimblington provides opportunities for new housing development. The following 
  sites, set out in Policy LP50, are allocated for the construction of new dwellings.
 Policy LP50: Residential site allocations in Wimblington
 The following sites are allocated for housing development:
 Site allocation: Land east of March Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP50.01 40278 97 3.91
 Development should provide:
  • Footway/cycleway along the Bridge Road and March Road frontages;
  • Pedestrian/cycle link to the south-eastern corner of the site to allow connections to the footway 
   linking Lily Avenue with Footpath No.5;
  • Archaeological investigation and mitigation works, as required; and
  • Landscaping and screen planting to mitigate visual impacts on the open countryside.
 Site allocation: Land north of King Street
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP50.02 40152 46 1.64
 Development should provide:
  • Vehicular access via adjacent site allocation;
  • Pedestrian/cycle links to Wimblington Public Footpath No.5 adjacent to the western boundary of the site;
  • Retention of the existing hedgerows and trees;
  • Archaeological investigation and mitigation works, as required; and
  • An assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 assessment.
 Sites for housing development with extant planning permission
 The following sites had extant planning permission at time of preparing this Local Plan*. These sites are 
 allocated for the purpose of providing clarity on the nature and scale of development, and to secure the 
 principle of development over the plan period.
 No specific policy requirements are set as it is expected that sites will be developed in accordance with  
 their planning permission.146Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings** Site name
LP50.03 40060 5 Land East Of 38 March Road
LP50.04 40074 25 Land North Of 37 - 45 King Street
LP50.05 40087 7 Land North Of 3A - 9 Bridge Lane
LP50.06 40529 30 Land North of Stoneleigh 22A Eaton Estate
 *  Sites with extant planning permission or resolution to grant planning permission at 01 April 2021
  with total site capacity of 5 or more dwellings.
 ** Number of dwellings reflects net commitment at 01 April 2021.
26. Medium Villages 
26.1 Medium Village should include a modest range of services and facilities such as a primary school,  
  at least one convenience shop and local employment opportunities. A village of this scale should 
  have a population of around 1,000 residents. 
Coates
26.2 Coates is situated two miles (c. 3km) to the east of Whittlesey on the A605, and close to the village 
  of Eastrea.  
26.3 The village is located on a regular bus route from Whittlesey, providing good access to the Market 
  Town. Coates has a primary school and a local convenience shop.
Residential site allocations
26.4 As a medium village, Coates provides opportunities for new housing development. The following 
  sites, set out in Policy LP51, are allocated for the construction of new dwellings
 Policy LP51: Residential site allocations in Coates
 The following sites are allocated for housing development:
 Site allocation: Land north of March Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP51.01 40265 232 10.83
 Development should provide:
 
  • Suitable access and provision of footway/cycleways along the March Road A605 
   frontage and Eldernall Lane;
  • Facilitate the re-location of Coates Primary School (in accordance with IDP);
  • Archaeological investigation and mitigation, as required;
  • Appropriate mitigation of potential land contamination; 
  • Landscaping and screen planting along the north-east boundary to mitigate visual impacts; and 
  • Proposals will be required to mitigate any evidenced recreational impacts on the Nene Washes SPA.
 To demonstrate no adverse effect on the Nene Washes SPA and Ramsar, planning applications must 
 include a non-breeding bird survey to assess whether the land affected by the proposed development  
 is regularly used by qualifying bird species (especially foraging and roosting swans). If the land is 
 identified to be functionally linked to the SPA and Ramsar, avoidance measures and mitigation will 
 be required, and the planning application will need to be assessed through a project level Habitats 
 Regulations Assessment to ensure that the development does not result in adverse effects on site integrity. 147 Site allocation: Land South of 104-178 March Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP51.02 40328 117 6.15
 Development should provide:
  • Highway infrastructure upgrades to Fieldside and South Green to adoptable standard, to create 
   a vehicular access with footway/cycleway connections;
  • Pedestrian/cycle link to Grounds Way on the western boundary of the site;
  • Whittlesey Public Footpath No.22 through the site to be retained and incorporated into the site 
   layout in a sympathetic manner;
  • Facilitate the re-location of Coates Primary School (in accordance with the IDP);
  • Retention of existing hedgerows and trees;
  • Significant compensation measures to achieve biodiversity net gain, due to the presence of 
   potentially valuable grassland habitat on-site;
  • Proposals will be required to mitigate any evidenced recreational impacts on the Nene Washes SPA;
  • An assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 assessment;
  • Archaeological investigation with mitigation as required;
  • Appropriate mitigation of potential land contamination; and
  • Landscaping and screen planting along the south-east boundary to mitigate visual impacts.
 Sites for housing development with extant planning permission
 The following sites had extant planning permission at time of preparing this Local Plan*. These sites are 
 allocated for the purpose of providing clarity on the nature and scale of development, and to secure 
 the principle of development over the plan period.
 No specific policy requirements are set as it is expected that sites will be developed in accordance with 
 their planning permission. 
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings** Site name
LP51.03 40198 20 Minuet Phase 2
LP51.04 40070 60 Land South East Of 208 Coates Road
 *  Sites with extant planning permission or resolution to grant planning permission at 01 April 2021   
  with total site capacity of 5 or more dwellings.
 ** Number of dwellings reflects net commitment at 01 April 2021.
Employment and other non-residential development
26.5 Policy LP52 makes site allocations for new employment development in Coates. Employment growth  
  will contribute to achieving jobs growth aspirations for the area
 Policy LP52: Employment allocations in Coates
 The following site is allocated for employment development:
 Employment allocation: Land East of Ben Burgess
Site
AllocationSHELAA Area (Ha)
LP52.01 40321 4.78148 Development proposals should:
  • Provide employment uses such as uses within classes B and E(g));
  • Undertake an assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 
   2 assessment; 
  • Provision of a suitable access, and footway/cycleway connections along March Road A605; and
  • Include appropriate landscaping and planting to reduce visual impacts.
 The Council will require the submission of sufficient information from the applicant to enable the 
 completion of a project-level screening exercise under the Habitats Regulations Assessment process.  
 Planning applications must include a non-breeding bird survey to assess whether the land affected by 
 the proposed development is regularly used by qualifying SPA and Ramsar bird species (especially 
 foraging and roosting swans). If the land is identified to be functionally linked to the SPA and Ramsar, 
 avoidance measures and mitigation will be required, and the planning application will need to be 
 assessed through a project level Habitats Regulations Assessment to ensure that the development does 
 not result in adverse effects on site integrity.
Elm
26.6 Elm is situated two miles (c. 3km) south of Wisbech, but is separated from the town by the A47.  Elm’s 
  population is estimated to be 1,690 persons (mid-2018). The village has a range of services meeting
   day to day needs including a primary school, local shop and post office. Elm benefits from its close 
  links to Wisbech provides a wider range of facilities within easy distance.
Residential site allocations
26.7 As a medium village, Elm provides opportunities for new housing development. The following sites,  
  set out in Policy LP53, are allocated for the construction of new dwellings.
 Policy LP53: Residential site allocations in Elm
 The following sites are allocated for housing development:
 Site allocation: Land north of March Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP53.01 40322/40306*** 215 10.02
 Development should provide:
  • New vehicular access at Begdale Road, with suitable footway/cycle links to all adopted highway 
   points, public rights of way and permissive pathways adjacent to the site boundaries;
  • Safeguarding of the setting and character of the adjacent Elm Conservation Area, listed 
   buildings and non-designated heritage assets in the vicinity including the retention of key views  
   following detailed assessment;
  • Archaeological investigation and mitigation, where required;
  • Retention of the woodland area adjacent to the existing southern entrance point on Begdale 
   Road as natural green space;
  • A site layout which avoids conflict with the overhead pylon lines through site design or re-location 
   of pylons; and
  • Landscaping and screen planting at northern and western site boundaries.
 Sites for housing development with extant planning permission
 The following sites had extant planning permission at time of preparing this Local Plan*. These sites 
 are allocated for the purpose of providing clarity on the nature and scale of development, and to 
 secure the principle of development over the plan period.149 No specific policy requirements are set as it is expected that sites will be developed in accordance with 
 their planning permission.
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings** Site name
LP53.02 40053 50 33 and Land North of 17-31
LP53.03 40083 5Land West of Cedar Way accessed from Gove 
Gardens
 * Sites with extant planning permission or resolution to grant planning permission at 01 April 2021 
  with total site capacity of 5 or more dwellings.
 ** Number of dwellings reflects net commitment at 01 April 2021.
 *** Amended site boundary see Sites Evidence Report
Friday Bridge
26.8  Friday Bridge is located approximately five miles (c. 8km) south of Wisbech on the B1101 which 
   serves as a secondary link between the market towns of Wisbech and March. Friday Bridge has an 
   estimated population of 1,320 persons (mid-2018).
26.9  Friday Bridge has close links to the neighbouring village of Elm. The village has access to a range 
   of services and facilities including a primary school, shop and post office. 
Residential site allocations
26.10 As a medium village, Friday Bridge provides opportunities for new housing development. The 
   following sites, set out in Policy LP54, are allocated for the construction of new dwellings.
 Policy LP54: Residential site allocations in Friday Bridge
 
 The following sites are allocated for housing development:
 Site allocation: Land east of Flint Way
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP54.01 40319 137 6.41
 Development should provide:
  • Vehicular access from both West Drive and Flint Way, with pedestrian/cycle links to Church Road;
  • Safeguarding of the setting and character of the nearby listed St Mark’s Church and non-designated 
   assets in the vicinity with key views retained;
  • Archaeological investigation, with mitigation where required;
  • A site layout which maximises the benefits of the substantial field drains on the eastern and   
   southern boundaries, including through building frontages, outlook and access; and
  • Extension and enhancement of the existing area of public open space on West Drive, in lieu of   
   on-site public open space requirements.
 Site allocation: Land at Rookery Farm
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP54.02 40305 87 3.5
 Development should provide:
  • Safeguarding of the setting and character of listed buildings and non-designated heritage assets 
   on or in the vicinity of the site;150  • A site layout which maximises the benefits of the substantial drain on the southern boundary, 
   including through building frontages, outlook and access;
  • An assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 assessment;
  • Archaeological investigation, with mitigation as required;
  • Appropriate mitigation of potential land contamination; and
  • Mitigation measures for protected species including potentially through loss of farm buildings 
   following detailed biodiversity assessment.
 Site allocation: Well End
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP55.01 40127 6 0.51
 Development should provide:
  • Frontage development only; and
  • A footway along the road frontage.
 
Gorefield
26.11 Gorefield is located approximately three and half miles (c. 5.5 km) to the north west of Wisbech.  
   The village has access to a limited range of services and facilities including a primary school, shop 
   and post office.
Residential site allocations
26.12 As a medium village, Gorefield provides opportunities for new housing development. The following 
   sites, set out in Policy LP55, are allocated for the construction of new dwellings.
 Policy LP55: Residential site allocations in Gorefield
 The following sites are allocated for housing development:
 Site allocation: Land at Gote Lane
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP55.01 40104*** 30 1.18
 Development should provide:
  • Access from Gote Lane with footway upgrades on Gote Lane to the village centre;
  • An assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 assessment;
  • Appropriate mitigation of potential land contamination;
  • Archaeological investigation to determine the need for archaeological mitigation works;
  • A sensitive design to safeguard the setting of listed buildings and Haze Dene Farm non-designated 
   heritage asset, in proximity of the site;
  • Public open space requirements to be met through extension and enhancement of the existing   
   area of public open space on Oxfield Drive, with provision of an adoptable foot/cycleway linking 
   the development to the existing area of open space;
  • Pedestrian/cycleway linkage points on the southern and western boundaries of the site to be 
   safeguarded for access to land to the south-west; and
  • Landscaping and screen planting to be provided along the northern boundary of the site to 
   mitigate visual impacts.
 Sites for housing development with extant planning permission
 The following sites had extant planning permission at time of preparing this Local Plan*. These sites are 151 allocated for the purpose of providing clarity on the nature and scale of development, and to secure   
 the principle of development over the plan period.
 No specific policy requirements are set as it is expected that sites will be developed in accordance with 
 their planning permission.
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings** Site name
LP55.02 40514 5 Land North of 3A - 15
LP55.03 40521 14 Denicks Yard Back Road
 * Sites with extant planning permission or resolution to grant planning permission at 01 April 2021   
  with total site capacity of 5 or more dwellings.
 ** Number of dwellings reflects net commitment at 01 April 2021.
 *** Amended site boundary see Sites Evidence Report
Leverington
26.13 Leverington is located half a mile (c. 1km) north west of Wisbech with part of the village adjoining 
   the built-up area of Wisbech. Leverington’s population is estimated to be 2,070 persons (at mid-
   2018). The village has a range of services and facilities including a primary school, local shop and 
   post office. The village benefits from good links to Wisbech 
Residential site allocations
26.14 As a medium village, Leverington provides opportunities for new housing development. The 
   following sites, set out in Policy LP56, are allocated for the construction of new dwellings.
 
 Policy LP56: Residential site allocations in Leverington
 The following sites are allocated for housing development:
 Site allocation: Land east of Woodgate Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP56.01 40133 96 3.87
 Development should provide:
  • A suitable vehicular access and footway and cycle connectivity to the village;
  • A site layout which maximises the benefits of the substantial field drain on the northern boundary, 
   including through building frontages, outlook and access;
  • Archaeological investigation, with mitigation as required; and
  • Landscaping and screen planting to be provided along the northern boundary of the site to 
   mitigate visual impacts.
 Site allocation: Land east of Roman Bank, north of Parson Drove Lane
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP56.02 40373/40498*** 100 4.31
 Development should provide:
  • A pedestrian/cycleway along the Roman Bank frontage;
  • A design which is sensitive to the setting of listed buildings in proximity of the site;
  • Archaeological investigation, with mitigation where required;152  • An assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 assessment;
  • Appropriate mitigation of potential land contamination;
  • Significant compensatory measures to achieve biodiversity net gain, due to the presence of   
   high-quality habitats on site;
  • An area of the existing orchard to be retained as part of the open space requirement as a   
   community food asset; and
  • Landscaping and screen planting along the north, east and southern boundaries of the site to   
   mitigate visual impacts.
 *** Amended site boundary see Sites Evidence Report
Parson Drove
26.15 Parson Drove is located approximately seven miles (c. 11km) to the west of Wisbech.  The village
   is in close proximity to Church End and many of the services and facilities can be shared such as 
   the Doctors Surgery. The village includes a primary school and shop, but no regular bus service.
Residential site allocations
26.16 As a medium village, Parson Drove provides opportunities for new housing development. The 
   following sites, set out in Policy LP57, are allocated for the construction of new dwellings.
 Policy LP57: Residential site allocations in Parson Drove
 The following sites are allocated for housing development:
 Site allocation: Land south of Brewery Close and Ingham Hall Gardens
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP57.01 40451*** 30 1.85
 Development should provide:
  • Upgrades to Ingham Hall Gardens to an adoptable standard to achieve site access;
  • A full Transport Assessment and Travel Plan;
  • Safeguarding of the setting and character of the nearby conservation area, listed buildings and 
   non-designated heritage assets;
  • An assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 assessment;
  • Archaeological investigation, and mitigation where required;
  • Appropriate mitigation of potential land contamination;
  • Retention of the existing pond and surrounding planting with incorporation into the public open 
   space provision for the development to include green infrastructure linkages to the existing area 
   of public open space on the site; and
  • Landscaping and screen planting along the west, east and southern boundaries of the site to 
   mitigate visual impacts.
 Site allocation: Land at Swanbridge Farm
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP57.02 40302 8 0.44
 Development should provide:
  • Appropriate mitigation of potential land contamination;
  • Safeguarding of the setting and character of the nearby conservation area, listed buildings and 
   non-designated heritage assets; and153  • Landscaping and screen planting, particularly along the western and southern site boundaries,   
   to mitigate visual impacts.
 Sites for housing development with extant planning permission
 The following sites had extant planning permission at time of preparing this Local Plan*. These sites 
 are allocated for the purpose of providing clarity on the nature and scale of development, and to 
 secure the principle of development over the plan period.
 No specific policy requirements are set as it is expected that sites will be developed in accordance with 
 their planning permission. 
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings** Site name
LP57.03 40504 5 Land East of The Silverings 114
 * Sites with extant planning permission or resolution to grant planning permission at 01 April 2021   
  with total site capacity of 5 or more dwellings.
 ** Number of dwellings reflects net commitment at 01 April 2021.
 *** Amended site boundary see Sites Evidence Report
Wisbech St. Mary
26.17 Wisbech St. Mary is situated three miles (c. 5km) to the south west of Wisbech, with an estimated 
   population of 1,260 persons (mid-2018). The Settlement has a modest range of services and   
   facilities, including a primary school, convenience store and post office.  
Residential site allocations
26.18 As a medium village, Wisbech St Mary provides opportunities for new housing development. The  
   following sites, set out in Policy LP58, are allocated for the construction of new dwellings.
 Policy LP58: Residential site allocations in Wisbech St Mary
 The following sites are allocated for housing development:
 Site allocation: Trafford Farm
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP58.01 40103 90 3.66
 Development should provide:
  • Suitable vehicular access and footway/cycleway connectivity to Station Road and Barton Road;
  • Enable access to the adjacent site allocation to the north for vehicles, pedestrians and cyclists;
  • A Transport Assessment to provide a comprehensive review of potential transport impacts;
  • Safeguarding of the setting and character of listed buildings and non-designated assets in the vicinity;
  • Appropriate mitigation of potential land contamination;
  • Retention of existing hedgerows and trees within the site, with an area of the existing orchards to 
   be retained as part of the open space requirement as a community food asset; and
  • Landscaping and screen planting along the site boundaries, to mitigate visual impacts.
 Site allocation: Land at Sunset, Station Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP59.02 40171 51 2.08154 Development should provide:
  • A suitable vehicular access and footway/cycleways links from the adjoining site allocation;
  • Appropriate mitigation of potential land contamination;
  • Retention of existing hedgerows and trees on the site boundaries; and
  • Landscaping and screen planting along the site boundaries to mitigate visual impacts.
 Site allocation: Station Road next to Grantchester House
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP58.03 40424 9 0.27
 The site consists of two parcels. Development should provide:
  • A foot/cycleway along the road frontage; including to connect the two parcels;
  • Safeguarding of the setting and character of the nearby listed building;  
  • A ‘frontage’ development, with buildings oriented to face Station Road;  
  • An assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 assessment; 
   and
  • Landscaping and screen planting along the site boundaries to mitigate visual impacts.
 Sites for housing development with extant planning permission
 The following sites had extant planning permission at time of preparing this Local Plan*. These sites are 
 allocated for the purpose of providing clarity on the nature and scale of development, and to secure   
 the principle of development over the plan period.
 No specific policy requirements are set as it is expected that sites will be developed in accordance with 
 their planning permission. 
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings** Site name
LP58.04 40045 76 Land North of Orchard House
LP58.05 40518 5 Land north of The Barn, High Road
LP58.06 40531 6 Land West of Sunset Rooms Station Road
 * Sites with extant planning permission or resolution to grant planning permission at 01 April 2021 
  with total site capacity of 5 or more dwellings.
 ** Number of dwellings reflects net commitment at 01 April 2021.
27. Small Villages
26.1 Small Villages offer fewer services and facilities and therefore opportunities for development are more 
  limited.
26.2 Housing in rural areas can enhance or maintain the vitality of rural communities and help villages to 
  grow and thrive, and play an important role in supporting local services.
26.3 The settlement hierarchy categorises small villages into subsets ‘A’ and ‘B’, based on their population 
  size and provision of services and facilities.155Small Villages A
Christchurch
26.4 The village of Christchurch is situated on the eastern boundary of Fenland district, approximately 6.5 miles 
  (c. 10.5km) to the east of March on a minor road, linking the B1100 and the B1094.Christchurch has an 
  estimated population of 510 persons (mid-2018). Christchurch has a primary school.
Residential site allocations
26.5 As a small village, Christchurch offers limited opportunities for new housing development. The 
  following sites, set out in Policy LP59, are allocated for the construction of new dwellings.
 Policy LP59: Residential site allocations in Christchurch
 The following sites are allocated for housing development:
 Site allocation: Land north west Syringa House
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP59.01 40463 23 0.82
 Development should provide:
  • A suitable vehicular access and provision of footway/cycleways;
  • Safeguarding of the setting and character of listed buildings and non-designated heritage assets 
   in the vicinity; 
  • Archaeological investigation, and mitigation where required; and
  • Landscaping and screen planting along north-west boundary to mitigate visual impacts.
 
 Site allocation: Land adjacent to the Ferns, Padgetts Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP59.02 40369*** 10 0.29
 Development should provide:
  • A suitable vehicular access, with provision of footway along road frontage to join Church Road 
   footway;
  • Archaeological investigation, with mitigation as required; and
  • Landscaping and screen planting, particularly along north-west boundary, to mitigate visual impacts.
 Sites for housing development with extant planning permission
 The following sites had extant planning permission at time of preparing this Local Plan*. These sites are 
 allocated for the purpose of providing clarity on the nature and scale of development, and to secure 
 the principle of development over the plan period.
 No specific policy requirements are set as it is expected that sites will be developed in accordance 
 with their planning permission.
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings** Site name
LP59.03 40028 9 Christchurch Memorial Hall156LP59.04 40059 16 CFC Disposals Ltd
 * Sites with extant planning permission or resolution to grant planning permission at 01 April 2021 
  with total site capacity of 5 or more dwellings.
 ** Number of dwellings reflects net commitment at 01 April 2021.
 *** Amended site boundary see Sites Evidence Report
Eastrea
26.6 Eastrea is located one mile (c. 1.5km) to the east of Whittlesey on the main A605, and has an   
  estimated population of 750 persons (estimated). It is closely related to Coates to the east. Services 
  are limited and relies generally on Coates or Whittlesey for other facilities, and benefits from regular 
  bus services to and from Whittlesey.
Residential site allocations
26.7 As a small village, Eastrea provides opportunities for new housing development. The following sites, 
  set out in Policy LP60, are allocated for the construction of new dwellings.
 Policy LP60: Residential site allocations in Eastrea
 Site for housing development with extant planning permission
 The following site had extant planning permission at time of preparing this Local Plan*. The site is 
 allocated for the purpose of providing clarity on the nature and scale of development, and to secure 
 the principle of development over the plan period.
 No specific policy requirements are set as it is expected that the site will be developed in accordance 
 with their planning permission.
 
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings** Site name
LP60.01 40033 6 Land South of Jones Lane
 * Sites with extant planning permission or resolution to grant planning permission at 01 April 2021 
  with total site capacity of 5 or more dwellings.
 ** Number of dwellings reflects net commitment at 01 April 2021.
 
Guyhirn
26.8 Guyhirn is located approximately five miles (c. 8km) north of March and 6 miles (c. 10km) south of  
  Wisbech. Guyhirn has an estimated population of 570 persons (mid-2018). It is located close to the 
  A47 and benefits from a regular bus service.  
26.9 The village has a limited range of services and facilities, including a primary school and local shop. 
Residential site allocations
26.10 As a small village, Guyhirn provides opportunities for new housing development. The following 
   sites, set out in Policy LP61, are allocated for the construction of new dwellings.
 Policy LP61: Residential site allocations in Guyhirn
 The following sites are allocated for housing development:
 Site allocation: Land at Gull Drove
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP61.01 40147 15 0.92157 Development should provide:
  • A footway around all road frontages with a foot/cycleway along the B1187 designed to 
   accommodate the mature trees on the site;
  • Retention of mature trees on the site, with mitigation or compensatory measures for protected 
   species to achieve biodiversity net gain;
  • An assessment of Flood Risk which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 assessment; and
  • Appropriate mitigation of potential land contamination.
 The Council will require the submission of sufficient information from the applicant to enable the  
 completion of a project-level screening exercise under the Habitats Regulations Assessment process 
 and, if that screening concludes that full Appropriate Assessment is needed, sufficient information 
 to enable it to complete that Appropriate Assessment. This process will need to demonstrate that the 
 development will not have a significant adverse effect on the integrity of the Nene Washes SAC, SPA 
 and Ramsar.
 Site allocation: Land at Selwyn Lodge Farm
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP61.02 40303 15 0.92
 Development should provide:
  • Suitable vehicular access, with footway/cycleway connectivity;
  • Retention of access to the adjacent sports fields to the north of the site with foot/cycleways linking 
   to the access;
  • Public open space requirements which enhance and complement the sports fields to the north;
  • Safeguarding of the setting and character of the listed building and non-designated heritage 
   assets in the vicinity;
  • Retention of mature trees on the site, where possible; 
  • An assessment of Flood Risk which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 assessment; and
  • Significant mitigation or compensatory measures to achieve biodiversity net gain, due to presence 
   of habitats on site.
 The Council will require the submission of sufficient information from the applicant to enable the   
 completion of a project-level screening exercise under the Habitats Regulations Assessment process 
 and, if that screening concludes that full Appropriate Assessment is needed, sufficient information   
 to enable it to complete that Appropriate Assessment. This process will need to demonstrate that the 
 development will not have a significant adverse effect on the integrity of the Nene Washes SAC, SPA   
 and Ramsar.
 Site allocation: Land to the rear of Neneside
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP61.03 40207 5 0.22
 Development should provide:
  • Suitable vehicular access and provision of footways/cycleways;
  • Retention of mature trees on the site, where possible;
  • An assessment of Flood Risk which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 assessment; and
  • Evidence of consultation with Natural England, due to the site’s location within an IRZ.158Murrow
26.11 Murrow is located approximately five miles west of Wisbech and south of Parson Drove, and has
   an estimated population of 950 people (mid-2018). Murrow has a very limited range of services 
   and facilities includes a primary school, but no local convenience shop.  
   
Residential site allocations
26.12 As a small village, Murrow provides opportunities for new housing development. The following   
   site, set out in Policy LP62, is allocated for the construction of new dwellings.
 Policy LP62: Residential site allocations in Murrow
 The following site is allocated for housing development:
 Site allocation: Front Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP62.01 40150 7 0.48
 Development should provide:
  • Suitable vehicular access with footway/cycleway connectivity at road frontage;
  • Safeguarding of the setting and character of the listed buildings and non-designated heritage 
   assets in the vicinity; and
  • Retention of trees at the road frontage and mature hedgerow on the western boundary, with
    screen planting at eastern boundary to mitigate visual impacts.
 The Council will require the submission of sufficient information from the applicant to enable the  
 completion of a project-level screening exercise under the Habitats Regulations Assessment process 
 and, if that screening concludes that full Appropriate Assessment is needed, sufficient information 
 to enable it to complete that Appropriate Assessment. This process will need to demonstrate that the 
 development will not have a significant adverse effect on the integrity of the Nene Washes SAC, SPA   
 and Ramsar.
Tydd St. Giles
26.13 Tydd St Giles lies approximately six miles (c. 10km) north-west of Wisbech. It is on the northern
   most boundary of the District, separated from Lincolnshire by the Shire Drain. It has an estimated 
   population of 660 (mid-2018). The village includes a primary school but otherwise has limited   
   services.  
Residential site allocations
26.14 As a small village, Tydd St Giles provides opportunities for new housing development. The following 
   site, set out in Policy LP63, is allocated for the construction of new dwellings.
 Policy LP63: Residential site allocations in Tydd St Giles
 The following site is allocated for housing development:
 Site allocation: Hockland Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP63.01 40364 7 0.34159 After the base date (01 April 2021), planning permission was granted (F/YR21/0531/NONMAT) for 
 the development of 7 dwellings in effect superseding this site. It is expected that development will be   
 delivered in accordance with the requirements of the planning permission.
Small Villages B
Coldham
26.15 Coldham is situated some 4.5m miles north of March on the B1101, Friday Bridge is 2.5 miles to 
   the north. The village has an estimated population of 130 people (mid-2018) and has limited   
   services and facilities with no local shop or primary school.  
Residential site allocations
26.16 As a small village, Coldham provides opportunities for new housing development. The following  
   site, set out in Policy LP64, is allocated for the construction of new dwellings.
 Policy LP64: Residential site allocations in Coldham
 The following site is allocated for housing development:
 Site allocation: Land north of March Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP64.01 40135 11 0.34
 Development should provide:
  • Suitable vehicular access with footway/cycleway connectivity;
  • Undertake an assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2  
   assessment; and
  • Significant compensation measures to ensure biodiversity net gain is achieved, due to the 
   presence of high-quality habitats on site.
Collett’s Bridge
26.17 Collett’s Bridge is situated on the eastern boundary of the district and is 1.5 miles east of Elm.  
26.18 Collett’s Bridge has an estimated population of 60 persons (mid-2018) and has no services or   
   facilities and as such relies very much on the surrounding settlements for shops, schools and other 
   facilities.
Residential site allocations
26.19 As a small village, Collett’s Bridge provides opportunities for new housing development. The 
   following site, set out in Policy LP65, is allocated for the construction of new dwellings.
 Policy LP65: Residential site allocations in Collett’s Bridge
 The following site is allocated for housing development:
 Site allocation: Land north of March Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP65.01 40137 10 0.52160 Development should provide:
  • Suitable vehicular access with footway/cycleway connectivity; 
  • Significant compensation measures to ensure biodiversity net gain is achieved, due to the   
   potential for high-quality habitat on site; and
  • Landscaping and planting at western boundary to reduce visual impacts.
Newton
26.20  The village is situated five miles north of Wisbech on the B1165 which links Wisbech to Spalding.  
   Newton has an estimated population of 420 persons (mid-2018) and has very limited services and 
   facilities. Post office facilities are located within the village hall with limited opening hours. 
 
Residential site allocations
26.21 As a small village, Newton provides opportunities for new housing development. The following 
   site, set out in Policy LP66, is allocated for the construction of new dwellings.
 Policy LP66: Residential site allocations in Newton
 The following site is allocated for housing development:
 Site allocation: Land adjoining Parrock View
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP66.01 40368 6 0.32
 Development should provide:
  • Suitable vehicular access with footway/cycleway connectivity; 
  • Significant compensation measures to ensure biodiversity net gain is achieved, due to the 
   potential for high-quality habitat on site; and
  • Landscaping and planting to reduce visual impacts. 
Employment and other non-residential development
26.22 Policy LP67 makes site allocations for new employment development in Newton. Employment 
   growth will contribute to achieving jobs growth aspirations for the area. 
 Policy LP67: Employment allocations in Newton
 Extant sites for major employment and non-residential development
 The following site had extant planning permission at time of preparing this Local Plan. The site is 
 allocated for the purpose of providing clarity on the nature and scale of development, and to secure   
 the principle of development over the plan period.
 No specific policy requirements are set as it is expected that sites will be developed in accordance with 
 their planning permission.
Site
AllocationSHELAA Area (Ha) Site name Permitted use
LP67.01 40533 0.35Land South of Newberry 
Roman Bank Newton-In-The-
Isle CambridgeshireB2 General 
Industrial
 161Ring’s End
26.23 Rings End is located one mile south of Guyhirn and four miles north of March, south of the A47 
   and A141 Guyhirn roundabout. The village has an estimated population of 110 persons (mid-
   2018) and has very limited services and facilities.
Residential site allocations
26.24 As a small village, Ring’s End provides opportunities for new housing development. The following 
   site, set out in Policy LP68, is allocated for the construction of new dwellings.
 Policy LP68: Residential site allocations in Ring’s End
 The following site is allocated for housing development:
 Site allocation: 6 March Road
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP68.01 40241*** 8 0.24
 Development should provide:
  • Suitable vehicular access with footway/cycleway connectivity; 
  • Undertake an assessment of Flood Risk, which reflects the recommendations of the SFRA Level 2 
   assessment;
  • Significant compensation measures to ensure biodiversity net gain is achieved; and
  • Provide an assessment of the scheme’s impact on the significance of heritage assets within and 
   in proximity of the site, notably the setting of the Toll House listed building.
 The Council will require the submission of sufficient information from the applicant to enable the 
 completion of a project-level screening exercise under the Habitats Regulations Assessment process 
 and, if that screening concludes that full Appropriate Assessment is needed, sufficient information 
 to enable it to complete that Appropriate Assessment. This process will need to demonstrate that the 
 development will not have a significant adverse effect on the integrity of the Nene Washes SPA, SAC 
 and Ramsar.
 *** Amended site boundary see Sites Evidence Report
 
Tholomas Drove
26.25. Tholomas Drove is situated on the B1441 between Guyhirn (approximately 1.5 miles to the south) 
   and Wisbech St. Mary (2 miles to the north). The village has an estimated population of 70 people 
   (mid-2018) and has very limited services and facilities and relies on neighbouring settlements.
Residential site allocations
26.26. As a small village, Tholomas Drove provides opportunities for new housing development. The 
   following site, set out in Policy LP69, is allocated for the construction of new dwellings.
 Policy LP69: Residential site allocations in Tholomas Drove
 
 The following site is allocated for housing development:
 Site allocation: Land at Willock Farm
Site
AllocationSHELAA Dwellings Area (Ha)
LP69.01 40307*** 10 0.72162 Development should provide:
  • Suitable vehicular access with footway/cycleway connectivity; and
  • A ‘frontage’ development, with dwellings oriented to face High Road.
 The Council will require the submission of sufficient information from the applicant to enable the   
 completion of a project-level screening exercise under the Habitats Regulations Assessment process 
 and, if that screening concludes that full Appropriate Assessment is needed, sufficient information 
 to enable it to complete that Appropriate Assessment. This process will need to demonstrate that the 
 development will not have a significant adverse effect on the integrity of the Nene Washes SAC, SPA 
 and Ramsar.163Part E - Policies Map 
The Policies Map illustrates geographically the application of policies in this draft Local Plan. The following 
provides an  interactive version  of the Policies Map is available on the Council’s website; 
www.fenland.gov.uk/interactivepoliciesmap
In addition, the draft Policies Map includes certain designations from the adopted Cambridgeshire and 
Peterborough Minerals and Waste Local Plan (July 2021), these include:
 • Minerals Allocation Areas
 • Minerals Development Areas
 • Transport Infrastructure Areas
 • Waste Management Areas
 • Water Recycling Areas
 • Consultation Areas for Water Recycling Areas 
 • Consultation Areas for Minerals Allocation Areas, Minerals Development Areas, Waste Management 
  Areas & Transport Infrastructure Areas
These designations are not subject to public consultation and are shown for information only. To maintain 
legibility of maps, Mineral Safeguarding Areas are not shown. For full details of minerals and waste policies, 
please see the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Minerals and Waste Local Plan which is available to view 
and download from Cambridgeshire County Council’s website81.
Designated Neighbourhood Areas are not shown on the Policies Map. At time of preparing this Draft 
Local Plan, the following parishes have been designated as Neighbourhood Areas for the purposes of 
neighbourhood planning by Fenland District Council:
 • Doddington
 • March 
 • Parson Drove 
 • Tydd St Giles 
 • Whittlesey
 • Wimblington
For details of made or emerging Neighbourhood Plans, please visit the relevant town or parish council’s 
website.
 
 
81 https://www.cambridgeshire.gov.uk/business/planning-and-development/planning-policy/adopted-minerals-and-waste-plan#:~:tex -
t=The%20Cambridgeshire%20and%20Peterborough%20Minerals%20and%20Waste%20Local,guide%20mineral%20and%20waste% -
20management%20development%20and%20will%3A 164Appendix 1 - Glossary of Terms 
Throughout this document you will find a number of technical planning terms. We have tried to explain 
these clearly within the text. However, here is a quick summary of the terms used to help you understand the 
planning process. Please see the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) for a comprehensive glossary 
of planning related words and phrases.
Adoption  - the formal decision by the Council to approve the final version of a document, at the end of 
all the preparation stages and examination in public, bringing it into effect.
Affordable Housing  - housing for sale or rent, for those whose needs are not met by the market 
(including housing that provides a subsidised route to home ownership and/or is for essential local workers).
Amenity  - a general term used to describe benefits or features associated with a property or location, that 
contribute to its character, comfort, convenience or attractiveness.
Biodiversity  - a contraction of biological diversity, all species of life on earth including plants and animals 
and the ecosystem of which we are all part.
Brownfield Land  - land that has been previously used.
Conservation Area  - a formally designated area of special historic or architectural interest; its character 
must be preserved or enhanced.
District Centre  - an area, defined on the Policies Map, which usually comprises groups of shops often 
containing at least one supermarket or superstore, and a range of non-retail services, such as banks, 
building societies and restaurants, as well as local public and community facilities such as a library.
Gypsies and Travellers  - persons of nomadic habit of life whatever their race or origin, including such 
persons who on grounds only of their own or their family’s or dependants’ educational or health needs 
or old age have ceased to travel temporarily. This excludes members of an organised group of travelling 
showpeople or circus people travelling together as such. See Planning Policy for Traveller Sites (PPTS) 2015.
Health Impact Assessment (HIA)  - a method of considering the positive and negative impacts of 
development upon human health. Infrastructure - a collective term which relates to all forms of essential 
services like electricity, water, and road and rail provision.
Listed Building  - a building or structure designated by the Secretary of State under the Planning (Listed 
Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 for its special architectural or historic interest, and therefore 
included in a ‘list’ of such buildings and structures.
Local Centre  - an area, defined on the Policies Map, which usually includes a range of small shops of a 
local nature, serving a small catchment. Typically, local centres might include, amongst other shops, a small 
supermarket, a newsagent, a sub-post office and a pharmacy. Other facilities could include a hot-food 
takeaway and laundrette. In rural areas, large villages may perform the role of a local centre.165Major Development  - Where the phrase ‘major development’ is used in this Local Plan, it means major 
development as defined by national legislation at the time. At the time of writing this Local Plan, the phrase 
is defined in The Town and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 
2010 as follows:
 “major development” means development involving any one or more of the following -
 (a) the winning and working of minerals or the use of land for mineral-working deposits;
 (b) waste development;
 (c) the provision of dwellinghouses where —
  (i)  the number of dwellinghouses to be provided is 10 or more; or
  (ii) the development is to be carried out on a site having an area of 0.5 hectares or more and it is not 
   known whether the development falls within sub-paragraph (c)(i);
 (d) the provision of a building or buildings where the floor space to be created by the development is  
  1,000 square metres or more; or
 (e) development carried out on a site having an area of 1ha or more.
National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF)  - the government’s national planning policies for 
England and how these are expected to be applied.
National Planning Practice Guidance (NPPG)  - provides guidance for local planning authorities 
and decision takers, both drawing up plans and making decisions about planning applications. The 
guidance is categorised into subject categories.
Objectively Assessed Need  - the identified housing need to meet the needs of the local authority area 
over the plan period.
Open Space  - areas of undeveloped or largely undeveloped land for leisure purposes – including village 
greens, allotments, children’s playgrounds, sports pitches and municipal parks.
Park Home  - a residential mobile home, similar to a bungalow or caravan in style. Installed as a dedicated 
site or ‘home park’ that is either privately owned or owned by a Local Authority. They are designed to be lived 
in permanently and provide opportunity for residents to own a home, but pay rent to the owner of the site.
Primary Shopping Area  - an area where retail and the number of shops in a town centre is most 
concentrated. The extent of this area is defined on the Policies Map.
Registered Park and Garden  - a park or garden that is included on Historic England’s ‘Register of 
Parks and Gardens of special historic interest’. Registered parks and gardens are designated heritage assets 
of national significance.
Scheduled Monument  - a nationally important archaeological site that has been designated by the 
Secretary of State under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979, and therefore 
included in a ‘schedule’ of such monuments.
Sequential Approach  - an approach to planning decisions which may require certain sites or locations 
to be fully considered for development before the consideration moves on to other sites or locations. The 
approach could apply to issues such as retail development, the use of previously developed land or the use 
of land at risk from flooding.
Settlement Boundary  - a boundary on a map beyond which the local planning authority proposes that 
a settlement should not be able to extend.166Settlement Hierarchy  - settlements are categorised into a hierarchy based on the range of facilities, 
services and employment opportunities available, plus the ability to access other higher ranking settlements 
by public transport.
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD)  - SPDs expand on policies or provide further details to 
policies contained in a Local Plan.
Sustainability Appraisal (SA)  - a formal, systematic process to assess the environmental, economic 
and social effects of strategies and policies in a SPD from the start of preparation onwards. The process 
includes the production of reports to explain the outcomes of the appraisal.
Tenure - the financial arrangements under which someone has the right to live in a house. The most 
frequent forms are tenancy, in which rent is paid to a landlord, and owner occupancy.
Viability  - an individual development can be said to be viable if, after taking into account all of the costs 
involved in developing the scheme, it provides a competitive return to the developer and provides a land 
value sufficient to persuade the land owner to sell their land for the development proposed. Whether or not 
a Local Plan is deliverable can be greatly affected by viability. A Local Plan can be said to be deliverable if 
it identifies sufficient viable sites to deliver the plan’s housing requirements over the plan period. 167Appendix 2 – Neighbourhood Planning 
Neighbourhood planning gives Parish and Town Councils direct power to develop a shared vision for their 
area and shape development and growth. Once a Neighbourhood Plan has been ‘made’ (adopted) it 
forms part of the development plan for the district, so it has the same legal status as a Local Plan. 
A number of Parish and Town Councils in Fenland have shown an interest in preparing Neighbourhood 
Plans. There are two ‘made’ Neighbourhood Plans in Fenland District Council - the March Neighbourhood 
Plan (made November 2017) and the Parson Drove Neighbourhood Plan (made August 2020). 
Whittlesey Town Council submitted their Plan in June 2022. In addition, Fenland District Council has 
designated Tydd St Giles Parish, Doddington Parish and Wimblington & Stonea Parish as Neighbourhood 
Areas, paving the way for a Neighbourhood Plan to be prepared if the relevant Town or Parish Council 
chooses to do so.
Fenland District Council is supportive of Parish and Town Councils that wish to prepare a Neighbourhood 
Plan. Please see www.fenland.gov.uk/neighbourhood-planning for more information on Neighbourhood 
Planning in Fenland.
Strategic and Non-Strategic Policies
A Neighbourhood Plan has considerable scope to include detailed policies to shape new development, 
allocate development sites and protect open spaces. Neighbourhood Plans are required to meet the basic 
conditions as set out in legislation. One element of this is that a Neighbourhood Plan must be in general 
conformity with the strategic policies contained within the Local Plan.
The NPPF indicates that ‘strategic policies’ includes those policies which set out an overall strategy for 
the pattern, scale and design quality of places, and make sufficient provision for the area’s development 
needs including infrastructure and community facilities; and provide conservation and enhancement of the 
natural, built and historic environment, and climate change mitigation and adaptation.
Strategic policies should be limited to matters necessary to address the strategic priorities of the area, and 
provide a clear starting point for any non-strategic policies that are needed. Strategic policies should not 
extend to detailed matters that are more appropriately dealt with through neighbourhood plans or other 
non-strategic policies.
To assist the preparation of neighbourhood plans, the strategic policies of this draft Local Plan are listed 
below:
 
 • Policy LP1: Settlement Hierarchy
 • Policy LP2: Spatial Strategy for the Location of Residential Development
 • Policy LP3: Spatial Strategy for Employment Development
 • Policy LP4: Securing Fenland’s Future
 • Policy LP5: Health and Wellbeing
 • Policy LP6: Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Infrastructure
 • Policy LP7: Design
 • Policy LP11: Community Safety
 • Policy LP12: Meeting Housing Needs
 • Policy LP13: Custom and Self Build
 • Policy LP14: Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople
 • Policy LP15: Employment
 • Policy LP16: Town Centres
 • Policy LP17: Culture, Leisure, Tourism and Community Facilities
 • Policy LP18: Development in the Countryside168 • Policy LP19: Strategic Infrastructure
 • Policy LP20: Accessibility and Transport
 • Policy LP21: Public Rights of Way
 • Policy LP22: Parking Provision
 • Policy LP23: Historic Environment
 • Policy LP24: Natural Environment
 • Policy LP25: Biodiversity Net Gain
 • Policy LP26: Carbon Sinks and Carbon Sequestration
 • Policy LP27: Trees and Planting
 • Policy LP28: Landscape
 • Policy LP29: Green Infrastructure
 • Policy LP30: Local Green Spaces and Existing Open Space
 • Policy LP31: Open Space and Recreational Facilities
 • Policy LP32: Flood and Water Management
 • Policy LP33: Development on Land affected by Contamination
 • Policy LP34: Air Quality
Policies not listed above should be assumed to be non-strategic for the purposes of neighbourhood planning.
Status of ‘Part D’ policies
The Local Plan distributes housing and jobs growth through identifying specific development sites known as 
‘site allocations’. Part D of this Local Plan consists of individual sections for each town or village identified in 
the Settlement Hierarchy which has at least one site allocation. The site allocation policies set requirements 
for the development of individual sites within a specific town or village and are considered ‘non-strategic’. 
Whilst the policies in Part D are considered non-strategic, each plays an important role in delivering the 
housing and jobs growth needed across the district, which is a strategic priority. Attempts to reduce the 
overall amount of development likely to delivered within a settlement through a Neighbourhood Plan or 
Neighbourhood Development Order could result in conflict with the Local Plan’s strategic policies, meaning 
the Plan or Order may not satisfy the basic conditions.
Housing Requirement for Neighbourhood Area
Paragraph 66 of the NPPF requires the Local Plan to set a housing requirement for all designated 
neighbourhood areas through its strategic policies. 
Through its site allocations, this Local Plan provides an adequate supply of land to meet Fenland’s 
development needs in full. Consequently, there are no additional development needs to be met through 
Neighbourhood Plans or Neighbourhood Development Orders. However, where a Town or Parish Council 
chooses to allocate additional sites for development, this aspiration will generally be welcomed by Fenland 
District Council.
For the purposes of setting a housing requirement for designated Neighbourhood Areas, Policy LP2 requires 
that Neighbourhood Plans or Orders deliver not less than the sum total of the dwelling supply from site 
allocations identified in Part D for all settlements within the Neighbourhood Area.
The Planning Practice Guidance states that Neighbourhood Plans should not re-allocate sites that are 
already allocated through strategic plans. Therefore, there is no need to ‘re-confirm’ Local Plan site 
allocations through a Neighbourhood Plan.
So long as a Neighbourhood Plan does not undermine the delivery of Local Plan site allocations, the 
housing requirement for the Neighbourhood Area will be considered to have been met.
 169Appendix 3 - Affordable Housing Worked Example 
Policy LP12 sets out the following affordable housing requirements:
 • ‘For sites south of the district development proposals of 10 of more dwellings on greenfield sites 
  should through negotiation, provide 20% affordable housing. 
 • For sites north of the district development proposals of 10 or more dwellings should meet the NPPF 
  requirement for 10% affordable home ownership.
 • All brownfield sites of 10 or more dwellings should meet the NPPF requirement for 10% affordable 
  home ownership’.
National policy requires that 10% of the site affordable home ownership products. 
The NPPG stipulates that First Homes should make up at least 25% of all affordable housing units being 
delivered through planning obligations. First Homes are a type of affordable home ownership product and 
therefore make up part of the NPPF 10% requirement for affordable home ownership. 
Breakdown of proportion of 
different types of affordable 
housing requiredSouth of the district 
(greenfield sites)  North of the district and 
all brownfield sites  
Total % of homes to be Affordable 
Homes on schemes of 10 or more 
units made up of: 20%  10%  
1. Affordable rent   10%  0%  
2. First Homes   At least 5%  At least 2.5%  
3. Other affordable home 
ownership products   5%  7.5 
In Fenland this means that in the south of the district there will be a 50/50 split between affordable rented 
products and affordable home ownership products, with at least half of the affordable home ownership 
requirement made up of First Homes. 
The following sets out worked examples of sites in south and the north of the district. 
Example 1 - 80 homes South of the district 
For a development of 80 homes in March (South of the district) with a policy requirement for 20% affordable 
housing would be expected to provide a total of 16 affordable homes to comply with Local Plan policy. 
25% of these affordable homes would be expected to be First Homes, which would equate to 4 First Homes 
(5% of the total number of homes provided). The expectation that at least 10% of homes on this site to be 
available for affordable home ownership would equate to 8, of which the 4 First Homes can form part of 
this requirement. This means an additional 4 affordable home ownership products would be expected to 
total 8 homes required.
Example 2 - 80 Homes North of the district
For a development of 80 homes in Wisbech (North of the district) with a policy for 10% affordable housing 
would be expected to provide 8 affordable home ownership products to comply with local plan policy. 25% 
of these affordable homes would be expected to be First Homes, which would equate to 2 First Homes 
(5% of the total number of homes provided). The expectation that at least 10% of homes on this site to be 
available for affordable home ownership would equate to 8 homes so an additional 4 affordable home 
ownership products would be expected to total 8.170The following table sets out some worked examples. 
Example 1: 
80 dwellings in March 
(South)Example 2:
80 dwellings in Wisbech 
(North) 
Total % of homes to be 
Affordable Homes on 
schemes of 10 or more units 
made up of:  16
(20% of 80 = 16)(10% of 80 = 8)
8
(10% of 80 = 8) 5%  7.5 
1. Affordable rent   8 (10% of 80) 0
2. First Homes   4 (5% of 16) 2
3. Other affordable home 
ownership products   4 (5% of 16) 6171Appendix 4 - Landscape Character Areas 
Policy LP28 Landscape identifies five Landscape Character Areas, and are as shown on the following map.
172Appendix 5 – Open Space Standards
Policy LP31 sets out the requirements relating to Open Spaces and Recreational facilities. The precise 
type of on-site provision that is required will depend on the nature and location of the proposal and the 
quantity/type of open space needed in the area. This should be the subject of discussion/negotiation at the 
pre-application stage. If there are deficiencies in certain types of open space provision in the surrounding 
area, the Council will seek variations in the component elements to be provided by the developer in order 
to overcome them.
If either:
 (a) the proposed residential development site would be of insufficient size in itself to make the appropriate 
  provision in accordance with the standards below; or
 (b) taking into account the accessibility/capacity of existing open space facilities and the circumstances 
  of the surrounding area, the open space needs of the proposed residential development can be 
  met more appropriately by providing either new or enhanced provision off-site, then proposals will 
  be acceptable if the developer has first entered into a planning obligation to make a financial or in-
  kind contribution towards meeting the identified open space needs of the proposed residential 
  development off-site.
Where appropriate, the Council will seek to enter into a Section 106 agreement with the developer for the 
future management and maintenance of the open space provision, before granting planning permission.
The average number of persons per household in Fenland is 2.32.  
TypologyBaseline quantity 
StandardsHierarchyBaseline 
accessibility 
standards
County Park:  A 
predominantly natural or 
semi-natural landscape of 
at least 10 hectares in size; 
for example woodland, 
grassland, wetland, heathland 
or parkland, with no more 
than 5% of the area built 
upon (excluding car parks).No Standard – provision 
should be opportunity led, 
and requested on a case-by-
case basisN/A • 5km
Neighbourhood 
Parks and Gardens: 
A designed green space 
that provides a social and 
recreational focal point for a 
neighbourhood that offers a 
variety of facilities including 
recreational centres, sports 
fields and playgrounds. 
Providing opportunities for a 
variety of active and passive
outdoor activities and access 
to nature.0.9ha per 1,000 population• Small Local 
Neighbourhood Park 
and Garden (less than 
2ha)
• Local 
Neighbourhood Park 
and Garden (between 
2ha and 20 ha)• 300m
• 400m173TypologyBaseline quantity 
StandardsHierarchyBaseline 
accessibility 
standards
Informal Parkland and 
Amenity Green Space:  
Informal recreation spaces 
and green spaces in and 
around housing, with a 
primary purpose
of providing opportunities for 
informal activities close to 
home or work.0.34ha per 1,000 population N/A • 480km
Allotments:  An allotment 
is an area of land, leased 
either from a private or local 
authority landlord, for the 
use of growing fruit and 
vegetables. In some cases this 
land will also be used for the 
growing of ornamental
plants.0.21ha per 1,000 population N/A • 650km
Natural and Semi-
Natural Green Space: 
Access to nature, wildlife 
conservation, biodiversity 
and environmental education 
awareness.1.8ha per 1,000 population• Local Natural Space 
(between 2ha and
20 ha)
• Small Natural Space 
(up to 2.0 ha)• 300m
Neighbourhood 
Playgrounds:  Designed 
primarily for play and social 
interaction involving children 
and young people, such as 
equipped play areas, ball 
courts, skateboard areas and 
teenage shelters12m2 per child• Local Area for Play 
(LAP) ages 0-5
• Local Equipped Area 
for Play (LEAP) ages 
0-11
• Neighbourhood 
Equipped Area for Play 
(NEAP)
• Other Play – for 
older children and 
teenager. Skate parks 
and Multi Use Games 
Areas (MUGAs)• 100m
• 400m
• 1,000m
• 700m174Appendix 6 - Parking Standards
This Appendix sets out the Parking Standards for Fenland. Please refer to Policy LP22 for further information 
and any exceptions to the standards. 
In market towns, sharing of parking provision will be encouraged, particularly for non-residential 
development. Where a site has good public transport links, such as in a central area of a market town, a 
reduction in car parking provision may be negotiated and, in special circumstances, nil parking provision 
may be appropriate. 
Class C3 – Dwelling House  
The following table set out the minimum standards for housing (C3). 
For developments of more than 10 dwellings the car parking standards includes part spaces (e.g. 2.2 spaces 
per dwelling). This is an average over the scheme, as one dwelling could not provide a fifth of a space.  This 
means that for every fifth dwelling an additional space will be required. Because the car parking standards 
are minimum this means that the number of spaces will always be rounded up to the nearest whole space.  
In addition, for developments of 10 or more dwellings visitor spaces are required.  For every four dwellings 
there should be one unallocated visitor parking space. (0.25 visitor parking spaces per dwelling) with visitor 
parking designed to be included as part of the highway and not as a separate parking area.
A single garage will not count as a car parking space. A double grange will count as one space. 
Number of Bedrooms Minimum Parking Provision
Less than 10 dwellings More than 10 dwellings
One bedroom 1 space per dwelling 1 space per dwelling
Two bedrooms 2 spaces per dwelling 2 spaces per dwelling
Three Bed 2 spaces per dwelling 2.2 Spaces per dwelling
Four Bed 3 spaces per dwelling 3.2 spaces per dwelling
Visitor Parking (Unallocated) 0 0.25 Spaces per dwelling
The remaining parking standards are set out on the basis of the Use Classes defined in the 1987 Use 
Classes Order (as amended) . However, many uses do not fall within the Use Classes specified below. These 
uses are described as being in a class of their own (sui generis). Parking provision for these uses will be 
assessed on their merits in relation to the demand for parking which they are likely to generate.
Use Class Car Parking Standards*
B2 General Industry Two spaces per unit plus one space for every 50 sq. 
metres over 50 sq. metres.
B8 Storage and Distribution Three spaces per unit, plus one space for every 300 sq. 
metres of floor space.
NB: Parking provision for Commercial and HGVs will be 
required in addition to car parking provision175Use Class Car Parking Standards*
C1 Hotels One space per bedroom (residents and staff 
accommodation). Plus one space per ten sq. metres of 
dining areas for hotels with restaurants open to the public. 
Hotels are seldom used solely as a hotel and often offer 
multifunctional amenities such as restaurants, gyms and 
conference facilities. These multifunctional uses must be 
considered per individual use class and adequate parking 
allocated to encompass all uses when considering the 
potential for cross visitation. 
C2 Residential Institutions One space per four residential units, plus one visitor 
space per four residential units plus one space for each 
resident member of staff.
C2a Secure residential institutions One space per full time equivalent staff. 
Class C2A includes a variety of uses which will demand a 
varying need for parking. Standards should be used as a 
guide but there must be flexibility and applications should 
be looked at on a case-by-case basis. Visitor parking 
requirements will vary between institutions and should be 
dealt with on an individual application basis.
C4 Houses in multiple occupation One space per bedroom. 
Ea Shops other than sale of hot food For each shop unit and retail warehouse/garden centre, 
two spaces and in addition:
• Units up to 499 sq. metres – One space for every 25 sq. 
metres of floor space over 50 sq. metres of floor space. 
• Units up to 1,999 sq. metres – One parking space for 
every 20 sq. metres of floor space.
• Units over 2,000 sq. metres – One parking space for 
every 10 sq. metres of floor space. 
Eb Food and Drink which is mostly 
consumed on the premises One space per 15 sq. metres. 
Ec Financial and Professional services Two spaces, plus one additional space for every 25 sq. 
metres of floor space over 50 sq. metres.
Ed Indoor sports and recreation (not 
swimming pools, ice rinks)To be applied on a case-by-case basis and agreed with 
the Council. Taking into account the need for buses and 
coaches at the venue. 
Ee Medical Services not attached to 
the residence of the practitionerOne space per full time equivalent staff plus two per 
consulting room plus drop off/pickup facilities.
Ef Non – residential creche, day 
centres or nurseryOne space per full time equivalent staff plus drop off/
pickup facilities.
Eg i) office
ii) the research and development 
of products or processes or
iii) any industrial process, 
(which can be carried out in any 
residential area without causing 
detriment to the amenity of the 
areaTwo spaces per unit plus one space for every 50 sq. 
metres floor area over 50 sq. metres.
* Area referred to is gross floor area.176Appendix 7 - Additional Committed Sites (2021/22)
At time of preparing this Draft Local Plan, comprehensive land-use monitoring data for the 2021/22 
reporting year is not yet available. 
The Council has carried out a review of planning applications granted planning permission during the 
2021/22 reporting year and has identified a number of additional committed sites are not included in Part 
D of this Local Plan since these sites had no planning status at the base date. 
Prior to submitting the Draft Local Plan for examination, the Council intends to update relevant sections of 
relating to the supply of land available for development. This will include updating the plan to align the plan 
with Fenland’s latest available Five-Year Housing Land Supply Report, and will likely affect the proposed 
allocation of committed sites
The table provides details of additional committed sites which the Council expects to allocate 
in the next version (i.e. the Submission Version) of the Draft Local Plan. These additional committed sites 
are expected to deliver 94 dwellings (equivalent to <1% of the housing requirement over the plan period).
Planning 
App RefStreet Address ParishApplication
TypeProposalNumber 
of 
dwellingsPermission 
Granted 
DateF/YR21/0871/FDLLand West Of 
98 - 102, High 
Street, Chatteris, 
CambridgeshireChatterisFenland 
District LandErect 6 x dwellings 
(2-storey 2-bed) 
including 
associated 
infrastructure and 
alterations to 
existing wall6 07/01/2022F/YR21/0339/FLand North and 
West Of 47, 
Fridaybridge 
Road, ElmElmFull Planning 
PermissionConversion of 
existing barns to 
1 x 4-bed and 
1 x 5-bed two 
storey dwellings 
and erection of 8 
x dwellings with 
garaging (6 x 
2-storey 4-bed and 
2 x 2-storey 5-bed) 
and associated 
works including 
demolition of 
existing dwelling10 23/09/2021F/YR21/0915/FThe Rodings, 
Fallow Corner 
Drove, Manea, 
March, PE15 0LTManeaFull Planning 
PermissionErect 6 x 2-storey 
dwellings 
comprising 2 
x 4-bed and 
4 x 3-bed and 
detached garage 
for plot 1 involving 
demolition of 
existing dwelling6 07/12/2021177Planning 
App RefStreet Address ParishApplication
TypeProposalNumber 
of 
dwellingsPermission 
Granted 
DateF/YR21/1185/OLand South West 
Of, Queen Street 
Close, March, 
CambridgeshireMarchOutline 
Planning 
PermissionErect up to 9 
dwellings (outline 
application with 
matters committed 
in respect of 
access)9 25/02/2022F/YR21/0110/OLand North Of 
47-53, New 
Road, Whittlesey, 
CambridgeshireWhittleseyOutline 
Planning 
PermissionErect up to 6 
dwellings (outline 
application 
with all matters 
reserved) involving 
demolition of 
garage and shed6 22/07/2021F/YR21/0172/O22 Barrs Street, 
Whittlesey, 
Peterborough, 
Cambridgeshire, 
PE7 1DAWhittleseyOutline 
Planning 
PermissionErect up to 8 
dwellings (outline 
application with 
matters committed 
in respect of 
layout, scale, 
appearance and 
access) involving 
demolition of 
buildings8 22/12/2021F/YR21/0361/FLand North Of 
39 To 49, Coates 
Road, Eastrea, 
CambridgeshireWhittleseyFull Planning 
PermissionErect 5 x dwellings 
(1 x 2-storey 
3-bed, 2 x 3-storey 
5-bed and 2 x 
3-storey 6-bed) 
involving the 
demolition of 
existing buildings5 30/07/2021F/YR21/0582/OG And J Ping 
Limited, 63 
Coates Road, 
Eastrea, 
Peterborough, 
Cambridgeshire, 
PE7 2BAWhittleseyOutline 
Planning 
PermissionErect up to 18 x 
dwellings involving 
the demolition of 
existing buildings 
(outline application 
with all matters 
reserved)18 10/03/2022F/YR21/1165/FLand East Of 
24-26, Mill 
Close, Wisbech, 
CambridgeshireWisbechFull Planning 
PermissionErect 6no 
dwellings (1-bed, 
single-storey)6 19/01/2022178
Fenland District Council, Fenland Hall, County Road, March, Cambridgeshire, PE15 8NQ
Tel: 01354 654321    Email: info@fenland.go v.uk     W eb: fenland.gov .uk
