 
  
Council name  Forest of Dean District Council  
Name and date of 
Committee  CABINET – 8 October 2020  
Report Number  PH.451   
Subject  LOCAL PLAN PREFERRED  OPTION  
Wards affected  ALL 
Accountable 
member  Councillor Chris McFarling, Cabinet Member for Planning Policy Tel: 
01594 810000 Email: Chris.McFarling@fdean.gov.uk  
Accountable officer  Nigel Gibbons, Forward Plan Manager  
Tel: 01594 812338 Email: nigel.gibbons@fdean.gov.uk  
Summary /Purpose  The review of the Council’s current Local Plan  (LP) comprising Core 
Strategy and Allocations Plan has been commenced and a range of 
issues and options were identified and consulted on in 2019.  These 
have now b een further considered along with the feedback received 
and additional assessment of potential sites and options.  A number of 
draft plan policies setting out the general approach for the new LP 
have also been informally considered.  This report however fo cusses 
on the selection of a strategic option and seeks endorsement of this 
together with approval for a consultation exercise based on this option. 
It is not yet fixed but it is expected that the strategic option will guide 
the content of the draft plan.   
 
From the issues that have been identified a range of generic options 
were suggested which could represent strategies for the LP to follow.  
These have been further considered and are evaluated in the attached 
paper.  This report is a distillation of that evaluation and should be 
considered alongside the full document, and in the light of other 
evidence referred to.  
 
The LP programme has been affected by the pandemic and is 
consequently delayed.  In addition government has published a white 
paper seeki ng views on a major reform of the planning system.  This 
could change the nature and delivery of the LP but is at the 
consultation stage at present.  Government ha s also signalled an 
intent to make changes to the current planning system on an interim 
basis .  The most significant of these for the LP is a further change to 
the calculation which is used to determine housing provision.  It could 
mean a very great increase in the number of dwellings required in the 
LP to the point where it is considered undelive rable.  
. 
Annexes  Annex A   Local Plan 2041 LP Strategic Option Paper  
Recommendation/s  a) To approve and endorse a strategic option for the Forest of Dean 
Local Plan and to recommend it to Council  
b) To approve the consultation of the Local Plan preferred option  and 
to recommend it be approved by Council  
Corporate priorities  1.1. Improve community wellbeing, supporting and celebrating our 
distinctiveness.  
1.2. Develop a vibrant economy that is resilient and future proofed.  
1.3. Provide a range of affordable housing to meet the needs of the District.  
1.4. Protect and enhance the local environment and address the climate 
emergency  
Key Decision  1.5. No 
Exempt  1.6. No 
Consultees/  
Consultation  1.7. Prior consultation in respect of the new Local plan, Issues and Options 
2019  
 
 
    
 
 
1. BACKGROUND  
1.1. This report asks Cabinet to approve key elements of a broad strategy for the new 
Local Plan (LP) based on the previous Issues and Options consideration.  It is 
concluded that an option which includes the establishment of new strategic 
development in three locations and involves a new settlement, the expansion of 
Newent and a new mixed development on previously developed land at Beachley 
delivers the best LP option.  This is considered best placed to be sustainable in 
terms of climate change and will establi sh a strategy which can carry on beyond 
the present end date of 2041.  The recommended location for the new settlement 
is close to Gloucester in the area served by the A40 and A48, complementing the 
other major development at Lydney, Newent and Beachley.  As this strategy marks 
a significant change to previous ways of delivering the development needs of the 
district it is considered that it needs to be considered by Full Council at this stage.  
1.2. This strategy best delivers the changes required in a manner that  is compliant with 
the Council’s Corporate Plan and the LP’s own vision.  While the headline items of 
the strategy are as outlined above, it is emphasised that much development will 
take place in accord with existing commitments and there will also be an e lement 
of continuity sites allocated over the district mainly of a non strategic nature.  
These will support existing settlements providing for their needs over the plan 
period.  The large scale development at Lydney will continue through at least the 
first half of the LP period and will in effect be a fourth strategic site.  
1.3. In order to progress the LP , approval of a strategy is sought, and at the same time 
it is considered necessary to carry out consultation based on this.  The second 
recommendation theref ore seeks approval to carry out such an exercise.  The 
decision on the strategy and the consultation will provide a suitable context for the 
draft plan and enable additional evidence material to be collected knowing it will 
support the LP.  
 
2. MAIN POINTS  
2.1. Context-  
The current context for the emerging LP includes the National Planning Policy 
Framework (NPPF) and related guidance and the means of establishing a housing 
requirement that has evolved since 2018.  It also includes the Council’s own 
corporate objectives including an intent to “Support climate change resilient places, 
communities and businesses, and enhance environmental quality and biodiversity 
through the review of our Local Plan” (p8 Corporate plan 2019 -23). The LP is one 
of the  key routes through which this and other objectives must be delivered 
including the intent to achieve carbon neutrality for the Council by 2030.  2.2. There is a new government White Paper (WP) proposing radical change to LPs 
and Development Management, but it i s at present a discussion document only.  If 
implemented it would necessitate a complete change to the form and content of a 
LP.  There is also a government consultation paper in respect of change to the 
existing system which would form an interim step to any more radical change.  This 
does not affect the form of the emerging LP but its recalculation of the housing 
requirement which Local Authorities (LAs) would have to provide for would have a 
major impact.   
2.3. Although presently unclear what the binding housing requirement for the district 
would be , the starting point would be a figure of 12 ,162 dwellings required over 20 
years as opposed to the present new plan figure of 7440.  This may not be the final 
target because it would be subject to a process that takes account of any 
constraints , such as Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AoNB ) or Special Area 
for Conservation (SAC) as well as areas at risk from flooding.  It would be 
calculated by government.  Althou gh this change is only a proposal at present it 
does suggest a significant upward shift in the number of dwellings that the LP 
would have to provide for.  There are many issues arising from these two sets of 
proposed changes, and the nature and content of the emerging LP may be greatly 
affected by them.  For the present and given the status of the two consultations , 
the LP is being prepared as indicated above, using guidance that currently applies. 
A move to a housing figure of 12 ,162 would effectively doub le the present 
requirement to identify new sites, to about 8000 new dwellings.  
2.4. Under the current requirements the LP will need to provide for development 
including about 4000 dwellings on sites not currently identified over the 20 year 
plan period.  It mus t do this in a manner that makes the optimum contribution to the 
reduction of carbon and in a manner that can deliver environmental gains including 
green infrastructure.  Carbon reduction means providing locations that promote 
less travel, provide for incr eased active travel and public transport and are well 
located for shared facilities whether existing or new.  They must also support the 
prudent delivery of infrastructure and the constructions themselves must be energy 
efficient and well designed and plan ned.   
2.5. Overall constraints   
Over the (Forest of Dean District) FoDD there are a variety of constraints on 
development as well as opportunities.  The former include designated areas such 
as AoNB within which major development is not appropriate though small er local 
change may be beneficial.  Constraints include those designated wildlife sites 
which are not able to be developed and more local designations which also need 
to be respected.  Areas at risk from flooding are also largely excluded.  As well as 
designated areas there are landscape considerations which are constraining.  
Some areas of complex relief would be difficult to develop and the landforms are in 
many localities (whether designated or not) attractive and important areas of 
countryside worthy of  protection in their own right.  The Forest of Dean, (ie 
statutory forest (FoD)) itself contains various designations but it and its related 
woodlands are not able to be proposed for development with very few exceptions such as sites already built on. Alth ough communications and access is generally 
reasonable in the FoDD, there are differences between the various areas and 
allied to this some localities are well placed for access to services by various 
means of transport while others are not.  The two AoNBs , the FoD and the uplands 
associated with it generally form the most constrained parts of the FoDD along with 
those affected by the main SACs along the Severn and Wye rivers as well as the 
numerous sites identified which host bats.   
2.6. Opportunities  
Areas wh ich present potential development opportunities  include previously 
developed land which may be suitable for new uses, and locations which are 
relatively free of constraints and can be afforded or already have good access to 
facilities in larger settlements .  Opportunities of this nature can be identified in the 
various settlements across the district.  Change should  be in some way 
proportional to the size and nature of settlements  to which it relates or it may be 
promoted where the necessary facilities can be made available. Access to facilities 
and importantly job opportunities will involve looking at services , jobs and other 
facilities outside the FoDD but to which it has suitable access. The need to provide 
a new LP over a relatively long period can mean that there is an ability to promote 
comprehensive mixed developments in appropriate locations and develop new or 
enhanced services.   
2.7. The LP will need to continue to provide for the needs of existing settlements in a 
manner that supports their function and  overall sustainability. Existing committed 
sites will serve part of this role, and although they will be reviewed and some may 
be deleted it is considered appropriate to retain most.  To these retained sites, 
many of which are being developed at present t here may be scope for further 
additions.  This is however limited by the nature of the settlements and constraints 
which apply.  These in turn mean that the LP must consider options that go beyond 
the incremental expansion of places that have spare capacit y and the realisation of 
existing commitments.  Sources of information include sites suggested over the 
various calls for sites and those identified during the now complete re survey of all 
the defined settlements in the LP.  
2.8. Looking at the potential for gr owth at the main settlements the following major 
considerations apply:  
Lydney:  Currently there are permissions or allocations capable of supporting 
almost 1 ,500 new dwellings in Lydney, some of which are under construction.  
Beyond the areas covered by these there may be some limited opportunity on 
unconstrained land that is well related to the town.  The current level of 
commitments and activity means that th ey will probably provide new dwellings over 
at least the next ten years and it is likely that the build rate (151 completions 
2019/20 with four active national builders) is at or near the maximum that can be 
sustained.  
Cinderford:  There are sites yet to b e developed at Cinderford which are allocated 
and have permission, (about 600 committed) but beyond these there is little scope because of the statutory forest and landscapes/steep slopes as well as the 
protected sites which surround the town.  The LP will  continue to support the 
Cinderford Northern Quarter as an important aspect of its strategy.  
Coleford:  Sites capable of accommodating about 550 dwellings can be identified at 
present in Coleford and immediately surrounding villages.  Beyond these the fore st 
boundary and some designations represent firm constraints and the locally valued 
landscape which sits between Coleford and the forest edge settlements is another 
constraint supported by the Neighbourhood Development Plan (NDP) and the 
current LP.  AoNB and its setting is a further consideration in some areas.  There is 
therefore limited potential at Coleford.  
Newent:  Partly constrained by a watercourse and floodplain to the north, the 
protection of the town centre from the impacts of development is also important 
with its concentration of Listed Buildings and some access constraints.  The town, 
set in an attractive landscape is considered to have some potential for expansion 
especially in the south east. To enable this local access and wider travel issues  
(including alternatives to car borne commuting) must be satisfactorily addressed 
and improved for new and existing development.   
Note: the above general conclusions in respect of the four towns were set out in 
the issues and Options Report of 2019.  
Tutshill Sedbury and Beachley : Tutshill and Sedbury make up the largest 
settlement in the FoDD after the towns but effectively function as part of Chepstow.  
Although affected by various constraints and presently affected by congestion 
around the A48, there ar e some opportunities for additional development.  One, 
possibly the largest, is that Beachley camp is planned to be disposed of by the 
Ministry of Defence (MoD) and presents a large area brownfield site for which an 
alternative use will need to be found.  Transport and access to and around 
Chepstow is currently the subject of an extensive study and development on either 
side of the border will need to demonstrate that it can be accommodated bringing 
any necessary improvements.  
Bream:  As one of the largest F oDD villages, Bream could support some change , 
having services and being relatively accessible.  Most of it lies in or on the edge of 
the statutory forest however and additional parts may be constrained by former 
iron mines, the associated cavities and the  designated SACs.  
Mitcheldean:  Mitcheldean hosts a great deal of employment, related services and 
is quite accessible.  It is a potential location for additional change although the 
current allocations have not been taken up.  The settlement is quite const rained by 
landscape and nearby SACs but remains suitable for some growth.  
Newnham:  well served although the Conservation Area and nearby SACs must be 
fully considered.  There is some potential for additional change to the north of the 
village adjoining the  new development now commenced.  
Drybrook:  commitments for over 110 dwellings at present and limited by landscape 
and forest  Lydbrook : limited by relief, AoNB and forest, relatively little scope for additional 
development  
Yorkley/ Whitecroft and Pillowell:  limited by landscape and forest, some limited 
scope for additional development including land presently allocated at Whitecroft.  
 
Table 1 Indicative allocations for a strategy using existing settlements only  
 
 Current 
commitments  Indicative additional 
allocation  Additional sites for maximum 
capacity: notes  
Lydney  1500  250 Some additions beyond 
existing commitments  
Cinderford  600 130 Little scope beyond current 
allocations some 
redevelopment potential  
Coleford  550 300 Some allocations including in 
locally protected landscape  
Newent  400 700 Major development plus 
smaller sites within town and 
on periphery  
Tutshill Sedbury 
Beachley  180 800 Beachley Camp mixed 
development plus additional 
land at Tutshill Sedbury  
Large Villages 
and others for 
new allocations  850 1275  Maximum capacity of potential 
sites- Newnham, Mitcheldean, 
Bream also probably 
developments in settlements 
such as Huntley and 
Woolaston  
Total  4080  3455  Maximum capacities are 
identified in the list above - 
within these there is potential 
for smaller scale allocations  
Difference from 
4000 sought   -545 Can provide with a large 
number of allocations  
 
2.9. Existing settlement capacities  The table above indicates the possible scope for 
existing capacities in settlements across the district using a combination of sites 
including some suggested during consultations that are considered suitable and 
others identified as part of the LP process .  Most are large incremental additions to 
existing settlements but several would be more strategic major sites.  Major 
development is assumed at Newent, Beachley and another location or two such as Huntley.  This is for the purpose of illustration of how a LP option based around the 
expansion of existing settlements would have to deliver.  It is broadly in keeping 
with the settlement hierarchy except where new major allocations are possible and 
these would need suitable supporting infrastructure.  All pote ntial sites would need 
additional consideration before they could be allocated but the main points are that 
the option is one that represents the ultimate capacity of most areas and it is one 
of dispersal.  It does fall short of the current running target of 4000, implying an 
additional 500+ dwellings would need to be accommodated.  These could be on 
smaller or larger sites and would further stretch the capacity of the area to provide 
suitable sustainable opportunities.   
2.10.  Alternatives  The Issues and Options  paper of 2019 highlighted the same issues 
that the above table shows, these being the general lack of capacity over the 
FoDD and also the need to make compromises in order to accommodate the scale 
of change that is sought.  These include the identificatio n of sites that are 
constrained, may have locally important protective designations and leave little 
capacity for future plans.  More importantly the strategy of dispersal reduces the 
ability of new development to share infrastructure and new facilities an d may place 
further stress on existing facilities.  There is less scope to identify items such as 
Green Infrastructure (GI).  Overall the impact would be spread across the FoDD 
with localised effects occurring where land is allocated.   
2.11.  A dispersal option spreads the “load” and does not rely on just a few sites, 
although in this case it would require a small number of larger allocations because 
the capacity does not exist elsewhere.  Some sites would be better located to 
benefit from transport networks that  exist.  Overall the option could be delivered to 
the current level of housing required.  It would not perform well in terms of 
sustainable development where there is an ability to reduce travel and provide 
sustainable development in the best locations.   
2.12.  Alternatives to the above were proposed at the Issues and Options stage.  The 
development of a new settlement was considered and has the following 
advantages and disadvantages:  
 It can be part of a planned long term strategy  
 It should be better able to cont ribute to carbon reduction by economies of 
scale, location and providing facilities as required in one place  
 It can deliver community facilities and supporting GI, landscape  
 It can be planned as a sustainable location and designed accordingly with 
purpose built infrastructure such as schools making the optimum use of 
available land  
 Provision of affordable housing may be better achieved as part of a single 
settlement  
 The location can be chosen to benefit the area (for example where it can 
contribute to bett er transport links)   
 To make an allocation requires considerable supporting (evidence) material   It requires major infrastructure  
 It will take a long time to be developed (so must be regarded as available in 
the mid or later part of the plan period - this may however provide a degree 
of regulation of the likely pace of development)  
2.13.  In the FoDD the LP option that includes a new settlement is considered to have 
considerable advantages.  It is not an exclusive option, but would exist alongside a 
range of other  sites.  These would be taken from those considered in table 1 but 
without the need to select all.  Development which can sustainably support existing 
settlements would continue both as existing commitments are built and with new 
allocations.    
2.14.  The locati on of any new settlement must be considered at this stage in the context 
of other elements of the strategy and known major constraints.   
 Major development is considered appropriate at Beachley and at Newent as 
part of a LP.   
 Lydney in effect forms anothe r strategic site.   
 Much of the FoDD is orientated towards Gloucester/ Cheltenham and this 
brings benefits and problems too.   
 There is one railway and the main lines of communication are the A40 the 
A48 and the A4136 as well as the A417 and some north to south secondary 
routes.   
 The least physically constrained areas in the FoDD are in the east and 
north.   
 Much of the employment and higher level services used by the FoDD are in 
the Gloucester area.  
 Active travel should be considered but is best implemented where origins 
and destinations are reasonably close.  
 
2.15.  The above suggests a location near the main routes of travel, though the modes of 
travel will need to change to be more sustainable.  Physical constraints mean that 
a location near the core of the Forest is not possible.    
On balance the major strategic sites which it is recommended the LP should 
include are Lydney (predominantly the existing allocated land), Newent, chiefly to 
the southeast , Beachley Camp for mixed development and a new set tlement in the 
vicinity of the A48/A40 with potential to connect to the railway.   
Table 2 illustrative new settlement option, possible distribution of allocations  
 Current 
commitments  Indicative additional 
allocation  Additional sites for maximum 
capacity:  notes  
Lydney  1500  150 Some additions beyond 
existing commitments  Cinderford  600 130 Little scope beyond current 
allocations  
Coleford  550 100 Some allocations in locally 
protected landscape  
Newent  400 600 Major development plus 
smaller sites within town and 
on periphery  
Tutshill Sedbury 
Beachley  180 800 Beachley Camp mixed 
development plus additional 
land at Tutshill Sedbury  
New settlement  0 2000  Ultimate capacity greater than 
2000 - depends on location and 
phasing, 2000 assumed by 
2041  
Large Villages 
and others for 
new allocations  850 250 Maximum capacity of potential 
sites- Newnham, Mitcheldean, 
Bream also probably 
developments in settlements 
such as Huntley and 
Woolaston  
Total  4080  4030  Possible scales of 
development above are 
illustrative to show how current 
2041 LP requirements can be 
addressed  
Difference from 
4000 sought    Can provide  
 
2.16.  There is presently considerable uncertainty with regard to the future housing 
requirements that LPs will have.  Even if they remain the same or similar to the 
present, additional flexibility in meeting plan totals is desirable.  This enables 
changes sought  by an Inspector at examination to be better addressed and 
provides scope for a LP to show how it would deliver continuity beyond its current 
plan period.  Some form of allowance for non implementation of allocations is also 
necessary in demonstrating the robustness of a LP.  
 
  
 
3. NEXT STEPS FOR THE L OCAL PLAN  
3.1. This report considers strategic options.  While it takes account of development 
possibilities which have been highlighted during the recent call for sites and at the issues and options stage, and the in dividual sites proposed have been studied and 
evaluated, the considerations above do not imply any particular proposal will or will 
not be expected to be allocated.  All will be considered on their merits having 
regard to the preferred option for the LP an d its needs.  At this stage in the LP the 
Council welcome s further dialogue and information in respect of the potential 
content of the LP.  
3.2. From the increasing amount of evidence being accumulated the next major step is 
to compile a draft LP.  This will be a complete plan which will be approved by the 
Council for further consultation.  It will at the time it is approved represent the views 
of the council and will be a material consideration in determining planning 
applications.  It will be the subject of a further full consultation the results of which 
will be used together with any additional evidence to compile a revised plan.  This 
revised p lan will be subject to a further consultation before the responses to this, 
and the plan is submitted for examination.  It is not expected that the plan be 
further changed as a result of this final consultation except as part of the 
examination process.  
  
4. CONCLUSIONS  
4.1. The above report supplements and also summarises the wider discussion in the 
attached document, Preferred Options.  It supports the LP going forward in a 
manner that best delivers against the current levels of housing required, in a 
manner that  best meets the Council ’s corporate objectives.  
4.2. Two basic approaches have been considered and illustrated, the first based 
around existing settlements but with a number of larger “strategic” allocations and 
the second with strategic sites including a new s ettlement.  The former stretches 
capacity in reaching the overall requirement and would result in a dispersed 
pattern of new development which would not perform as well in respect of overall 
objectives nor as part of a long term strategy.  The latter would  not soak up all 
available capacity, would not require allocations where some constraints are not 
respected, and could establish a long term pattern.  It would allow focussed 
attention on transport infrastructure provision including active travel.   
4.3. There are areas in common with the two approaches due in part to the existing 
committed sites that would be largely taken into the new LP as allocations and also 
the common new proposed allocations at Newent and Beachley.  Furthermore both 
provide for continuity  of development meeting the needs of individual settlements 
by existing commitments and new allocations.  
4.4. It is recommended that the attached document be the subject of consultation in 
respect of the LP strategy accompanied by supporting material.  Although  the LP 
itself would contain a number of general policies and various allocations the 
decision sought at this stage is the endorsement of a strategy which encompasses 
the following:  
 Providing for about 4000 new dwellings over and above present 
commitments   Identifying new strategic sites for mixed development at Beachley of the 
order of 600 dwellings, Newent of the order of 600 dwellings and in the 
vicinity of the A48/ A40 close to Churcham of the order of 2000 dwellings 
within the LP period.  
 Identifying fur ther development opportunities in accord with the settlement 
hierarchy at towns and larger villages  
 The strategic allocations are only to be delivered alongside satisfactory 
transport and travel provision to reduce the need for travel, provide for 
active t ravel and support public transport.  
4.5. The above refers to the current calculation in respect of housing required in the 
FoDD.  Any revision (as may be included in the development of proposals by 
government currently being consulted on) may require further co nsideration of the 
strategy.  
 
5. FINANCIAL IMPLICATIO NS 
5.1. The cost of the current plan making exercise is substantial whichever option is 
chosen . 
 
6. LEGAL IMPLICATIONS  
6.1. It is a requirement for the Council to have an up to date Local Plan. The proposals 
sought for approval here are consistent with the development of an up to date plan 
and the proposed process follows the relevant regulations.  
 
7. RISK ASSESSMENT  
The possible strategies carry risk and potential delays also are risks that there will 
not be a LP in place when required by government.  External events (pandemic 
and now proposed changes to the planning system) are substantial risks to the 
programme, the former having diverted some resources and caused delay and the 
latter may lead to a very different kind of new LP.  
 
8. EQUALITIES IMPACT   
No implications: the process will ensure all who wish to engage in the consultation 
are able to do so . 
   
9. CLIMATE CHANGE IMPLI CATIONS  
The LP must consider the implications of its policies and proposals for climate 
change.  The importance of this is referred to in the report and supporting 
information.  There is a risk that the dispersal option will perform much worse than 
one where a new  planned settlement is able to be promoted and developed in a suitable location.  This is one very significant reason for the choice of the 
recommended option . 
There are differences also in the ability of each to deliver against the Council’s 
corporate objectives.  Overall the recommended option is considered to perform 
much better in respect of achieving the district’s and wider climate change 
objectives.  
 
10. BACKGROUND PAPERS  
The following documents have been identified by the author of the repo rt in 
accordance with section 100D.5(a) of the Local Government Act 1972 and are 
listed in accordance with section 100 D.1(a) for inspection by members of the 
public:  
National Planning Policy Framework, 2019  
Planning P ractice  Guidance  
Local Plan Evidence B ase documents (see website for details)  
Local Plan Issues and Options paper, 2019  
Local Plan Preferred Option paper 2020.  
These documents will be available for inspection at the Council Offices during 
normal office hours for a period of up to 4 years from the date of the meeti ng. 
Please contact the author of the report . 
 
 