 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Fylde Local Plan to 2032  
(incorporating Partial Review ) 
 
Adopted December 2021  
  
 
 
 
 Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
1 Preface  
The Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (the Local Plan) was adopted by the Council on 22nd October 2018, 
providing the overall strategy for the development of the Borough to 2032. The plan allocates sites to 
ensure that the development needs of the borough are met i n a co -ordinated way, with the majority 
of this development focused on four strategic locations: Lytham and St Annes; Fylde – Blackpool 
Periphery; Warton; and Kirkham and Wesham. It also provides protections from development in 
certain circumstances, such as in parks and open spaces, nature reserves, the green belt, areas of 
separation, conservation areas and the countryside. Containing a complete suite of policies for 
assessing planning applications for different types of development, the Local Plan forms the principal 
part of the statutory development plan for the Borough. Accordingly, it plays a vital role, to manage, 
guide and encourage development within Fylde to meet the identified needs and aspirations of our 
local communities.  
The Council has produc ed the Partial Review to update the Local Plan to accord with latest government 
policy and to address a housing shortfall in the neighbouring Borough of Wyre. The Partial Review 
ensures that the Local Plan will continue to deliver a sustainable pattern of development for the plan 
period and that development of the Borough continues to follow the plan -led system.  
This version of the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review) has been produced for 
Adoption, as the principal document of the statu tory Development Plan for the borough. It is the final 
result of a process of consultation that culminated in the Examination in Public under the direction of 
the Inspector, Mrs Yvonne Wright BSc(Hons) Dip TP MSc DMS MRTPI, on behalf of the Secretary of 
State.  
The Local Plan directly or indirectly affects all residents, communities and businesses within the 
Borough and ensures that all who live or work in Fylde, along with those who visit, can look forward 
to the achievement of the Council’s Vision for Fyl de in 2032.  
 
 
Councillor Trevor Fiddler  
Chairman of the Planning Committee , Fylde Council   
Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
2 Contact Information  
 
If you have a query about any aspect of the Fylde Local Plan to 2032  (incorporating Partial Review) , 
please contact the Planning Policy Team by email:  planningpolicy@fylde.gov.uk  
 
Contact Information  
Planning Policy      Tel:   01253 658418  
Fylde Council     
Town Hall      Email:   planningpolicy@fylde.gov.uk  
St Annes  
Lancashire FY8 1LW      
 
Website:   https://new.fylde.gov.uk/resident/planning/planning -policy -local -
plan/adopted -local -plan -to-2032/  
 Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
3 Contents  
 
Chapter 1:  Introduction          11 
 
Chapter 2:  A Spatial Portrait of Fylde        27 
 
Chapter 3:  A Vision for Fylde         39 
A Vision for Fylde to the Year 2032       39 
 
Chapter 4:  Strategic Objectives         43 
 
Chapter 5 The Development Strategy        47 
Strategic Policy S1: The Proposed Settlement Hierarchy     48 
Strategic Policy DLF1: Development Locations for Fylde     52 
 
Chapter 6: Strategic Locations for Development      55 
Strategic Policy M1: Masterplanning the Strategic Locations for Development  56 
Strategic Policy SL1:  Lytham and St Annes Strategic Location s for Development  59 
Strategic Policy SL2: The Fylde -Blackpool Per iphery Strategic  
 Location s for Development      61 
Strategic Policy SL3: Warton Strategic Location for Dev elopment    63 
Strategic Policy SL4: Kirkham and Wesham Strategic Location for Development  64 
Strategic Policy SL5: Development Sites outside the Strategic  
Locations for Development      66 
 
Chapter 7: General Development Policies       71 
Non -strategic Policy GD1: Settlement Boundaries     71 
Strategic Policy GD2: Green Belt        72 
Strategic Policy GD3: Areas of Separation      73 
Strategic Policy GD4: Development in the Countryside     75 
Non -strategic Policy GD5: Large Developed Sites in the Countryside  
 and Green Belt        76 Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
4 Strategic Policy GD6: Promoting Mixed Use Development    78 
Strategic Policy GD7: Achieving Good Design in Development    80 
Strategic Policy GD8:  Demonstrating Viability      84 
Non -strategic Policy GD9: Contaminated Land      87 
 
Chapter 8: The Fylde Economy         89 
Strategic Policy EC1: Overall Provision of Employment Land  and Existing   
Employment  Sites        91 
Strategic Policy EC2: Employment Opportunities      95 
Strategic Policy EC 3: Lancashire A dvanced Engineering and Manufacturing   
Enterprise  Zone, at BAE Systems,  Warton    97 
Strategic Policy EC4: Blackpool Airport Enterprise Zone     98 
Strategic Policy EC 5: Vibrant Town, District and Local Centres    103 
Strategic Policy EC 6: Leisure, Culture and Tourism Development    108 
Non -strategic Policy EC 7: Tourism Accommodation     111 
 
Chapter 9: Provision of Homes in Fylde        115 
Strategic Policy H1: Housing Delivery and the Allocation of Housing Land  118 
Strategic Policy H2: Density  and Mix of New Residential Development   119 
Non -strategic Policy H3: Conversions and Change of Use to Residential   126 
Strategic Policy H4: Affordable Housing       127 
Strategic Policy H5: Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople’s Sites  131 
Non-strategic Policy H6: Isolated New Homes in the Countryside    133 
Non -strategic Policy H7: Replacements of, and Extensions to, Existing  
Homes in the  Countryside      134 
 
Chapter 10: Health and Wellbeing         137 
Strategic Policy HW1: Health and Wellbeing      139 
Strategic Policy HW2: Community Facilities      142 
Strategic Policy HW3: Protection and Provision of Indoor and Outdoor  
 Sports Facilities       144 
 Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
5 Chapter 11: Infrastructure, Service Provision and Transport     147 
Strategic Policy INF1: Service Accessibility and Infrastructure    148 
Non -strategic Policy INF2: Developer Contributions     151 
Strategic Policy T1: Strategic Highway Improvements     154 
Strategic Policy T2 : Warton Aerodrome       155 
Strategic Policy T 3: Blackpool Airport       156 
Strategic Policy T 4: Enhancing Sustainable Transport Choice    159 
Non -strategic Policy T 5: Parking Standards      161 
 
Chapter 12: Water Management, Flood Risk and  Climate Change    163 
Strategic Policy CL1: Flood Alleviation, Water Quality and Water Efficiency  167 
Strategic Policy CL2: Surface Water Run -Off and Sustainable Drainage   171 
Strategic Policy CL3: Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Generation  –  
excluding onshore wind turbines     175 
Strategic Policy CL4: Decentralised Energy Networks and District  
Heating  Systems       178 
 
Chapter 13: Conserving and Enhancing the Natural, Historic and Built Environment   181 
Strategic Policy ENV1: Landscape       181 
Strategic Policy ENV2: Biodiversity       185 
Strategic Policy ENV 3: Protecting Existing Open Space (Part of the Green  
Infrastructure  network)       192 
Strategic Policy ENV 4: Provision of New Open Space (Part of the Green  
Infrastructure  networ k)      194 
Strategic Policy ENV 5:  Historic Environment      198 
 
Glossary            211 
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
6 Appendices  
 
Appendix 1:       Schedule of saved policies from the Fylde Borough Local Plan (As 
Altered), October 2005 and policies from the Fylde 
Local Plan to 2032 (as adopted) that are  
superseded by  policies i n the  Partial Review    227 
 
Appendix 2: Housing Trajectory         241 
 
Appendix 3: Retail  - Town, District and Local Centre  -Boundaries Review    245 
 
Appendix 4: Holiday Area(s) Boundary Review       247 
 
Appendix 5: Sea Front Area(s) Boundary Review       249 
 
Appendix 6:  Existing Employment Sites Review       251 
 
Appendix 7  Biological Heritage Sites in Fylde       257 
 
Appendix 8: Performance Monitoring Framework       261 
 
Appendix 9:  Evidence Base          273  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
7 List Of Figures/Tables/Maps  
 
Figures   
Figure 1: Local Plan  preparation  through to adoption       18 
Figure 2: Design and Access Statements – 10 Pointers to good practice     80 
Figure 3: The Determinants of Health and Wellbeing in Our Neighbourhoods    137 
Figure 4:  Land -use and marine planning systems in practice       164 
 
Tables  
Table 1: Mineral Safeguarding Areas (MSAs) within Strategic Sites for Development    25 
Table 2: Business and Industrial Land Requirement       91 
Table 3: Additional Convenience floor -space        101 
Table 4: Housing size by middle layer super -output area       122 
Table 5: Proportions of properties required        123 
Table 6: Roles and responsibilities of  Flood Risk Management Authorities    166 
Table 7: Fylde deployable potential in 2020 and 2030 by technology     175 
Table 8: Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) in Fylde      188 
 
Maps  
Map 1: Mineral Safeguarding Areas         26 
Map 2: Fylde in context           29 
Map 3:  Local Assets and Key Designations        37 
Map 4: Strategic Locations for Development        51 
 
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
8 Abbreviations  
 
AEM  
AMR  
BHS Advanced Engineering and Manufacturing  
Authority Monitoring Report  
Biological Heritage Site  
CPRE  
CCG 
CHP 
CIL 
DCLG  
DCSA  Campaign to Protect Rural England  
Clinical Commissioning Group  
Combined Heat and Power  
Community Infrastructure Levy  
Department for Communities and Local Government  
Defence Communi cations Services Agency  
DEFRA  
DfT 
EA 
EDC Department of Environment, Food and Rural Affairs  
Department for Transport  
Environment Agency  
Economic Development Company  
EiP 
EU 
GVA  
GTAA  Examination  in Public  
European Union  
Gross Value Added  
Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Accommodation Assessment  
HCA  
HIA 
HNT  Homes and Communities Agency  
Health Impact Assessment  
Healthy New Towns  
HRA  Habitats Regulations Assessment (Screening Report)  
IDP 
IDS 
LAPS  Infrastructure Delivery Plan  
Infrastructure Delivery Schedule  
Local Areas for Play  
LCC Lancashire County Council  
LEAPS  
LMWLP  Local Equipped Areas for Play  
Lancashire Minerals and Waste Local Plan  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
9 LDO  
LDS 
LEP 
LLFA  
LNP Local Development Order  
Local Development Scheme  
Lancashire Enterprise Partnership  
Lead Local Flood Authority  
Local Nature Partnership  
LNR Local Nature Reserve  
LTP 
MCZ  
MMO  
MOD  Local Transport Plan  
Marine Conservation Zone  
Marine Management Organisation  
Ministry of Defence  
MSA  
NATS  
NCA  
NDP  
NGB  
NHS  
NNR  Mineral Safeguarding Area  
National Air Traffic Service  
National Character Area  
Neighbourhood Development Plan  
National Governing Body  
National Health Service  
National Nature Reserve  
NPPF  
 
NEAPS  National Planning Policy Framework – (the Framework)  (2021 unless 
otherwise stated)  
Neighbourhood Equipped Areas for Play  
PPG  
RPO  
RSPB  
RSS 
S106  
SA 
SAC 
SEA 
SFRA  
SHELAA  
SHMA  Planning Practice Guidance  
Revised Preferred Option  
Royal Society for the Protection of Birds  
Regional Spatial Strategy  
Section 106 Agreement (planning obligation)  
Sustainability Appraisal  
Special Areas of Conservation  
Strategic Environmental Assessment  
Strategic Flood Risk  Assessment  
Strategic Housing and Employment Land Availability Assessment  
Strategic Housing Market Assessment  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
10 SME  
SNHP  
SNPP  
SPD 
SPA 
SSSI 
SuDS  
UK 
 Small and Medium Sized Enterprises  
Sub National Household Projections  
Sub National Population Projections  
Supplementary Planning Document  
Special Protection Area  
Site of Special Scientific Interest  
Sustainable Drainage Systems  
United Kingdom  
 
 Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
11 Chapter 1:  Introduction  
 
The Fylde Local Plan to 2032  (incorporating Partial Review)  
1.1 Future development within Fylde will be guided by the plans and policies within this new Local 
Plan for Fylde, which runs from 1 April 2011 to 31 March 2032 .   
1.2 The Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review) includes Strategic and Non -
Strategic Allocations for new homes and employment land, sites for Gypsies, Travellers and 
Travelling Showpeople, leisure, retail, tourism and community use, or a mixture of such uses. 
The Plan also comprises Development Manageme nt policies, which will inform decisions on 
planning applications and appeals; together with policies to protect the natural and built 
environment and heritage assets.   
1.3 The Fylde Local Plan  to 2032  superseded the saved policies of the Fylde Borough Lo cal Plan 
(As Altered: October 2005).  In turn, the Partial Review supersedes nine policies of the Fylde 
Local Plan to 2032.  Appendix 1  sets out the policies in the adopted Fylde Borough Local Plan 
(As Altered: October 2005) and shows:  
• Policies replaced by policies in this new Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial 
Review) including both Strategic and Non -Strategic Allocations and Development 
Management policies;  
• Policies which have been superseded by the National Planning Policy Framework (the 
Framework); and  
• Policies which are no longer required.  
• The Partial Review of the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 supersedes nine policies of the Fylde 
Local Plan to 2032. Appendi x 1 also sets out those policies in a separate schedule.  
Preparation of the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 fulfilled the requirements set out in the Planning 
and Compulsory Purchase Act, 2004 and the accompanying Town and Country Planning (Local 
Planning) (Engla nd) Regulations, 2012; and followed the guidance set out in the Framework, 
published in March 2012 and the Planning Practice Guidance (PPG), issued in March 2014  (as 
updated) . The revised National Planning Policy Framework was published in July 2018 , and a  
further version, published in February 2019, incorporated minor further revisions . A further 
version with new revisions was published in July 2021.  Henceforth in this document , unless 
otherwise stated,  “the Framework” refers to the July 2021  version of th e Framework.  
Paragraph 214 of the  2018 Framework provided a transitional arrangement for Local Plans 
submitted for Examination on or before 24th January 2019 whereby, for the purposes of 
Examination,  the policies in the 2012 Framework applied . The Fylde Local Plan to 2032 was 
therefore prepared and Examined with reference to the 2012 Framework, in accordance with 
the transitional arrangement.  
1.4 This version of the Local Plan is the Fylde Local Plan to 2032  (incorporating Partial Review) . 
The Council has undertaken the Partial Review to address two matters:  
• Paragraph 212 of the 2019 Framework states that Plans may need to be revised to 
reflect policy changes which the replacement framework has ma de. This should be Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
12 progressed as quickly as possible, either through a partial revision or by preparing a 
new plan. This Fylde Local Plan to 2032  (incorporating Partial Review)  incorporates 
revisions to ensure the Local Plan is in accordance with the revised Framework of July 
2021 .  
• Paragraph 1.27 of the Local Plan commits the Council to undertake an early review of 
the Plan (whether partial or full) to examine the issue of unme t need in Wyre, if 
Wyre’s Local Plan is adopted with unmet need. The Wyre Local Plan (2011 -2031) was 
adopted on 28th February 2019 with a shortfall of housing provision against the 
housing need figure identified in the plan. This Fylde Local Plan to 2032  (incorporating 
Partial Review)  incorporates revisions to provide explanation of the updated position 
in order to address the issue, and is accompanied by a supporting statement of 
common ground.  
1.5 The Fylde Local Plan to 2032  (incorporating Partial Revie w) is built upon the key principle of 
sustainable development  and its three dimensions: social, economic and environmental.  
These dimensions give rise to the need for the planning system to perform a number of roles 
(the Framework):  
• An economic objective  – to help build  a strong, responsive and competitive economy, 
by ensuring that sufficient land of the right type s is available in the right places and at 
the right time to support growth , innovation  and improved productivity ; and by 
identifying and coordinating the provision of infrastructure;  
• A social objective  – to support  strong, vibrant and healthy communities, b y ensuring 
that a sufficient number and range of homes can be provided  to meet the needs of 
present and future generations; and by fostering well -designed , beautiful  and safe  
places , with accessible services and open spaces that reflect current and future  needs 
and support  communities’  health, social and cultural well -being; and  
• An environmental objective  – to protect and enhanc e our natural, built and historic 
environment; including making effective use of land , improv ing biodiversity, using  
natural resources prudently, minimising  waste and pollution, and mitigating  and 
adapting  to climate change , including moving to a low carbon economy.  
1.6 The Fylde Local Plan to 2032  (incorporating Partial Review)  – hereinafter referred to as the 
Local Pla n - will provide the locally specific part of the development plan, whilst the 
Framework provides the national framework against which all development in Fylde must be 
assessed. The North West Regional Spatial Strategy was revoked in May 2013, meaning that  
Local Plans must cover the strategic element of the development plan which was previously 
included in regional strategies. The Local Plan does  not repeat policies contained in the 
Framework unless there is a locally specific aspect of the Framework that n eeds to be clarified.  
1.7 The Local Plan contains a Spatial Portrait  of how the Borough looks and functions now, 
together with the Vision for Fylde  and a Development Strategy  that set out how the Council 
envisages the area will develop over the course of the Plan period. It seeks to ensure that new 
homes, jobs and services required by communities are located in the most sustainable 
locations and that the framework for delivering the necessary infras tructure, facilities and 
other development will be provided to make this achievable.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
13 1.8 The Local Plan should be read as a whole and every policy and supporting 
justification should be considered , in order that  a balance d judgement  be made , 
when determini ng planning applications.  
Neighbourhood Development Plans  
1.9 Neighbourhood Development Plans (NDPs) may also be produced by a parish/town council  or 
a neighbourhood forum . Neighbourhood planning provides a powerful set of tools for local 
residents to ensure they achieve the right type of development for their community. NDP 
policies must be in general conformity with the strategic policies of the adopted Local Plan 
and Nat ional Policy.  The Framework states ‘ Neighbourhood planning gives communities the 
power to develop a shared vision for their area.  Neighbourhood plans can shape, direct and 
help to deliver sustainable development , by influencing local planning decisions as  part of the 
statutory development plan .’ Two NDPs  have been  prepared in advance of th is Local Plan. The 
St Anne ’s on the Sea NDP  and t he Bryning with Warton N DP were both made on 24th May 
2017, following public hearings and referenda . Neighbourhood Development Plans for Wrea 
Green and Staining are in progress . Elswick Parish Council has agreed to pr epare a N DP, 
following the decision of the Development Management  Committee on 9 March 2016 to 
reduce the number of homes from 140 to 50 and  to change its status to a Tier 2  Smaller Rural 
Settlement. Improvements may be required to the existing A585 Thistleton junction to 
improve safety and accessibility.  
1.10  Once adopted a NDP  will sit alongside the Local Plan and form part of the Developme nt Plan 
for the area.  The St Anne ’s on the Sea NDP and the Bryning with Warton NDP are compliant 
with the policies contained in this Local Plan.   All Neighbourhood Development Plan area 
boundaries are shown on the Policies Map  including Inset Plans , which accompan ies this 
Local Plan.  Neighbourhood Development Orders may also be produced to grant planning 
permission for development that complies with the order.  Community groups may also 
produce Community Right to Build orders to give planning permission for small -scale, site -
specific developments.   
1.11 Where a NDP  could lead to significant environmental effects it will be necessary to screen the 
Plan in relation to the Habitats and Species Regulations (as amended) 2010 (the 'Habitats 
Regulatio ns') and the Environment Assessment of Plans and Programmes Regulations 2004. 
In relation to the Habitats Regulations, a N DP cannot progress if it would result in a likely 
significant effect on any European Site (see Schedule 2, The Neighbourhood Planning 
(General) Regulations, 2012 ). A screening exercise should be undertaken if there is any doubt 
about the effects of the Plan on European protected sites. This will be particularly important 
if a N DP is to progress before a Local Plan has been adopted and/or  the N DP proposes 
development which has not be assessed and/or included in the HRA for the Local Plan. In 
addition to the HRA process, if environmental effects are predicted a SEA screening exercise 
should also be undertaken. A SEA may be required where:  
• a NDP  allocates sites for development  
• a NDP  contains sensitive natural assets that may be affected by the plan  
• a NDP  may have significant effects that have not already been considered and dealt 
with in the Sustainability Appraisal for the Local Plan  
More i nformation on NDPs is available on the Council’s website.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
14 The Duty to Cooperate  
1.12 The Government has recognised  that the need for strategic planning remains following the 
revocation of Regional Spatial Strategies. To ensure that sensible planning for issues which 
extend beyond a council administrative boundary occurs, it introduced a Duty to Cooperate . 
The Duty to Cooperate is set out in Section 33A of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act, 
2004 as amended by Section 110 of the Localism Act 2011 and the Framework.  
1.13  The Duty to Cooperate applies to all local planning authorities, county councils in England and 
to a number of other public bodies, including statutory consultees as set out in part 2 of the 
Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations 2012.  The duty requires 
them to cooperate with each other to address strategic planning matte rs relevant to their 
areas in the preparation of development plans. The duty requires ongoing constructive and 
active engagement on the preparation of development plans and other activites relating to 
the sustainable development and use of land.   
1.14 The Duty:  
• relates to sustainable development or use of land that would have a significant impact on 
at least two local planning areas or on a planning matter that falls within the remit of a 
county council;  
• requires that councils set out planning policies t o address such issues;  
• requires that councils and other bodies engage constructively, actively and on an ongoing 
basis to develop strategic policies in the preparation of Local Plans and any documents 
and activities that can reasonably be considered to pr epare the way for such plans;  
• requires councils to consider joint approaches to plan -making.  
1.15 The Framework give s further guidance on ‘Maintaining effective cooperation ’ and highlights 
the importance of joint working to help to determine where additional infrastructure is 
necessary, and whether  development needs that cannot be wholly met within a particular 
plan area  could be met elsewhere . ‘Local planning authorities and county councils (in two -
tier areas) are under a duty to cooperate with each other, and with other prescribed bodies, 
on strategic matters  that cross administrative boundaries. ’ (the Framework)  
1.16  The Framework states that ‘ In order to de monstrate effective and on -going joint working, 
strategic policy -making authorities should prepare and maintain one or more statements of 
common ground, documenting the cross -boundary matters being addressed and progress in 
cooperating to address these. ’  
1.17 The Council areas of Blackpool, Wyre, West Lancashire, Preston (Central Lancashire Authority) 
and South Ribble (Central Lancashire Authority) are adjacent to Fylde. Fylde Council is working 
closely with these authorities, Lancashire County Council  (LCC) and other public bodies on 
issues of strategic importance to the Local Plan.1  The Fylde Coast sub -region al Authorities 
(Fylde, Blackpool and Wyre) along with L CC have drafted a Memorandum of Understanding 
which  sets the parameters for their continued joint approach to strategic planning across the 
Fylde Coast sub -region. Joint working has already involved producing evidence on housing, 
retail, Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople and coastal defence issues.   The Fylde 
 
1 Appendix 1 of the  IDP for Fylde  contains a list of infrastructure delivery agencies with whom the Council are engaging in relation to the 
provision of key infrastructure in the Borough.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
15 Coast Authorities intend to work together on the Green Infrastructure  network , ecological 
networks and wildlife habitats  and renewable energy .  
Duty to Cooperate Meetings  
1.18 Under the Duty to Cooperate Fylde, Blackpool, Wyre and Lancashire County Councils are 
collectively working together on the strategic priorities highlighted in the Framework for the 
Fylde Coast sub -region, which are:  
• the overall strategy for the pattern, scale and qualit y of development ; 
•  housing (including affordable housing), employment, retail, leisure and other commercial 
development ;  
• infrastructure for transport, telecommunications, security, waste management, water 
supply, wastewater, flood risk  and coastal change management , and the provision of 
minerals and energy (including heat) ; 
• community facilities (such as health, education and cultural infrastructure ); and 
• conservation and enhancement of the natural , built  and historic environment, including 
landscape s and green infrastructure, and planning measures to address climate change 
mitigation and adaptation .    
1.19 Quarterly Duty to Cooperate meetings are held between officers from the Fylde Coast 
Authorities and  LCC, where strategic planning issues are discussed.  Joint working has already 
involved the production of an evidence base.  
1.20 The Fylde Coast Authorities Joint Member and Officer Advisory Steering Group was 
established in November 2014, comprising of c ouncillors and senior officers from the Fylde 
Coast Authorities and LCC, to oversee the work under the Duty to Cooperate.  A key remit of 
the Advisory Steering Group will be to resolve difficult and sensitive issues, reaching common 
understanding.  
1.21 Officers from Fylde hold six monthly meetings with colleagues from Preston City Council 
relating to matters of cross boundary concern.  
1.22 The Fylde Coast Authorities officers Duty to Cooperate meetings, together with the Fylde and 
Preston officers Duty t o Cooperate meetings are effective mechanisms for ensuring that 
strategic planning issues that cross council administrative boundaries are given due 
consideration, are planned for and are delivered effectively through the plan making process.  
Neighbouring Local Authorities and the Duty to Cooperate  
1.23  In October 2012, Blackpool Council requested that Fylde Council provide 14ha of employment 
land to assist in meeting Blackpool’s requirement to 2027. Blackpool provided its 2012 
Employment Land Update which evidenced why this employment land could not be provided 
within Blackpool’s administrative area. Fylde Council accepted this evidence and an additional 
14 Ha of employment land (to meet Blackpool’s requirements) was identified in the Fylde Local 
Plan.  
1.24 Wyre Council wrote to Fylde Council in May 2016, under the Duty Cooperate, to request that 
Fylde Council assist Wyre Council in meeting its objectively assessed housing need. In 
consequence, the Local Plan was adopted with a mechanism to trigger a review  (whether full Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
16 or partial) to examine the issue of unmet need. The explanation was given in the original text 
of the Local Plan in paragraphs 1.24 to 1.27. The review mechanism is contained in paragraph 
1.27. The original policy text is reproduced for information below:    
Text from o riginal Fylde Local Plan to 2032 as Adopted in October 2018:  
1.24 Wyre Council wrote to Fylde Council in May 2016, under the Duty Cooperate, to 
request that Fylde Council assist Wyre Council in meeting its obj ectively assessed 
housing need.  The Objectively Assessed Need (OAN) figures for the three Fylde 
Coast Authorities originate from the ranges set out in the original SHMA 2014 and 
its updates which considered revised population and household formation data.  For 
Wyre Council this gave an OAN of between 400 and 479 dwellings per annum from 
2011 to 2031. Wyre Council considers 479 dwellings per annum to be an 
appropriate housing requirement figure which ties in with the economic evidence 
and this figure was acc epted by Wyre Council on 14th April 2016.   
1.25  Wyre Council has identified that the supply of deliverable land is constrained by 
three main issues:  
• Highway capacity, in particular on the A585(T), and A6 and also at Junctions 
1 and 3 on the M55  
• Flood Ris k  
• Green Belt  
1.26  Wyre  Council’s evidence base in relation to these issues remains incomplete and 
the exact extent of their unmet need is unknown as the precise numbers of homes 
that will need to be delivered outside Wyre Council’s administrative area has not 
yet been assessed.  It is also unclear what provision, if any, other neighbouring 
authorities will be able to make. The difficulty has arisen because of timing: the 
production of plans has not been aligned.  
1.27  Fylde Council recognises that Wyre  Council have identified difficulties in planning 
to meet its objectively -assessed need for housing. Any need that remains unmet 
following the adoption of Wyre’s Local Plan will need to be addressed. Fylde Council 
will undertake an early review of the Fyld e Local Plan (whether full or partial) to 
examine this issue, working with other authorities adjoining Wyre under the Duty 
to Co -Operate. The objective of this process would be to ensure that any unmet 
need is met within the Housing Market Area and/or in o ther appropriate locations, 
where consistent with the achievement of sustainable development.  
 
1.25  The Wyre Local Plan (2011 -2031) was adopted on 28th February 2019. Paragraph 4.1.6 of the 
Wyre Local Plan identifies the Objectively Assessed Need (OAN) for housing to be 479 
dwellings per annum, equating to 9,580 over the plan period to 2031, derived from the Fylde 
Coast SHMA and its Addenda. The Wyre Local Plan Policy SP1 states that it will deliver a 
minimum of 9,200 dwellings, which equates to 460 dwelli ngs per annum over the plan period, 
resulting in a shortfall of 380 dwellings or 4% of the OAN. The adoption of the Wyre Local Plan 
with this shortfall therefore triggers the early review mechanism contained within paragraph 
1.27 of the Fylde Local Plan to  2032 (as adopted).  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
17 1.26  The shortfall in Wyre, established through the Wyre Local Plan (2011 -2031) (30 dwellings per 
annum), is provided for through the new housing requirement of 305 dwellings per annum for 
the period 2019 -2032 in the Fylde Local Plan t o 2032  (incorporating Partial Review) .  
1.27  The Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review ) therefore has incorporated 
alterations to its strategic policies DLF1 and H1 and to supporting text, to the housing needs 
and requirement figures, and to the performance monitoring framework, following 
consideration of the issue of housing needs in Wyre. Explanatory paragraphs above are revised 
to clarify the updated position following the Partial Review.   
Soundness of the Local Plan  
1.28 Before a Council adopts a Local Plan, it must be submitted to the Secretary of State, and 
undergo Examination in Public.  The Local Plan has been  examined by an independent 
inspector whose role is to assess whether the plan has been prepared in accordance  with legal  
requirements including the Duty to Cooperate, and whether it is sound.  Similarly, the Partial 
Review has been submitted to the Secretary of State and examined by an independent 
inspector.  The tests of soundness are set out in the Framework ; the Local Plan  must be : 
• Positively prepared  –providing a strategy which , as a minimum,  seeks to meet the 
area’s objectively assessed  needs;  and is informed by agreements with other 
authorities, so that unmet need from neighbouring areas is accommodated where it 
is practical to do so and is consistent with achieving sustainable development;  
• Justified  –an appropriate strategy, taking into account the reasonable alternatives, 
and based on proportionate evidence;  
• Effective  –deliverable over the plan  period , and  based on effective joint working on 
cross -boundary strategic  matters that have been dealt with rather than deferred, as 
evidenced by the statement of common ground ; and  
• Consistent with national policy  –enabling the delivery of su stainable development in 
accordance with the policies in this Framework  and other statements of national 
planning policy, where relevant .  
The outcome of the Examination s of the Local Plan  and Partial Review  is explained later in this 
chapter.  
Stages of Plan Preparation  
1. 29 All of the stages in the preparation of the plan, initially comprising a Part 1 document  (strategic 
allocations and development management policies) , but now comprising one complete Local 
Plan are explained in summary in Figure 1 . 
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
18 Figure 1: Local Plan and Partial Review preparation through to adoption  
 
Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
19  
 
Vision, Issues and Objectives  
1.30 The Council prepared the Vision, Issues and Objectives for informal public consultation in 
February and March 2011. The purpose of this was to seek initial views on the main issues 
facing the Borough along with views on the objectives for the Local Plan and wha t the future 
spatial vision of Fylde should include.  
Issues and Options  
1.31 The Council’s Issues and Options document underwent consultation during a six week period 
in Ju ne and July 2012.  The document presented the vision for Fylde and five alternative spatial 
options for the distribution of future development.  The five spatial options were:  
• Option 1: Focus on Lytham and St Annes  
• Option 2: Equal Focus on Lytham and St Annes and Kirkham  
• Option 3: Lytham and St Annes  and Key an d Local Service Centres  
Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
20 • Option 4: Lytham and St Annes and Rural Dispersal  
• Option 5: Equal Focus on Lytham and St Annes and land on the south east edge of  
 Blackpool  
It also included options on policy issues such as landscape and biodiversity, climate change 
and open space.   
1.32 A Consultation Statement was prepared summarising the responses to the Issues and Options 
document and the way the Council addressed them as part of the Preferred Option.   It was 
concluded in the Consultation Statement that the preferred spatial option was  likely to be an 
amalgamation of some of the aspects of all five alternative options and the suggested sixth 
option.  It was accepted that development should be distributed throughout the Borough, 
adjacent to the main settlements, in order that they could benefit from a supply of new 
housing and investment in the town centres, services and infrastructure. It was accepted that 
an allowance would be made for smaller sites in the main urban areas and adjacent to rural 
settlements.  
Preferred Option  
1.33 The Local Plan: Part 1 Preferred Option was prepared for consultation for an eight week period 
running from June to August 2013.  It took account of the responses to the Issues and Options 
consultation and updated evidence and incorporated development manageme nt policies.  
The Framework came into effect late into the process of preparing the Issues and Options 
document and meant that, in some cases, the choice of preferred option was influenced by 
the inclusion of a policy within the Framework. The Preferred Op tion comprised  of four  
Strategic Locations for Development:  
• Lytham and St Annes;  
• Fylde -Blackpool Periphery;  
• Warton; and  
• Kirkham and Wesham.  
1.34 Formal consultation on the Preferred Option undertaken in 2013, was carried out under the 
relevant regulatio ns relating to this aspect of the Development Plan process (Regulation 18 of 
the Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations, 2012).   
1.35 A Consultation Statement summarising the responses to the Preferred Option document and 
the way the Council proposed to address them as part of th e Revised Preferred Option 
document was issued in July 2014 and is available to view and download from the Council’s 
website.  
Revised Preferred Option  
1.36 The Preferred Option  informed th e Revised Preferred Option of the Local Plan, which include d 
for the first time  both strategic and non -strategic sites for housing, employment and mixed 
use development. The Plan also identifie d the distribution of development over the Plan 
period to 2032; together with development management policies such as housing, 
employment, ret ail, tourism, climate change, heritage assets and the natural and built 
environment.  The Revised Preferred Option  also include d defined town, district and local Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
21 centre boundaries; together with primary and secondary retail frontages.  The boundaries of 
the Primary Holiday Areas in St Annes and the seafront areas of St Annes and Ansdell / 
Fairhaven were  reviewed and defined in the Revised Preferred Option .  Work was carried out 
as part of the preparation of the Revised Preferred Option to establish whether existing 
employment locations and allocations should continue to be protected and be carried 
forward.   
1.37 Consideration of the responses to the Revised Preferred Option consultation, changes to 
national planning policy , legislative changes including the  enactment of the Housing and 
Planning Act, 2016  and further evidence  including and update to the Gypsies ’, Travellers ’ and 
Travelling Showpeople ’s Accommodation Assessment that has been commissioned jointly 
with Blackpool and Wyre Councils informed the Publication version . Significant revisions were  
necessary to the housing policies in the Publication version as a result.  
Publication Version  
1.38 The Publication Version was produced for publication for public consultation under Regulation 
19 of the Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations 2012 , for 
comments on the soundness of the Local Plan  (see paragraph 1.28 above) . The Publication 
Version Local Plan identified the  spatial application of the policies on the Policies Map  
including Inset Plans , which accompanie d it. The consultation on soundness  took place 
between 11th August 2016 and 22nd September 2016 , following which  the Council prepared  
responses to all of the representatio ns received.  
Submission, Examination, Modifications and Adoption  
1.39  The Local Plan was submitted to the Secretary of State in December 2016. The Inspector Mrs 
Yvonne Wright BSc(Hons) Dip TP MSc DMS MRTPI conducted the Examination  in Public  on 
behalf of the Secretary of State. The purpose of the Examination is to assess whe ther the Local 
Plan has been prepared in line with legal requirements, including compliance with the Duty to 
Cooperate, and whether it is sound. The Examination took place over three hearing sessions 
held in the Dalmeny Hotel, Lytham St. Annes, in March, J une and December 2017.  
1.40  Following further public consultation in February –March 2018 on Main Modifications made 
during Examination, the Inspector’s Report was published in September  2018. The Inspector 
found that the Local Plan was legally compliant, and was sound, with Main M odifications as 
put forward by the Council. The Inspector’s Report and Schedules of Modifications are 
published on the Council’s website.  The final version of t he Local Plan for Adoption 
incorporate d all of the Main Modifications required for soundness. It also incorporate d 
Additional Modifications, which are more minor in nature and do not materially affect the 
policies of the Local Plan: the Additional Modifica tions were to correct grammar and spelling, 
improve clarity or to provide updated information within the text. The Local Plan is 
accompanied by the Policies Map including Inset Plans , which incorporate s modifications 
made during the Examination process.  
Partial Review  
1.41  This version of the Local Plan is the Fylde Local Plan to 2032  (incorporating Partial Review) . It 
incorporates revisions to the text of the adopted Local Plan, to address changes to the 
Framework and the matter of housing need in Wyre,  as set out earlier in this chapter.  A 
Regulation 18 Consultation for the Partial Review was undertaken between 25th April 2019 Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
22 and 6th June 2019 . The outcomes of that consultation  were reflected in the Partial Review of 
the Fylde Local Plan to 2032: Schedule of Revisions to the FLP32, henceforth referred to as the 
Partial Review, which was published for Regulation 19 consultation between 23rd July and 3rd 
September 2020, and then su bmitted to the Secretary of State for Examination on 21st 
October 2020. The Partial Review makes no changes to the adopted Policies Map including 
Inset Plans. The Examination hearing sessions were held in March 2021, consultation on Main 
Modifications in J uly-September 2021 and the Inspector’s final report on the Partial Review 
was received by the Council on 21st October 2021, which found that the Partial Review was 
legally compliant and sound providing that 11 Main Modifications are made to the Partial 
Review. The Inspector’s Report with the Schedule of Main Modifications as an appendix is 
published on the Council’s website. This Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial 
Review) includes the revisions made by the Partial Review, as modified by the Mai n 
Modifications recommended by the Inspector as necessary for legal compliance and 
soundness . 
Evidence Base  
1.42 It is important to gather up -to-date relevant information to support the Local Plan, which is 
referred to as the 'evidence base'. The Council h as collected information on a range of issues 
to directly inform the preparation of policy.  A comprehensive list of the evidence used to 
inform preparation of the Local Plan is available on the Council’s website. Evidence has been 
updated as necessary in order to justify  changes made through the Partial Review.  
Technical Assessments  
1.43 It is a statutory requirement and best practice that the Local Plan is subject to on-going 
technical assessments during its preparation to ensure that it is addressing the specific issues 
of sustainability, impact on international sites of nature conservation importance, economic 
viability, health, and impact on rural areas.  Therefore, the following assessments of the Local 
Plan have been prepared.  
• Sustainabi lity Appraisal (SA)  
• Habitat Regulations Assessment (HRA) - Screening Report  
• Health Impact Assessment (HIA) – best practice  
• Rural Proofing Assessment  
• Viability Assessment  
1.44 The results of the previous technical assessments have been used to update and enhance the 
Local Plan during its preparation.  Updates of the technical assessments have been undertaken 
where necessary following modification of the plan during examination. A further update of 
the HRA was undertaken to take account of the Court of Justice of the European Union  (CJEU) 
judgement (People over Wind & Sweetman v Coillte Teoranta Case C -323/17), dated 12th 
April  2018, in Ireland: this update incorporated Appropriate Assessment of the policies and 
allocations where likely significant effects could not be screened out without mitigation . The 
HRA Update concluded that the Local Plan would not result in  adverse effec ts on the integrity 
of the European sites, either alone or in -combination with other plans or projects.  This 
conclusion was supported by Natural England.  Further updates to the technical assessments 
have been undertaken to take account of the revisions mad e by the Partial Review.    Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
23 Cross Cutting Themes  
1.45 Promoting health and wellbeing, achieving good design , sustainability , equality  and viability  
are cross cutting themes promoted through the Framework that are integral to all the policies 
in this Local Plan.  Equality , sustainability , viability  and sustainability  are generic themes  and 
run through the entire Local Plan.  The cross cutting themes promoting health and wellbeing  
and achieving good design  will be highlighted, together with the relevant strategic objectives, 
at the end of chapters 5 to 12 inclusive.   
 
Equality  
In terms of equality, the planning system can play an important role in facilitating social interaction 
and creating healthy, inclusive communities. Measures to promote healthier lifestyles, such as 
promoting walking and cycling, will lead to reductions in  inequalities.  
Improving transport infrastructure and accessibility to such infrastructure reduces the number of 
trips and provides alternative forms of transport to the car including walking, cycling and public 
transport.  
Sustainability  
The UK Sustainable  Development Strategy Securing the Future sets out five ‘guiding principles’ of 
sustainable development which apply to the Local Plan: living within the planet’s environmental 
limits; ensuring a strong, healthy and just society; achieving a sustainable eco nomy ; promoting good 
governance; and using sound science responsibly.  
Viability  
Plans should set out the contributions expected from development. This should include setting out 
the levels and types of affordable housing provision required, along with other infrastructure (such 
as that needed for education, health, transport, flood and water management, green and digital 
infrastructure). Such policies should not undermine the deliverability of the plan.  (The Framework)  
The role for viability assessment is primarily at the plan making stage. Viability assessment should 
not compromise sustainable development but should be used to ensure that policies are realistic, 
and that the total cumulative cost of all relevant policies will not undermine deliverabilit y of the 
plan.  
It is the responsibility of site promoters to engage in plan making, take into account any costs 
including their own profit expectations and risks, and ensure that proposals for development are 
policy compliant. The price paid for land is no t a relevant justification for failing to accord with 
relevant policies in the plan. Landowners and site purchasers should consider this when agreeing 
land transactions.  
 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan  
1.46 The Infrastructure Delivery Plan ( the IDP) , incorporating an Infrastructure Delivery Schedule 
(IDS) , identifies infrastructure projects which will assist in accommodating all of  the 
development  identified in the Local Plan, including  but not limited to new  homes, 
employment and mixed use developmen t.    Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
24 Planning Policy on Minerals and Waste Development  
1.47 LCC is the Minerals and Waste Planning Authority in Fylde and has responsibility for identifying 
sites and policies for minerals and waste development in Lancashire within the Joint Minerals 
and Waste Local Plan.  Minerals and waste issues are not covered in this Local Plan.  Fylde 
Council officers have held regular meetings with officers of LCC to discuss matters of 
relevance. Issues where Minerals and Waste matters will be relevant to the Local Plan include:  
• The designation of Mineral Safeguarding Areas (MSAs) within policy M2 of the 
adopted Joint Lancashire Minerals and Waste Local Plan (adopted in 2013) on sites 
allocated in this Local Plan. It will be necessary to consider the potential impact that 
development may have on sterilising those minerals, i.e. preventing them bein g 
extracted ahead of development;  
• Existing permitted mineral sites where there may be the potential to affect residential 
amenity if new housing were to be permitted too close to the boundary  of the site ; 
and 
• Existing and proposed waste sites which may see k to use existing or proposed 
employment related sites.  
1.48  There are three sites allocated in Fylde in the Joint Minerals and Waste Local Plan:  
a. Westinghouse  Springfields  (Salwick)  – This site is situated within the Westinghouse 
complex and is allocated for the disposal of low -level radioactive waste produced at the 
processing plant. The allocation is intended to allow the site to landfill its own low -level 
radioactive wastes, such as those arising from the decommissioning of redundant 
buildings or from o peration al wastes such as used safety clothing. This waste is currently 
disposed at the Clifton Marsh landfill site. However, the planning permission for this type 
of disposal ran until 2015 and there are no plans to renew the planning permission.  
b. Salwick Sidings  – Situated on the section of railway line adjacent to Westinghouse, these 
railway sidings will be safeguarded against development that could compromise the 
future use of the site for the transportation of waste.  
c. Whitehills Business Park  – A site for waste management facilities is allocated at Whitehills 
Business Park, adjacent to the boundary with Blackpool  (i.e. the Fylde -Blackpool 
Periphery) . 
1.49 The site allocations  and commitments  identified in the Fylde Local Plan do not impact upon 
these three sites and it is not anticipated that there will be any issues in relation to the delivery 
of the housing, employment and mixed use sites.  
Mineral Safeguarding Areas  
1.50 Mineral planning authorities are required b y national policy (Minerals Planning Statement 1 
and Planning Policy Guidance) to ensure that unworked mineral deposits are safeguarded 
from development that would hinder their potential exploitation in the future.  Mineral 
Safeguarding Areas (MSA) are incl uded within the Joint Minerals and Waste Local Plan. Policy 
M2 of the Joint Minerals and Waste Local Plan does not allow new development in these areas 
unless it can be demonstrated that any of the exceptions listed in the policy can be met.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
25 1.51 LCC will be consulted on proposals, including planning applications that are likely to prejudice 
or prevent the future extraction of the minerals within the MSAs , but Fylde Council will 
determine the planning applications  for residential, retail, and commercial developments and 
changes of use of the land within the MSAs . Three  of the strategic sites proposed in C hapter 
7 have MSAs within their boundaries, to a greater or lesser extent. These sites are set out in 
Table 1 be low.  
Table 1: Mineral Safeguarding Areas (MSAs) within Strategic Sites for Development  
Strategic Location for 
Development  Strategic Site s for 
Development  Mineral Safeguarding Area (s) within   
site boundary  
Lytham and St Annes  HSS1 – Land at Queensway,          
St Annes  Sand and gravel (majority of site)  
Kirkham and Wesham  HSS8 – The Pastures, 
Fleetwood Road, Wesham  Sand and gravel (majority of site)  
HSS9 - Land North of 
Blackpool Road, Kirkham  Sand and gravel (minority of site)  
 
1.52 Before development takes place on these strategic sites, LCC advises that site surveys are 
carried out to assess the extent and quality of the sand and gravel reserves and whether there 
is a case for prior extraction before built development commences.  The undertaking of site 
surveys could affect the delivery of housing on these strategic sites over the lifetime of the 
Local Plan.  
1.53 The Framework specifies that peat is  no longer classed as a mineral . LCC recommends that 
site surveys are undertaken for sites with peat, before development takes place, in order to 
assess what contribution or potential contribution they could make in terms of carbon sink.  
Shale Gas Exploration, Production and Distribution  
1.54 The potential for shale gas has been identified across the Fylde Coast area with exploration 
wells.  Companies seeking to undertake exploratory investigations, and to subsequently test 
for and extract onsh ore oil or gas, including shale gas, must apply for planning permission 
from LCC. The County Council advertises the planning applications it receives and there is the 
opportunity to make representations on individual proposals. Fylde Council is consulted o n 
these planning applications as a statutory consultee.  
1.55 Lancashire County Council continue to work on a Minerals and Waste Local Plan for Lancashire 
which will include Onshore Oil and Gas Exploration, Production and Distribution. The industry 
is stil l in the exploration phase. If a shale gas production industry is developed in Fylde, the 
Council acknowledges it will need to consider the scale and rate of shale gas development and 
review any cumulative impacts.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
26 Map  1: Mineral Safeguarding Areas
  
Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
27  
Chapter 2:   A Spatial Portrait of Fylde  
 
Fylde Borough  
2.1 Fylde is a predominantly rural Borough, covering 166km2, which is situated on the west coast 
of Lancashire .  It is bounded to the north by Wyre Council and the estuary of the River Wyre, 
to the north -west by the densely populated urban area of Blackpool, to the east by Preston 
and to the south by the Ribble Estuary.   
2.2 The main land use in Fylde, in terms of  area, is agriculture. This is due to the significant areas 
of Grade 2 and Grade 3a agricultural land (classed as the best and most versatile agricultural 
land). Fylde has no areas of Grade 1 agricultural land, but around 50% of the Borough is 
classified a s Grade 2, and a further 34% as Grade 3a. Natural England retains up -to-date maps 
of best and most versatile agricultural land.  
2.3 The coastline is one of the dominant features of the Borough and is the setting for the majority 
of its urban areas.  The l argest towns, Lytham and St Annes, together have a reputation as a 
high quality resort with their significant visitor attractions along with their distinctive 
seafronts and an internationally famous championship golf course.  The other significant 
settleme nts are Warton and Freckleton, lying further east, and Kirkham and Wesham, which 
together form the only sizeable inland settlements.  
2.4 With a total of 3.067  million touris m visits worth more than £214  million  in 2014 , equating to 
5% of all tourism visit s to Lancashire, the Fylde Council area has a strong and consistent visitor 
offer that includes a variety of major events . Part of this offer are the natural assets such as 
the expansive beach, Lytham Green and surrounding rural areas which appeal to walke rs and 
cyclists.  
Heritage Assets  
2.5 Fylde boasts a rich and varied built environment including sites and buildings of historic and 
architectural interest. Heritage assets make a valuable contribution to economic and social 
wellbeing, as well as providing a focus for heritage led regeneration and tourism development.  
2.6 The historic development of the Borough is the result of economic, social, cultural and 
environmental factors which have resulted in its built heritage, including a significant va riety 
of high quality  buildings.  Within the Borough there is a market town and Victorian  and 
Edwardian  sea side resorts with vibrant town centres , together with rural settlements  some 
of which date back to the middle ages . Fylde contains attractive planne d residential suburbs 
evoking the spirit of Victorian, Edwardian and interwar development.  
2.7 Historic attractions such as Lytham Hall, the Victori an Pier  and promenade  at St Annes and 
iconic Lytham Windmill  and Green  provide a strong identity and character for Fylde, 
complement ing the thriving town cent res which include a variety of quality independent 
dining and shopping opportunities.  The choice and quality of accommodation stock continues 
to grow to meet the demand s of visitors, and contributes over £124 million to the local 
economy.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
28 2.8 Fylde contains a number of heritage assets , which require protection,  including over 200 
Listed Buildings (Grade I, Grade II* and Grade II), ten Conservation Areas, three Register ed 
Parks and Gardens included within the national register , which are  Lytham Hall Park, Ashton 
Gardens and Promenade Gardens, all within Lytham and St Annes.  Lytham Hall is the only 
Grade I listed building in Fylde , which is of exceptional interest , however  it is on Historic 
England’s  ‘at Risk ’ register.  There are no scheduled ancient monuments  in Fylde , but there is 
the potential for undesignated archaeological sites.  In addition, there are heritage assets of 
local interest that may not meet the cr iteria for statutory designation but merit local 
protection.  
Demographics  
2.9  The Borough of Fylde has a population of 76,000  (Mid-2013 population estimate. Source: 
Office for National Statistics) ). There were approximately 38,000 people employed in Fylde 
and 2,8 70 VAT / PAYE registered enterprises in 201 4.The 2011 Census  shows an increase in 
population of 3.6% since the last census in 2001. This is si milar to the county average of 3.3% 
but below the England and Wales rate of 7.8%.  
2.10  Fylde already has a high proportion of older residents due to its popularity as a retirement 
location, currently with 2 8% of those aged 65+ years, the highest in Lancashire and well in 
excess of the national average  of 16.3% . There will be a higher proportion of the population 
aged 65 and over; approximately a third of residents (33%) will be aged 65 and over by 2035.  
Betw een 2011 and 2030, it is projected that the population 65 and over will increase by 8,851 
(a 41% increase) whilst the overall population will rise by 6,756 (an 8.9% increase). Therefore, 
all of the population increase is accounted for by those 65 and over.  By 2020 there  will be 
more than 5,000 people aged 85 and over in the Borough. (Source: SHMA)  
Deprivation  
2.11 Deprivation is not a significant problem in the Borough. According to Public Health 
Observatory statistics, Fylde ranks 235th out of 326 district and unitary authorities in the 
country, making it the 2nd least deprived district in Lancashire. However, ther e are small 
pockets of relatively high deprivation (in the 20% to 30% most deprived areas), these tend to 
be concentrated near the boundary with Blackpool and in St Annes town centre. Overall, less 
than 10% of the population are considered to be income dep rived.   Eighteen per cent of 
households in Fylde are considered to be in fuel poverty.  Excess winter deaths are a concern 
in the district – particularly for the more vulnerable residents.  Fylde has the fifth highest rate 
of excess winter deaths in the co unty (19.5%) between 2008 and 2011 (Lancashire average 
16.8%)  1. 
The Fylde Coast Sub -Region  
2.12  The Fylde Coast -sub region encompasses the area covered by Fylde, Blackpool and Wyre 
Councils, within the wider area administered by Lancashire County Council (LCC). The Fylde 
Coast sub region stretches from the Ribble Estuary in the south to Morecambe Bay in the 
north and from the Irish Sea coastline to the edge of the Forest of Bowland Area of 
Outstanding Natural Beauty in the east. It covers 384 square km and  is home to 327,400 
residents.  
(1. LCC Environment Commissioning Plan for Fylde 2015 -16, May 2015).  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
29 Map 2: Fylde in context  
 
  
Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
30 2.13  The western part of the Fylde Coast sub -region which is dominated by the larger coastal 
settlements of Fylde, Blackpool and Wyre demonstrates a high level of self -containment in 
terms of housing markets, travel to work patterns and economic functionality,  i.e. a single 
housing market and a single employment market. This is described in more detail in the SHMA 
2014. The central areas of Wyre relate to a wider rural housing market that has linkages with 
Lancaster and Preston. Eastern Fylde has stronger conne ctions for both housing and 
employment with Preston.  
2.14  The economic functionality of the Fylde Coast Sub region, in particular the western coastal 
area is apparent through the strong travel to work patterns and employment with a shared 
tourism  and cultu ral offer, public sector administration and a shared infras tructure which 
includes access via the strategic highway and rail network, plus the coastal tramway.  
2.15  Fylde is unusual in that there is a dominance of manufacturing employment (approximately 
40%) with approximately 50% of workers commuting into the Borough. Most of these 
manufacturing jobs are based in the south of the Borough at BAE Systems, Warton and 
Westinghouse, Salwick. BAE Systems has another site at Salmsbury just east of Preston, 
worke rs are contracted to work at both sites and many therefore live in the wider Preston 
area. BAE Systems also attracts workers from much further afield, both nationally and 
internationally.  
2.16  The Lancashire Advanced Engineering and Manufacturing Enterpris e Zone at BAE Systems 
Warton, has the potential to improve the economic and physical connectivity of Fylde and the 
wider Fylde Coast Sub Region, with the City of Preston and Central Lancashire.     
Local Areas  
2.17 The Borough of  Fylde can be readily divided into five local areas, allowing for their individual 
characteristics to be addressed and managed. The areas are based on geographical areas, 
some of which have issues in common.  
2.18 The five local areas are:  
a. Lytham and St Annes;  
b. Fylde -Blackpool Periphery;  
c. Warton;  
d. Kirkham and Wesham; and  
e. Rural Areas.  
The main characteristics of each area at the start of the plan period are set out below:  
Lytham and St Annes   
2.19 Lytham , St Annes and Ansdell  are located on the south west side of t he Borough, within the 
main urban area which runs adjacent to the coastline.   
2.20 The area is bounded to the south by the coastline and by Green Belt to the north and east.  To 
the north  east , the area is bounded by Lytham Hall Registered Historic Park, golf courses and 
countryside also adjoins the area.   
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
31 Key Characteristics   
2.21  The coastal town of Lytham , fronting the expansive  Ribble  Estuary has an attractive historic 
environment including the  iconic Windmill and Green and Lytham Hall, together with the  
principal streets , which were laid out in the nineteenth century,  which  forms its commercial 
core, including Clifton Street, Park Str eet and the Market Square. Over a number of years, 
environmental improvements have taken place along Clifton Street and more recently along 
Station Road, linking Clifton Street with the recently constructed Booths supermarket. 
Funding is to be made availab le, by way of developer contributions, to enhance the link 
between Lytham Hall and the historic Green. Development Management Policies and the 
potential for CIL will be used to secure improvements into the future.  
2.22 St Annes is a classic seaside resort with its seafront, Victorian and Edwardian architecture and 
pier, together with the Promenade and Ashton Gardens and the tourism activities centred on 
The Island Sea Front Area; with the traditional charm enhanced by the introduction of Beach 
Huts on the p romenade.  Lytham provides a more formal resort based on the Green with the 
iconic windmill, and the cultural assets based around Lowther Pavilion and Garden, Lytham 
Hall and its historic parkland and The Fylde Gallery in the Booths store.   
2.23 There is a high concentration of listed buildings and conservation areas in Lytham and St 
Annes, with Lytham Hall a Grade I listed building on Historic England ’s ‘property at risk’ 
register.  There are three registered Historic Parks and Gardens of national importa nce within 
the area : Ashton Gardens and Promenade Gardens in St Annes and Lytham Hall Park in 
Lytham. All of the conservation areas in Lytham and St Annes and the three registered Historic 
Parks and Gardens are identified on the Policies Map  including Inse t Plans .  
2.24 Lytham and St Annes are popular tourist resorts that provide local employment.  The towns 
of Lytham and St Annes  are the main shopping areas in Fylde, positioned at the top of the 
retail hierarchy and also where many of the Borough’s services are concentrated.  This local 
area is well served by public transport and well connected to Blackpool  and Preston  by bus  
and rail.  However, connections to Kirkham town centre and rural areas are relatively 
infrequent.  
2.25 Housing in  Lytham and St Annes is considered to be the least affordable in the Borough and 
the need for affordable housing is therefore greatest compared to  the rest of the Borough.  
From April 2001 - March 2014, 55% of residential completions have been apartments  that 
generally cater for the older population and this trend could continue to attract retirement in -
migration.  The trend has also resulted in lim ited provision of new family housing in Lytham 
and St Annes.  The construction of modern blocks of apartments has significantly changed the 
character of the built environment in some areas.   
2.26 Lytham and St Annes  contain over half of the Borough’s popu lation.  The population age 
profile includes significantly lower proportions of children and young adults and a high 
proportion of people over the age of 65.   
2.27 The Ribble Estuary, off the coast of Lytham and St Annes is designated as both a Ramsar sit e 
and a Special Protection Area (SPA) for birdlife.  The Ribble Marshes are also designated as a 
National Nature Reserve, covering 4,520 Ha of intertidal and saltmarsh habitats at the mouth 
of the Ribble Estuary.  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
32 Implications for the Local Plan  
2.28 The Local Plan should provide for an appropriate housing mix and provision of affordable 
housing . Opportunities for infill development should be maximised, whilst taking into account 
the characteristics of the area and seeking to avoid the loss of viable empl oyment sites and 
public open space.  
2.29 New development will need to be planned and delivered comprehensively  to allow for the 
provision of primary and secondary education, transport , social and the Green Infrastructure  
network , including increasing  capacity of the combined sewer system and alleviat ion of  flood 
risk. The upgrading and maintenance of flood defences is required and the tourism benefits 
of this will be optimised as part of any scheme. Land should be provided for recreational 
opportunities, including allotments.   
Fylde -Blackpool Periphery  
2.30 This area includes the Blackpool Airport Corridor and Whitehills Business Park.  Whilst it is 
located in Fylde Borough, it is adjacent to the boundary with Blackpool, which means that this  
area has greater connections with Blackpool in terms of character and geographical location.  
It is likely that existing residents and businesses within th is area will continue to rely on 
Blackpool’s infrastructure , services  and facilities .  
Key Character istics  
2.31 Housing schemes have been approved on land at Whitehills, reflecting the sub -regional 
importance of opportunities on the Fylde –Blackpool Periphery.  Whitehills does not have a 
recognised  local shopping centre. Services focused on a local retail centre will be needed for 
the new community.  
2.32 The Fylde -Blackpool Periphery is of sub -regional importance in employment terms. At 
present, the majority of existing industrial / business units a nd new employment 
opportunities are located at Whitehills. Key employers in this area include the Department for 
Work and Pensions , located at Peel Park  in close proximity to Junction 4 of the M55 .  
2.33 Many holiday caravans / chalet pitches within the Bo rough are located at the boundary with 
Blackpool ; which s support tourism in both Lytham and St Annes and Blackpool.  
2.34 There is a shortage of both primary and secondary school places.  
2.35 Blackpool Airport still has the potential to be an international airport and as such should be 
supported in its continued operation and as a development growth area. In March 2015, the 
government announced plans for a n Enterprise Zone at Blackpool Airport , which was ratified 
on 1st April 2016 . 
2.36 Squires Gate Railway Station currently has limited access for people with limited mobility.  It is 
difficult for train passengers to access the airport, although it is close by.  
2.37 Erosion of the sand dunes is an issue at Clifton Drive South.  It is recom mended that, within 
the next 20 years, the sand dunes should be managed as the main front line sea defence, 
whilst also determining the requirement for a second defence line set back at Clifton Drive, 
south of Squires Gate.  If viable, this would manage th e risk of breaches in the sand dunes.  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
33 Implications for the Local Plan  
2.38 The Local Plan should provide for an adequate supply of market and affordable housing . In 
relation to the erosion of the sand dunes, management of the dune frontage is supported.  
2.39 This area is important for employment provision and tourist accommodation.  The sub -
regional significance of land at Whitehills Business Park to the Fylde Coas t economy is 
recognised and further housing permissions at Whitehills will be discussed through the Duty 
to Cooperate, as th is location is of sub -regional importance for employment land provision . 
Due to the level of development planned for the Fylde -Black pool Periphery, it is proposed that 
a local retail centre be developed  on land west of Cropper Road  (site HSS5 ) over the lifetime 
of the plan.  
Warton  
2.40 Warton  is located on the south side of the Borough and is part of the main urban area which 
runs adjacent to the coastline.  The urban area is bounded to the south by existing 
employment land at BAE Systems Warton  and to the west of Warton and north of Freckleto n 
by Green Belt.  
Key Characteristics  
2.41  Warton has been the subject of significant residential development proposals in recent years. 
The local community has expressed a wish to physically enhance the centre of Warton to 
provide a n area which is a focus for the community . This will include proposals to provide 
improved planting, street furniture, surfacing and access to forecourts. It is envisaged that the 
scheme as approved will be implemented in the early part of the plan period.  
2.42 Key employer s include BAE Systems at Warton and the Land Registry.  The internationally and 
nationally significant Lancashire Enterprise Zone has been established  jointly at BAE Systems, 
Warton  and at BAE Systems, Samlesbury . Although this area is one of the most affo rdable in 
the Borough, additional affordable housing is required.  
2.43 There are high levels of commuting to the BAE Systems site and increased pressure on the 
local road network during peak times.   However, it is acknowledged that many of the jobs at 
Warton are highly specialized and as such it attracts workers from all over the United Kingdom 
and further afield.  The functional economic area is described in greater detail in the Housing 
Requirement Paper, 2015.  In addition, Warton does not have a recogn ised local shopping 
centre, and it is less accessible than other Key Service Centres and Local Service Centres in the 
Borough. Services focused on a local retail centre will be needed for  Warton within the lifetime 
of the Local Plan . 
2.44 The Lancashire En terprise Zone at BAE Systems, Warton is focused on advanced engineering 
and manufacturing (AEM) including aerospace, automotive, nuclear and new growth areas 
including energy. This will create net additional employment opportunities.   A Local 
Development O rder (LDO) has been prepared and adopted by Fylde  Council, which will run 
for three years. The LDO identified that a Masterplan (Phase 1 Consultation Masterplan) be 
prepared by BAE Systems and the Lancashire Enterprise Partnership (LEP).  The LDO sets out 
guiding principles for the preparation of the Masterplan and the matters it should address.  
The Masterplan was adopted on 1 October 2014.   
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
34 Implications for the Local Plan  
2.45 The Local Plan should provide a flexible framework that can maximise the opportunities that 
will arise through the restructuring of BAE Systems , Warton  and the establishment of the 
Enterprise Zone for the benefit of the local community, businesses and the environment.  
2.46 The Local Plan should provide for an adequate supply of market and affordable housing.  
2.47 Warton has a long standing requirement for a recognised local shopping centre and land 
should be provided for recreational opportunities. Without  a strategic review of the Green 
Belt, development in Freckleton will be limited to infill  development .     
2.48 The Local Plan will seek to address drainage problems in new build development, for example 
by incorporating sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) and other ways of reducing run -off. 
Kirkham and Wesham  
2.49 These settlements are  located centrally within the  Borough and provides services for the 
surrounding rural area.  They are  bounded to the south by Green Belt and to the north and 
east by land at risk of flooding.  
Key Characteristics  
2.50 Kirkham is recognised as a historic market town and one of the main  shopping areas in the 
Borough.  Kirkham town centre, together with Lytham and St Annes town centres are at the 
top of the retail hierarchy in Fylde, according to the Fylde Coast Retail Study, 2011, but 
Kirkham has less varied retail offer.  The appearance of Kirkham town centre has deteriorated 
recently and requires investment in the public realm and private investment in the shops and 
shop -fronts.  
2.51  Kirkham town centre has been subject to pressures that have threatened it s long term vitality. 
The inclusion of a supermarket, public car park and community centre in the late 1990s 
enhanced the retail environment and improved accessibility and footfall.  
2.52 Within the settlement hierarchy, Kirkham serves the role of a Key Se rvice Centre.   Housing is 
generally more affordable in this area but, like the rest of the Borough, additional affordable 
housing is required.  There is a shortage of both primary and secondary school places.  
Employment is provided at Foxes Biscuits and H MP Kirkham Prison. The development of the 
mixed use site at Mill Farm Sports Village, Wesham, including a new football stadium will 
provide well designed employment premises within a sustainable location.  The delivery of 
this development will contribute t owards a responsive supply of employment land to meet 
requirements.  
2.53 Kirkham and Wesham railway station is situated on the Preston to Blackpool line, just before 
it divides into the North Fylde Line to Blackpool and the South Fylde Line to Lytham and S t 
Annes.  It is the busiest station in the Borough in terms of passenger numbers and train 
frequency but the station currently has limited access for people with limited mobility  and a 
lack of parking spaces . 
2.54 The area contains approximately 15% of the  Borough’s population.  Housing  in Wesham  
generally comprises smaller properties , compared with other parts of Fylde .  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
35 2.55 Kirkham and Wesham currently have no Primary Care Centre provision and this is already 
creating pressure given the scale of development planned and under construction.  There will 
be a need for some new health provision at this locality.  
Implications for the Local Plan  
2.56 There should be a focus in the Local Plan on regenerating Kirkham town centre.  The character 
and appearance of the historic market town should be protected and enhanced  and vacant 
units should be refurbished and put back into viable use, in line with the Council’s 
Regeneration Framework , 2016 -2032 .      
2.57 The Local Plan should provide for an adequate supply of affordable housing  in Kir kham and 
Wesham.  Development should be directed away from areas at high risk of flooding and land 
should be provided for recreational opportunities.  
Rural Areas  
2.58 The rural areas include the Tier 1: Larger Rural Settlements  of Newton, Staining and Wrea 
Green; and Tier 2: Smaller Rural Settlements  of Clifton, Elswick, Singleton and Weeton.  A 
large proportion of land within the Borough falls within the rural areas.  Land  south of Newton 
and Clifton is in a high flood risk area.  
2.59 To the south, the rural areas use services in the  coastal area.  The central rural areas have 
greater links to Kirkham and Wesham.  To the north, th ese areas have greater links to Wyre.  
To th e east, the rural areas have links to Preston and beyond and to the west these areas use 
services in  Blackpool.   
Key Characteristics  
2.60   The rural areas are predominated by pasture land and associated use in support of the 
extensive agricultural based supply chain, principally of  small and medium sized enterprises  
(SMEs ). In addition there is an extensive network of livery businesses and their associated 
supply chains. This primarily undulating  countryside is interspersed with woodland which 
supports wi ldfowl, raptors and large wildlife, including deer. The land is also used seasonally 
by migrating wildfowl. This provides sporting and leisure opportunities. The landscape creates 
the backdrop for rural attractions. Tourism facilities exist across the rura l area, including static 
and mobile caravan sites. Leisure infrastructure of hostelries, including in the rural settlements, 
supported by public rights of way and the cycle network all a dd to the amenity. This landscape 
also creates an attractive residenti al location, with an infrastructure of churches, award -
winning schools and community halls and social clubs. The re -use of redundant farm buildings 
for residential property has created demand for local service s for the new residents. Active 
investment cont inues in the grazing / dairy based agricultural sector. The well -established 
game shooting industry continues. Ribby Hall Holiday Village is the largest single rural area 
employer, with several hundred people employed directly on the site, supported by an 
extensive, even bigger local supply chain. Local, regional, national and international visitors 
who stay in the rural areas add to local spend in leisure and high street businesses across the 
Fylde, Blackpool, Wyre and beyond.  
2.61  House prices in the rural areas are typically higher than other areas in Fylde. This means that 
the provision of affordable housing is a significant issue throughout the rural areas, with 
demand outstripping supply.  The unauthorised use of static holiday caravans for residential 
use puts pressure on local facilities, which is not accounted for in service provision.   Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
36 2.62  Although agriculture remains an important part of the local economy, farm diversification is 
also required to supplement the rural econ omy.   
2.63 Tourism and sporting facilities are provided at Ribby Hall Holiday Village where there may be 
the potential for future investment and enhancement , within the existing site boundaries .   
2.64 Public transport provision in the rural areas is limited . Investment is required to conserve the 
distinctive character of the larger and smaller rural settlements.  
2.65 Newton and Wrea Green are in the best 25% of areas in England for health deprivation. W rea 
Green has the highest proportion of homes in the higher tax bands, with more than half of 
homes within these bands. Singleton and Wrea Green have the lowest proportion of homes 
in the lowest tax band which suggests larger properties.  
Implications for the Local Plan  
2.66 The Local Plan will provide for an adequate supply of rural affordable housing.  Development 
will be sustainably located and the agricultural economy, farm diversification and 
employment opportunities supported.  Land should be provided for recreational 
opportunities, including allotments.    
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
37 Map 3: Local A ssets  and Key Designations
 
  
Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
38  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
39 Chapter 3:  The Local Plan’s Vision for Fylde  
 
3.1 The Vision for Fylde is a positive statement of how the Council would like Fylde to look at the 
end of the Local Plan period in 2032.  
3.2  The Local Plan’s Vision is not a wish -list but something the Council and its partners will seek 
to achieve through the plan -led process.  
3.3  The Vision for Fylde was included in the Issues and Options , the Preferred Option the Revised 
Preferred Option and the Publication consultation documents.  The Vision in this version 
proposed for adoption includes minor additions and re -ordering of th e text, reflecting 
comments received in response to those consultations, the recommendations of the 
Sustainability Appraisal report and other technical documents.  
 
The Vision for Fylde to the year 2032  
By 2032,  Fylde will be a welcoming  place with highly skilled and healthy communities. There will 
be a diverse and prosperous culture and an economy that encourages everyone to contribute.  
Employment opportunities will have been diversified and young people retained in t he job market 
in Fylde.  A ccess to healthy lifestyle choices, local health care facilities, good education and lifelong 
learning facilities will have been improved. Significant further educational opportunities and leisure 
facilities for young people will have been provided.  Communities will have the opportunity to 
access public services, good jobs and decent and affordable homes, close to where they live, 
through the delivery of mixed use development.  
Fylde  will have continued to develop as a dynamic, pro sperous place to live and work through 
boosting the delivery of sustainable homes and economic growth within the four Strategic Locations 
for Development, supported by the necessary facilities, services, infrastructure and access to 
modern telecommunicatio ns.  New homes of an appropriate type and mix to address affordability, 
an ageing population and family needs will be located within sustainable locations. High quality 
design and sustainable building methods will be the key principles of all types of new development, 
including urban extensions in the form of garden suburbs , together with  the delivery of  Whyndyke 
Garden Village , which has been identified as a demonstrator site for the NHS healthy new town  
initiative .  
Fylde will have remained flexible in it s approach to changing economic and employment patterns, 
particularly with regard to major local employers.  It will have developed closer working 
relationships t hrough the Duty to C ooperate with the adjoining Fylde Coast Authorities and with 
the Central L ancashire Authorities and other organisations and strengthened its position within the 
Lancashire sub -region and its linkages and connectivity to Blackpool and to the city of Preston.   
Opportunities for sub -regionally important employment at the Lancashir e Advanced Engineering 
and Manufacturing (AEM) Enterprise Zone at BAE Systems, Warton and Whitehills Business Park 
will have been realised and employment will have been provided close to where people live, 
thereby reducing the need to travel long distances .  Fylde will have an energy hub, generating a 
cluster of energy based companies and amenities together with an energy logistics park, within  
Blackpool Airport  Enterprise Zone , to support energy businesses on the Fylde Coast.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
40 Fylde will have enhanced its unique qualities including its historic and built environment, the  classic 
seaside resort towns of Lytham and St Annes , the historic market town of Kirkham, tranquil 
coastline, high quality golf courses, tourism offer, picturesque rural settlements and attractive 
landscapes.  The visitor economy will have been strengthened by the area’s resort appeal, its 
reputation as a centre for world famous golf championships and its attractive rural areas. High 
quality attractions and organised events such as the Lytham 1940s Wartime Weekend and the 
Lytham Festival, staged activities at Lytham Hall (Grade 1 Listed) and the retention o f serviced 
tourism accommodation in the Holiday Areas, will generate an increase in the number of visitors. 
The Island Sea Front Area and the Promenade Gardens at St Annes and Fairhaven Lake will have 
been regenerated to provide a high quality visitor expe rience.  
Lytham and St Annes will be thriving resorts with quality specialist shops, with Kirkham a vibrant 
historic market town. Lytham, St Annes and Kirkham will have retained and enhanced their 
positions at the top of the retail hierarchy.  Warton will be a Local Service Centre with a local retail 
centre serving the needs of the local community and employment opportunities will have increased 
and diversified through the development of the Lancashire Advanced Engineering and 
Manufacturing Enterprise Zone,  at BAE Systems.  The Fylde -Blackpool Periphery will  have been 
developed as a Local Service Centre by the end of the plan period in 2032, with a local retail centre 
serving the new community that will have been developed at Whitehills.  Wesham and Frecklet on 
will retain their functions as Local Service Centres.   
Rural settlements in Fylde will have retained their individual identities and heritage assets and their 
distinctive features will have been protected, enhanced and promoted ; and all development wil l 
have respected and conserved the character of these settlements.  
Sufficient levels of housing of an appropriate type, tenure, design, density and mix to address local 
issues of affordability will have been provided in the smaller rural settlements.   The re will have 
been proportionate levels of economic growth to strengthen and diversify the local economies and 
reduce the need to travel.  
To overcome existing traffic congestion and to accommodate all of the development proposed in 
Fylde to the year 2032, the M55 (Junction 4) to Heyhouses Link Road between Whitehills and St 
Annes will have been completed;  as would improvements on M55 Junction 4;  and congestion on 
the A585 trunk road will have been resolved through the del ivery of the M55 to Fleetwood Corridor 
Improvements (formerly known as the Blue Route ).  The Preston Western Distributor Road, to a 
new Junction 2 on the M55, will have been delivered and opened.  The construction of the Preston 
Western Distributor Road wi ll improve road access to the Lancashire Advanced Engineering and 
Manufacturing (AEM) Enterprise Zone at BAE Systems, Warton, and to the wider Fylde Coast  sub-
region .  
The viable continuation of Blackpool Airport for general aviation and the e xpansion of s ervices 
provided by the a irport will have been secured, along with enhanced public transport access. There 
will have been an increase in the use of public transport. Public transport services across the rural 
parts of the Borough and onto Blackpool, Presto n and beyond will have been improved.  Railway 
station facilities at Kirkham and Wesham will have been enhanced, making the market town more 
accessible to other parts of the North West and increasing its sustainability as a residential and 
employment centr e.   Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
41 Sufficient open space and indoor and outdoor sports pitches and recreational facilities will have 
been provided, woodland cover increased and Fylde ’s unique offer of Green  and Blue  Infrastructure 
will be accessible and contribute to a high quality of life.  
Sea defences in the Coastal Change Management Areas, along the Ribble and Wyre Estuaries, will 
have been improved, whilst bathing water quality will have been protected and enhanced, and 
associa ted tourism, recreational and environmental benefits realized, through the delivery of the 
Coastal Strategy, providing an essential tract of Green Infrastructure network along the coast, 
running from Starr Gate in the west to Savick Brook in the east.  
The public rights of way network will have been protected and enhanced.  Additional footpaths, 
cycleways , bridleways and canal towpaths will have been provided to facilitate increased walking, 
cycling and horse riding, taking advantage of Fylde’s assets: its f lat landscape and open coastline.  
The rural character and attractiveness of the countryside areas of the Fylde will have been retained 
and enhanced and the rural economy will thrive, in particular small and medium sized enterprises. 
The release of land wit hin the countryside for development will have been minimised and the 
highest quality agricultural land will have been protected from inappropriate development.  
Biodiversity , including Fylde’s Ecological Network, will have been enhanced and protected from 
inappropriate development.     
 
 
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
42  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
43 Chapter 4:  The Local Plan’s Strategic Objectives for 
Fylde  
 
4.1 The strategic objectives were included in both the Issues and Options , the Preferred Option 
and the Revised Preferred Opttion consultation documents. Taking account of comments 
received in response to those consultations and the recommendations of the Sustainability 
Appraisal report and other technical documents, the  following  five strategic objectives have 
been refined  in order to deliver th e Vision for Fylde : 
  
(1) To create sustainable communities   
(2) To maintain, improve  and enhance  the environment  
(3) To make services accessible  
(4) To diversify and grow the local economy  
(5) To develop socially cohesive, safe, diverse  and healthy communities  
 
  
4.2  These strategic objectives are important as they will be used as a basis to measure the success 
of the Local Plan in achieving the Vision. The objectives will be regularly monitored by way of 
targets set out in the Council ’s Authority Monitoring Report (AMR) and through the 
Performance Monitoring Framework  which is set out in Appendix 8. 
4.3 The five strategic objectives set out how the Vision can be achieved. They express the purpose 
of the Local Plan and what the Developm ent Strategy aims to achieve.  
4.4 The strategic objectives address the key issues that have been identified for the Borough. The 
Local Plan will set out policies that help to move towards achieving the objectives, so that the 
Council  will achiev e the Visi on for Fylde. In line with the Framework, the objectives, policies 
and proposals contained in the Local Plan are underpinned by the ‘presumption in favour of 
sustainable development’ . 
Strategic Objective 1:  To Create Sustainable Communities  
4.5 All development will be located in sustainable locations , primarily within the four Strategic 
Locations for Development,  in order to minimise the use of private transport and avoid areas 
at highest risk of flooding.  New development s will follow sustainable design principles and 
incorporate sustainable building practices by reducing carbon emissions, maximising water 
and waste efficiency  and ensuring that they are resilient to the effects of climate change.  The 
use of  previously developed land should be encouraged . The  quality of the openness of the 
Green Belt  and Areas of Separation will be maintained.    Developer contributions will be used 
to mitigate the impacts of development on the surrounding area .  
A sustainable approach to housing will be taken. This will:  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
44 a. Improve access for all to well -designed, good quality, affordable and resource efficient 
homes across the Borough.  
b. Meet the specific housing needs of all sections of the community (including afforda ble, 
special needs housing  including housing for the elderly  and the needs of Gypsies and 
Travellers) by providing the right dwelling  type and mix to secure sustainable communities 
and to improve housing choice. In particular, to provide more homes suitabl e for older 
people . 
c. Bring forward a responsive and deliverable supply of housing land and buildings in 
sustainable locations to meet housing requirements.  
d. Make the best use of previously developed land and buildings, subject to appropriate site 
investigati on and remediation where required, to reduce the loss of greenfield land.  
Strategic Objective 2:  To maintain, improve  and enhance  the environment by : 
a. Protecting, restoring and enhancing the quality, character and distinctiveness of the 
biodiversity, landsc ape and countryside of Fylde.  
b. Expanding biodiversity resources, including improving habitat connectivity, particularly 
away from the coastal edge.  
c. Promoting the Green Infrastructure network throughout the urban and rural areas of 
Fylde.   
d. Improving access to the natural environment.  
e. Conserving and enhancing the built and historic environment and requiring new 
development to meet the highest quality urban design  having regard to local identity and 
character.  
f. Minimising the risk of surface w ater flooding, coastal and pluvial flooding and 
groundwater flooding, to existing and new development and to agricultural land, and 
improving bathing water quality.  
g. Protecting best and most versatile agricultural land.  
h. Protecting existing areas of Green Be lt and proposed Areas of Separation .   
i. Promoting renewable and low carbon energy, in order to reduce and mitigate carbon 
emissions.  
j. Supporting the delivery of actions identified in the Coastal Strategy.  
k. Ensuring that infrastructure is available to enable new development, whilst protecting and 
enhancing the natural and built environment.  
l. Development will have regard to the  identity, character and setting of the rural 
settlements.  
m. Working with the Marine Management Organisation to ensure clean, healthy, safe, 
productive and biologically diverse seas.  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
45 Strategic Objective 3: To make services accessible by : 
a. Taking an integrated approach to the location of development with improved accessibility 
to key facilities (by walking, cycling and public transport) in order to provide the 
opportunity for a modal shift away from car use.  
b. Reducing rural isolation and soc ial exclusion through the protection and provision of 
public transport, key services and facilities such as local shops and doctors’ surgeries. This 
may be linked to the allocation of new housing development within and on the boundary 
of Tier 1  rural settl ements.  
c. Improving the South Fylde Line and its Community Rail Partnership status, including 
improved pedestrian access , together with the provision of a park and ride  at Kirkham and 
Wesham Railway Station and improved access to Blackpool Airport; supporti ng Cottam 
Parkway and the proposed new Preston Western Distributor Road, which will link to a new 
Junction 2 of the M55 motorway and to support other projects identified in the Local 
Transport Plan (LTP3) and the Highways and Transport Masterplan(s).  
d. Facil itating appropriate development at Blackpool Airport, and ensuring the viable 
continuation of the airport for general aviation.  
e. Encouraging the delivery of the M55 to Heyhouses (St Annes) Link Road  and the M55 to 
Fleetwood Corridor improvements (i.e. form erly known as the Blue Route) . 
f. Continuing the Council’s involvement in key decisions seeking to reduce traffic congestion 
on the A585(T) trunk road.  
g. Seek to resolve congestion and capacity issues on M55 Junction 4 exacerbated by 
development over the Loc al Plan period.  
Strategic Objective 4: To diversify and grow the local economy by:  
a. Diversifying the Borough’s economic base in order to reduce reliance on a small number 
of large employers.  
b. Making provision for high quality and readily available sites in sustainable locations that 
will facilitate the growth of existing local firms and be attractive to new inward 
investment, including high technology uses.  
c. Recognising the international and national strategic importance of the Lancashire 
Enterprise Zone at B AE Systems, Warton and BAE Systems, Samlesbury as means of 
achieving economic growth and diversifying and protecting existing employment land and 
industrial premises, where appropriate.   
d. Recognising the role of the ‘Preston and Lancashire City Deal’ and i ts potential to 
significantly improve the economic and physical connectivity of strategic employment and 
housing sites in Fylde.  
e. Enhancing the vitality and viability of town centres through the promotion of mixed uses 
and focussing on development that att racts a large number of people.  
f. Developing a distinctive image of the Borough as a business location, based on existing 
assets such as BAE Systems Warton Aerodrome, Lancashire Enterprise Zone at Warton , 
Blackpool Airport Enterprise Zone  and Whitehills Business Park and developing a vibrant Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
46 cultural and creative community that will drive economic growth, attract inward 
investment, develop skills and innovation, create and sustain jobs and support 
regeneration.  
g. Maximising the potential of the visitor economy through the development of a widely 
recognised image of the Borough as a quality regional tourism and visitor destination, 
based on existing assets such as the high quality hotels and the coastline (including the 
championship golf courses, and implementing the Coastal Strategy).   
h. Promoting the image of the classic seaside resort of St Annes, which builds upon the 
heritage assets including the Promenade Gardens and Ashton Gardens and the Pier; and 
the Victorian, Edwardian and Interwar archit ecture of the Conservation Areas.  
i. Promoting the continuing improvement of the vitality and viability of the town, district 
and local centres.  
j. Supporting and protecting agricultural and farming operations, and appropriate 
diversification as a key element of the rural economy.  
k. Recognising the importance of Fylde’s heritage assets and the contribution they make to 
the local economy through promoting opportunities for conservation and enhancement.  
Strategic Objective 5:  To develop socially cohesive,  safe,  diverse and healthy  
communities by : 
a. Engaging and empowering local communities to be involved in local matters that shape 
their areas.  
b. Ensuring that new development seeks to address pockets of deprivation.  
c. Protecting, increasing  and enhancing open space, sport and recreation provision and the 
Green Infrastructure network throughout the Borough.  
d. Promoting good health and wellbeing by providing accessible high quality open space, 
sport and recreation  facilities  in association with new developments.  
e. Incorporating crime prevention measures into the design and layout of new development.  
f. Reducing urban isolation and rural exclusion through the promotion of appropriate tenure 
mixes in new residential developments and improved accessibili ty to key services and 
facilities.  
g. Promoting access to and support for lifelong learning opportunities and providing 
sufficient school places.  
h. Facilitating access to community facilities, including health and social infrastructure  and 
developing socially c ohesive, diverse and healthy communities by investment in the 
existing and the provision of new formal indoor and outdoor sports facilities across the 
Borough.  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
47 Chapter 5: The Development Strategy  
 
5.1 Fylde Council  is part of the Fylde Coast sub -region of Lancashire  and borders Blackpool, Wyre, 
Preston, South Ribble and West Lancashire.  In particular, the population of Fylde has close 
links with Blackpool, Wyre and Preston. Through establishing a development strate gy and 
setting out the settlement hierarchy, the role that neighbouring areas play in providing 
accessible services to the population of Fylde has been taken into account.  As part of the Duty 
to Cooperate, strategic planning with these authorities will be  maintained and the strategic 
policies in the Local Plan will reflect the fact that people and services cross council  boundaries.  
5.2 The Development Strategy identifies the proposed Settlement Hierarchy and the Strategic and 
Non -strategic Locations for D evelopm ent, which will accommodate the level of development 
in new homes, jobs and associated s ervices, required across Fylde during the entire plan 
period.   
5.3 There are some significant constraints to developme nt in Fylde, which have had an impact on 
which strategic and non -strategic sites have been included in this Local Plan. These constraints 
include Green Belt land which in Fylde protects against the merging of settlements . A minor 
amendment will need to be made  in the Green Belt  at the former Pontins site at Blackpool 
Airport Corridor . There will be no need for a strategic review of the Green Belt boundaries in 
the Borough , as the development requir ements of Fylde can be met on land outside the Green 
Belt. Other constraints include Areas of Separation; European Nature Conservation Sites; 
Biological Heritage Sites; Sites of Special Scientific Interest; Historic Parks and Gardens; and 
golf courses. No development sites have been  included in these areas.    
5.4 The floodplain is also a significant constraint to development.  Although some sites overlap 
into the floodplain, the part within the floodplain will not be developed for housing or 
employment , rather they would be developed for landscaping or public open s pace purposes . 
5.5 The SH ELAA 2015 update indicates that there is not sufficient land within existing settlement 
boundaries , as defined in the Fylde Borough Local Plan (As Altered), October 2005 to 
accommodate all new development and sites have been identified for development on 
sustainable greenfield land, at the edge of existing settlements.  
Locating Development  
5.6 The overa ll strategy for directing where new development and investment will be located in 
Fylde is set against the backdrop of underlying development trends. It involves providing for 
new homes, employment, services , tourism,  renewable energy  and the infrastructur e that 
supports them. Development must be achieved in the most sustainable way in order to 
protect and, where possible, enhance Fylde’s historic, environmental, social and economic 
assets. In particular, choosing the most sustainable locations for developm ent will help 
mitigate the impacts of climate change. Encouraging a mix of uses on larger development sites 
and locating homes and businesses in close proximity will reduce the need to travel.  
5.7 Infrastructure is integral to new development. It includes physical features, such as roads and 
sewers, as well as services such as education, community services and Green Infrastructure 
network. The Infrastructure Delivery Plan  (IDP) , which is a separate document which 
accompanies the Local Plan and sets out new transport, utilities, flood risk and coastal Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
48 defence, social (educational, health and social care) and Green Infrastructure to mitigate, 
improve and wherever possible overcome existing shortfalls.   
5.8 The size and connectivity of existing places, along w ith the level of services available, are key 
considerations in deciding where to locate development.  Fylde has many attractive features 
and distinctive local characteristics which could be lost by allowing inappropriate 
development to take place in unsust ainable locations.  The role of the Local Plan is two -fold. 
Firstly it needs to plan for development and to allocate land accordingly  in the Strategic 
Locations.  Secondly, it is to provide policies for the protection of the Borough’s built and 
natural environment, including nature conservation sites, heritage assets and local 
characteristics.   
The Proposed Settlement Hierarchy  
5.9 Sustainable development is at the heart of planning. Within Fylde, it has a role in reinforcing 
the distinction between urban and rural, protecting the natural environment, conserving and 
enhancing the historic environment and local character, supporting loca l agriculture and 
enabling the economic and social growth of the key settlements.  It is important  that 
communities of different scales are created and linked together by sustainable transport 
networks. The proposed Settlement Hierarchy by the end of the p lan period, is set out in Policy 
S1 below and it provides the basis for creating sustainable communities.  
 
Strategic Policy S1  
The Proposed Settlement Hierarchy  
Key Service Centres  
(urban areas)  Local Service 
Centres  
(urban areas)  Tier 1  
Larger Rural  
Settlements  
 Tier 2  
Smaller Rural   
Settlements  
 
Lytham (including Ansdell)  
St Annes  Freckleton  
Warton  Newton  
Staining  Clifton  
Elswick  
Kirkham  Wesham  Wrea Green  Singleton  
 Whitehills  
Whyndyke   Weeton  
 
Key Service Centres  
The towns of Lytham (including Ansdell) , St Annes  and Kirkham  perform the role of Key Service  
Centres and serve the wider catchment area.  The role of these towns as Key Service Centres will be 
maintained over the life time of the Local Plan; existing services and facilities will be enhanced; a 
range of housing and employment opportunities will be promoted and delivered, as well as retail 
and other community services, to serve the wider catchment ar ea.  
Local Service Centres  
Local Service Centres  of Freckleton  and Wesham  are well placed to provide for future local housing 
and employment needs.  
Over  the life of the Plan period to 2032, it is anticipated that:  
• Development at Freckleton  will be by way of infilling and rounding -off the existing 
settlement boundary.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
49 • Warton  will have improved services  including shops and community facilities  when 
development set out in the Warton Strategic Location for Development has taken place.   
• Wesham  will accommodate some development as part of the Kirkham and Wesham 
Strategic Location for Development.  
• The area referred to as Whitehills  at the Fylde -Blackpool Periphery will have developed into 
a Local Service Centre when development set out in the Fylde -Blackpool Periphery Strategic 
Location for Development has taken place. Whyndyke Garden Village  will also have 
developed into a Local Service Centre over  the lifetime of the Local Plan  
Rural Settlements  
Tier 1: Larger Rural Settlements     
Newton, Staining and Wrea Green.  The larger rural settlements provide small scale essential local 
services, as well as local opportunities for employment. They can therefore be regarded as 
sustainable communities, albeit with a dependency on, and sustainable transport connection to / 
from, the Key Service Centres, Local Service Centres and the Strategic Locations for Development, 
identified in Policy DLF1  for other services and facilities.  
Tier 2: Smaller Rural Settlements    
Clifton, Elswick, Singleton  and Weeton.   The smaller rural settlements have fewer essential services 
and employment opportunities and tend to have limited transport connections with the Key Service 
Centres, Local Service Centres and the Strategic Locations for Development, identified in Policy 
DLF1 .  
Within the rural areas, development will be restricted to the Tier 1 : and Tier 2 : Larger and Smaller  
Rural Settlements , except where development is allowed by Policy GD2, GD3 or GD4 as applicable . 
Development will be permitted within the limits of the rural settlement boundaries where it is 
consistent with other policies in this Plan.  
Development that is appropriate to the scale and character of settlements at each  level of the 
settlement hierarchy, will be promoted in accordance with the  Development St rategy.   
 
 
Justification  
Key Service Centres  
5.10 Key Service Centres include a range of housing and employment opportunities, as well as 
retail, leisure, community, civic, health, and education facilities and financial and professional 
services that serve a wide area.  They have good public transport links to surrounding areas, 
or the potential for their development and enhancement.  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
50 Local Service Centre  
5.11 Local Service Centres provide a more limited range of services to the local community, 
compared to Key Service Centres  – they provide facilities to serve local community needs.  
Local Service Centre serve their own communities and those in nearby rural settlements with 
basic services and are well placed to provide for future local housing and employment need.  
Rural Settlements  
5.12 Outside the Key Service Centres and Local Service Centres, there are Tier 1:  Larger Rural 
Settlements  and Tier 2:  Smaller Rural Settlements . Good access to services is essential if rural 
communities are to flourish.  
Development Locations for Fylde  
5.13 It is important that development within the Strategic Locations for Development is 
accompanied by the timely provision of the necessary infrast ructure. The IDP identifies the 
essential strategic infrastructure that is needed  to deliver  all of the proposed development – 
what it comprises and where and when it will be provided , as well as the likely infrastructure 
providers and funding sources. Where there is a funding shortfall developers will be expected 
to provide or contribute towards the necessary infrastructure, subject to viability.  
5.14 The Local Plan seeks to ensure that development occurs in the most sust ainable locations. The 
site specific detail of where this development will be located is set out in Chapter 6.   
5.15 The risk of flooding in Fylde has been evaluated in the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (the 
SFRA, updated in November 2011). Some places in Fylde are susceptible to tidal and fluvial 
flooding and, due to climate change, likely to be more so in the future. These risks have been 
taken into account in proposing the spatial distribution of development. More detail on flood 
risk is included in Policy CL1 in Chapter 12. 
Strategic Locations for Development  
5.16 Based on the need to locate development within sustainable communities, a large proportion 
of new development is proposed at the four Strategic Locations for Development, providing 
essential  key services and facilities, as well as the provision of employment opportunities or 
access to them.  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
51 Map 4: Strategic Locations for Development  
 
 
Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
52 Strategic Policy DLF1  
Development Locations for Fylde  
The Local Plan will  provide sites for  a minimum of 7,275  new homes and a minimum of  60.6  Ha 
(gross requirement) of additional employment land over the plan period to 31 March 2032.  
 
Locations for Development  
Strategic Locations for Development  
The Local Plan Development Strategy is to direct the majority of future growth to the most 
sustainable locations, specifically to the four Strategic Locations for Development.   
The four Strategic Locations are:  
• Lytham and St Annes ;  
• Fylde -Blackpool Perip hery ;  
• Warton ; and  
• Kirkham and Wesham .  
 
Development of the Strategic Sites at these Strategic Locations is key to ensur ing that the 
Development Strategy is achieved.  
Non -strategic Locations  for Development  
Other development will mainly be located in the Non -strategic Locations for Development, which 
comprise the Local Service Centre of Freckleton, the Tier 1 Larger Rural Settlements and the Tier 2 
Smaller Rural Settlements.    
 
Broad Distribution of Development  
Strategic Locations  
Around 90% of homes to be developed in the plan period (including small sites)  and 59.6 Ha of 
employment land  will be located in the four Strategic Locations for development.  
Non -strategic Locations  
Around 10% of homes to be developed in the  plan period (including small sites) and 2.4 Ha of 
employment land will be located in the Non -strategic Locations . 
 
Windfalls (including small committed sites)  
 Small housing sites (amounting to between 1 and 9 homes) are not allocated; they can occur 
throughout the borough where compliant with the other policies of the plan. Small sites are 
provided for through a windfall allowance of 40 homes per annum in years 10 to 21 of the plan. The 
delivery of small sites that are already committed  is included within the Housing Trajectory 
(Appendix 2): this provides for the delivery of small sites up to year 10 of the plan. Small committed Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
53 sites and windfalls yet to come will provide around 11% of the housing requirement. There may also 
be some lar ger windfall sites that will also contribute to this figure.   
 
Existing Land uses  
Development will not be permitted which would prevent or undermine the operation of existing 
land uses, including hazardous installations and the ethylene pipeline and Mineral Safeguarding 
Areas, or prejudice airport safety at Blackpool Airport or at Warto n Aerodrome.   
Development will contribute towards sustainable growth, the continuation and creation of 
sustainable communities , by their locations and accessibility and through the sustainable use of 
resources and construction materials.  
 
 
Justification  
5.17 Lytham (including Ansdell) and St Annes  are a focus for development as it is sustainable to 
concentrate new development in the Key Service Centres, since they contain the main civic, 
community, retail, employment and business activity.  St Annes is the primary retail centre in 
the Borough and Lytham provides a complementary r ole with its variety of independent, 
specialist shops.  Business activity is focused in Lytham and St Annes and there is potential for 
the creation of new jobs and training. Development will result in investment in local 
infrastructure and affordable housi ng in the area and will maximise the use of existing 
infrastructure.  
5.18 The Fylde -Blackpool Periphery, comprising two parts: 1) Blackpool Airport Corridor and 2) 
Whitehills, is another focus for new development , with good access to the M55 at Junction 4 .  
5.19 Warton will have a recognised Local Service Centre over the lifetime of the Local Plan; with a 
local retail centre which will be developed , in consultation with Bryning with Warton Parish 
Council,  on previously developed land owned by BAE Systems on  Lytham Road.  With the 
establishment of the Lancashire  Enterprise Zone  and its associated job creation  and the 
prospect of improved road access by means of the Preston Western Distributor Road to a new 
Junction 2 of the M55; it will become a more sustainable location for new development over 
the lifetime of the Local Plan.   
5.20 Kirkham is a Key Service Centre, with a vibrant town centre.  Kirkham and Wesham  railway 
station provides good access to sustain able public transport connections with the rest of the 
Fylde Coast sub-region and the regional and national rail network through Preston Railway 
Station.  The development of Mill Farm to the north of Kirkham and Wesham has led to 
increased employment opport unities.  
5.21 The allocated sites are set out in Policies SL1 to SL5. The Housing Trajectory (Appendix 2) 
shows how the sites will be delivered over the plan period. Chapter 8 provides the justification 
for the overall amount of employment land provided fo r through Policy DLF1  and Chapter 9 
provides the justification for the overall level of housing provision within the policy.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
54 5.22 Performance Monitoring Indicator 4 , in Appendix 8, set s out a target / policy outcome to 
achieve the following cumulative home completions from 1st April 2011 to the end of the plan 
period: Strategic Locations for Development: 90% ; Non-Strategic Locations for 
Development: 10% . 
Development Sites  
5.23 Strategic development sites (amounting to 100 or more homes) are set out in Policies SL1 to 
SL5, prefixed by the letters HSS (for housing) or MUS (for mixed -use). Non -strategic housing 
sites (amounting to between 10 and 99 homes) are set out in Policies SL 1 to SL5, prefixed by 
the letters HS. Small housing sites (amounting to between 1 and 9 homes) are not allocated 
within the plan.  
 
Cross Cutting Themes In Chapter 5:  
Promoting Health and Wellbeing  
The Development Strategy focusses on the settlement hiera rchy based upon urban areas and existing 
service centres to make the most efficient use of existing health services and other social 
infrastructure. The levels of development proposed in the four Strategic Locations will result in the 
need for new infrastructure.  This investment must be co -ordinated with service providers and, where 
appropriate, funded by new development. The Development Strategy can contribute towards well -
being in a number of ways by developing new and maintaining existing networks of green open spaces.  
Whyndyke Garden Village , in the Fylde -Blackpool Periphery has been identied by the NHS as a 
demonstrator site in the Healthy New Towns  initiative.  
Achieving G ood Design  
It is essential that development within the existing settlements and in the Strategic Sites and Strategic 
Locations, leads to the creation of places that are well designed, attractive to live in and work; and 
that development is in keeping with  the character of the area and also results in the maintenance and 
enhancement of Fylde’s built environment.  
Strategic Objectives  
The following five strategic objectives are achieved in the development of Strategic Locations for 
Development in Chapter 5.  
Objective 1 : To create sustainable communities  
Objective 2 : To maintain, improve  and enhance  the environment  
Objective 3 : To make services accessible  
Objective 4 : To diversify and grow the local economy  
Objective 5 : To develop socially cohesive, safe, diverse and healthy communities  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
55 Chapter 6: Strategic Locations for Development  
 
Strategic Locations, Strategic Development Sites  and Non -Strategic Development Sites  
6.1 The four Strategic Locations for Development  include strategic development sites, comprising 
land for homes, employment, commercial and leisure uses.  Development of these sites will 
help ensure that the Plan’s Development Strategy, Vision and Strategic Objectives are 
achieved in order to accommodate the level of development and growth required within the 
lifetime of the Local Plan.   
6.2 It is important that the strategic development sites are accompanied by the timely provision 
of infrastructure, otherwise proposals will not be deliverabl e. It is always preferable for 
infrastructure to be delivered up -front before the development takes place.  The 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan ( IDP) and accompanying Infrastructure Delivery Schedule identify 
the required essential infrastructure – what it comprises and where and when it will be 
needed, as well as the likely providers and funding sources. Where there is a funding shortfall, 
developers will be expected to directly provide and  / or contribute towards the necessary 
infrastructure, subject to viability.  
6.3 On strategic development sites with a high proportion of new homes, local services such as 
small shops, community centres and on -site open space including formal and informal play 
areas, will be expected to be provided by developers. Financial contributions may be sought 
towards off -site Green Infrastructure, including the delivery of schemes and initiatives 
identified in the Coastal Str ategy  (2015 -2032) , and public realm works and improvements 
across the Borough.  Further details of contributions is set out in Policy INF2  in Chapter 11.  
Masterplans and Design Codes  
6.4  The Council welcomes early discussions with landowners / developers on the scope, content 
and process of preparation of masterplans  and design codes  for the masterplanning of 
development within the four Strategic Locations for Development. A masterplan should s et 
the vision for the strategic development location, together with the strategy for implementing 
that vision and how the individual sites collectively will meet that vision. It should include, 
amongst other matters, an access and movement framework, Green  Infrastructure and 
ecology mitigation and enhancement, a hydrology and drainage assessment, land use and 
development capacity analysis, infrastructure requirements, a viability assessment and a 
delivery strategy.  Any new development within the strategic development locations should 
provide networks of Green Infrastructure for use by pedestrians, cyclists and horse riders.    
6.5 A design code sets out design principles aimed at delivering better quality places.  A design 
code is a type of detailed design g uidance that is particularly useful for complex scenarios 
involving multiple parties in long -term development. A code can be a way of simplifying the 
complex and often elongated processes associated with new development to give more 
certainty to all those involved and help to make high quality places. Code preparation can 
allow organisations and local communities to work together more effectively, helping to build 
consensus about what kind of place everyone wants to create.  Design codes vary mainly 
accordi ng to their level of prescription (what they fix and what they leave flexible) and the 
scale at which they operate. They can, effectively, set out ‘rules for assembly’ of a place. They Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
56 are the instructions that tell you how to assemble the different parts of the plan. Preparing a 
code well is about finding a balance between technical specificity and a succinct description 
of what is required. Some of the best, most effective codes are very short.  
6.6 Where sites require a masterplan as part of the policy or  justification, in order to achieve the 
comprehensive development of a Strategic Development Location, the masterplan  should be 
prepared by the prospective applicants of the site in consultation with the Council, in advance 
of the submission of any plannin g application. The draft masterplan should be the subject of 
consultation with all stakeholders and interested parties, including the wider community. The 
masterplan shall be agreed with the Council and thereafter be adopted for the purposes of 
development  management as a development brief in the determination of subsequent 
planning applications. Where no masterplan has been agreed with the Council in advance, the 
applicant will be required to prepare a masterplan as part of the Design and Access Statement 
for the application; the Design and Access Statement including the proposed masterplan will 
then be required to be subject to pre -application consultation in accordance with national 
guidance.  
 
Strategic Policy M1  
Masterplanning the Strategic Locations for Development  
Unless a Masterplan or design code has already been prepared by the Council, prospective 
developers of Strategic Sites (100 or more homes) within the Strategic Locations for Development 
named in policy DLF1  will be expected to prepare a masterplan or design code for their site in 
consultation with the Council.  This should be carried out as part of the pre -application consultation 
process set out in the Statement of Community Involvement.  Following approval by the Council, 
the masterplans will become supplementary planning documents.  
The masterplans should include an agreed  programme of implementation in accordance with the 
masterplan and an approved design code.  
The masterplans should meet all the following criteria:  
a) The Strategic Locations for Development should be considered as a whole and a 
comprehensive approach to maki ng every strategic site within  the Strategic Locations for 
Development sustainable , should be taken.  
b) A broad balance and range of housing choice, including both market and affordable 
housing, in line with the Fylde Coast SHMA, 2014 should be provided , in accordance with 
policies H2 and H4 ; 
c) Variations in housing density with an overall minimum net density of 30 homes per hectare;  
d) High quality design should be included and development should be designed to encourage 
cohesion within the site and seek to minimise the impact on neighbouring properties;  
e) A wide range of local employment opportunities should be provided that offer a choice of 
jobs and training prospects;  
f) An appropriate level of retail, leisure, social, cultural, community and health facilities  should 
be provided that meet local needs of the residents of the development, but does not Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
57 undermine existing town, district or local centres or neighbouring key service centres or 
local service centres;  
g) Additional school capacity for nursery, primary an d, where necessary, secondary 
educational needs should be provided in the short, medium and long -term;  
h) Appropriate highways access and a comprehensive approach to planning the highway 
network within and linking the sites which make up the Strategic Locatio ns for 
Development;  
i) Access to well -designed, separate but overlooked cycleways (both on -road and off -road), 
walking routes and bridleways serving the local facilities and linking to services and 
amenities.  Opportunities should be sought for the developmen t of a network of walking, 
cycling and bridleway routes  with access to and from adjacent settlements and the nearest 
town centres and schools ; 
j) Housing, employment, retail and leisure facilities located within a maximum walking 
distance of 400 metres of a f requent, viable and accessible bus service;  
k) Secured by Design principles should apply in new developments;  
l) Energy efficiency measures should be incorporated into new developments;  
m) A design led approach to the provision of car parking spaces with the over all aim of reducing 
dependency on the private car;  
n) Measures to deliver a shift to public transport, away from car use over the plan period.  
Opportunities should be sought to improve access to public transport and minimise the 
need to travel by private car ;  
o)   Provide a Green Infrastructure network of open spaces, including natural and semi -natural 
greenspaces, amenity greenspace, allotments, and formal and informal recreation areas 
with provision for children and young people where people can congregate. Provid e for 
large scale landscape enhancement, including the provision of tree belts and advanced 
landscaping  and ensure the site links into the wider Green Infrastructure network. Existing 
ponds, trees, woodland, hedgerows, water features and areas of open space should be 
retained wherever possible.  Details  should be provided regarding the maintenance and 
manage ment of the on-site open spaces.  
p) The conservation and enhancement of important environmental assets and natural         
resources, biodiversity (nature conservation) and ecological networks. Ecological 
connectivity within the site and with the surround ings should be maintained and enhanced 
through appropriate site layout; the retention of existing important features including 
trees, woods and water bodies and their integration within a well -designed landscape with 
appropriate habitat protection;   
q)    The site designs should be informed by appropriate ecological surveys to ensure appropriate 
mitigation measures are implemented.  Potentially damaging effects of development on 
sites of nature conservation value, especially Natura 2000 sites should be avoi ded, unless 
the potential effects can be mitigated;  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
58 r)    Where it is considered that proposals may have a harmful impact upon the significance of a 
heritage asset,  the proposal should be considered in relation to the provisions of Policy 
ENV5.    
s) To confirm the presence or otherwise of sub -surface archaeology, more detailed  
archaeological studies should be undertaken, prior to development;  
t)    Development respec ts the environmental character of its surroundings.  Particular attention 
should be given to the creation of a well -designed and defined edge to development and a 
sensitive transition to adjoining areas in the countryside.  Proposals will need to include 
plans for the long term use and management of these areas;  
u)   Inappropriate development in Flood Risk Zones 2 or 3 will not be permitted.     Development 
in Flood Zones 2 and 3 should be in accordance with the requirements of the national 
Planning Practic e Guidance. Where a strategic development location contains land within 
Flood Risk Zone 2 and 3, landscaping constitutes an appropriate form of development in 
these areas. Developments will be required to include measures to deal with surface water 
drainag e using the SuDs hierarchy;  
v)    Health impact screening to be undertaken for all major development proposals on strategic 
sites. A full independent Health Impact Assessment will be required if the screening 
demonstrates a need;  
w)  Wastewater infrastructure upgrades should be completed and the development of sites 
should ensure that any potential adverse impacts are mitigated. Design of the infrastructure 
should take into account any potential future development;  
x)    Local waste ma nagement facilities and neighbourhood waste management facilities for the 
separation, storage and collection of waste, to increase the efficiency of its subsequent re -
use, recycling and treatment should be provided.   
 
 
Justification  
6.7 A Masterplan is required for the Strategic Locations for Development, so as to ensure the 
delivery of a comprehensive development within the plan period. A detailed design code, in 
accordance with the masterplan, will need to be prepared by the applicant and  agreed with 
the Council in order to ensure a high quality  of development throughout the strategic sites so 
as to embrace sustainable development principles. Applicants will also be required to agree a 
programme of implementation with the Council.  
6.8 Deve lopment of the strategic sites will improve access to well -designed, good quality, 
affordable and resource efficient homes to  meet the requirements of the Key Service Centres 
and the Local Service Centres . The sites will contribute towards the development of dynamic 
and prosperous communities through the delivery of sustainable homes. The allocation of the 
sites will contribute towards a flexible and responsive supply of housing land in sustainable 
locations to meet Fylde’s housing requirements.  
6.9 The SH ELAA 2015 update demonstrates that there is not enough land within the defined 
settlements , as defined in the Fylde Borough Local Plan (As Altered), October 2005 to meet Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
59 Fylde’s housing requirement and that some sustainable greenfield sites on the edge of 
settlements will need to be allocated for housing.  
6.10 Development will need to protect and enhance features of nature conservation value, such as 
field ponds, or if th eir loss is unavoidable, seek to replace such features. Nature conservation 
sites in Fylde include Natura 2000 , which is a network of nature protection areas  made up of 
Special Areas of Conservation  (SACs) and Special Pro tection Areas  (SPAs) designated 
respectively under the Habitats Directive  and Birds Directive . The network includes both 
terrestrial and marine sites ( Marine Protected Areas  (MPAs)).  
Infrastructure requirements in the Strategic Locat ions for Development  
6.11 The comprehensive development of the Strategic Locations will be dependent upon the 
provision of infrastructure to ensure a sustainable development. An infrastructure delivery 
schedule  has been drafted and is incorporated as Appendix 2 in the IDP, which accompanies 
this Local Plan . The delivery schedule will be secured through a legal agreement between the 
developer and the Council to ensure that the development proceeds only when the ne cessary 
infrastructure is in place.  All schemes within the infrastructure delivery schedule will be 
implemented through the scheme and such contributions could be offset from any CIL monies 
required.  
6.12 To ensure the Strategic Locations for Development are sustainable, community facilities  
including nursery , primary and secondary education provision, local retail centres and health 
care provision will need to be included within the infrastructure delivery schedule and 
provided through developer contribut ions. Greater connectivity will be required between the 
sites allocated for residential development and the existing settlements.  The Green 
Infrastructure  network  will be an integral part of the development of the Strategic Locations 
to create high qualit y attractive environments  and to connect into existing landscapes .  This 
will include the provision of cycleways, bridleways and footpath connections within the sites  
and links to the ecological network ; all of which will need to be included within the 
infrastructure delivery schedule  (IDS) . 
6.13 Throughout this document strategic housing sites are identified by the prefix  HSS and non -
strategic  housing sites are identified by the prefix HS; employment  sites  are identified by the 
prefix ES; and mixed use development sites are identified by the prefix MUS . 
Strategic Policy SL1   
Lytham and St Annes Strategic Location for Development   
The following strategic and non -strategic sites identified on the Policies Map  including Inset Plans  
accompanying this plan  are allocated for development :   
Site  Homes to be 
completed during 
Plan period  Employment 
over Plan 
period  Projected 
commencement 
date  
HSS1  - Queensway, St Annes   992 0.0 Ha   Commenced 2018  
MUS4 – Heyhouses Lane, St Annes  322 0.0 Ha  Commenced 2014  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
60 HSS3 – Lytham Quays, Lytham  119 0.0 Ha  Commenced 
2007/08  
HS1 – Queen Mary School, Clifton 
Drive South, St Annes   35 0.0 Ha  Commenced 2011  
HS2 – Jubilee House, East Beach, 
Lytham  20 0.0 Ha   2018/19  
HS3 – Ashton Nurseries, Mythop 
Road, Lytham  12 0.0 Ha   2019/20  
HS4 – The Gables, 35 -39 Orchard 
Road, St Annes  19 0.0 Ha  Commenced 2017  
HS5 – 7-8 St George’s Square, St 
Annes  11 0.0 Ha  Commenced 
2016/17  
HS7 – Petros House, St Andrew’s 
Road North, St Annes  35 0.0 Ha   Commenced 
2017/18  
HS8 – 35-37 South Promenade, St 
Annes  36 0.0 Ha  Commenced 
2016/17  
HS9 – 23-33 Fairhaven Road, St Annes  32 0.0 Ha  Commenced 
2017/18  
HS10 – 34-36 Orchard Road, Lytham 
St Annes   12 0.0 Ha   2018/19  
HS11 – The Galleries, 2 -4 Kingsway, 
Lytham  10 0.0 Ha   2018/19  
HS12 – Fairways, Heeley Road, St 
Annes  20 0.0 Ha  2023/24  
HS13 – Kingsway Garage, St Annes  30 0.0 Ha  2019/20  
HS14 – AXA, Lytham   65 0.0 Ha  2019/20  
HS15 – Land to the West, Ballam 
Road, Lytham  12 0.0 Ha   Commenced 
2016/17  
HS16 – Clifton Drive North, St Annes  34 0.0 Ha  Commenced 
2013/14  
HS17 – Hastings Point, Ballam Road, 
Lytham  25 0.0 Ha  Commenced 
2013/14  
HS18 – Former FBC Depot, St David’s 
Road North, St Annes  32 0.0 Ha  Commenced 
2014/15  
HS19 – 1 Lord Street, St Annes  14 0.0 Ha  Commenced 
2015/16  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
61 HS20 – Former Kwik Save, St Annes  15 0.0 Ha  Commenced 
2015/16  
HS58 - Westmoreland House  25 0.0 Ha  2018/19  
HS59 - Land to east of Sefton Road  12 0.0 Ha  Commenced 2017  
HS60 - Valentine Kennels     53 0.0 Ha  2018/19  
HS61 - Roseacre, Wildings Lane    45 0.0 Ha  2018/19  
HS62 - Keenans Mill     26 0.0 Ha  Commenced 2017  
HS67 - St. Leonards Bridge Garage     38 0.0 Ha  2019/20  
HS68 - Church Road Methodist 
Church     10 0.0 Ha  2018/19  
ES1 - Queensway Industrial Estate, 
Snowdon Road, St Annes  0 3.8 Ha  TBC 
ES2 – Dock Road, Lytham  0 0.9 Ha  TBC 
ES3 – Boundary Road, Lytham  0 0.7 Ha  TBC 
Total  2,111 homes  5.4 Ha   
Masterplans and approved design codes for each Strategic Site (100 or more homes)  listed above   
(where they do not have planning permission) - within  the Lytham and St Annes Strategic Location 
for Development should make provision for a range of land use s to include homes, employment 
and commercial uses, Green Infrastructure and community facilities.  A programme of 
implementation should be agreed between the Council and the developer in accordance with the 
masterplans and the design codes.  
 
 
Strategic Policy SL2  
The Fylde -Blackpool Periphery Strategic Location for Development  
The following strategic and non -strategic sites identified on the Policies Map  including Inset Plans 
accompanying this plan are allocated for development as follows : 
Site  Homes to be 
completed during 
Plan period  Employment 
over Plan 
period  Projected 
commencement 
date  
HSS4  – Coastal Dunes, Clifton Drive 
North, Blackpool Airport Corridor  429 0.0 Ha  Commenced 2015  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
62 MUS1  – Cropper Road East, 
Whitehills  529 5.7 Ha  Commenced 2016  
MUS2  – Whyndyke Garden Village, 
Preston New Road, Whitehills  630 20.0 Ha  2021/22  
HSS5  – Cropper Road West, 
Whitehills  250 0.0 Ha  2023/24  
HSS6 – Land at Lytham St Annes Way, 
Whitehills  151 0.0 Ha  Commenced 
2013/14  
HS21 – Land to the rear of 11 -63 
Westgate Road, Squires Gate  25 0.0 Ha  Commenced 
2017/18  
HS22 – Former Clock Garage, Preston 
New Road, Westby  14 0.0 Ha  2018/19  
HS23 – Land South of Bridgeside, 
Squires Gate  22 0.0 Ha  2018/19  
ES4 – Blackpool and Fylde Industrial 
Estate, Whitehills  0 2.4 Ha  TBC 
ES5 – Blackpool Airport Enterprise 
Zone (Zone A), Squires Gate   0 14.5 Ha  TBC 
ES6 – ITSA, Brunel Way, Whitehills  0 4.9 Ha  TBC 
ES7 – Whitehills Business Park, 
Whitehills  0 5.6 Ha  TBC 
Total  2,050 homes  53.1 Ha   
Masterplans and approved design codes for each Strategic Site (100 or more homes)  listed above 
(where they do not have planning permission) - within the Fylde -Blackpool Periphery Strategic 
Location for Development, which includes land along the Blackpool Airport Corridor at Squires Gate 
should make provision for a range of land uses to  include homes, employment and commercial uses, 
Green Infrastructure network and community facilities. A programme of implementation should be 
agreed between the Council and the developer in accordance with the masterplans and the design 
codes.  
 
Justification   
Whyndyke Garden Village , Preston New Road, Whitehills (site MUS2)  
6.14 This mixed use development site is situated to the east of Preston New Road (A583), 
Whitehills , and is predominantly in agricultural use, with land also used for paint balling, a 
temporary car boot sale and summer circus. The development of a mental health unit  on site 
is proving to be succssful . A small part of the site falls within Flood Zone 2. In terms of 
biodiversity, the site is adjacent to a Biological Heritage Site. There are also numerous field 
ponds within the site and these will need to be protected, or replaced if lost.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
63 6.15 Outline planning permission has been granted , for 1,310 homes i n Fylde including 200 
affordable homes , 20.0 Ha of B2 and B8 employment land, two local neighbourhood centres, 
a primary school and a health centre.   It is anticipated that development of housing on this 
site could start in 201 8, with 630 homes being deliv ered  within the plan period  and the 
remaining 680 being constructed beyond the Plan period . The site is being marketed as the 
Whyndyke Garden Village and it is a demonst rator site in the Heathy New Towns initiative  
(see Chapter 10 for more information on Healthy New Towns ).  
6.16 There are surface water and wastewater issues at land at Junction 4 of the M55 and road 
improvements will be required to the same junction. No discharge to the public sewerage 
system from the site  will take place  until appropriate surface water mitigation measures have 
been implemented, and no surface water from the site shall discharge to the public sewerage 
system at any time.  
Cropper Road West, Whitehills (site HS S5) 
6.17 Any planning application for the development of this site will need to be accompanied by a 
comprehensive masterplan to be agreed by the Council, which will need to include the site for 
a local (retail) centre, serving Whitehills. There are surface water  and wastewater  issues at 
land at Junction 4 of the M55 and road improvements will be required to the junction . 
However, it is anticipated that development of housing on this site could start in 2023/24 , 
with 250 homes being delivered within the plan period a nd the remaining 200 being 
constructed beyond the plan period .  
6.18 Employment at Whitehills Business Park ( site ES7 ), Cropper Road East (site MUS1)  and 
Whyndyke Garden Village (site MUS2)  will recognise the sub -regional significance of land at 
the end of the M55 as a strategic location and its contribut ion towards diversifying both 
Fylde’s and the wider Fylde Coast’s economic base  by making provision for high quality and 
readily available sites and developing a distinctive image based on existing assets.   
 
Strategic Policy SL3   
Warton Strategic Location for Development  
The following strategic and non -strategic sites identified on the Policies Map  including Inset Plans 
accompanying this plan  are allocated for development : 
Site  Homes to be 
completed during 
Plan period   Employment 
over Plan 
period  Projected 
commencement 
date  
HSS2  – Blackfield End Farm, Church 
Road, Warton  360 0.0 Ha  2018/19  
HSS7  – Highgate Park, Lytham Road, 
Warton  254 0.0 Ha  Commenced 2014  
HSS12  – Land north of Freckleton 
Bypass Warton  350 0.0 Ha  2022-23 
HSS13  – Clifton House Farm, Warton  115 0.0 Ha  2022-23 Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
64 HS24  Riversleigh Farm, Warton  82 Ha Commenced 
2015/16  
HS25  - Nine Acres Nursery, Harbour 
Lane Phase 1  75 0.0 Ha  Commenced 
2012/13  
HS26  - George’s Garage, Warton   16 0.0 Ha  2018/19  
HS27 – Oaklands Caravan Park, 252 
Lytham Road, Warton  53 0.0 Ha  2023/24  
Total  1,305 homes  0.0 Ha   
Masterplans and approved design codes for each specific Strategic Site (100 or more homes)  listed 
above  (where they do not have planning permission) within the Warton Strategic Location for 
Development will make provision for a range of land uses to include homes, employment and 
commercial uses, Green Infrastructure network and community facilities including a new local retail 
centre. A programme of implementatio n should be agreed between the Council and the developer 
in accordance with the masterplans and the design codes.  
 
 
Strategic Policy SL4   
Kirkham and Wesham Strategic Location for Development  
The following strategic and non -strategic sites identified on the Policies Map  including Inset Plans 
accompanying this plan are allocated for development :   
Site  Homes to be 
completed during 
Plan period  Employment 
over Plan 
period  Projected 
commencement 
date  
HSS8  – The Pastures, Fleetwood 
Road, Wesham  264 0.0 Ha  Commenced 
2015/16  
HSS9  – Land North of Blackpool 
Road, Kirkham  588 0.0 Ha  Commenced 
2015/16  
HSS10 – Willowfields, Derby Road, 
Wesham  124 0.0 Ha  Commenced 2008  
HS28 – Sunnybank Mill, Kirkham   52 0.0 Ha  2019/20  
HS29 – Crossacres, land between 
Weeton Road/Fleetwood Road, 
Wesham  13 0.0 Ha  Commenced 
2011/12  
HS30 – Pennine View, Weeton Road, 
Wesham  12 0.0 Ha  2021/22  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
65 HS31 – Former Fylde Council Offices, 
Derby Road, Wesham  24 0.0 Ha  Commenced 
2014/15  
HS32 – West End Residential Park, 
Kirkham  27 0.0 Ha  2018/19 
HS33 – Arundel Lodge Nursing 
Home, 1 Station Road, Wesham  11 0.0 Ha  Commenced 
2015/16  
HS34 - Crossroads, Kirkham  12 0.0 Ha  Commenced 
2011/12  
HS35 – Henthorne Builders, Orders 
Lane, Kirkham  26 0.0 Ha  Commenced 
2012/13  
HS36 – St George’s Hotel, Station 
Road, Kirkham  11 0.0 Ha  Commenced 
2013/14  
HS57 – Brook Farm Dowbridge  170 0.0 Ha  2018/19  
HS63 – Campbells Caravans  30 0.0 Ha  2019/20  
MUS3  – Mill Farm Sports Village, 
Fleetwood Road, Wesham  0 1.1 Ha   TBC 
Total  1,364 homes  1.1 Ha   
Masterplans and approved design codes for each specific strategic site listed above (here they do 
not have planning permission) within the Kirkham and Wesham Strategic Location for Development 
should make provision for a range of land uses to include homes , employment and commercial 
uses, Green Infrastructure network and community facilities. A programme of implementation 
should be agreed between the Council and the developer in accordance with the masterplans and 
the design codes.  
Development of the strategic sites should conform to the following relevant criterion:  
• Before any further development is granted planning permission on The Pastures, Fleetwood 
Road, Wesham ( site HSS8 ) and Land north of Blackpool Road, Kirkham ( site HSS9 ) it is 
advisable that  site surveys are carried out to assess the extent and quality of the mineral 
reserves and whether, in the case of the sand and gravel deposits, there is a case for prior 
extraction before built development commences.  
 
 
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
66 Justification    
Land North of Blackpool Road, Kirkham (site H SS9) 
6.19 This residential site is also locally known as the ‘Kirkham Triangle’ and is bordered by the A583, 
A585 and the railway line, to the west of Kirkham.  Part of the site already has planning 
permission.  The developme nt of new homes  on Land North of Blackpool Road, Kirkham (site 
HSS9) will need to be well screened from views into the site, by a comprehensive landscaping 
scheme including substantial tree belts and the provision of Green Infrastructure  on the site . 
A min imum 8 metre buffer zone should be provided between site HSS9  and Wrongway Brook.  
Mill Farm Sports Village, Fleetwood Road, Wesham (site MUS3)  
6.20 This mixed use site for employment, leisure and retail is situated at Mill Farm, north -west of 
Wesham and includes  4.5 Ha of woodland. Planning permission has been granted and 
development has commence d on a football stadium on the land, for use by AFC Fylde and 
other uses include a Foodstore and offices. The delivery of m ixed use development at Mill 
Farm Sports Village, Wesham (site MUS3)  will contribute towards diversifying Fylde’s 
economic base, making provision for high quality and readily available employment premises  
in a sustainable location, close to Junction 3 of t he M55  and Kirkham and Wesham Railway 
Station . The provision of improved access to Mill Farm Sports Village (site MUS3)  by foot and 
cycle and the provision of bus stops on the A585, will enhance the sustainability and 
connectivity of the site to Kirkham an d Wesham.  
 
Strategic Policy SL5  
Development Sites outside the Strategic Locations for Development  
The sites in the following locations outside the Strategic Locations for Development, identified  on 
the Policies Map  including Inset Plans  accompanying this plan, are allocated for development  :   
Site by s ettlement  Homes to be completed 
during Plan period  Projected 
Commencement 
date  
Local Service Centres  
HS37 – The Refuge, Ruskin Road, Freckleton   11 (commitment)  2018/19 
HS38  – Land rear of High Meadows, Lower 
Lane, Freckleton  13 (allocation)  2021/22  
HS66 – Quernmore Trading Estate  Freckleton  10 (allocation)  2021/22  
HS69 – Naze Court, Naze Lane  Freckleton  12 (minus 10 net of 
demolitions) (allocation)  2019/20  
ES8 – Naze  Lane,  Freckleton  2.4 Ha  Employment over 
Plan period  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
67 Tier 1: Larger Rural Settlements  
HS51 – Newton Hall, School Lane, Newton  86 (allocation)  2027/28  
HS52 – Cobweb Barn, Oak Lane, Newton  40 (allocation)  2019/20  
HS70 – Land west of Woodlands Close,  
Newton  50 (commitment)  2018/19  
HS39 – Land South of Chain Lane, Staining  42 (commitment)  Commenced 
2015/16  
HS40 – Land at King’s Close, Staining  30 (commitment)  Commenced 
2017/18  
HS41 – Thornfield Caravan Park, Staining  28 (allocation)  2023/24  
HS42  – Baines Farm, Mill Lane, Staining  11 (commitment)  Commenced 
2011/12  
HS43 – Land adjacent to 18 Chain Lane, 
Staining  30 (commitment)  Commenced 
2012/13  
HSS11 – Land off Willow Drive, Wrea Green  86 (commitment)  2018/19  
HS44  – Land adjacent Richmond Avenue, 
Wrea Green  54 (commitment)  Commenced 
2014/15  
HS45 – Rear of 54 Bryning Lane, Wrea Green  36 (commitment)  2018/19 
HS46  – North View Farm, 22 Ribby Road, 
Wrea Green  42 (commitment)  Commenced 
2015/16  
HS47  – Land North of North View Farm, Wrea 
Green  15 ( allocation ) 2023/24  
HS48 – Former Wareings, Ribby Road, Wrea 
Green  13 (commitment)  Commenced 
2011/12  
Tier 2: Smaller Rural Settlements  
HS49 – Land North of Preston Old Road, 
Clifton  74 (allocation)  2018/19 
HS50 – Land East of Rowan Close, Ash Lane, 
Clifton  30 (allocation)  2019/20  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
68 HS71 North of High Gate and East of Copp 
Lane,  Elswick  24 (minded to approve)  2020/21  
HS72 Land North of Mill Lane,  Elswick  50 (commitment)  2019/20  
HS73 Land North of Beech Road,  Elswick  50 (commitment)  2018/19  
HS53 – Singleton Village, Singleton  15 (minded to approve)  2023/24  
HS54 – The Laurels and Willow House, 
Mythop Road, Weeton  20 (commitment)  Commenced 
2014/15  
HS64 – Land West of Church Road  Weeton  25 (commitment)  2019/20  
Other  locations  
HS55 – The Rowans (Former Blue Anchor Inn), 
Fleetwood Road, Greenhalgh  17 (commitment)  Commenced 
2013/14  
HS56 – Sunnydale Nurseries, Garstang Road, 
Little Eccleston   41 (allocation ) Commenced 2018  
Total  933 homes   
 
Justification  
6.21 Policy SL5 confirms the number of homes proposed to be completed outside the Strategic 
Locations for Development over the lifetime of the Local Plan.  There may be smaller schemes 
/ infill schemes for sites of fewer  than 10 homes, which are factored into allowances a nd not 
specified for each settlement or other location. The Council has prepared a Settlement 
Hierarchy Background Paper which assesses the level of services and facilities in each 
settlement. The Background Paper includes Tier 1: Larger Rural Settlements , which the 
Council considers could accommodate around 100 / 150 homes over the plan period; and Tier 
2: Smaller Rural Settlements which could accommodate around  50 homes over the plan  
period.     
Cross Cutting Themes In Chapter 6:  
Promoting Health and Wellbeing  
The levels of development proposed in the four Strategic Locations will result in the need for new 
infrastructure, together with the need to make the most efficient use of existing health services and 
other social infrastruc ture.  This investment must be co -ordinated with service providers and, where 
appropriate, funded by new development. The concentration on new development in the four 
Strategic Locations would contribute towards well -being, by developing new and maintainin g existing 
networks of green, open spaces.  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
69 Achieving Good Design  
It is essential that development in the Strategic Sites and Locations leads to the creation of places that 
are well designed, attractive to live and work  in; and that development is in keeping with the character 
of the area and also results in the maintenance and enhancement of Fylde’s built environment.  
Strategic Objectives  
The following five strategic objectives are achieved in the development of Strategic Locations for 
Development in Chapter 6.  
Objective 1 : To create sustainable communities  
Objective 2 : To maintain, improve and enhance the environment  
Objective 3 : To make services accessible  
Objective 4 : To diversify and grow the local economy  
Objective 5 : To develo p socially cohesive, safe, diverse and healthy communitiesFylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
70   Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
71 Chapter 7:  General Development Policies  
 
Settlement Boundaries  
7.1 Policies S1 and DLF1  in Chapter  5 provide the overarching settlement hierarchy and the 
Development Strategy, setting out the levels of development that will be permitted within the 
settlements in Fylde and in the Strategic Locations for Development. However, these policies 
do not specify the precise extent of the settlements. The existing settlement boundaries , as 
defined in the  Fylde Borough Local Plan (As Altered), October 2005  will, in most cases, 
continue to be the most appropriate for Fylde’s settlements. However, where strategic and 
non-strategic sites are allocated adjacent to existing settlements  - forming urban extension s - 
the settlement boundaries have been  amended  on the Policies Map  so as to include them 
within the settlement  boundary . 
 
Non -strategic Policy GD1  
Settlement Boundaries  
The boundaries of settlements in Fylde are shown on the Policies Map  including Inset Plans  and in 
Neighbourhood Development Plans where these have been made .   
Development proposals on sites within settlement boundaries will be assessed against all relevant 
Local Plan policies.   
Development proposals outside settlement boundaries will be in accordance with Policies GD2, 
GD3, GD4 and/or GD5 as applicable.  
 
 
Justification  
7.2 Under the Framework, land within settlements should generally be treated as suitable for 
development.  
7.3 Policy GD1  supports development of previously developed land within settlements, subject to 
other relevant Local Plan policies being sa tisfied. Greenfield land within settlements, which is 
not allocated for any specific use, will be subject to the relevant policies within this Local Plan. 
In addition, the following matters will also be taken into consideration:  
• The sustainability of the site, namely how well it relates to the settlement, and how easy 
it is to access the settlement centre and other local services on foot or by sustainable 
modes of transport ; 
• The extent of, and the likely impact upon the site’s vis ual, amenity, leisure, recreational, 
biodiversity value, tree cover; and the scope for effective mitigation measures;  
• Whether the site includes any best and most versatile agricultural land, and if so, whether 
the proposed development can be configured to minimise the loss or sterilisation of the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
72 agricultural land. The best and most versatile agricultural land is a finite  resource. Where 
significant development of agricultural land is demonstrated  to be necessary, areas of 
poorer quality land should be used in preference to that of  a higher quality.   
• Whether the site includes any mineral safeguarding area, and if so, whet her the proposed 
development can be configured to minimise the loss or sterilisation of the mineral 
resource;  
• Whether the proposal is at risk of flooding and / or will result in an increase in surface 
water run -off. This will be expected to be investigated  and confirmed as part of any 
planning application submission.   It will be necessary to attenuate any discharge of surface 
water through the incorporation of sustainable drainage systems (SuDS).  The preference 
will be for no surface water to discharge to the public sewer, directly or indirectly, if more 
sustainable alternatives are available.  
• The cumulative impact of successive development proposals in the same settlement, or 
in the same part of a settlement;  
• The scope for provision of community facilities , general improvements to the locality, or 
other community benefits;  
• The historic environment with particular reference to the contribution the site makes to 
the character and setting of the local area.  
Green Belt  
7.4 There is a hierarchy of designations on land outside settlement boundaries in Fylde, with the 
greatest level of protection offered to the Green Belt, followed by Areas of Separation and 
finally the Countryside.  All land outside settlement boundaries in Fy lde is within either the  
Green Belt or the Areas of Separation or the Countryside  .   
7.5 The Green Belt serves five purposes:  
• to check the unrestricted sprawl of large built -up areas;  
• to prevent neighbouring towns merging into one another;  
• to assist in s afeguarding the countryside from encroachment;  
• to preserve the setting and special character of historic towns; and  
• to assist in urban regeneration, by encouraging the recycling of derelict and other urban 
land. (The Framework)  
 
Strategic Policy GD2  
Green Belt  
The Green Belt within Fylde is  shown on the Policies Map .  Within that area national policy for 
development in the Green Belt will be applied.  
 Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
73 Justification  
7.6 There are four tracts of Green Belt within Fylde:  
a. between Kirkham and Freckleton;  
b. between Lytham and Warton;  
c. between St Annes and Squires Gate; and   
d. between Staining, Blackpool and Poulton -le-Fylde.   
No strategic review of the Green Belt within Fylde has been  undertaken when preparing the 
Local Plan.   
7.7 Inappropriate development in the Green Belt should not be approved  unless there are very 
special circumstances which justify an exception.  The Framework sets out the types of 
development that are considered to be exceptions to inappropriate development and those 
forms of development that are not inappropriate provided they preserve the openne ss of, and 
do not conflict with the purposes of including land within, the Green Belt . 
7.8  Policy  ENV3 , Protecting Existing Open Space (Part of the Green Infrastructure network) , sets 
out the positive community benefits the Green Belt can provide in terms  of landscape, 
amenity and open space.   
Areas of Separation  
7.9 In order to help maintain the openness of areas outside the Green Belt and the identity and 
distinctiveness of individual settlements, policy GD3  proposes that Areas of Separation are 
defined . An Area of Separation is different to Green Belt, and tends to be  of a significantly 
smaller scale and located between settlements  boundaries  that are relatively close and at risk 
of merging . 
 
Strategic Policy GD3  
Areas of Separation  
Areas of Separation shown on the Policies Map are designated between:  
• Kirkham and Newton; and 
• Wrea Green and Kirkham .  
Development will be assessed in terms of its impact upon the Area(s) of Separation, including any 
harm to the to the effectiveness  of the gap  between the settlements and, in particular, the degree 
to which the development proposed would compromise the func tion of the Area(s) of Separation 
in protecting the identity and distinctiveness of settlements.   Development will be limited to:  
a) that needed for purposes of agriculture, horticulture  or forestry; or other uses 
appropriate to a rural area, including uses which would help to diversify the rural 
economy, of a type and scale which would not harm the effectiveness of the gap 
between the settlements in protecting the identity and distinctiv eness of 
settlements;  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
74 b) the re -use or rehabilitation of existing permanent and substantial buildings;  
c) extensions to existing dwellings and other buildings in accordance with Policy H7;  
d) development essentially needed for the continuation of an exis ting enterprise, 
facility or operation, of a type and scale which would not harm the effectiveness of 
the gap between the settlements in protecting the identity and distinctiveness of 
settlements;  
e) isolated new homes in the countryside which meet the cri teria set out in Policy H6.  
f)           minor infill development, of a scale and use that does not have a material impact 
on the rural character of the area and does not conflict with the provisions of policy 
ENV3, providing that it would not result in an y harm to the effectiveness of the gap 
between the settlements or compromise the function of the Area(s) of Separation 
in protecting the identity and distinctiveness of settlements.  
Development that is needed for uses appropriate to a rural area situated w ithin the Area of 
Separation should be sited carefully to avoid harm to the effectiveness of the gap between the 
settlements in protecting the identity and distinctiveness of settlements.  
 
 
Justification    
7.10 An Area of Separation is designed to preserve the character and distinctiveness of individual 
settlements by restricting inappropriate development that would result in the coalescence of 
two distinct and separate settlements.  The Council considered the po tential to establish Areas 
of Separation in response to concerns that there was potential for settlements to merge 
without further protection. The Council produced the Area of Separation Background Paper 
(2014) which assessed potential Areas of Separation using the following criteria:  
• Distance between settlements or built -up areas (at narrowest point);  
• Current land use;  
• Landscape character;  
• Topography;  
• Development pressure;  
• Planning application history;  
• Local Plan designation; and  
• Other relevant designations.  
7.11 There is a narrow strip of land between the settlement boundaries of Wrea Green and 
Kirkham, measuring  313 metres at its narrowest point, which is recognised as an area valued 
locally as part of the Green Infrastructure network.  Similar ly, there is a narrow strip of land 
measuring 1,023 metres between Newton and Kirkham. In both cases, it has been 
demonstrated in the Area of Separation Background Paper that, having considered each area 
against the criteria, there is potential for the gap  between settlements to be compromised, 
which without protection would over time lead to the progressive coalescence of settlements 
leading to a loss of distinct identity. Consequently, t he policy identifies two Areas of Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
75 Separation, one between Wrea Green and Kirkham and the other between Kirkham and 
Newton.   
7.12 The Areas of Separation will be a focus for Green Infrastructure. So far as is consistent with 
the predominantly open and undeveloped character of the area, opportunities to improve 
public access and appropriate recreational uses will be supported.  Similarly, opportunities to 
conserve, restore , enhance and create  biodiversity and geodiversity value will be encouraged.  
Development in the Countryside  
7.13 It is important that the countryside  is protected from unacceptable development which would 
harm its rural character. The intrinsic value and rural character of the countryside of Fylde 
needs to be protected. However, certain forms of development are necessary to support rural 
life and maint ain or enhance the rural economy.  Policy GD4  defines the types of development 
which are acceptable in the countryside in appropriate circumstances.   
 
Strategic Policy GD4  
Development in the Countryside  
Development in the Countryside, shown on the Policies Map  including Inset Plans , will be  
permitted in the following circumstances :  
a) where it is needed for  the purposes of meeting local business and community needs ; for 
the purposes of agriculture, horticulture or forestry; or other uses appropriate to a rural 
area, including uses which would help to diversify the rural economy, including small -scale 
tourist accommodation, holiday caravan sites and very exceptionally, larger  scale tourism 
development . The development must be sensitive to its surroundings, must not have an 
unacceptable impact on local roads and should offer opportunities to make the location 
more sustainable (for example by improving the scope  for access on fo ot, by cycling or by 
public transport).   
b) the re -use or rehabilitation of existing permanent and substantial buildings;  
c)  extensions to existing dwellings and other buildings  in accordance with Policy H7; 
d) development essentially needed for the continuation of an existing enterprise, facility or 
operation, of a type and scale which would not harm the character of the surrounding 
countryside ; 
e)  isolated new homes in the countryside which meet the criteria set out in Policy H6; 
f) minor infill development ; 
g) entry -level exception sites for first -time buyers (or those looking to rent their own home) 
on land not  already allocated for housing which meets the criteria set out  in the Framework 
and Policy GD7.  
 
 
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
76 Justification  
7.14 The most appropriate  development permissible in the countryside will be for the purposes of 
meeting local business and community needs and for agricultural, horticultural or forestry 
purposes, where this is necessary for the efficient and effective running of the e nterprise.  
Development for community needs will relate to facilities such as local shops, meeting places, 
sports venues, open space, cultural buildings, public houses and places of worship. Some 
forms of tourism development are appropriate within the rura l areas, all of which are covered 
in Chapter 8.  
7.15 The re -use of substantial brick or stone buildings, which are structurally sound may be an 
appropriate way of preserving an important local feature in the landscape or providing for a 
rural use which ot herwise may have required a new building. Extensions  to existing homes 
and other non -residential buildings are also acceptable in principle, providing they do not 
prejudice the character of the countryside and are appropriately designed.  Minor infill 
development will be of a scale and use that does not have a material impact on the rural 
character of the area and does not conflict with the provisions of policy ENV3 . 
Large Developed Sites in the Countryside  and Green Belt  
7.16 There are a number of large developed sites in open land outside settlement boundaries’ 
within Fylde, such as Weeton Barracks Camp, HM Prison Kirkham  , Mill Farm Sports Village 
Wesham  and Ribby Hall Holiday Village.  There are also existing employment sites including 
the Laleham Health and Beauty  Factory at Greenhalgh, Helical Technologies Ltd at Hillock 
Lane, Warton, Westinghouse Springfields in  Salwick, and Naze Lane Industrial Estate at 
Freckleton.  Whethe r these premises are redundant, become redundant over the lifetime of 
the plan or are in continuing use, the complete or partial re -development of these sites may 
provide opportunities for environmental improvements and local employment in the rural 
areas.  The Council encourages such proposals, subject to the provisions of policy GD5  and 
other relevant policies in the Local Plan.  Applicants should be aware that redevelopment 
proposals in these locations can place different pressure on infrastructure.  It w ill be necessary 
to consider the impact of any redevelopment proposal on infrastructure as part of an 
application submission. It may be necessary to co -ordinate the delivery of development with 
the delivery / upgrading of infrastructure.   
 
Non -strategic Policy GD5  
Large Developed Sites in the Countryside  and Green Belt  
The large developed sites in the countryside are listed below and are identified on the Policies Map :  
• Laleham Health and Beauty  Factory at Greenhalgh;  
• Helical Technologies Ltd at Hillock Lane, Warton;  
• Westinghouse Springfields in  Salwick;  
• Naze Lane Industrial Estate at Freckleton;  
• Weeton Barracks Camp;  
• Mill Farm Sports Village, Fleetwood Road, Wesham; and  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
77 • Ribby Hall Holiday Village .  
The complete or partial redevelopment of these large developed sites in the countryside will be 
permitted subject to the following criteria:  
a) The proposal would not result i n harm  to the character, appearance or nature conservation 
value of land in the countryside , landscape setting, historic environment in comparison with 
the existing development, in terms of footprint, massing and height of the buildings;   
b) The proposal will not require additional expenditure by public authorities in relation to 
infrastructure and it can safely be served by existing or proposed means of access and the 
local road network;  
c) Proposals for partial re -development are put forward in the context of a comprehensive 
long term plan for the site as a whole;  
d) Proposed re -development can be safely and adequately served by existing or proposed 
means of access and the local road network  without adversely affecting highway safety ; 
e) Opportunities to improve public transport connections , and pedestrian and cycle links  are 
maximised; and  
f) Mixed use development is promoted on  all of  these sites.  
Her Majesty’s Prison Kirkham, which is situated wit hin the Green Belt, is also identified as a large 
developed site on the Policies Map .  Any development of or at this site will be required to be in 
accordance with the provisions of Policy GD2 . 
 
 
Justification  
7.17 It is important that re -development of existing or redundant large developed sites respect s 
the character of land in the countryside  or Green Belt land in which they are situated  or 
adjacent to ; together with the historic environment, in particular the contr ibution the site 
makes to character and setting of the local area and potential undesignated archaeological 
assets.   Policy GD5  relates only to the specific sites listed in the policy. Redevelopment of other 
sites within the Countryside, Green Belt or Areas of Separation, such as redundant farms or 
holiday caravan sites or parks, will be assessed against Policy GD2 , GD3  or GD4  as applicable, 
and any other relevant policies of the plan.  
Promoting Mixed Use Development  
7.18 Mixed use development  can include urban, suburban or rural development, that combines a 
mix of residential, commercial, cultural, institutional, leisure, educational, community, health 
or industrial uses, where those functions are physically and functionally integrated, and that 
provides pedestrian  and cycle  connections.  
7.19 Traditionally, settlements have developed in mixed use patterns. However, with 
industrialisation planning regulations were introduced to separate different functions, such as 
manufacturing, from residential areas.  Increasing car use has meant people commu te long 
distances to work.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
78 7.20 The benefits of mixed -use development include:  
a. The sustainability of the site, i.e. how well it relates to a settlement, and how easy 
it is to access the settlement centre  or local retail centre  and other local services 
on foot or by sustainable modes of transport;  
b. Greater housing variety and density;  
c. Reduced distances between housing, workplaces, retail businesses, schools and 
community facilities ; 
d. Stronger neighbourhood character;  
e. Pedestrian and cycle -friendly environment s;  
f. Reduction in car journeys; and  
g. Opportunities for home working.  
  
Strategic Policy GD6  
Promoting Mixed Use Development  
Mixed use development will be encouraged , particularly  on strategic sites . The mix of uses could 
include local retail centres , employment, commercial, leisure , community  and recreational  uses as 
well as residential .  The element of mixed use development will depend on the particular site and 
the character of the surrounding are a. 
Providing it does not undermine housing delivery,  mixed use development will be promoted where 
the following apply:  
a. Within an area where  the scale and character of uses is such that no single land use 
predominates. Residential, retailing, business, health, community, educational 
facilities, recreation, sport, open space and industrial uses may all be represented ; 
b. Where residential and commercial uses can be integrated within the same unit, creating 
flexible working practices and live / work units, or op portunities for home working ; or 
c. On Strategic Development Sites MUS1, MUS2, MUS3 and MUS4, and on other Strategic 
Development Sites where appropriate.  
  
 
Justification  
7.21 The Framework provides clear guidance in support of mixed use development.  Locally, the 
focus of development over the lifetime of the plan is within the four Strategic Locations for 
Development.  It is with the quantum of development in these locations th at the critical mass 
will be achieved to ensure that mixed use developments will be delivered, with homes being 
built close to where people work and shop and also seek ing a range of services.  Therefore, it 
is intended that all development on sites where a ny of criteria a. to c. in Policy GD6  apply 
should include an element of mixed use. The Framework  contains a particular Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
79 recommendation for live / work.  It says that when drawing up local plans, councils should 
“allow for new and flexible working practices  (such as live -work accommodation) ” (the 
Framework).  
Achieving Good Design in Development  
7.22 The importance of high quality  design is integral to the Local Plan and is therefore central to 
the planning of all development.  This is crucial in Fylde, especially in the seaside resorts of 
Lytham and St Annes, both of which developed in the Victorian and Edwardian era - an era 
that is now recognised as producing high quality architecture. The high quality of design in the 
Borough is fundamental in attracting people to live in Fylde, for businesses to invest in the 
area and it also increases its popularity for tourism.   
7.23 Good des ign can deliver wider economic, environmental and social benefits. Therefore, it is 
not just an issue of visual appearance but how design can contribute to the way in which an 
area functions in the short term and also over the lifetime of the development. On that basis, 
the Council considers that to achieve high quality, sustainable design proposals must:  
a. Respond positively to their context and setting , including reinforcing local identity and 
character ;  
b. Address the connections between people and places;  
c. Be physically, functionally and economically integrated into their existing 
environment in a positive and inclusive manner;  
d. Be integral to creating safe, accessible and inclusive environments; and  
e. Reduce the impact of the development on the natural envir onment  and enhancing 
biodiversity .  
7.24 It is important that new developments take account of layout, scale, landscaping and 
accessibility in order to be sympathetic to their location, as well as enhancing the area where 
previous opportunities may have be en missed. The design of streets, incorporation of Green 
Infrastructure and the wider public realm can further encourage community cohesion, 
identity and pride. The six design principles are set out below.  
7.25 Design Principles  
a. Movement and Legibility : A place that is easy to get to and move through by  sustainable 
modes of transport and is easy to understand.  
b. Space and Enclosure : A place with attractive, sustainable and successful outdoor areas 
where public and private s paces are clearly dist inguished.  
c. Mix of Uses and Tenures : A development that promotes a variety and choice in terms of 
uses and ownerships in response to local needs.  
d. Adaptability and Resilience : A development that can adapt and respond to changing 
economic, social and technolo gical conditions.  
e. Resources and Efficiency : A development that contributes to tackling climate change and 
adapting to and mitigating its effect s both in its construction and operation.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
80 f. Architecture and Townscape : A development that responds positively to i ts surrounding 
environment through its external appearance and form.  
Design and Access Statements and Planning Applications  
7.26 The majority of planning applications  are required to include a Design and Access statement 
in support of the proposed development. The information provided should be proportionate 
to the type and scale of development proposed. The requirements of a Design and Access 
statement are set out in the Planning Practice Guidance .  
 
Figure 2: Design and Access Statements – 10 Pointers to good practice  
1. Show your thinking.  
2. Prepare the design statement as part of the pre -application process rather than 
commissioning  a consultant to prepare it in isolation.  
3. Start writing the statement at the start of the process.  
4. A design statement should form part of an audit trail of the design and approval process.  
5. Think of the statement as a process, not a product.  
6. Make sure the statement is appropriate in length; neither too long, irrelevant and 
confusing , nor too short and formulaic.  
7. Design statements should be read, not weighted.  
8. Pictures should be annotated or have a caption.  They should not just be wallpaper.  
9. Design statements should expose designs which are ill considered or inappropriate to the 
particular site and area.  
10. A good design statement cannot justify poor quality design.  
From Urban Design Group data sheet:  http://www.neighbourhood -design.org/publications/udg -publication/design -access -
statements -explained    
7.27 Where the application is in outline, the information provided in the Design and Access 
statement should be sufficient to explain and justify the concepts for the scheme without the 
need for further information at reserved matters stage. This is to ensure the full impact of the 
propos al could be properly assessed at the outline stage.  
7.28 It is also important that new development mitigates against and adapts to the effects of 
climate change through its design.  
  
Strategic Policy GD7  
Achieving Good Design in Development  
Design and Access Statements  
Where required, all development proposals s hould be accompanied by a Design and Access 
Statement that fully explains and justifies the design approach for the scheme.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
81 General Principles of good design  
Development will be expected to be of  a high standard of design, taking account of the character 
and appearance of the local area, including the following  requirements :  
a) In order to promote community cohesion and inclusivity, new development will be 
expected to deliver mixed uses, strong neig hbourhood centres and active street frontages 
which bring together all those who live, work and play in the vicinity.  
b) Ensuring densities of new residential development reflect and wherever possible enhance 
the local character of the surrounding area.  
c) Ensu ring that amenity will not be adversely affected by neighbouring uses, both existing 
and proposed.  
d) Ensuring t he siting, layout, massing, scale, design, materials, architectural character, 
proportion, building to plot ratio and landscaping of the proposed d evelopment , relate well 
to the surrounding context . 
e) Taking account of landform, layout, building orientation, massing and landscaping to 
minimise energy consumption.  
f) Conserving and enhancing the built and historic environment.  
g) Applying Secured  by Design pr inciples to all new developments.  
h) Being sympathetic to surrounding land uses and occupiers, and avoiding demonstrable 
harm to the visual amenities of the local area.  
i) Taking the opportunity to make a positive contribution to the character and local 
distinct iveness of the area through high quality new design that responds to its context  and 
using sustainable natural resources where appropriate . 
j) Ensuring parking areas for cars, bicycles and motorcycles are safe, accessible and 
sympathetic to the character of the surrounding area and that highway safety is not 
compromised.  
k) Ensuring the layout, design and landscaping of all elements of the proposal,  including any 
internal roads, pedestrian footpaths, cycleways and open spaces,  create user friendly, 
sustainable and inclusive connections between people and places resulting in the 
integration of the new development into the built and historic environmen t. 
l) Creating safe  and accessible environments where crime and disorder, and the fear of crime, 
do not undermine quality of life or community cohesion, and there are clear and legible 
pedestrian and cycle routes and high quality public space, which encourage s the active and 
continual use of public areas  and which promote health and wellbeing . 
m) Protecting existing landscape features and natural assets as an integral part of the 
development ; requiring multi -functional green infrastructure to be integrated into u rban 
areas; providing enhancements to open spaces to encourage people to use them ; 
protecting and enhancing habitats ; providing open spaces and linkages to the wider 
ecological networks  as part of the Green Infrastructure network ; and enhancing the public 
realm.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
82 n) Making provision for the needs of specific groups in the community such as the elderly and 
those with disabilities, in line with the Equalities Act.  
o) All new housing developments should result in a high standard of amenity for occupiers. 
The standar d of amenity for occupiers should not be compromised by inadequate space, 
poor layout, poor or lacking outlook or inconvenient arrangements for waste, access or 
cycle storage. Developments should include adequate outside amenity space for the needs 
of resi dents. New homes designed specifically to accommodate the elderly should comply 
with optional standard M4(3 (2a)) in accordance with policy H2.  
p) Ensuring that the quality of approved development is not materially diminished between 
permission and completion.  
Highway Safety  
q) The needs of non -motorised users, such as pedestrians and cyclists, should be prioritised 
over other road users, through design measures.  
r) The development should not prejudice highway safety, pedestrian safety, and the efficient 
and convenient movement of all highway users (including bus passengers, cyclists, 
pedestrians and horse riders) .  The development  should not reduce the number of on -site 
parking spaces available, unless there are other material considerations which justify the 
reduction.   
s) All development proposals will need to show that  appropriate provision is made for public 
transport services; appropriate measures are provided to f acilitate access on cycle or foot; 
where practicable, ensure existing pedestrian, cycle and equestrian routes are protected 
and extended; and the needs of specific groups in the community such as the elderly and 
those with disabilities are fully provided f or. 
Climate Change  
t) Development proposals should consider measures to mitigate the effects of climate change 
by the incorporation of energy and water efficiency in new and existing buildings, ‘grey’ 
water and rainwater harvesting and storage for waste and r ecyclables.  
u) Adaptation to climate change should be achieved through the design and orientation of 
buildings to maximise solar gain, provide shelter from the elements and take advantage of 
natural light and ventilation.  
Existing Land Uses  
v) The development sh ould not prejudice or prevent the operation of existing land uses.  
Public Realm  
w) The public realm should be designed appropriately, to reflect the quality of the area 
including landscaping, street furniture and materials, and developments should be 
appropriately managed and maintained so that they add to the character, quality and 
distinctiveness of the surrounding area.  
 
 Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
83 Public Open Space (the Green Infrastructure network)  
x) New public open space should be provided in a single central useable facility where 
possible, which is accessible, of high quality and good design, be visible, safe, using quality 
materials, including facilities for a range of ages and incorporating long t erm maintenance; 
unless it is agreed by the Council that provision is more appropriate off -site.  
Advertisements  
y) Advertisement designs should respect the character and architectural details of the 
buildings and location within which they are proposed, and t heir surroundings, in terms of 
scale, details, siting and method of illumination.  
Flood Risk  
z) Inappropriate development in Flood Risk Zones 2 and 3 will not be permitted.  
Waste Management  
aa) Local waste management facilities and neighbourhood waste management facilities for the 
separation, storage and collection of waste should be provided to increase the efficiency of 
its subsequent re -use, recycling and treatment. Sufficient space should be provided at all 
new homes for the storage of wheelie bins and recycling boxes.  
 
 
Justification  
7.29 The Framework stresses that great importance should be given to the design of the built 
environment. Policy GD7  sets out a series of criteria relating to different aspects of design. 
These are well understood principles which derive from the wider princip les of sustainable 
development, such as the drive to a low -carbon future, conservation of the natural 
environment, promoting sustainable economic development and the creation of sustainable 
communities in healthy environments.  
7.30 The need for development  to respect local character is a key principle of policy GD7 , which 
applies to all developments. Where the local environment is poor, good building design helps 
to enhance its identity and sense of place, as well as increasing local pride in an area.  The 
Council is preparing a Good Design SPD, which sets out best practice for new developments 
and works within conservation areas. The St. Anne ’s Town Council prepared a comprehensive 
Design Guide to accompany the St. Anne ’s on the Sea NDP. It is the Counc il’s intention to 
adopt this Design Guide as a part of the Good Design SPD.  
7.31 To ensure that safe and convenient access is afforded to everyone, new  developments 
should reduce rather than increase the dependence on private cars.   
7.32 Whilst much atte ntion is usually given to road improvements to cope with additional traffic, 
it is important that other modes of transport are taken into account when dealing with 
planning applications for new development, if car use is to be reduced.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
84 7.33 It is a nationa l requirement that councils adopt policies that seek to mitigate against and adapt 
to climate change.  Policy GD7  includes measures to achieve this through the design of new 
development and the use of natural resources.  
7.34 Mandatory housing standards are  applied through the Building Regulations.  Applicants will 
need to be aware of these requirements when designing development proposals.  In addition 
optional technical standards may be applied if there is evidence of need.  In this case there is 
evidence to support the application of optional technical standard M4(3 (2a)) which is referred 
to in criterion o. of Policy GD7  and Policy H2.  The application of this standard will be secured 
through planning conditions.  
Public Realm  
7.35 The public realm generally includes the spaces and the buildings surrounding them but in this 
context, is generally taken to be the publicly accessible parts of the environment, physically 
and / or visually.  
7.36 In designing the public realm, the most appropriate materials and street furniture should  be 
used, consistent with available resources. Fylde Council intends to develop a ‘public  realm  
code’ manual that will identify a specification for the various element s of the public realm 
including street furniture, landscaping, and materials and an inventory with agreed 
maintenance schedules put in place. This practice would represent a good means of auditing 
the quality of the public  realm and agreed actions from the  various partners involved would 
highlight what is required to maintain it to an appropriate standard. This initiative would 
involve working alongside  LCC as the highway authority.  
Demonstrating Viability  
7.37  A number of  Local Plan policies seek to maintain particular uses of land, for example 
employment uses on employment sites, retail units in town centres, or agricultural buildings 
in the countryside. However, these policies allow for changes of use in some cases, prov ided 
it is robustly demonstrated by the applicant that to maintain the former use is no longer 
viable. The purpose of this policy is to set out a range of parameters that will enable the 
Council to make a fair and robust assessment of whether there is a ju stifiable case for 
whatever change of use is proposed.  
7.38  In addition, any policy of this nature must accord with Government policy which requires 
councils to be proactive in terms of development proposals and to approve planning 
applications wherever p ossible, unless the proposal is contrary to other local or national policy 
objectives.  
Strategic Policy GD8  
Demonstrating Viability  
The Council will seek to retain existing commercial / industrial (B1, B2 or B8)  (Policies EC1 and EC2) 
and leisure uses, i ncluding land / premises, together with agricultural / horticultural workers' homes  
(Policy H6) and the tourism use of premises in Holiday Areas  (Policies EC6 and EC7) identified on the 
Policies Map  including Inset Plans , unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Council 
that one of the following tests has been met:  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
85 a) the continued use of the site / premises for its existing use is no longer viable in terms of 
the building age and format and that it is not co mmercially viable to redevelop the land or 
refurbish the premises for its existing use. In these circumstances, and where appropriate, 
it will also need to be demonstrated that there is no realistic prospect of a mixed -use 
development for the existing use and a compatible use; or  
b) the land / premises is / are no longer suitable for the existing use when taking into account 
access / highway issues (including public transport), site location, business practices, 
infrastructure, physical constraints, environme ntal considerations and amenity issues.  The 
compatibility of the existing use with adjacent uses may also be a consideration; or  
c) marketing of the land / property indicates that there is no demand for the land / property 
in its existing use.   
Details of t he current occupation of the buildings, and where this function would be relocated, will 
also be required.  
Where the existing use is no longer considered viable by the Council and a mixed -use scheme is also 
not viable or appropriate, the Council will pref erentially seek the following  alternative uses prior to 
consideration of a market housing -led scheme:  
• For existing retail uses  (A1), an alternative use that helps create or maintain the vitality of 
a town, district or local centre; and  
• For existing agricultural / horticultural workers' homes, for affordable housing, except when 
located in an isolated rural location.  
Marketing  
Where an application relies upon a marketing exercise to demonstrate that there  is no demand for 
the land / premises in its current use, the applicant will be  expected to submit evidence to 
demonstrate that the marketing was adequate  and that no reasonable  offers were refused. This will 
include evidence  demonstrating that:  
i) The marketing has been undertaken by an agent or surveyor at a price which reflects 
the current market or rental value of the land / premises for its current use and that no 
reasonable of fer has been refused.  
ii) The land / premises has been marketed, as set out in iii) below, fo r an appropriate 
period of time , which will usually be 12 months or 6 m onths for retail premises.  
iii) The land / premises has / have been frequently advertised and targete d at the 
appropriate  audience.  Consideration will be given to the nature and frequency of 
advertisements in the local press, regional press, property press or specialist trade 
papers etc; whether the land / premises has / have been continuously included o n the 
agent’s website and agent’s own papers / lists of premises; the location of 
advertisement boards; whether there have been any mail shots or contact with local 
property agents, specialist commercial agents and local businesses; and with regards to 
com mercial / industrial property, whether it has been recorded on the Council’s sites 
and premises search facility.   Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
86 In certain cases, for example, where a significant departure from policy is proposed, the Council 
may seek to independently verify the submit ted evidence, and the applicant will be required to bear 
the cost of independent verification.   
 
 
Justification  
7.39 The Ministerial Statement which emerged at the end of March 201 2, along with the 
Framework, have made it clear that the Government’s policy will focus on facilitating 
development and new jobs in sustainable locations and generally on encouraging more 
residential development, including on vacant employment sites. The ai m of these changes is 
to enable the delivery of much needed housing and ensure the effective use of previously 
developed land, including employment sites where they are no longer considered 
economically viable.  
7.40 It is important that the Council has a r obust policy in place to respond to this change in 
emphasis. However, that is not to say that the Council should freely permit a change of use. 
Whilst the Council wishes to ensure that there is provision of a wide selection of business / 
retail space and t hat viable and suitable sites for such uses should be retained, it is accepted 
that leaving land vacant or underused is not an efficient use of land and should be avoided if 
an appropriate alternative use can be considered.  
7.41 Accordingly, those circumst ances where it will be appropriate to support alternative uses are 
outlined in the policy, which broadly aims to acknowledge those situations where it would be 
unproductive to protect land / premises for the current use. For example, where a site or 
premis es has remained empty or vacant for a period of time, despite active marketing or it is 
no longer suited for the needs of the existing use or user.  
7.42 Where the existing use is no longer considered viable, regard should be had as to whether:  
a. a mixed -use scheme involving the existing use is viable and then;  
b. whether for existing retail premises or agricultural / horticultural workers' homes, 
an alternative use that meets a similar need or purpose as the existing use (as set 
out in the policy above) is vi able.  
c. If these alternative uses have been proven to not be viable, market housing will 
be considered as a final alternative use. The affordable housing requirements of 
policy H4 will apply to market housing developments that ultimately emerge from 
this process, regardless of the previous use of the land / building.  
Contaminated Land   
7.43 The following policy focusses on contaminated land constraints. Such constraints should not 
be seen as a barrier to development but should be overcome to bring forward any affected 
previously developed land for appropriate use whilst dealing safely with an y identified 
hazards.   
 Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
87 Non -strategic Policy GD9  
Contaminated Land  
There will be a presumption in favour of the re -development of previously developed land.  
Previously developed land can be subject to contamination. However, development will be 
encourage d on contaminated previously developed land subject to all of the following criteria being 
met:  
a) Applicants will be required to provide evidence of a satisfactory site investigation and show 
that any proposed remedial works are adequate to deal with any ide ntified hazards, 
including  the risk to human health and controlled waters from land contamination. Any 
remedial work should be undertaken to the satisfaction of the local authority, ahead of the 
commencement of development;  
b) Development should not have an a dverse impact on the stability of surrounding areas; and  
c) Applicants will be required to provide details of remedial and mitigation measures to 
protect the high levels of biodiversity value on contaminated land and to protect   
conservation and heritage ass ets on the site.  
 
 
Justification  
7.44 Contaminated land can include land previously used for industry or landfill sites. A major 
problem associated with contaminated land is the possible migration of methane from landfill 
sites. This should be remedied before development begins on or adjacent to the site.  
7.45 The disturbance of contaminated land can also mobilise pollutants and either cause first time 
pollution or worsen existing problems. Leakages and drainage from contaminated land sites 
pose  serious risks of major pollution to both rivers and groundwater. Development proposals 
for land that is, or is potentially unstable , should address the physical capability of the land, 
the adverse effects of instability on the development, or of adjoining  development on 
unstable land, and the effects of both on  local amenities and conservation interests of the 
development and any remedial measures. The scale of the constraint should not be seen as a 
deterrent where there are appropriate remedial measures a vailable.  
 
Cross Cutting Themes In Chapter 7:  
Promoting Health and Wellbeing  
A high quality built environment, good design which facilitates walking and cycling , has a positive 
effect on a community’s health and wellbeing.  Green Infrastructure can help make space for nature 
in urban areas, promote better health and affect people’s sense of wellbeing, defining how they feel 
about the places where they live.  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
88 Achieving Good Design  
The high quality design of new buildings,  mixed use developments  and the creation or enhancement 
of the existing Green Infrastructure  network  will enhance the character of the built and natural 
environment, ensuring effective place sha ping across Fylde.  It is essential that development is in 
keeping with the character of the area and also results in the maintenance and enhancement of 
Fylde’s built environment.  
Strategic Objectives  
The following strategic objective is achieved in Chapter 7 
Objective 1 : To create sustainable communities  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
89 Chapter 8: The Fylde Economy  
 
The Economy and Employment Land  
8.1 The preservation and development of a strong, vibrant and sustainable economy is a high 
priority within this Local Plan and Strategic Objective 4 is to diversify and grow the local 
economy.  
8.2 Manufacturing accounts for over 30% of employment in Fylde, wi th advanced manufacturing 
a particular strength through aerospace and nuclear fuels processing. The area also contains 
development orientated service sectors, such as computer and business services, alongside 
the traditionally strong sectors of tourism, ag riculture and the rural economy.  
8.3 Since 1999 Fylde has experienced economic growth of 12.7% exceeding national and regional 
comparisons over this period. This highlights Fylde as an area of opportunity, development 
and growth, particularly in compariso n to other districts within Lancashire and the North 
West. Unemployment is currently low, with a claimant count rate of 1.1%. The Borough has 
lower levels of deprivation overall than the Lancashire average, although there are small 
pockets of relatively hi gh deprivation, these tend to be concentrated near the boundary with 
Blackpool and in St Annes town centre.  
8.4 Fylde is one of the most affluent areas of Lancashire, distinguished by its quality of life and 
diversity of its rural and coastal environment.  According to the Annual Survey of Hours and 
Earnings, wage levels are high, exceeding national averages for both residence and work place 
earnings, with Fylde recording the highest workplace wages in Lancashire, probably due to the 
presence of large high value employers, such as BAE Systems at Warton. Fylde's affluence is 
reflected in the third highest average gross household income in Lancashire and is well above 
the Lancashire average.  
8.5 The three authorities of Fylde, Wyre and Blackpool comprise the Fylde Coast Sub -region, with 
strong commuting flows (i.e. travel to work area) between the three areas which defines a 
vibrant, inter -dependent employment market. Strategic employment sites within Fylde 
Borough, such as the Enterprise Zone at BAE Systems, Warton  and Blackpool Airport EZ  could 
provide extensive employment opportunities and support development in other parts of the 
Fylde  Coast . Employment opportunities could be opened up further to local people through 
well-planned public transport / sustainable travel options.  
Assisted Area Status  
8.6 There are two wards included within an Assisted Area in Fylde. The Assisted Area comprises 
the wards of : 1) Warton and Westby and 2) St Leonard’s . The Assisted Area is  based upon a 
map drawn up and agreed between the UK Government and the European Commission. The 
map has now been formally approved by the European Commission and it runs from 1 Jul y 
2014 until 31 December 2020.  The Assisted Area is an area whe re regional aid can be offered 
to undertakings, typically businesses, under Commission state aid rules. The Regional Growth 
Fund  supports projects and programmes within the Assisted Area that are using private sector 
investment to create economic growth and sustainable employment.  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
90 Fylde Coast Energy Hub  
8.7 Blackpool, Fylde and Wyre Economic Prosperity Board was established in 20 18 as the 
successor to the Blackpool Fylde and Wyre Economic Development Company . It is operated  
by the three Fylde Coast Authorities (Blackpool, Fylde and Wyre), with members  from the 
public and private sectors.  The development of a diverse Fylde Coast Energy Sector has been 
identified as one of the six key priority areas. The application for EZ status at Blackpool Airport 
was co -ordinated by the EDC. The EZ became operational from 1st April 2016 and will continue  
until 2040 . The Blackpool Airport Enterprise Zone will become a centre of excellence for the 
energy sector . Central to this is  a new Energy HQ, a dedicated new training facility developed 
by Blackpool and Fylde College . It has been backed by a £6.2 millio n Growth Deal funding, and 
aims to provide job -ready students in engineering and advanced technology. A two storey 
college building  has been completed and occupied  at the site of the former airport terminal 
building. Courses commenced in September 2017. This development will support energy 
businesses on the Fylde Coast.     
The Fylde Employment Land and Premises Study , 2012  
8.8 The Fylde Employment Land and Premises Study , published in August 2012, provides a 
comprehensive assessment of the local economy.  The study bases the requirement for Fylde’s 
future employment land on the evidence of annual average take -up rate experienced by Fylde 
Council  since 1989.  This is considered to be a long term trend.  If lo ng term trends continue, 
the study recommends that Fylde Council  will need to cater for an expected annual take -up 
of 2.7 Ha  rolled forward  to the end of the Local Plan period.  This historic take -up figure has  
subsequently been monitored up to a base date of 31 March 2015 and it has also  been 
corrected to exclude sui generis  development. Consequently, the annual average take -up rate 
of 2. 22 Ha for Fylde results in a requirement of 46.6  Ha for the plan period.    
8.9  In addition to identifying a quantum of land required, the Study includes a number of key 
recommendations and identifies potential areas of search. The recommendations of this study 
have regard to the Framework. Of particular significance is the fact that the study 
recommends the protection of t he identified current land supply that is not the subject of 
existing consents for alternative uses.  
8.10 The study  identified the most appropriate broad locations for future employment land 
provision. If Fylde Council  is to strive towards delivering a balanced employment land 
portfolio, it needs to  provide for different types  / sectors of employment development.  
Overa ll Provision  of employment land   
8.11 Fylde is in need of further opportunities to meet employment land requirements up to 2032.  
The amount and type of employment land required to promote the economic health of the 
area and support , therefore the supply of job opportunities for its residents is addressed by 
policy EC1.  In doing so, it is recognised that Blackpool functions within the wider Fylde Coast 
Sub-Region employment market and the future employment forecasts for Fylde cannot be met 
in isolation without also jointly considering the requirements for the Sub -Region.  It is 
acknowledged that Blackpool’s administrative area is characterised by a tightly constrained 
boundary.  Discussions between Blackpool and Fylde Councils have identified tha t Blackpool 
Council requires Fylde  Council  to provide 14Ha of employment land within Fylde Borough, to 
meet Blackpool’s requirement up to 2027.  This requirement will be added to the Fylde Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
91 employment land requirement of 46.6  Ha.  Consequently, this results  in a combined 
requirement of employment land for Fylde and Blackpool, for the plan period , of 60.6  Ha. 
8.12 Between April 2011 and March 201 5, 3.0 Ha of business and industrial land was developed in 
Fylde .  A further  11.0  Ha of business and industrial lan d either had planning permission or was 
under construction.  Between April 2011 and March 2015, 15.3 Ha of land was lost to business 
and industrial use.  Consequently, this results in an adjusted  requirement for employment 
land in Fylde, up to 2032, of  62.0 Ha as summarized in table 2 below . 
 
Table 2: Business and Industrial Land Requirement  
(April 2015 – March  2032)   
 Hectares  
 i) Business and Industrial Land Requirement 2011 -2032  60.6  
 ii) Land developed 2011 -2015  3.0 
 iii) Land under construction  2.0 
 iv) Land with planning permission  8.9 
iv) Land lost to business and industrial use (2011 -2015)  15.3  
  
Adjusted business and industrial land requirement  
60.6 - (3.0 + 2.0 + 8.9) + 15.3   
62.0 
 
Strategic Policy EC1  
Overall Provision of Employment Land and Existing Employment Sites  
The Local Plan provides sites for 62 ha of new employment land to be delivered during the plan 
period.  Thefollowing sites are allocated and identified on the Policies Map  including Inset Plans  
acco mpanying  this plan . 
Site Area (Ha)  Appropriate Use Classes  
ES1 Queensway Industrial Estate, 
Snowden Road, St Annes  3.8 B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  
ES2 Dock Road, Lytham  0.9 B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  
ES3 Boundary Road, Lytham  0.7 B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  
MUS3  Mill Farm Sports Village, 
Fleetwood Road, Wesham (mixed use: 
employment and leisure)   1.1 B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8 and 
(D2)  
ES4 Blackpool and Fylde Industrial 
Estate, Whitehills  2.4 B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
92 ES5 Blackpool Airport  Enterprise Zone , 
Squires Gate  14.5 B1(a), B1 (b), B1 (c), B2, B8  
(to be determined through a 
masterplan for the 
Enterprise Zone)     
ES6 DWP , Brunel Way, Whitehills  4.9 B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  
ES7 Whitehills Business Park, 
Whitehills  5.6 B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  
MUS1  Cropper Road East, Whitehills 
(mixed use: housing and employment)  5.7 B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  
MUS2  Whyndyke Garden Village , 
Preston New Road, Whitehills (mixed 
use: housing and employment)  20.0   B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  
ES8 Naze Lane, Freckleton  2.4 B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2  
Total  62.0 Ha  
 
Appropriate uses for each site are listed in the table above. In these locations, development 
proposals for alternative uses to those listed above will be resisted, unless it is demonstrated to the 
satisfaction of the Council that  there is no reasonable pr ospect of the site being used for the 
specified purposes , having satisfied the tests of Policy GD8 . Proposals for alternative uses will also 
have to satisfy the requirements of other policies of the Plan, in particular Policy GD7 . 
Existing Employment Sites  
Within the existing business and industrial areas,  listed below,  land and premises will be retained  
within the acceptable use classes shown in the table below, unless it is demonstrated to the 
satisfaction of the Council that  there is no reasonable prospe ct of the site being used for those 
purposes , having satisfied the tests of Policy GD8 . Proposals for alternative uses will also have to 
satisfy the requirements of other policies of the Plan, in particular Policy GD7 . 
Site Appropriate Use Classes  
Queensway Industrial Estate, Snowden Road, 
St Annes  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  
Blackpool Airport, Squires Gate  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  
Scafell Road, Snowden Road / Everest Road, 
St Annes  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  
Preston Road, Lytham  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
93 Dock Road, Lytham  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  
Boundary Road, Lytham  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  
Naze Lane, Freckleton  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  
Kirkham Trading Park, Kirkham  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  
Progress Mill, Orders Lane, Kirkham  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  
Marquis Street / Richard Street, Kirkham  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  
Whitworth Street, Wesham  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  
Westinghouse  Springfield , Salwick  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  
BAE Systems , Warton  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  
Blackpo ol and Fylde Industrial Estate, 
Whitehills  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  
Whitehills Park, Whitehills  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  
AXA / AEGON Offices, Ballam Road, Lytham  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c)  
Jubilee House, Lytham  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c)  
St George’s Park, Kirkham  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B8  
Fairfield Research Station, Greenhalgh  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c)  
Former RAF Camp, Hillock Lane, Warton  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c)  
Land Registry, Warton  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c)  
Brook Mill, Station Road, Wrea Green  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  
Clifton Marsh Depot, Clifton  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  
Mill Farm, Wesham  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B8  
Wareing’s  Site, Blackpool Road, Kirkham   B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8  
Peel Hall Business Village, Westby  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B8  
Braithwaites Yard Business Park, Warton  B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B8  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
94 Mythop Lodge, Weeton with Preese  B8 
Freckleton Boatyard, Freckleton  B1(c), B8  
Dingle Farm Rural Business Park, Newton  B1(c), B8  
 
 
Justification  
8.13 The employment land requirement and specific sites need to be allocated and brought 
forward through policies in th is Local Plan.   In maximising the Borough’s economic potential, 
consideration has been given to potential  employment land being accessible by public 
transport; environmental impact; viability (in terms of market demand); and proximity  to 
population centres.  Policies for employment land are flexible to accommodate the needs of 
indigenous business expansion and potential investment to the area.  In order to promote 
sustainable and integrated development, some of the employment land allocations identified 
in Policy EC1 are referred to as mixed use sites.  These sites form part of the portfolio of 
Strategic  and No n-Strategic  Locations for Development which are addressed in more detail in 
Chapter s 5 and 6. 
8.14 Sustainable economic growth and expansion of all types of business and enterprise in rural 
areas is supported, provided it accords with other policies within the Local Plan.  
8.15 Given that Blackpool, Fylde and Wyre function within the Fylde Coast Sub -Region employment 
market, and t he position of ‘constraint’ currently faced by Blackpool in allocating further 
employment land within its own bound ary, part of its requirement will be met on land in Fylde 
Borough.  The locally -determined targets, calculated by Fylde Council for Fylde and by 
Blackpool Council for Blackpool, will be met as sustainably as possible, while delivering jobs, 
in the right se ctors and in the right locations.  It is important to ensure that employment uses 
are maximized at Whyndyke Garden Village and Cropper Road East, Whitehills to capitalise on 
their location close to Junction 4 of the M55, within the Fylde -Blackpool Periphery  Strategic 
Location for Development .  
8.16 Blackpool Airport Enterprise Zone (Site ES5) is allocated in Policy EC1 to provide 14.5 Ha of 
additional land in the employment uses listed in the policy for that site. The precise mix of 
uses will be determined t hrough the Masterplan. By contrast, the Lancashire Advanced 
Engineering and Manufacturing Enterprise Zone at BAE Systems Warton, is listed in Policy EC1 
as an existing employment site. This is previously -developed land, contained within the 
existing BAE Sy stems site. Policies EC3 and EC4 provide further clarification as to the 
development that may be brought forward at each site.  
8.17 The appropriate uses identified in policy EC1 are intended to provide for the development 
needs of business and industry. The Council will resist proposals which seek to reduce the 
supply of land for business and industrial use.  However, the Framework makes it quite clear 
that planning policies and decisions need to reflect changes in the demand for land.  
Performance Monitoring Indicator 5, in Appendix 8, sets out a target / policy outcome 
recording the cumulative take -up of land for employment development from 1 April 2011 in 
relation to  the plan pe riod requirement of 60.6 Ha. 
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
95 Existing Employment Sites  
8.18 The boundaries of the existing business and industrial areas  have been updated, along with 
sites that have become employment related uses since the start of the Plan period on 1 April 
2011 and they are referenced in Appendix 6 and are shown on the Policies Map  including 
Inset Plans . A flexible approach will be take n with regard to existing employment sites such 
that appropriate enabling development will be supported, in order to retain employment uses 
on these sites. The Westinghouse Springfield s, Salwick site will be subject to activities 
associated with the proces sing of materials and wastes from nuclear fuel fabrication and 
decommissioning of redundant facilities. These activities could fall outside the Use Classes 
specified in Policy EC1. 
Managing Development of Employment Land  
8.19 The Council recognises that, in addition to the locations referred to in policy EC1, there will be 
instances where proposals for business and industrial development come forward in other 
locations.  The factors which should be addressed when considering such a proposa l include 
the character and amenity of surroundings and the nature of the business proposed. Policy 
GD7 : Achieving Good Design in Development, in Chapter 7, will apply.  
 
Strategic Policy EC2  
Employment Opportunities  
The availability of land in the Borough  for employment opportunities is limited.  Therefore, the 
Council seeks to retain continued employment use of current employment sites. This could include 
any type of employment use, including agriculture, and may not be restricted to B1, B2 and B8 land 
uses.  
Land and premises will be retained in employment uses unless it is demonstrated to the satisfaction 
of the Counci l that there is no reasonable prospect of the site being used for those purposes, having 
satisfied the tests of Policy GD8 . Proposals for alternative uses will also have to satisfy the 
requirements of other policies of the Plan, in particular Policy GD7 . 
The Council will take account of the following factors when assessing all development proposals for 
employment uses:  
a. The accommodation should be flexible and suitable to meet changing future employment 
needs, and in particular provide for the requirements o f local businesses and small firms.  
b. The Council will seek to ensure that employment opportunities are provided and are easily 
accessible for local people and, where necessary, developers will be encouraged to 
implement relevant training programmes.  
In order to support economic growth and expansio n, the Council endorses the roll -out of high speed 
broadband in line with the Lancashire Broadband Plan.  
The sustainable growth and expansion of all types of business is supported where this is in 
accordance with other policies in the Local Plan.  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
96 Justi fication  
8.20 Policy EC2 applies to all development proposals for employment uses. It applies to the 
development of employment land in the locations referred to in policy EC1 and elsewhere in 
the Borough.  Particular regard is to be had to how well an employment development can b e 
integrated into its surroundings without causing unacceptable harm to the area’s amenity.  
8.21 Employment opportunities are a finite resource and once lost to non -employment use, 
particularly residential use, they are unlikely to return to employment use . Therefore there is 
a policy presumption to retain employment sites, unless there is no reasonable prospect of 
the site continuing in that use.  
8.22 The Framework states that local plans should enable sustainable  growth and expansion of 
businesses in the rural areas by taking a positive approach to sustainable new development  
and conversions . It also says that local plans should enable  the development and 
diversification of agricultural and other land based rural businesses.  Sustainabl e agricultural 
diversification will be promoted as an important aspect of maintaining the rural economy. 
Sustainable rural  businesses, tourism or recreational uses will also be encouraged. Decisions 
should enable the retention and development of accessible  local services and community 
facilities in line with the Framework.   
8.23 The SH ELAA (update 2015) and Employment Land and Premises Study, 2012 both conclude 
that land in the countryside , will need to be released to meet the Borough’s housing and 
employme nt land requirements, as well as some of Blackpool’s employment requirement (i.e. 
14 Ha).   
8.24 LCC is pursuing a plan to roll -out a network of superfast broadband across Lancashire. This will 
help to stimulate economic activity, increase business productivity and home working 
opportunities and attract investment into Fylde and Lancashire as a whole.  
Lancashire Advanced Engineering and Manufacturing Enterprise Zone at BAE Systems, 
Warton  
8.25 BAE Systems, Warton, has been an important employment si te for many years, as identified 
in policy EMP2 in the existing Fylde Local Plan, (As Altered), October 2005. This strategic site 
currently supports the local economy, providing local employment opportunities and 
investment due to its specialised activitie s.  However, it has the capability to stimulate 
economic growth in the Fylde Coast, the wider Lancashire sub -region and nationally, with the 
potential of attracting significant inward investment of an international scale.   
8.26 The Lancashire Enterprise Z one at BAE Systems, Warton was announced in the Chancellor’s 
Autumn 2011 Statement and came into effect on 1 April 2012.  It is centred around BAE 
Systems bid to boost economic development, through offering business incentives including 
a simplified planni ng regime.  The main thrust of the Lancashire Enterprise Zone is about 
attracting new investment and employment to the North West area , which is based around 
BAE Systems being a key driver.  Ongoing and future operations related to the airfield at 
Warton A erodrome will be protected and safeguarded.  The focus of the Enterprise Zone is 
the advanced engineering and manufacturing (AEM) sector. The regional skills centre / 
academy is at BAE Systems, Samlesbury.  One of the aims is to retain younger people in Fy lde 
and Lancashire as a whole and promote new development / industry that may not necessarily 
have set up in the area.  The role of the Enterprise Zone in relation to the Preston and Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
97 Lancashire City Deal is important, in particular, its potential to signif icantly improve the 
economic and physical connectivity of key employment and housing sites.  
8.27 The Council, LCC and BAE Systems have prepared a Local Development Order (LDO) for Phase 
1 of the Enterprise Zone . It was adopted in 2012 and lapsed in October 2015. The 2015 LDO 
is, in effect, an extension of the previous Order with amendments to reflect the 2014 
Masterplan, to increase the period of operation for a further nine years and take account of 
updated legislation.   
8.28 The adopted LDO identif ied that a Masterplan (the Lancashire Advanced Engineering and 
Manufacturing Enterprise Zone Phase 1 Consultation Masterplan) would be prepared by BAE 
Systems and the Lancashire Enterprise Partnership (LEP).  The Masterplan establishes a 
framework for the long term strategic objectives for the Enterprise Zone, including  securing 
the delivery of the necessary infrastructure. In order to fully realise the economic benefits of 
the Enterprise Zone, t he LDO provides wider permitted development rights and sets ou t 
guiding principles for the preparation of the Masterplan and the matters it should address.  
The Masterplan was adopted on 1 October 2014.  The agreement and adoption of the 
Masterplan was as a result of considerable work by BAE Systems and it forms the template for 
the consideration of future phases.  
8.29 The LDO authorises development falling within specific Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) 
Codes, as far as it relates to advanced engineering and manufacturing.  It has a number of 
conditions whic h need to be discharged by the Local Planning Authority.  Development falling 
outside of these SICs therefore require s the submission of a planning application.  Building on 
the resurgence of advanced manufacturing and Government’s re -commitment to positio ning 
the UK as a leading force in the global advanced engineering and manufacturing arena, the 
Lancashire Enterprise Zone will be become a national focal point for the sector.  The Enterprise 
Zone will aim to provide the opportunity to create 4,000 to 6,00 0 high value jobs in the long 
term and 1,200 jobs in the short to medium term.  
8.30 The Enterprise Zone was excluded from the Fylde Employment Land and Premises Study , 2012  
as it is a planned re -use of an established employment allocation, and serves as a location for 
specific industry sectors relevant to the site’s current use.  The following policy protects the 
strategic designation of the site including the BAE Systems Co re Area and its operations, and 
supports the delivery of the Enterprise Zone.   
 
Strategic Policy EC 3   
Lancashire A dvanced Engineering and Manufacturing  (AEM)  Enterprise Zone at BAE 
Systems, Warton  
a. The Lancashire Enterprise Zone at BAE Systems, Warton  
The Council continues to support the specialised activity at BAE Systems, Warton, in line 
with  the company’s operations. The boundary of the site, which includes both the BAE 
Systems Core Area and the Enterprise Zone, are identified on the Policies Map .  The 
designation of the Lancashire Enterprise Zone at BAE Systems, Warton will help create more 
businesses, jobs and attract international investment, with positive benefits across the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
98 wider economic area. It will help improve the local econo my and also increase the 
contribution to national growth.  
 
b. Local Development Order s 
The Council supports the delivery of the Lancashire Enterprise Zone and has produced and 
reviewed a Local Development Order - Part 1, to aid the delivery process. Subsequent Local 
Development Orders will be produced when necessary. A Masterplan has also been 
produced and adopted, which forms a key part of the overall delivery of the Enterprise 
Zone.  The key purpose of the Masterplan is to establish the deve lopment and design 
framework for Phase 1 of the site and ensure it is in accordance with the relevant 
parameters within the Local Development Order.   
 
 
Justification  
8.31 The site and surrounding area is owned by BAE Systems which has  operated at the site for 
many years. The site is situated in the southern area of the Borough, with access to the A584. 
The site ’s accessibility and connectivity has been strengthened through the completion of a 
new  highway junction on Lytham Road , to acc ess the site and support its delivery. The location 
and setting of the site has the potential to attract high profile new businesses and investment, 
which will also help to deliver a high quality environment and landscape.  The Central 
Lancashire Highways and Transport Masterplan (adopted March 2013) includes a strategy for 
bringing forward strategic highways and transport infrastructure to support economic 
development within the area, includ ing the delivery of the Preston Western Distributor Road 
and a new  Junction 2 onto the M55  west of Broughton ; and will improve connectivity between 
the two parts of the Lancashire Enterprise Zone at Warton and Samlesbury . 
Blackpool Airport Enterprise Zone  
8.32 Blackpool Airport was proposed as an Enterprise Zone in March 2015 and following the 
submission of a business case it was designated in April  2016. The Enterprise Zone fronts 
Squires Gate Lane and currently comprises a mix of airport hangars, long stay sur face car 
parking and sports pitches.  
 
Strategic Policy EC4  
Blackpool Airport Enterprise Zone  
a. The Blackpool Airport Enterprise Zone  
The boundary of the Enterprise Zone is identified on the Policies Map .  The designation of 
the Blackpool Airport Enterprise Zone will help create more businesses, jobs and attract 
international investment, with positive benefits across the wider economic area.  Fylde 
Council supports the sustainable development of Blackpool Airport, including working to 
explore the po tential to develop commercial aeronautical activity  and to relocate Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
99 operational buildings and facilities closer to the main runway, in the areas outside the 
greenbelt, unless there are overriding operational requirements that constitute very special 
circum stances and which justify development in the Green Belt .  The Enterprise Zone  will 
help improve the local economy and also increase the contribution to national growth  
through targeting the energy industry, advanced manufacturing and engineering, food and 
drink manufacture and the digital and creative sector . 
b. Enabling Development  
Alternative uses, such as retail  and leisure , may be appropriate where it can be 
demonstrated that they help deliver aviation uses on this site.  The scale of any alternative 
enabling development will be limited to that which is clearly demonstrated to be necessary 
to fund essential infrastructure which will not prejudice the maintenance of the primary 
aviation function of the site  and where it can be demonstrated that a) there a re no 
sequentially preferable locations within or on the edge of designated centres that are 
available and suitable to accommodate them and b) there would be no significant adverse 
impacts on investment and the vitality and viability of designated centres .  Any proposed 
main town centre uses must satisfy the sequential and impact tests set out in the National 
Planning Policy Framework and the relevant policies in this Local Plan.   
c. Local Development Order  & Masterplan  
The Council supports the delivery of the Blackpool Airport Enterprise Zone and will produce 
a Local Development Order , if requested,  to aid the delivery process.  Fylde Council, working 
with Blackpool Council, Lancashire County Council and stakeholders including landowners 
is prepa ring a masterplan for the Enterprise Zone , which will form a key part of the overall 
delivery of the Enterprise Zone, together with an agreed programme of implementation in 
accordance with the Masterplan.  The key purpose of the Masterplan is to establish t he 
development and design framework for the site ; it will determine the appropriate mix, 
quantum and location of development in the area, reflecting the delivery objectives of the 
Enterprise Zone and that of maintaining the viable long -term operation of Bl ackpool 
Airport, ensur ing it is in accordance with the relevant parameters within the Local 
Development Order.  
 
 
8.33 Development of an Enterprise Zone at Blackpool Airport has the potential to provide 
opportunities for retail, employment and leisure uses at the airport and would also provide 
jobs close to where people live.  
8.34 Blackpool Airport is previously developed land, which is within walking distance of Squires 
Gate Railway Station and there is good access by bus into Blackpool and Lyt ham and St Annes. 
New or improved signalised junction and public transport facilities, including associated 
highway infrastructure such as cycling and pedestrian facilities, will be required if the site is to 
meet its full potential.  In terms of cycling, Lancashire County Council seeks a cycle path on 
Squires Gate Lane, along with toucan crossings.  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
100 Vibrant Town, District and Local Centres  
8.35 Retail is an important part of the economy of the Fylde Coast sub -region . As town centres  – 
including Blackpool, St Annes, Lytham, Kirkham , Cleveleys, Fleetwood  and Poulton -le-Fylde - 
provide employment and a centre for leisure, cultural and social activities, the range and 
quality of the retail offer can contribute directly to the vibrancy of  town centres and affect 
their vitality and viability.  
8.36 Increased mobility and car ownership has meant people are more likely to travel further to 
meet their shopping needs, which has resulted in retail centres facing increasing competition 
from neighb ouring centres. The development and expansion of out -of-town centres and the 
rising level of internet shopping have also increased competition.  
8.37 District and local centres are vital to the sustainability of smaller communities. If this provision 
is los t people will have to travel further to meet their daily / weekly needs. These centres act 
as a focus for their communities and offer opportunities for social integration.  
8.38 National policy with regard to planning for retail, leisure and town centres is  set out in the 
Framework. The Local Plan will generally rely upon national policy with regard to the 
promotion and protection of town centres . The three Fylde Coast authorities jointly 
commissioned the 2011 Retail Study, which means that a consistent appr oach has been taken 
under the Duty to Cooperate .  
Fylde Coast Retail Study 2011 and 2013 Update  
8.39 The Retail Study , 2011  referred to Goad data (1) (October 2009), which stated that the main 
centres in Fylde provide 74,970 (square metres gross) of both comparison and convenience 
retail floor -space.  Comparison goods and convenience goods are defined in the Glossary. It is 
acknowledged that Blackpool Town Centre is the sub -regional centre for the Fylde Coast and 
will serve the needs of residents across the sub -region; but it is also recognised that Preston 
City Centre plays a role as a sub -regional centre serving the needs of residents of Fylde . 
1) Experi an Goad is a retail property intelligence system that helps retail developers, property investors, planning professionals, 
and commercial agents to identify profitable locations for retail property development and investment projects.  It offers 
comprehensi ve retail location plans and easy to use reports covering over 3,000 shopping areas in the UK and Ireland.  
Comparison Goods  
8.40 The 2011 Retail Study recommended that comparison goods retail development across Fylde 
should be 8,620 (square metres gross) i n the period 2010 - 2026. The distribution of this 
capacity should be 70% at Lytham and St Annes, 20% at Kirkham and 10% across all other 
areas.  
8.41  In the 2013 update to the Retail Study it was identified that Fylde currently has a requirement 
for an additional 3,369 square metres of comparison goods sales areas floor -space in the 
period to 2032.  The update included recommended floor -space allowance figures as a range 
and suggested that the Council should make provision for additional comparison goods sales 
floor -space over the period from 2013 to 2032 as follows:  
➢ 1,000 to 1,500 square metres in the town centres of St Annes and Lytham;  
➢ 500 to 1,000 sq uare metres in Kirkham town centre; and  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
101 ➢ 250 to 500 square metres for provision across the Borough’s district and local centres 
(this is a borough wide figure and not an allowance for each individual centre).  
Convenience Goods  
8.42 In respect of convenience  goods, the 2011 Retail Study advised that there was no quantitative 
capacity for further floor -space in the sub -region up to 2021, and only limited capacity to 
2026.  
8.43 Although the Study concluded that there was no overall need for further convenience goods 
floor -space in the immediate period, some localised deficiencies had been identified which 
need to be addressed.  In rural areas it was recognised that small scale enhancements to the 
convenience provision can support communities and reduce reliance on the private car, by 
providing day -to-day shopping facilities within existing local and district centres.  
8.44 There is no quantitative need identified in the retail update, 2013, for additional 
convenience goods retail floor -space across the Fylde Coast in the time period up to 2016.  
However, there  would be a need for an additional 2,825 square metres (net) colle ctively 
across the Fylde Coast sub -region in the overall plan period to the year 2032.  Given the lack 
of quantitative capacity to support additional convenience floor -space requirements across 
the Fylde Coast sub -region, distribution is not then specified  between the Fylde Coast 
Authorities and their individual centres.  
Table 3: Additional Convenience floor -space  
 Additional Convenience floor -space (square metres net)  
2013 -16* 2016 -21 2021 -26 2026 -30 2013 -30 
Fylde Coast sub -
regional Authorities 
(Fylde, Wyre and 
Blackpool Councils)  -2,642  1,652  2,531  1,284  2,825  
*NB. Negative requirements 2013 -16 indicate a significant over -supply of net floor -space is identified in that period.  
 
8.45 There continues to be pressure on councils to permit edge of centre and out -of-centre 
foodstores.  The Retail Study recommended that the potential adverse impact such 
development can have on nearby centres must be carefully taken into account.  
Retail Centre s in Fylde  
Kirkham Town Centre  
8.46 The Retail Study, 2011, recommended that the focus should be on halting increasing vacancy 
rates and enhancing retailer representation in the comparison goods sector, particularly 
clothing and footwear. The comparison of fer is limited in Kirkham, with an increasing number 
of charity shops. The total existing gross retail floor -space in Kirkham measured 11,940 square 
metres in the 2011 Study, 690 square metres of which was vacant.   The study suggested the 
refurbishment of vacant units, so that they are better suited to the requirements of multiple 
retailers  this would  represent the best opportunity for enhancing the retail offer in Kirkham.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
102 8.47 In addition to this, the 2013 updated assessment suggested that there may be a  requirement 
for new comparison goods sales floor -space over the development plan period and it is 
suggested that provision should be made for between 500 and 1,000 square metres in 
Kirkham.  
Lytham Town Centre  
8.48 Lytham  currently performs strongly in ter ms of catering for the needs of local residents. The 
centre has a strong convenience goods base and good representation from quality 
independent retailers in the comparison goods sector.   The total existing gross retail floor -
space in Lytham measured 24,41 0 square metres in the 2011 Study, 3,010 sq uare  metres  of 
which was vacant. Therefore, the recommendations for Lytham focussed on maintaining the 
centre’s vitality and viability through monitoring vacancies, maintaining the public realm and 
using the ident ified floor space capacity to enhance the existing offer. This would ensure the 
centre remained attractive to local residents, in preference to competing destinations outside 
the ar ea and out -of-centre locations.   
8.49 The 2013 Retail Study update recommended that the comparison floor -space requirements 
for Lytham Town Centre are substantially lower than in the 2011 study. It is suggested that 
provision is made for between 1,000 and 1,500 square metres of additional comparison goods 
sales floor -spac e. This would allow for a range of new, smaller units that would complement 
the existing offer and future demand from independen t comparison operators.  
St Annes Town Centre  
8.50 The Fylde Coast Retail Study 2011 found that St Annes was a well maintained an d vibrant 
centre with a strong convenience base, reflected in a relatively high localised convenience 
goods retention rate. In the comparison goods sector clothing and footwear were slightly 
under -represented and there were a number of charity shops. The t otal existing gross retail 
floor -space in St Annes measured 38,620 square metres in the 2011 Study, 4,430 square 
metres of which was vacant. The Study recommended that a more complementary and 
diverse mix of retailers be promoted and that the refurbishment  of vacant units be 
encouraged so that they are fit for purpose.  
8.51 The 2013 update to the Retail Study recommended that there may be a future qualitative 
requirement for additional convenience goods floor -space within St Annes Town Centre to 
support its  vitality and viability following the granting of planning permission for a new 
foodstore at an out of -centre location at Heyhouses Lane. In terms of comparison goods, the 
updated assessment indicates that St Annes should provide between 1,000 and 1,500 sq uare 
metres of additional  comparison  goods sales floor -space over the period to 2032. This would 
allow for the development of a number of good -sized new units to meet the requirements of 
comparison retailers.  
Other Centres  
8.52  According to the 2013 updated assessment, in terms of Fylde’s lower order centres (i.e. district 
and local centres), it could be expected that these centres might collectively provide between 
250 and 500 square metres of new comparison goods sales floor -space in the period up to 
2032. However, it is recognised that small scale facilities to meet local, day -to-day, shopping 
needs are inherently sustainable and that there may be justification for the expansion of Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
103 existing district and local centres, or the cr eation of new centres, to meet the needs of new 
large -scale residential and mixed use developments.  
Strategic Policy EC 5 
Vibrant Town, District and Local Centres  
The town, district and local centre s; and primary and secondary frontages are defined on the 
Policies Map  which includes Inset Plans  and accompanies  this plan . 
 
Retail Hierarchy of Centres  
The retail hierarchy of town, district and local centres within Fylde is as follows:  
1. Town Centres  
• Kirkham;  
• Lytham; and  
• St Annes.  
2. District Centres  
• Ansdell.  
3. Local Centres  
• Freckleton;  
• Alexandria Drive, St Annes;  
• Headroomgate Road, St Annes;  
• St Davids Road North, St Annes;  
• St Albans Road, St Annes;  
• A local centre is proposed in Warton;  
• A local centre is proposed in Whitehills ; and  
• A local centre is proposed in Whyndyke . 
In the town centres, as defined on the Policies Map  including Inset Plans , retail and other main town 
centre uses, including the following uses, will be encouraged within the defined town centres: Retail 
(A1), Financi al and Professional Services (A2), Restaurants and Cafes (A3), Drinking Establishments 
(A4), Hot Food Takeaways (A5), Business (B1), Hotels (C1), Non -residential Institutions (D1) and 
Assembly and Leisure (D2).  
Primary Shopping Frontage  
In the primary sho pping frontages, as defined on Policies Map  including Inset Plans , proposals for 
the change of use from A1 , A2 and A3 uses  to other uses will be required to meet the following 
criteria:  
a) The proposal retains a pedestrian -level shop front with windows and display;  
b) Any proposed non  A1, A2 and A3 uses  at pedestrian level should, wherever possible, have 
operational hours that include at least a part of traditional opening times (9.00am – 
5.00pm). Uses that involve operational hours in the evening or night sho uld not create 
unacceptable disturbance  or nuisance  to residents or other users of the centre and 
surrounding areas.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
104 Secondary Shopping Frontage  
In the secondary shopping frontages, as defined on the Policies Map  including Inset Plans , 
proposals for main t own centre uses will be permitted at ground and upper floor levels.  Uses that 
involve operational hours in the evening or night should not create unacceptable disturbance to 
residents or other users of the centre and surrounding areas.  
Wood Street, St Annes  
Within Wood Street, St Annes  redevelopment or changes of use to restaurants, cafes and drinking 
establishments, or extensions to such existing uses will be permitted, subject to any external works 
being in keeping with the character and amenities of the town centres , and impacts on neighbours 
being acceptable . 
Office Development  
Office development will be encouraged within or on the edge of the defined town centres and on 
other sites allocated for Business (B1) development. The office development should be of a suitable 
scale and should not have an unacceptable impact on the locality  by virtue of appearance, scale, 
highways and residential amenity . 
Town Centre Management Plans  
The Council will produce Town Centre Management Plans which will address the function and 
accessibility of each town centre, including appropriate public realm schemes.  
Development Outside of Town Centres  
Proposals for retail and leisure development in ‘edge of centre’ or ‘out -of-centre’ locations will be 
considere d in line with the Framework, bearing in mind the impacts on existing centres.  
When assessing proposals for retail and leisure development outside of centres, a local threshold 
of any development  more than 750 square metres , will apply in terms of requiring a  retail  impact 
assessment.  
When undertaking a sequential test, or retail impact assessment, it will be necessary to have regard 
to likely impact upon other centres, including those outside of Fylde.  
Ansdell District Cent re 
Within Ansdell District Centre a range of appropriate services that support the role and function of 
the District Centre, including a supermarket, food and drink , leisure uses, public and community 
uses and other uses complementary to local shops, will be encouraged.  
Local Centres  
The following criteria apply to a change of use and development within Local Centres:  
a) Planning permission will be granted provided that:  
• The proposal would contribute in level, quality or range towards meeting local 
shopping ne eds; and  
• The proposal would not adversely affect the character of the centre or the amenity 
of adjoining property; and  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
105 • The proposal would not adversely affect the vitality and viability of other nearby 
existing centres or prejudice future investment in those centres.  
b) Premises  within Local Centres will be protected and enhanced for retail use (A1). Other uses 
such as financial and professional services (A2) and Restaurants and Cafes (A3) may be more 
appropriate to maintain / enhance the vita lity and viability of the Local Centre and will be 
permitted at ground level where:  
• The development does not cause undue detriment to the centre’s range of 
facilities, thereby threatening the centre’s viability and vitality;  
• the development does not prejudice residential amenity or highway safety.  
c) Other non -retail uses, including residential, will be permitted if criteria 2(a) and 2(b) above 
are met and if they do not result in a break  (i.e. a single unit)  in the shopping fro ntage that 
would threaten the centre’s viability and vitality.  
d) Where the applicant can demonstrate that the whole building will be fully utilised for retail 
/ commercial purposes, the provision of apartments on the upper floors will be discouraged.  
A Loca l Centre is proposed in Warton  to support the Warton Strategic Location for Development ; 
and Local Centre s are  also proposed at Whitehills  and Whyndyke  to support the Fylde –Blackpool 
Periphery Strategic Location for Development .  Within the proposed Warton  Local Centre , 
Whitehills Local Centre  and Whyndyke Local Centre , as identified  indicatively  on the Policies M ap 
including Inset Plans , a range of appropriate services that support the role and function of the Local 
Centre s will be encouraged, subject to criteria 1 - 4 above.  The Local Centres at Warton , Whitehills  
and Why ndyke  should include pedestrian and cycling linkages and access to  public transport.  
Loss of Community, Leisure and Cultural Facilities and Services  
The loss of community, health, leisure and cultural facilities and services within town, district and 
local centres will be resisted unless it can be demonstrated that the facility is no longer needed, or 
it can be established that the services provided by the facility can be provided in an alternative 
location or manner that is equally accessible by the community , in accordance with Policy GD8  in 
Chapter 7. 
 
 
Justification  
8.53 The purpose of policy EC5 is to set out the retail hierarchy for Fylde and to maintain and 
enhance the vitality and viability of town, district and local centres. The retail hierarchy 
reflects  the quality and range of shops and other services for the day to day needs of the local 
communities they serve.  Within town centres, a diversity of uses that support the vitality and 
viability of the centre will encourage a  daytime a nd an  evening economy and improve safety 
and security by increasing natural surveillance of the centre. Such us es include cultural 
facilities, restaurants and cafés, financial and professional services, offices and residential 
uses, as well as uses relating to non -residential institutions and leisure / recreation uses that 
are appropriate in a town centre.  
8.54 The defined town centres in Fylde represent the primary shopping areas, which include 
primary and secondary shopping frontages.  They are the main core of the retail centres and Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
106 are identified on the Policies Map  including Inset Plans , together with primary a nd secondary 
shopping frontages. The primary shopping frontage contains ground floor frontages with a 
higher proportion of retail (A1) uses. In the secondary shopping frontages a mix of town centre 
uses is acceptable.  In all other parts of the Primary Sho pping Area, active shop frontage is to 
be encouraged where no adverse impact on its vitality and viability would result.  Performance 
Monitoring Indicator 7 , in Appendix 8, sets out a target / policy outcome that there is no net 
loss of retail floor -space in Lytham, St Annes and Kirkham town centres.  
8.55 The sequential approach to planning applications for main town centre uses, as set out in the 
Framework, will operate requiring a town centres first approach. Proposals for development 
in ‘edge of centre’  or ‘out -of-centre’ locations will be considered in line with the Framework. 
Consequently, when assessing proposals for retail  and leisure development outside of town 
centres, a local threshold for development comprising more than  750sq.m.  will require  an 
impact assessment.  
Town Centre Management Plans  
8.56 The Council will put in place Management Plans for the three town centres, which will address 
the function and accessibility of each centre and include all envisaged public realm schemes 
for each of the town centres.  
Change of Use from Retail (A1)  
8.57  The impact of the loss of a retail unit will vary according to the unit’s size in relation to the 
defined centre as a whole, and the extent of alternative provision in the centre. Marketing of 
a vacant retail unit should be undertaken in accordance with th e requirements of policy  GD8 : 
Demonstrating Viability.  
8.58 Where there is high demand for retail units, changes away from retail (A1) use will be resisted. 
Where there is little or no demand for retail (A1) uses, other economic activity in the town 
centre  could help maintain vitality. It could be  that, in large centres , the centre as  a whole is 
vital and viable but less vital / viable pockets exist in certain parts.  
8.59 Retention of a ground floor shop -front helps minimise the impact of changes of use away from 
retail by maintaining a retail appearance on the street and allowing for easy conversion back 
to retail in the future.  
8.60 Office uses are defined in national po licy as a main town centre use that is considered 
appropriate in or on the edge of town, district and local centres. They can help contribute 
towards vitality and viability as workers access the local shops and services. As town centres 
tend to be easily a ccessible by sustainable forms of transport, office uses of an appropriate 
scale will be encouraged.  
8.61 As office uses provide economic benefits, they will also be permitted elsewhere within 
settlement areas, provided other relevant policies are satisfie d. By requiring that they are 
accessible by public transport, the impact on the area in terms of traffic can be reduced. 
Limiting schemes to a scale in keeping with the locality will minimise the possibility of negative 
impacts on neighbouring uses. Nation al policy exempts small -scale rural office development 
from the sequential approach, but applicants proposing larger developments should 
demonstrate that they have first considered sites within or on the edge of town centres, 
except where such uses are pro posed on land allocated or designated in the Local Plan for 
business (B1) uses.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
107 8.62 The local (retail) centres at Warton , at Cropper Road West ( site HSS5 ) at Whitehills  and at 
Whyndyke ( site MUS2 ), identified on the Policies Map  including Inset Plans  will be delivered 
by means of planning applications and the land will be assembled by the landowner(s) / 
developer(s) at the respective sites. The details of the construction and management of the 
individual units in the local centres will be set out in S1 06 Agreements.  
Leisure, Culture and Tourism  
8.63 The diversification and development of the local economy is a strategic objective of the Local 
Plan (Objective 4) and leisure, culture and tourism, including coastal tourism and recreation, 
make up an impo rtant industry in Fylde, accounting for 1 in 10 jobs. The Borough attracts over 
3 million visitors each year, generating nearly £220 million spending in the local economy 
through a total of 4.25 million tourist days. More than three -quarters of these visit ors are day -
trippers to the traditional seaside resorts of St Annes and Lytham, the attractive market town 
of Kirkham and the picturesque rural settlements. However, the 670,000 staying visitors 
generate more than 1.9 million visitor nights (an average of 2.9 nights per trip).  Jobs 
supported through leisure, culture and tourism stood at 2,942 in 2012, up 7% from 2,747 in 
the previous year (Lancashire STEAM Report 2012).  The Tourism Economy is the third largest 
employer in the area.  
8.64 Fylde capitalises on its proximity to Blackpool, which is the UK’s most visited seaside resort.  
The Borough also benefits from  major cultural and international sporting events such as the 
Lytham Festival; and the Lytham 1940s Wartime Festival.  These events rai se the profile of the 
area .  Lowther Pavilion and Gardens is a major tourism attraction, which is important for both 
the daytime and night time economy and includes the only theatre in the Borough.  The British 
Open Golf Championship returned to Royal Lyth am and St Annes in 2012 and attracted 
181,400 visitors, generating over £27.62 million for the Lancashire economy (The Open Impact 
Report 2012). The Walker Cup was held at Royal Lytham and St Annes in September 2015.  
8.65 Cultural facilities add to the diversity of uses in town centres, and can make an important 
contribution to a centre’s vitality and viability.  The value of land in town centres means that 
community and cultural facilities may come under pressure from uses  which attract higher 
land values and, without protection against this, the community may lose an accessible 
facility.  Once these sites are lost to other uses, it can be very difficult to find alternative sites.  
Demand for different types of community fa cilities will change over time, but it is important 
to retain such premises to meet the future needs of residents and visitors.  Victoria Public 
House in St Annes is now a community asset.  The safeguarding of existing community and 
cultural facilities wil l help to realise the potential for community use of existing buildings and 
encourage the re -use of buildings when they become available.  
8.66 Fylde offers a more traditional, low key tourist offer than its neighbouring resort of Blackpool. 
Whilst its offe r is different from Blackpool, there are obvious mutual benefits for the wider 
Fylde Coast through the greater range of destination types and experiences on offer.   
8.67 Fylde has a relatively weak rural tourism economy compared to its traditional coastal  market, 
despite rural visitor accommodation such as Ribby Hall Holiday Village and a range of caravan 
and camping sites. There is potential to build upon the rural tourism economy  by providing 
more attractions  and develop greater links with other areas and maximise the potential of the 
Lancaster Canal as a recreational resource. Farm diversification is now increasing in 
importance.   Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
108 8.68 There are aspirations to deliver the actions and infrastructure identifie d in the Coastal 
Strategy  (2015 -2032) , which was adopted by the Council in March 2015. The Coastal Strategy 
identifies initiatives and new opportunities for local people, visitors and businesses to benefit 
from the area, by developing a clear action plan t o regenerate the coast and to promote and 
enhance coastal tourism and recreation.  
8.69 There are particularly high concentrations of static caravans in the Rural South West and Rural 
North East of Fylde, with the number of caravans in these areas and the w ider Fylde  Coast 
increasing between 2001 and 2011. The previous SHMA, 2008, identified this as a significant 
issue in Fylde, with large numbers of older people living in Residential Park Homes.  This 
creates issues with isolation, maintenance and poor insulation, and  further monitoring of the 
caravan stock in Fylde  should therefore be undertaken.  
8.70 Fylde has a number of regionally important tourism attractions , listed in policy EC6 below .  
Particular emphasis is placed in this plan on broadening the range of attra ctions.  
 
Strategic Policy EC 6 
Leisure, Culture and Tourism Development   
The Council will plan for leisure, culture and tourism by:  
a) Promoting St Annes  as a classic seaside resort, based on its tourism heritage, the seafront, 
Promenade and Ashton Gardens, its Victorian architecture and Pier.   
b) Promoting the principles of sustainable tourism through realising the potential of the 
Borough’s heritage assets , in particular the Promenade Gardens and Ashton Gardens, St 
Annes Pier, Lytham Hall and its historic parkland, Lytham Windmill and Lowther Pavilion 
and Gardens.  
c) Supporting the high quality regeneration of The Island Sea Front Area  at St Annes  and the 
protection of seaside resort facilities, to support wider tourism, culture and the local 
economy.  
d) Reconstruction  and enhancement of the manmade coastal defences at The Island  Sea 
Front Area , Fairhaven Lake and Church Scar in order to encourage coastal tourism and 
recreation and help maintain flood defences.  
e) Encouraging daytime and evening business, leisure, cultural and heritage based tourism 
facilities, such as hotels, restaurants, cinemas, theatres, museums, swimming pools and 
leisure centres within town centres in Key Service Centres and  in Local Service C entres . 
f) Protecting tourism, cultural, heritage and leisure assets, such as golf courses and the 
seaside resort facilities, with a view to helping them to adapt to new challenges by the 
use of development briefs.  
g) Promoting public art and public realm works and seeking developer contribution funding 
where appropriate and CIL compliant.  
h) Promoting beach leisure activities, coastal  tourism and recreation al events.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
109 i) Implementing the infrastructure projects identified in the Coastal Strategy, including the 
delivery  of tourism and recreation.  
j) Encouraging the provision of training in leisure, culture or tourism development.  
k) Project specific Habitats Regulations Assessments (HRAs) will be required for  any tourism 
and coastal defence developments near to the Ribble and Alt Estuaries SPA/Ramsar. The 
HRAs will need to demonstrate that there will be no  likely  significant effect upon 
European Sites before the  tourism and  / or coastal defence developments  can be granted 
consent.   
The Island Sea Front Area  at St Annes  
Leisure, culture and tourism development within The Island Sea Front Area, as defined on the 
Policies Map  including Inset Plans , will be encouraged provided that proposals:  
i) are appropriate for a seafront location;  
ii) conserve and enhance heritage assets and  their setting;  
iii) respect  and enhance  the character of the area; and  
iv) do not prejudice the visual and other amenities of the seafront and nearby residential 
properties.  
Non leisure, culture and tourism uses will not be permitted  in this Sea Front Area.  
Ribby Hall Holiday Village  
Development of additional leisure, culture and tourism uses at Ribby Hall Holiday Village will be 
permitted  within the boundary of the Holiday Village , provided that the amenities and character of 
the site are preserved and enhan ced.  The boundary of Ribby Hall Holiday Village is identified on  
the Policies Map  including Inset Plans .   
Rural Tourism   
The promotion and enhancement of rural tourism will be encouraged through rural diversification 
to create small -scale, sensitively d esigned visitor attractions which:  
1) Take advantage of the Borough’s natural environment and heritage assets, including the 
Lancaster Canal corridor  and towpath ; 
2) Encourage the reuse, rehabilitation and conversion of existing permanent and substantial 
buildings in rural areas to support the visitor economy;  
3) Promote walking, cycling and horse riding, including long distance routes and linkages to 
national networks and trails, improvements to the coastal path and access to the coast;   
4) Contrib ute to Fylde’s open coastline and its enjoyment by visitors; and  
5) Provide opportunities to access , learn about and conserve the natural and historic 
environment.  
 
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
110 Justification  
8.71 The leisure, culture and tourism sectors are constantly evolving and the challenge is to protect 
important assets (such as the manmade sea defences at The Island  Sea Front Area , Fairhaven 
Lake and Church Scar), whilst enabling them to adapt to new challenges.  The Island Sea Front 
Area consists of a unique conc entration of large scale leisure , culture and tourism uses 
including a public swimming pool and cinema. It  constitutes a critical mass of attractions that 
are crucial to the tourism appeal of Lytham and St Annes.  However, there is a lack of indoor 
all year attractions at The Island  Sea Front Area .  Therefore, i t is important to protect this area 
as a focus for leisure, culture and tourism uses whilst at the same time facilitating new 
appropriate uses to enable the area to thrive and respond to changing market conditions  and 
provide an all year round offer .  As cultural and leisure facilities benefit from being part of a 
‘critical mass’, it makes sense to locate new facilities near to established ones.  
8.72 Visitors to these attractions sustain tourism r elated employment, which will continue to 
evolve and create new business opportunities.  The physical regeneration of the historic 
environment and the heritage assets along the seafronts in Lytham and St Annes is of 
paramount importance so as to ensure tha t visitor numbers are increased , to reinforce the 
visitor economy.  The Local Plan is intended to enable appropriate development and flexibility 
for leisure, culture and tourism operators so that they can invest in or respond to changes in 
visitor and leis ure preferences, whilst protecting the holiday areas and seafront locations in 
order to maintain the character and appearance of this predominantly tourist area.  
8.73 The Lytham and St Annes 2020 Vision and St Annes Seafront Masterplan set out the Council ’s 
leisure, culture and tourism proposals for Lytham and St Annes, including the Classic Resort 
concept, which is based on its tourism heritage and is set out in more detail in the Heritage 
Asset section in Chapter 13.    
8.74 The Coastal Strategy  (2015 -2032) identifies ten themes, together with actions and 
infrastructure projects to be implemented  within six character zones  
• Zone 1 -  Starr Hills Sand Dunes and Beaches;  
• Zone 2 - St Annes on the Sea;  
• Zone 3 - Fairhaven Sand Dunes;  
• Zone 4 - Fairhaven Lake, Gardens and Granny’s Bay;  
• Zone 5 - Lytham Heritage Coast; and  
• Zone 6 - Warton, Freckleton, Clifton and Lancaster Canal : along the coastline, running 
from the boundary with Blackpool at Starr Gate all the way along the coast to Savick Broo k 
in the east.   
The actions and infrastructure projects identified for the six zones in the Coastal Strategy, 
when implemented, will deliver improvements to coastal leisure assets.  The Council will 
require developer contributions, subject to viability, to invest in actio ns and infrastructure 
projects identified in the Coastal Strategy, including marine tourism and recreation and  the 
provision of public realm works and public art .   
8.75 A short length of the Lancaster Canal passes through the eastern part of the Borough. The 
Council recognises that the Lancaster Canal is a valuable resource for boating, angling , cycling, 
walking  and other forms of informal recreation. The Council has not identified the need for 
any large -scale new facilities or other development within the  short length of canal corridor Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
111 in Fylde.  The canal and its immediate environs are designated as a Biological Heritage Site in 
view of their importance in terms of nature conservation.   
8.76 With the level of development proposed in Fylde over the lifeti me of the plan there is an 
opportunity to extend the Public Rights of Way network, byways, cycleways and bridleways 
improving access to key Green Infrastructure assets, including the coastline  and Lancaster 
Canal towpath.  
Tourism Accommodation  
8.77 Improving the quality of the existing tourism / visito r accommodation is part of the Local Plan’s 
Vision for Fylde to 2032, as set out in chapter 3.  The Council considers it important to identify 
Holiday Areas in the Local Plan, to promote tourism accommo dation in these areas, which are 
located adjacent to tourism facilities, the town centre and the beach .  
 
No-strategic Policy EC 7 
Tourism Accommodation  
Holiday Areas  
High quality serviced tourism accommodation (e.g. hotels) will be encouraged in the Holiday Areas 
in St Annes, as defined on the Policies Map  including Inset Plans , provided that proposals:  
a. respect the character of the area;  
b. do not prejudice the visual a nd other amenities of nearby residential properties ; and  
c. do not adversely affect the nature conservation assets of the coastline and protected 
species, including  the Ribble and Alt Estuaries SPA / Ramsar site . 
Loss of serviced tourism accommodation either to non -serviced accommodation or to other uses in 
these areas will be resisted.  
Holiday Caravans and Camping Pitches  
Holiday caravan pitches will be retained for holiday use.  Proposals to allow residential use of existing 
holiday caravan pitches and holid ay park homes will be resisted. Conditions will be imposed on any 
permissions granted for additional holiday caravan pitches and holiday park homes to ensure that 
they are retained for holiday use.  
A limited increase in static and touring caravan and campi ng pitches will be permitted  within 
existing site boundaries  in order to enable environmental improvements.  
 
Justification  
8.78 The Fylde Coast Sub -regional Visitor Accommodation Study, 2009 jointly commissioned by 
Fylde, Wyre and Blackpool Councils, explores the quantity, quality and location of visitor 
accommodation and provides an appraisal of future need. The Council will follo w the general 
recommendations of the Fylde Coast Sub -regional Visitor Accommodation Study, 2009 with 
regard to tourism accommodation.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
112 8.79 The Study shows that serviced holiday accommodation (e.g. hotels and B ed and Breakfasts ) in 
Fylde is dominated by th e resort of St Annes, with a smaller number of businesses in Lytham.  
8.80 Holiday park pitch provision is predominantly located close to the boundary with Blackpool, 
although there are major holiday centres within the rest of the Borough.  
8.81 The study re commends that the Holiday Areas be restricted to serviced accommodation only, 
in order to prevent hotels being redeveloped for holiday apartments as a first step toward 
conversion to residential.  
8.82 The Fylde Coast Sub -regional Visitor Accommodation Stu dy highlights the use of holiday 
caravans for residential purposes.  Holiday caravan sites are often located outside settlement 
boundaries and conversion to residential units puts pressure on local facilities and often 
results in elderly residents living i n inaccessible locations.   The study recommends that 
conversion and loss is resisted in order to main tain an adequate supply of holiday 
accommodation.  
 
Cross Cutting Themes In Chapter 8:  
Promoting Health and Wellbeing  
All economic development, including business parks, industrial estates , town centres  and tourism 
related development  should be accessible by a choice of means of transport including walking, cycling  
and public transport which will mitigat e the effects on local traffic levels and reduc e congestion.  
Achieving Good Design  
The layout of new business parks and industrial estates; new development in town, district and local 
centres and developments relating to leisure, culture and tourism shoul d secure a high quality and 
inclusive design, which takes every opportunity available for improving the character and quality of 
the area and the way it functions.  It is essential that development is in keeping with the character of 
the area and also resu lts in the maintenance and enhancement of Fylde’s built environment and 
tourism assets.  
Strategic Objectives  
The following two strategic objectives are achieved in Chapter 8 
Objective 4 : To diversify and grow the local economy  
Objective 5 : To develop socially cohesive, safe, diverse and healthy communities  
Fylde Council’s Corporate Plan 2016 -2020 Priorities  
The following Corporate Plan priorities will be delivered through Chapter 8: 
• Attract new businesses and develop existing ones  (A vibrant economy)  
• Enhance and improve our town and village centres  (A vibrant economy)  
• Use technology effectively to make Fylde more accessible  (A great place to visit)  
• Provide a positive first impression of Fylde  (A great place to visit)  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
113 Fylde Council’ s Corporate Plan  2016 -2020 Actions  
The following Corporate Plan actions will be delivered through Chapter  8: 
• Facilitate and support Town Centre Partnerships  (A vibrant economy)  
• Develop and promote rural tourism  (A great place to visit)  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
114  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
115 Chapter 9:  Provision of Homes in Fylde  
 
Homes in Fylde    
9.1 Access to a decent home is fundamental to everyone’s quality of life. Homes should be 
available in sufficient quantity and of high quality design. There should be a variety of house 
types, particularly in terms of tenure and price, suitable for a mix of households such as 
families with children, single persons and older people.  Meeting society’s needs for homes is 
a key aspect of creating and maintaining sustainable communities.  
9.2 A key objective of the Framework is to significantly boost the supply of housing  by increasing 
the delivery of new homes so that everyone has the opportunity to live in quality, well 
designed affordable homes. To enable this, t he planning system should aim to deliver a 
sufficient quantity, quality, and range of homes consistent with land use principles and other 
policies in the Framework. The Council should objectively assess their development needs and 
derive local targets for housing delivery. In addition, authorities with a track record of 
persistent under -delivery on housing should plan for 20% more homes on top of their five year 
supply, this moves the requirement forward from later in the plan period.  
9.3 The Council should  set out the approach to density, mix, size, type and tenure, including 
affordable housing; identifying and bringing back into use empty housing and buildings.  
Development in residential gardens should be resisted where it will cause harm to the local 
area.  
9.4 In rural areas affordable housing should be provided through on-site provision within housing 
developments in the Tier 1: Larger Rural Settlements and Tier 2: Smaller Rural Settlements , 
where appropriate. Homes should be located where they will enh ance or maintain the vitality 
of rural communities and new isolated homes in the countryside will be avoided, unless there 
are special circumstances.  
9.5 In common with many Council areas, Fylde has witnessed a reduction in housing completion 
rates and ris ing house prices. Prices remain significantly high in relation to incomes. There are 
widening disparities between the areas with the highest house prices, such as Lytham, and 
parts of St Annes which contain homes in multiple occupation. Fylde does not have  a history 
of industrialisation  and there is, therefore, a lack of previously developed land, resulting in a 
requirement to develop some greenfield sites for housing.  
Housing Land Requirement and Supply  
9.6 Fylde, Blackpool and Wyre Councils jointly commissioned consultants to produce a Fylde Coast 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA). It was completed in 2013 and agreed by the 
Councils in February 2014.  
9.7 The Council has accepted the findings of the SHMA (2014) and they can be viewed on the 
Council’s website at https://new.fyl de.gov.uk/resident/planning/planning -policy -local -
plan/adopted -local -plan -to-2032/comprehensive -list-of-evidence/   
9.8 The SHMA was published in February 2014, however, in May 2014 the 2012 sub -national 
population projections (2012 SNPP) were released by t he Department for Communities and 
Local Government (CLG). Fylde, Blackpool and Wyre Council’s jointly commissioned Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
116 consultants to produce an Addendum to the SHMA which took account of these 2012 SNPP. 
The Analysis of Housing Need in Light of the 2012 Sub N ational Population Projections 
(Addendum 1) was completed in November 2014.  
9.9 The SHMA included a range of economic forecasts sourced during the course of the study, the 
modelling in Addendum 1 continued to highlight that in order to support levels of forecast job 
growth under the majority of the scenarios higher levels of housing need are likely to be 
created than those modelled based on historic trends. This reflects the ageing of the 
population and the need to retain and attract new working  age migrants into the area.  
9.10 Addendum 1 does not provide a full objective assessment of need for the Fylde Coast, and 
should therefore, be read alongside the SHMA. It was concluded that the objectively assessed 
ranges of need in the SHMA remain valid,  and are reflective of a longer term and more positive 
demographic economic context than that projected under the 2012 SNPP. The Council has 
accepted the findings of the Addendum 1 and they can be viewed on the Council’s website at 
https://new.fylde.gov.uk/resident/planning/planning -policy -local -plan/adopted -local -plan -
to-2032/compr ehensive -list-of-evidence/  
9.11 On 27 February 2015 the Sub National Household Projections 2012 -2037 (2012 SNHP) were 
released by the DCLG. An additional piece of work was commissioned by Fylde, to take account 
of the 2012 SNHP – The Analysis of Housing Ne ed in light of the 2012 SNHP (Addendum 2).  
9.12 The 2014 -based household projections to 2039 for England were published on 12 July 2016, 
and provide a new ‘starting point’ for the assessment of housing needs in line with the PPG. 
A further piece of work wa s commissioned by Fylde to take account of the 2014 SNHP and 
updated economic forecasts – The Objectively Assessed Housing and Economic Development 
Needs and the Fylde Local Plan to 2032  (May 2017) (Addendum 3). Addendum 3 concluded  
that the evidence indic ated  an Objectively Assessed Need (OAN) of between 410 -430 
dwellings per annum.  
9.13  A revised Framework was published in July  2021 . The Framework states that strategic policies 
should be informed by a local housing need assessment, calculated using the s tandard method 
in national planning guidance, unless justified by exceptional circumstances. This national 
policy therefore means that the approach used by the SHMA and its Addenda is superseded. 
The Fylde Local Plan  to 2032  (incorporating Partial Review)  is accompanied by the Housing 
Needs and Requirement Background Paper 2020 which contains the Council’s local housing 
need assessment , produced in response to this change in national policy . The local housing 
needs assessment concludes that the mini mum local housing need figure is 275 dwellings per 
annum.  The Framework states that any needs that cannot be met in neighbouring areas 
should be added to this figure. Therefore, the shortfall in Wyre identified in the Wyre Local 
Plan (2011 -2031) of 380 dwe llings, equivalent to 30 dwellings per annum for the period 2019 -
2032, is added to give a total of 305 dwellings per annum for the period 2019 -2032.2 
9.14 The Framework requires that strategic policy -making authorities establish a housing 
requirement figu re for the whole area (the Borough of Fylde), showing the extent to which 
the identified needs (and any that cannot be met in neighbouring areas) can be met. For the 
Local Plan, t he Council had considered the findings of Addendum 3 to the SHMA and 
determin ed the housing requirement for the 2011 -2032 plan period to be  415 net dwellings 
per annum. For the Partial Review of the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 , having considered the 
 
2 https://new.fylde.gov.uk/wp -cont ent/uploads/2020/07/11. -EDPR04 -Housing -Needs -and-Requirement -Background -Paper -2020.pdf   Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
117 evidence provided by the Housing Needs and Requirement Background Paper 2020 using the  
government’s standard method for housing need  and the obligation to include the shortfall in 
Wyre , the Council has determined the housing requirement figure for the plan period to be 
7,275 net dwellings . This is derived from an annual requirement of 415 n et dwellings for the 
period 2011 -2019 and 305 net dwellings per annum from 2019 -20 onwards.  This revised 
housing requirement takes account of the unmet need from the adopted Wyre Local Plan 
(2011 -2031 ).  
The Five Year Housing Supply  
9.15 Councils are required to have a five year supply of housing land available.  Where an authority 
is unable to demonstrate a five year supply, applications for housing development will be 
decided with regard to the ‘presumption in favour of sustainable devel opment’  contained 
within the Framework .  Unless there is an overriding reason why an application should be 
refused, the Council may find it difficult to resist development which it may consider 
unsuitable for other reasons. The housing supply will be revie wed at least annually as part of 
the Council’s Authority Monitoring Report  and Housing Land Supply Statement .   
Housing Delivery   
9.16 The historic rate of delivery of new homes in Fylde, before the recession, averaged around 
250 homes each year.  The annu al housin g requirement for Fylde is 305 net dwellings per 
annum  for the remainder of the plan period .  The overall minimum housing requirement figure  
established through the Partial Review is 7,275  net dwellings for the Plan period.  The Council 
has identified sufficient sites, including an allowance for small sites and windfalls, to provide 
a supply figure of  8,819  homes over the Plan period.   
9.17 1,538 dwellings were completed in Fylde from 2011 -2017, an average of 256 dwellings per 
annum. In the adopted Fylde Local Plan to 2032,  this figure was subtracted from the original 
plan period requirement of 8,715, to give a residual requirement of 479 dwellings per annum 
from 2017  onwards . 953 homes were completed in the years 2017 -2019. The Fylde Local P lan 
to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  has a minimum housing requirement for the plan 
period of 7,275 net dwellings, giving a residual requirement from 2019 -2032 of 4,784 net 
dwellings.  This figure ( 4,784 ) includes the shortfall which has accrued durin g the early years 
of the plan when large sites were in the planning process. This equates to 368 net dwellings 
per annum for the remaining years of the plan period  2019 -2032 . This is the ‘Liverpool’ 
method, for the purpose of calculating the 5 year housing  land supply and is necessary in order 
to provide the most effective strategy to facilitate the delivery of housing during the plan 
period.  
9.18 The housing requirement figure relates to all types of  housing including apartments , family 
housing and housing for specific needs such as the elderly  and includes both market and 
affordable housing . The allocation of new homes over the Plan period to 2032 is set out in 
policy H1 below.  
9.19 The trajectory at Appendix 2  shows the anticipa ted delivery of home s in relation to the 
requirement , throughout the plan period to 2032. A detailed trajectory will be published at 
least annually as part of the Council’s Housing Land Supply Statement. The Council’ s 
monitoring of housing completions has revealed that since the start of the Local Plan period 
a shortfall of  952 homes had accrued  as at 31st March 2017 . Planning application 
commitments amount to 6,405 homes as at  1st April 2019 . This means that 88%  of the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
118 requirement for the plan period already has planning pe rmission. Completions are anticipated 
to increase as larger sites commence delivery. The shortfall will be delivered over the 
remainder of the plan period to 2032.  
Housing Allocations  
9.20  As a result of the three separate calls for sites , a nu mber of  sites have been submitted by 
landowners, developers and members of the public, for due consideration by the Council.  The 
Council has assessed each of these sites, by measuring the sustainability, location and 
infrastructure needs of the area.  Fol lowing on from this, the Council has proposed to allocate 
the most sustainable, deliverable and developable (the Framework) sites for residential 
development as identified in Chapters 5 and 6 and on the Policies Map  including Inset Plans .  
9.21 The Local Plan aims to focus developm ent in the four Strategic Locations for Development in 
Fylde so as to maximise access to services, facilities, employment and to increase travel 
choices.  The Council is allocating previously developed sites first, but there is an insufficient 
supply of su ch land, so it has then had to look at sustainable greenfield sites. The priority is to 
develop sites comprising sustainable greenfield sites which adjoin existing settlements. The 
development of these sites would contribute towards the long -term viability  and vitality of 
the existing settlements (including Lytham and St Annes, Warton, Kirkham and Wesham), and 
allow new sustainable communities to develop (e.g. Whitehills) and which are within or close 
to existing or proposed public transport corridors.  The Sites Assessment Background Paper 
sets out why the sites proposed for allocation in the Local Plan were selected.  
 
Strategic Policy H1 – Housing Delivery and the Allocation of Housing Land  
The Council will p rovide for and manage the delivery of new housing by:  
a) Setting and applying a minimum housing requirement  of 415 net  homes per annum  for the  
period 2011 -2019 and a minimum housing requirement of  305 net homes per annum for the period 
2019 -2032 . 
b) Keeping under review housing delivery performance on the basis of rolling 3 year completion  
levels  as set out in accordance with the Monitoring Framework at Appendix 8 .  
c) Ensuring there is enough deliverable land suitable for house building capable of  providing a 
continuous 5 year supply calculated using the “Liverpool” method from the start of each annual 
monitoring period and in locat ions that are in line with the P olicy DLF1  (Development Locations for 
Fylde) and suitable for developments that will p rovide the range and mix of house types necessary 
to meet the requirements of the Local Plan.  
d) The delivery of t he developable sites, which are allocated for housing and mixed use from 1 April 
2011 to 31 March 2032  and provided for through allowances , to provide for a minimum of 7,275 
homes.   
 
Justification  
9.22 To make sufficient land available to deliver a minimum of 7,275 new homes up to the end of 
the Plan period in 2032 the Council will: Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
119 • allocate land for residential development;  
• take into account existing commitments where planning permission has been 
granted, the Council is minded to approve , and development that may or may not 
have commenced;  
• monitor completions; and  
• consider the possibility of small (not allocated) and windfa ll sites coming forward 
outside the Local Plan making process, including long term empty homes re -entering 
the market.   
9.23 In addition to allocations, commitments and completions, the Council would also expect to 
see some windfall development. Based on previous small sites and windfall trends,  an 
indicative total of small sites and windfall homes may be built over the Plan period  to the year 
2032, which will offer some flexibility to the housing supply.  However, there is no over -
reliance on this source of supply coming forward, as the Council has clearly allocated enough 
land to facilitate the provision of homes in line with the Framework.  
9.24 Performance Monitoring Indicator 1 , in Appendix 8, sets out a target / policy outcome to 
record the net additional homes completed against the residual requirement of 368 per 
annum.  Performance Monitoring Indicator 2  sets out a target / policy outcome to achieve a 
5 year supply of housing land.  Perform ance Monitoring Indicator 3 sets out a target / policy 
outcome to have a housing trajectory that delivers a minimum of  7,275 homes over the plan 
period.  
  
Strategic Policy H2  
Density and Mix of New Residential Development   
Density  
Developments will be expected to make efficient use of land, whilst avoiding detrimental impact on 
the amenity, character, appearance, distinctiveness and environmental quality of the surrounding 
area. It is expected that this will normally result in a min imum net residential density of 30 homes 
per hectare . 
When considering a proposal for a significantly higher density development, in addition to the 
above considerations, particular attention will be paid to ensuring that there is no unacceptable 
impact on  highway safety and that sufficient car parking is provided on -site. High density 
development should be very carefully designed to relate well to its surroundings, be orientated 
towards and have principal entrances facing towards the street, and should inc lude sufficient usable 
amenity space to provide for the needs of residents.  
Mix 
A broad mix of types and sizes of home, suitable for a broad range of age groups, will be required 
on all sites to reflect the demographics and housing requirements of the Borough as set out in the 
Fylde Coast Strategic Housing Market Assessment (2014). The mix required will be adjusted 
according to updated future Housing Needs Assessments over the plan period.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
120 All developments of 10 or more dwellings will therefore be required  to include at least 50% of 
dwellings that are 1 -, 2- or 3-bedroom homes. Developments within or in close proximity to the Tier 
1 Larger Rural Settlements or Tier 2 Smaller Rural Settlements  should include at least 33% 1 - or 2-
bedroom homes.  These requirem ents will be adjusted in response to the findings of future Housing 
Needs Assessments conducted on behalf of the Council.  
Specialist Accommodation for the Elderly  
In order to meet the needs of an ageing population in Fylde, at least 20% of homes within res idential 
developments of 20 or more homes should be designed specifically to accommodate the elderly, 
including compliance with optional technical standard M4( 3(2a)) (wheelchair -adaptable dwellings), 
unless it is demonstrated that this would render the development unviable. Affordable housing 
requirements set out in Policy H4 may be met partly by the provision of homes designed to 
accommodate the elderly, where these also fall into the defi nition of affordable housing set out in 
the Framework.  
Developments to provide 100% specialist accommodation for the elderly, including residential care 
homes, will be approved providing that:  
• It is situated to provide easy access to regular public transport. Within larger development 
sites, the part of the site in closest proximity to bus stops with a regular service should be 
chosen for this type of accommodation;  
• The proposal is well -designed, avoiding unnecessary use of high fencing around the 
perimeter, orientated towards the street with an entrance on the street side of the building 
providing the shortest possible pedestrian access, including usable outside landscaped 
gardens with seating, and access and parking for vehicles well separated from pedestrian 
routes;  
• The development complies with the development strategy and other policies of the plan; 
and 
• Convenient access arrangements are provided for vehicles providing hospital transport.  
Developments will be considered by the Council to be purpos e-built 100% specialist 
accommodation for the elderly if:  
• All areas used by residents will comply with optional technical standard M4( 3(2a)) 
(wheelchair -adaptable  dwellings);  
• A communal lounge or similar social facility for the exclusive use of all residen ts is included 
within the development;  
• A shared laundry service is provided for the use of all residents;  
• The development will be marketed with a restriction on age for residents of over 55;  
• A daily hot meals service is provided either through a central fa cility on -site or through an 
outside provider to residents who require it; and  
• An emergency alarm call service is provided for all residents.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
121 On sites where 100% specialist accommodation for the elderly is proposed as defined above, 
affordable housing cont ributions will not be sought.  
Development on Garden Land  
When considering proposals for residential development on garden land, stringent caveats will be 
applied relating to design, character, access, amenity and other issues deemed appropriate by the 
Council. Development on garden land should not result in any of the homes relying on what was 
previously a front garden for all of their private amenity space.  
Custom and Self -build Homes  
Proposals to include plots for custom - and self -build homes within larger housing development sites 
will be approved, subject to compliance with other requirements of the plan with respect to layout, 
density, mix and access. Developers of strategic housing  sites will be encouraged to devote a 
proportion of the site to provide serviced plots for custom - and self -build homes.  
Applications to provide serviced plots for custom - and self -build homes on small sites (of fewer  than 
10 dwellings) will be supported where the site is located in accordance with Policy DLF1 , subject to 
compliance with other policies of the plan.  
Wherever custom - and self -build homes are proposed, they should be well -designed, in accordance 
with Policy GD7 .  
 
 
Justification  
9.25 The Council sets requirements for housing density, expressed as net homes per hectare, in 
order to ensure the creation of well -planned sustainable communities with high standards of 
amenity and to prevent the profligate use of land. The use of net resident ial density excludes 
requirements for open space provision within developments and particularly the need on 
certain sites to provide sensitive transitions to areas of countryside and to retain site features 
in accordance with policy M1, which will vary between sites.  Lower net residential densities 
may be justified, where it would reflect and enhance the local character of the surrounding 
area in accordance with Policy GD7 , whilst also making efficient use of land as required.  
9.26 Densities within large sites are likely to vary based on the dwelling mix. The requirements for 
densities applies to the whole residential part of t he site. Areas of lower -density development 
within a large site can therefore be counterbalanced by higher -density areas providing, for 
instance, starter homes or accommodation for the elderly. The acceptability of detailed 
variation in density within site s should consider the requirements of policies M1 and GD7 . Mix 
of development on sites is further considered below.  
9.27 The low topography of the Borough, and sensitive margins to developed areas including the 
promenade, mean that the impact of high densi ty development can be unusually great. 
However, Planning Practice Guidance states that planning permission should not be refused 
for buildings and infrastructure that promote high levels of sustainability because of concerns 
about incompatibility with an e xisting townscape, if those concerns have been mitigated by 
good design. Therefore, higher density development can be acceptable when located in the 
most accessible locations providing that it is designed in such a way to mitigate any potential Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
122 harm arisin g from the higher density. In addition to the normal considerations therefore, the 
particular issues of parking, vehicular access, orientation of the development (so that it faces 
the street and is not constructed as an enclosed compound), provision of use ful amenity space 
and relationship with surrounding buildings and the wider area must be given special 
attention.  
9.28 Performance Monitoring Indicator 8, in Appendix 8 , sets out a target / policy outcome that a 
density target of 30 or more homes per hectare is achieved in Strategic Locations for 
Development, Key Service Centres, Local Service Centres and Tier 1 Larger Rural Settlements  
and Tier 2 Smaller Rural Settlemen ts.  
Mix  
9.29 Mix refers to the types of homes, e.g. detached, semi -detached or terraced, bungalows, 
apartments and live / work homes and to the size, e.g. number of bedrooms and floor area. 
Mix also relates to tenure, e.g. market housing, private rented,  buy-to-let and, in particular, 
affordable housing which includes intermediate (shared ownership) and housing association 
rented. Another aspect of mix is extra care and supported housing for the elderly, people with 
special needs, offenders, homeless and those avoiding domestic violence.  
9.30 In 2011 according to the Census, 10.3% of household spaces in Fylde had one bedroom 
(compared with 11.7% nationally), 29.7% had two bedrooms (27.8%), 37.7% had three 
bedrooms (41.2%), 17.4% had 4 bedrooms (14.4%) and  4.7% had 5 or more bedrooms (4.6%). 
Thus the profile of the housing stock is broadly typical for England, with the exception that 
there are more 4 bedroom homes, and fewer three bedroom homes. On average the housing 
stock is slightly larger than the natio nal average.  
9.31 There is some variation in property size between the different areas of Fylde. The table below 
shows 2011 Census data for housing size by middle layer super -output area:  
Table 4: Housing  size by middle layer super -output area  
  Fylde  
001 
Elswick 
Staining  
White  
hills Fylde 
002 
Kirkham 
Wesham  Fylde 
003 
Newton 
Clifton  Fylde 
004 
Airport  Fylde 
005 
Heyhous
es Fylde 
006 
St Annes  Fylde 
007 
Warton 
Freckle  
ton Fylde 
008 
Ansdell 
Fair 
haven  Fylde  
009 
Lytham  
1 or 2 bed 
homes  31.2%  33.4%  24.1%  37.2%  35.2%  58.5%  40.6%  44.9%  40.9%  
3-bed 
homes  37.5%  44.7%  45.5%  53.2%  39.3%  19.7%  43.2%  29.6%  38.6%  
4 or 5+  
bed 
homes  31.3%  21.8%  30.1%  9.3%  25.5%  21.4%  16.2%  25.3%  20.3%  
 
9.32 This shows that the rural areas (Elswick/Staining and Newton/Clifton) and Kirkham/Wesham 
have significantly fewer 1 and 2 -bed homes than other parts of the Borough (Heyhouses can 
be considered together with St Annes and Ansdell). The Blackpool Fringe/NW St . Annes area 
has many fewer 4 and 5 -bed homes than all other parts of Fylde. In addition, Central St. Annes 
has a far higher proportion of 1 -bed homes (26.3%) than all other parts of Fylde, whilst 
Newton/Clifton has very few indeed (2.1%).  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
123 9.33 The existi ng profile of household size in Fylde is characterised by an unusually large proportion 
of one -person households, over 35%, including 16.9% of all households being one -person 65 
and over. 23.4% of households are families that include dependent children, le ss than the 
national average (29%). Importantly, 29% of all households consist of people 65 and over only. 
However, care is required in attempting to relate required property types to groups within the 
population. Whilst affordable housing type is matched to the tenant at the beginning of a 
tenancy based on the needs of the household, in market housing the type of home is based 
on choice and aspiration, basic tenets of a free society.  
9.34 The Fylde Coast SHMA sets out the estimated size of homes required. In Fylde, the proportions 
of properties required are shown below:  
Table 5: Proportions of properties required  
Size Associated property types  Proportion 
required  
Below 50m²  Studio or small 1 -bed apartment  18%  
50-69m²  2-bedroom flat or small mews house  30%  
70-89m²  2-3 bedroom house, semi -detached or mews  28%  
90-109m²  3-4 bedroom family semi -detached house or small 4 -
bedroom detached house  11%  
110m² or more  Larger 4+ bedroom family detached house  13%  
9.35 Policy H2 therefore requires developers to include a mix of dwellings on all sites of 10 or more 
homes that includes at least 50% of homes to be 1, 2 or 3 bedroom homes, with the objective 
of creating sustainable communities and ensuring that all developments contr ibute to the 
above requirements . 
9.36 It is recognised that an element of the need for smaller units of accommodation will be 
provided by conversions; however, all windfalls including conversions and small sites will 
represent only 11% of all new homes dur ing the plan period. Therefore, it will be crucial, in 
providing for the types of properties needed, that the mix provided on individual 
developments contributes to the need for smaller units of accommodation. A significant 
element of this should be accomm odation for the elderly, considered separately below.  
9.37 It is particularly important that the housing types brought forward on new developments do 
not perpetuate disparities in accommodation types through the Borough. Developments in 
the Tier 1 Larger R ural Settlements and Tier 2 Smaller Rural Settlements  therefore should 
include at least 33% 1 - and 2 -bedroom homes. This will contribute to the creation of mixed, 
sustainable communities.  
9.38 The appropriate mix of development may change during the plan p eriod, due to differences 
in projected population and migration trends from those predicted in the SHMA. The mix 
required will therefore need to be informed by updated assessments of housing need during 
the course of the plan period.  
9.39 Mix of tenures is  considered in the Affordable Housing policy H4. Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
124 Specialist Accommodation for the Elderly  
9.40 Amongst the existing population of Fylde, both the raw number and the proportion of older 
people are large. There were 21,460 people aged 65 and over in the Borough in 2011, which 
by itself equates to the size of a medium -sized town. As a proportion the po pulation aged 65 
and over represents more than 28% of the total population, compared to 16.3% across 
England.  
9.41 The number of people 65 and over in Fylde is predicted to grow dramatically over the plan 
period. The over -65 population was projected in the  SHMA to increase from 21,460 in 2011 
to 30,311 in 2030, an increase of 8,851 or 41.2%. The predicted increase in numbers of those 
65 and over in 2030 will exceed the predicted increase in number of the overall population. 
Thus, all of the increase in popu lation is accounted for by an increase in the number of over 
65s. 
9.42 Furthermore, over one -third of all the increase in population in Fylde will be due to an increase 
in the number of people aged 85 and over. This highlights that the number of older peop le 
with support needs is likely to increase considerably. Data from the Institute of Public Care’s 
Projecting Older People Population Information System (POPPI) shows that by 2030:  
• The population 65 and over unable to manage at least one self -care activity  on their 
own (e.g. bathe, shower or wash, dress/undress, feed, take medicines) will increase 
from 6,778 to 9,625;  
• The population 65 and over with a moderate or severe visual impairment (equivalent 
to qualification to be registered blind or partially sight ed) will increase from 1 ,780 to 
2,499: of these, the number of 75 and over with specific registrable eye conditions 
will increase from 621 to 934;  
• The population 65 and over unable to manage at least one mobility activity on their 
own (e.g. going out of do ors and walking down the road, getting up and down the 
stairs, getting to the toilet) will increase from 3,742 to 5,437.  
Therefore, although there are already large numbers of elderly people who have difficulties 
with normal living, for instance problems with mobility, visual impairment or difficulties with 
their own basic care, the projections for the future show that there will be a significant growth 
in the numbers with support needs of one kind or another.  
9.43 The accommodation occupied by pe ople 65 and over in Fylde varies widely. Of the 21,460 
people 65 and over in Fylde in 2011, ONS data shows that 9 ,097 were living in homes of 3 or 
more bedrooms; of these, 2 ,149 were aged 80 and over. It also shows that 3743 people of 65 
and over were livi ng in flats, of which 3 ,269 were in Lytham and St. Annes; this highlights that 
very small numbers of older people in the rest of the Borough were living in flats. This may 
reflect supply constraints. In total there were 5,707 purpose -built flats in the Borough, but 
only a small proportion of these are purposely -designed for the elderly, and a significant 
minority, and possibly even the majority, are occupied by younger people.  
9.44 The existing stock of accommodation marketed specifically to the elderly con sists of 1 ,072 
units of sheltered accommodation, most of which will be capable of housing a couple. Of 
these, at least 97 are extra -care units where some element of care can be provided. In 
addition, there are 40 care homes providing spaces for 1115  residents. Thus, if there were no 
further developments of these types, the amount of accommodation intended specifically for Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
125 the elderly would be sufficient for just 11% of the population aged 65 and over at the end of 
the plan period.  
9.45 People will ch oose accommodation based on their own individual preferences, subject to their 
own budgets, and this applies equally to those who have retired as to any others. The 
accommodation currently inhabited by the elderly in Fylde will reflect these preferences, b ut 
will also reflect supply constraints. The provision of a greater supply of accommodation that 
better reflects the needs and aspirations of retired people is desirable on the grounds of 
general health and wellbeing for the population, and may release acc ommodation more 
suitable for other age groups back into the market.  
9.46 In order that new developments provide for the housing needs of Fylde, it is important that 
accommodation purportedly designed for the elderly genuinely provides for their needs. 
Acco rdingly, the Council will classify developments as purpose -built for the elderly providing 
it meets a series of requirements set out in the policy.  
9.47 The Council has opted to apply the new optional technical standards for a proportion of new 
dwellings w ithin major new -build developments. The standard proposed is M4( 3(2a)) 
wheelchair adaptable dwellings, which requires the accommodation to be designed so that 
with simple adaptations it could be made suitable for a wheelchair user if necessary.   
9.48 The Council recognises that, although all the growth in population will be from those 65 and 
over, the demographics of new house buyers will be very different. The Council is committed 
to the creation of sustainable, mixed communities with a cross -section of ag e ranges. Sites of 
20 or more homes should therefore include this proportion of accommodation that is 
genuinely suitable for older people without the prospect of significant further costs for 
adaptation.   
Development on Garden Land  
9.49 The Framework recommends that councils should consider the case for setting out policies to 
resist inappropriate development of residential gardens, for example where development 
would cause harm to the local area (The Framework).  The amount of residentia l development 
that has been permitted on garden land over recent years in Fylde has been relatively low. 
There has been an average of two residential completions in gardens each year in Lytham and 
St Annes, with a total of five in Kirkham (2003 - 2014), one  in Warton, none in Freckleton and 
two in the rural areas.  It is, however, acknowledged that concern about the impact of 
proposals can be particularly acute .  Policy H2 only allows for garden land development 
subject to stringent caveats relating to desig n, character, access, amenity and other matters.  
Custom and Self -Build Homes  
9.50 The development of individual custom -build and self -build dwellings has been a common form 
of residential development in other developed nations, but has been very uncommon in the 
UK. The government has recently sought to promote the delivery of plots for custom - and self -
build homes by changes in legislation and in national policy and guidance.  
9.51 The Framework requires councils to plan for a mix of housing based on the needs of different 
groups including people wishing to build their own homes. The Self Build and Custom 
Housebuilding Act 2015, with its accompanying Regulations, requires councils to have a 
register of those who wish to acquire a plot for a self -build or custom -build dwelling, and 
imposes a “ duty as regards registers ”, to have regard to the need for plots expressed by the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
126 register. Fylde Council has had a register in place since 24 March 2016. Planning Practice 
Guidance clarifies that evidence of dem and from the registers should inform local plan 
policies, supplemented by other evidence.  
9.52 At the time of the preparation of the plan the register had only just been instigated and 
therefore evidence from other sources has been considered. The Speciali sed Housing  
Background Paper compared the expressed need for plots with the number of single -plot and 
other small sites with planning permission, on which development had not commenced. The 
conclusion was that plots on sites with permission greatly exceede d expressed demand, and 
that no further deliberate immediate planning interventions were necessary for compliance 
with the duty as regards registers.  
9.53 However, it is possible given the positive government policies to encourage custom and self -
build, th at the level of interest will increase over and above this over the plan period. To 
ensure compliance with the duty as regards registers, the local plan must be sufficiently 
flexible to provide for any increase in the number on the register, to provide for  the delivery 
of the number of units needed.  
9.54 It is proposed that need expressed for custom - and self -build plots will be met through a 
mixture of smaller sites and plots within larger sites. Smaller sites could include conventional 
sites already with outline approval, but could also be sites with permission in principle. 
Alternatively, applicants may wish to apply for permission on small sites specifically to create 
serviced plots for dwellings, which would then be sold individually with access and uti lities 
ready. The government intends to introduce small sites registers, which would allow 
landowners to identify sites that might be suitable. Policy DLF1  makes an allowance for 
windfalls and non -strategic sites within the Strategic Locations for Developm ent and within 
and adjacent to Tier 1: Larger Rural Settlements and Tier 2: Smaller Rural Settlements : this 
provides for small sites coming forward.  
9.55 Large strategic sites provide an opportunity to devote part of the site for custom and self -build 
hous ing. Developers could offer certain plots for sale, with servicing, or offer a custom -
building service themselves, offering either a bespoke or catalogue product. Although it is 
recognised that it may be outside the preferred business model of some develop ers, the policy 
is intended to provide encouragement to those developers who may see custom building as 
an opportunity to develop bespoke design -and-build services as part of their product offer.  
 
Non -strategic Policy H3  
Conversions and Change of Use to Residential  
When considering proposals for residential conversions, careful attention should be paid to the 
amenity of nearby residents, the character of the immediate area, access to the nearest services, 
parking provision and the promotion of good design . Residential conversions should protect existing 
amenity space and should not result in any of the homes relying on what was previously a front 
garden for all o f their private amenity space.  
 
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
127 Justification  
9.56 Conversions form a significant component of the housing supply in Fylde. During the last 13 
years 14% of completions have resulted from the conversions of homes and buildings in other 
uses. For the period April 2001 - March 2014 there were 395 net completi ons arising from 
conversions and change of use. Of these, 59% were completed in Lytham and St Annes, 
comprising mainly large homes converted to apartments , as well as a small number of shops 
converted to residential use. 28% were completed in the rural areas, these being 
predominantly barn conversions, of which 5% were in Kirkham and Wesham and 6% in 
Freckleton and Warton.   
9.57 The Framework states that councils should support proposals for alternative uses of land 
which is currently developed but not allocated , where this would help to meet identified 
development  needs. However, the Local Plan provides for the identified needs to be met 
without the wholes ale loss of existing business premises . 
9.58 The Framework makes it quite clear that planning policies and decisions need to reflect 
changes in the demand for land . However, the Fylde Employment Land Study recommends 
that the Council should protect existin g employment sites that are not the subject of consents 
for alternative uses. The Study states that all existing business and industrial land and 
premises should be retained as there is a shortage within Fylde.  See Chapter 8 for detailed 
policy on employm ent land in Fylde.  
9.59 The Council will identify and bring back into use empty housing and buildings in line with local 
housing and empty homes strategies and, where appropriate, acquire properties under 
compulsory purchase powers.  Approximately 700 ho mes have been converted into self -
contained apartments and there is pressure to provide more Houses in Multiple Occupation 
(HMOs).  
 
Strategic Policy H4   
Affordable Housing  
On-site provision of affordable housing  
All market housing schemes of 10 or more homes will be required to provide 30% affordable 
housing, unless robust viability testing has demonstrated that the cost of the affordable housing 
provision would prevent the development from being delivered.  
a. For residential d evelopments within or in close proximity to the Key Service Centres and 
Local Service Centres (i.e. the urban areas), the provision of affordable housing will be to 
meet the requirements identified for borough wide needs.  
b. For residential developments within rural areas, the provision of affordable housing will be 
primarily to meet the requirements identified for the closest Tier 1 Larger Rural 
Settlements: i.e. Newton, Staining and Wrea Green  or Tier 2 Smaller Rural Settlem ents: 
i.e. Clifton, Elswick, Singleton and Weeton.  If, having regard to an agreed assessment, the 
level of identified local need is less than the equivalent of 30% of the homes proposed, the 
balance of the provision will be delivered for borough wide need s.  
The presumption is that affordable housing will be provided on the application site so that it 
contributes towards creating a mix of housing. In circumstances where the Council considers that Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
128 affordable housing would be most appropriately provided off -site, for instance in relation to 
applications for residential park homes, the Council will require contributions for off -site provision 
of affordable housing equivalent in value to the provision of 43% of the number of market homes 
to be built on site, th is being the equivalent of providing 30% affordable housing on -site.  
Tenure   
The precise requirements for tenure of affordable homes will be negotiated on a case -by-case basis, 
having regard to the viability of individual sites, local need and compliance w ith other policies of 
the plan.  
Size and Type  
Schemes of sheltered/extra care housing for social rent/affordable rent to the elderly may be 
provided to meet affordable housing requirements, in conjunction with a Registered Social 
Landlord. Such schemes sho uld meet the requirements of 100% specialist accommodation for the 
elderly in policy H2. 
Affordable housing provided for social rent or affordable rent should be 1, 2 or 3 -bedroom homes. 
Starter homes should normally be 1 and 2 -bedroom homes. The size and type of affordable housing 
on an individual scheme should be determined with reference to the SHMA or subsequent housing 
needs assessments undertaken by or on behalf of the Council. Affordable housing should meet the 
requirements of the National Technical Standards and policy GD7  of this plan.  
 
Viability  
The Council will take account of viability when assessing individual schemes. If a level of affordable 
housing lower than that set out above is proposed for a specific scheme, the Council will expect 
robust financially -based justification  to be provided by the applicant, demonstrating that the 
development would be unviable with a higher level of affordable housing than proposed.  The 
Council may seek to independently verify such information, with any co sts associated with the 
verification met by the applicant, before approving a scheme with lower levels of affordable housing 
than that specified above.  
 
9.60 The definition of affordable housing is set out in Annex 2 of the Framework and repeated in 
the Glossary to this Local Plan. It includes Social Rented, Affordable Rented and Intermediate 
housing provided to eligible households whose needs are not met by the market. Eligibility is 
determined with regard to local incomes and local house prices. Aff ordable housing should 
include provisions to remain at an affordable price for future eligible households or for the 
subsidy to be recycled for alternative affordable housing provision. Low -cost market housing 
is specifically excluded from the definition.  
9.61 Consultations have been undertaken by the government proposing a change to the definition 
of affordable housing. The December 2015 consultation proposed that the definition be 
broadened to include products that do not have in -perpetuity restrictions o r recycled subsidy. 
Starter homes can be included in the range of products considered by local authorities. The 
purpose of the change is to remove limits to the availability of home ownership options for 
households whose needs are not met by the market, an d more widely, to plan for the housing 
needs of those who aspire to home ownership.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
129 9.62 Social rented housing and affordable rented housing are both forms of housing provided by 
local authorities or registered social landlords to those households unable t o pay a market 
rent. Social rented housing has rent levels set according to the national rent regime; 
affordable rented housing is subject to a rent level restriction of no more than 80% of the 
market rent. In practice, new schemes are only easily able to secure delivery as affordable 
rent.  
9.63 Intermediate housing includes tenures given terms such as shared equity or low -cost-home -
ownership, whereby people purchase part of the equity of a home with a mortgage type loan 
and pay rent based on the value of t he remaining equity.  
9.64 The current government proposal is that starter homes will fall within the definition of 
affordable housing. The Planning and Housing Act, 2016  has introduce d a general duty for 
councils to promote the supply of starter homes . Starter homes are defined as a new dwelling, 
available for qualifying (generally under age 40) first -time buyers only, to be sold at a discount 
of 20% to the market price.  
The Need for Affordable Housing  
9.65 The Fylde Coast SHMA 201 4 sets out the need for affordable housing in the Borough. This was 
updated in the Addendum 1 to the SHMA (2014). Addendum 1 identifies a net annual 
affordable housing need for 249 dwelling units in Fylde, with Addendum 2 (2015) identifying 
that any variation from this is likely to be insignificant.  
9.66 People who wish to express an interest in potentially taking up affordable housing in Fylde, in 
whatever form the affordable housing would take, at present register their interest through 
the MyHomeChoiceFyldeCoast service, a choice -based lettings scheme o perated on behalf of 
affordable housing providers (including Progress Housing who took over Fylde Council’s 
former housing stock) and Fylde, Blackpool and Wyre Councils. At the end of quarter 3 2015 -
16 there were 945 active applicants registered, with an a verage of 57 applicants bidding for 
available properties each month (calendar year 2015). 137 properties in Fylde were let 
through the service in quarters 1 -3 2015 -16. 
9.67 The figure of 249 p er annum  would represent a large proportion of the 305 per annum  
requirement of all housing for Fylde, and this would therefore be undeliverable. The private 
rented sector in Fylde is of considerable importance in providing accommodation for those in 
affordable housing need, particularly for small units of accommodatio n. The SHMA shows that 
61.8% of housing benefit claimants in Fylde live in the private rented sector, compared to the 
figure of 34.5% for England. There has been a growing number of HMOs and flat conversions. 
Whether this has provided an ideal form of acco mmodation for those in housing need cannot 
be known for certain, but the expression of bids for the stock of the affordable housing 
providers through MyHomeChoiceFyldeCoast demonstrates demand unfulfilled by the private 
rented sector.  
9.68 The policy there fore requires 30% of all homes on major developments to be affordable, this 
being established as a level which makes as effective a contribution to affordable housing 
need as is viable. The Revised Preferred Option Local Plan was subject to viability testi ng with 
this level of affordable housing, and found to be deliverable. Performance Monitoring 
Indicator 10, in Appendix 8 , sets out a target / policy outcome to record the number of market 
housing schemes of 10 or more homes that provide 30% affordable hom es. Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
130 9.69 Developments of market housing will be brought forward in the Tier 1 Larger Rural 
Settlements  and Tier 2 Smaller Rural Settlements  in accordance with the development 
strategy, which will result in the delivery of affordable housing on -site. This w ill provide for 
the affordable housing needs of the rural settlements, as far as is viable. Hamlets and 
collections of dwellings within the countryside, other than the Tier 1 Larger Rural Settlements 
and Tier 2 Smaller Rural Settlements , are not regarded a s sustainable locations for the 
location of new housing development, including affordable housing; development in 
countryside areas is covered by Local Plan policy GD4 . Fylde operates a separate rural lettings 
policy as part of its Area Lettings Plan: this  requires a parish connection to be given highest 
priority for affordable lettings; this will ensure that affordable housing in rural settlements, 
although less sustainable than homes located in the strategic locations for development, 
successfully fulfils  the objective of providing for local housing need in the rural area, rather 
than drawing people into rural locations from the urban area.  
9.70 On certain types of site the delivery of affordable housing on -site can be problematic, or the 
type of development is not what is required for affordable housing provision.  An example of 
this is where residential park homes are proposed. Where the Council considers this to be the 
case, contributions will be required for off -site provision. The Affordable Ho using 
Supplementary Planning Document, which was adopted in September 2021, prescribe s the 
formula for calculating the commuted sums in lieu  of on -site provision and the arrangements, 
timing and information required from applicants in such cases.  
9.71 The SHMA sets out the need for affordable housing in Fylde by dwelling size. Fig ure 12.1 of 
the SHMA shows that 64% of the need is for 1 -bed, 16% for 2 -bed, 11% for 3 -bed and 9% for 
4+bed. However the SHMA clarifies that this does not take account of the gover nment’s 
welfare reform programme, and that need for 1 -bed flats is likely to be replaced with demand 
for bedsits (i.e. rooms in HMOs).  The need for sheltered housing will account for an element 
of the 1 -bed need.  
9.72 There is significant unfulfilled deman d for affordable sheltered accommodation for the elderly 
in Fylde with data from MyHomeChoiceFyldeCoast showing 242 applicants specifically 
requiring sheltered housing (as at quarter 3 2015 -16), with latent demand likely to be very 
much greater due to the impact of the constraints on supply: these will all be in need of small 
units of accommodation. The policy therefore specifically invites developers to come forward 
with schemes that include specialist accommodation for the elderly as their affordable rent  
homes, with reference to the criteria in policy H2. 
9.73 Proposed government policy is that starter homes would be treated as affordable housing. 
However, the price of homes in some of the rural areas is very high compared with other parts 
of the borough. Fig ure. 6.5 of the SHMA gives lower quartile house prices for 2013 for each 
area of the borough, including the rural areas: Kirkham/Wesham/Freckleton/Warton 
£115,000; Rural NW £125,000; Lytham St Annes £125,000; Rural NE £156,500; Rural E 
£165,000 ; Rural SW £246,747. Furthermore, the lower quartile house price for Fylde as a 
whole was £125,000, compared with Blackpool’s £72,000. A 20% discount to the market price 
would not realistically deliver houses within reach of first -time buyers, without addi tional 
stipulations. Therefore , the policy requires that starter homes should be small homes, of 1 or 
2 bedrooms, suitable for a young couple, perhaps with a baby.  
9.74 In the case of a proposed scheme being unable to meet the requirements of policy H4 and 
remain viable, consideration should be given on a case -by-case basis to whether the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
131 affordable housing requirement should be reduced in order to achieve a viable scheme . 
Where it is proposed to deliver affordable housing in the form of specialist accommodation 
for the elderly in accordance with policy H2, for affordable rent in conjunction with a 
Registered Social Landlord, it shall be considered to contribute towards bo th the requirements 
for affordable housing and for specialist accommodation for the elderly (in policy H2). 
 
Strategic Policy H5  
Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople’s Sites  
The Local Plan will provide sites for 3 extra pitches for Gypsies and Tr avellers meeting the definition 
in Annex 1 of the Planning Policy for Traveller Sites 2015 in Fylde Borough up to the year 2032. The 
allocations are commitments which provide 5 pitches.  
New Gypsy and Traveller pitches will be allocated at the following sit es: 
➢ Thames Street, Newton (up to 3 pitches)  
➢ The Stackyard, Bryning with Warton (2 pitches)  
Where there is a demonstrated need for pitches or plots from Gypsies, Travellers and/or Travelling 
Showpeople in the Borough, as defined in National Planning Policy, which is additional to the need 
identified by the Blackpool, Fylde and Wyre Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment 
Update 2016, and cannot be accommodated within the allocated sites, planning permission s for 
new Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople’s Sites will be granted where all of the following 
criteria can be met:  
a) There is evidence of need for a new Gypsy, Traveller or Travelling Showpeople’s site and 
the site would provide for the permanen t and/or transit accommodation needs in that area 
or neighbouring authority area;  
b) The site is not in the Green Belt or in an Area of Separation;  
c) The site is not in Flood Risk Zones 2 or 3;  
d) The location and design of the site would protect local amenity and  the local environment;  
e) The site would not be isolated and would be within or proximate to a settlement which can 
provide education, health, welfare and employment infrastructure. Local environmental 
quality with respect to noise and air quality should not have a detrimental impact on the 
health and wellbeing of Gypsies, Travellers and Travel ling Showpeople;  
f) There should be safe vehicular and pedestrian access to the site and adequate parking for 
vehicles and other equipment;   
g) The number of pitches and / or plots should be related to the specific size and location of 
the site and the size and  density of the surrounding population. In a rural or semi -rural 
location the scale of the site should not dominate the settled community;  
h) The site should have the potential to allow mixed -use development, such that traditional 
lifestyles can be accommoda ted by living and working on the same site. However, the uses 
proposed should be compatible with adjacent land uses;  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
132 i) The site should not place unacceptable pressure on existing infrastructure, such as services, 
schools, transport infrastructure and waste a nd wastewater capacity.  
 
 
Justification  
9.75 Planning Policy for Traveller Sites  2015  states that councils will need to set  pitch targets for 
Gypsies and Travellers and plot targets for Travelling Show People, which address the likely 
permanent and transit accommodation needs of travellers in their area, working 
collaboratively with neighbouring planning authorities.  Planning Policy for Traveller Sites 2015 
requires that the Council should identify a supply of deliverable land sufficient to provide f ive 
years  worth of pitches, identify a supply of specific developable sites or broad locations for 
years 6 -10 and where possible years 11 -15.   Annex 1 of Planning Policy for Traveller Sites 2015 
provides the definition of Gypsies and Travellers and Travel ling Showpeople for the purposes 
of national planning policy.  
9.76 Fylde Council, Wyre Borough Council and Blackpool Council (the Fylde Coast sub -regional 
Authorities) jointly commissioned consultants, Opinion Research Services to carry out a Gypsy, 
Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Accommodation Assessment (GTAA)  in 20 14.  An update 
of the GTAA was undertaken in 2016, to take account of the fact that the definitions of 
Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople used in the original assessment were out -of-
date. The GTAA and its Update should be read in conjunction.  
9.77 The GTAA Update 2016 provides an up -to-date understanding of the likely permanent and 
transit accommodation needs of Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople within the 
Fylde Coast sub -region as a whole and for each of the three Councils.  The stud y also provides 
an evidence base to enable the authorities to comply with their requirements towards Gypsies 
and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople under the Housing Act, 2004.  The estimated new  
pitch provision required for Gypsies and Travellers in the Fylde Coast  sub-region   to 2031 is 16 
pitches to address local needs.  For Fylde Borough, a  total of  3 extra pitches , for Gypsies and 
Travellers, are required up to the year 2031 .  
9.78 The estimated extra residential plot provision required for Trave lling Showpeople in the Fylde 
Coast  sub-region   to 2031 is  24 plots, to address local needs.  For Fylde Borough, n o extra 
plots are required for Travelling Showpeople over the period to 2031.  
9.79 The GTAA, 2014 recommends that the Fylde Coast Authorities use appropriate resources to 
help develop closer working relationships, for instance, the three authorities should work 
together to collate data on unauthorised encampments.  The GTAA, 2014 also recommends 
that the Lancashire -wide Gypsy and Tra veller Forum be continued.  The Council, working 
together with the other Fylde Coast Authorities, will undertake updates to the GTAA at least 
every five years (or otherwise in accordance with national policy and guidance) to ensure that 
changes in need with in the sub -region are identified.  
9.80 Policy H5 sets out the location for the provision of pitches for Gypsies and Travellers in Fylde 
up to 2031, in accordance with the Fylde Coast GTAA. A Call for Sites was undertaken in 
January – February 2015, but thi s did not result in the identification of any suitable sites. The 
sites shown in policy H5 are committed. The Council will regularly issue calls for sites and Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
133 consider other potential sources of sites to meet need  for pitches/plots for Gypsies, Travellers 
and Travelling Showpeople meeting the definition in Annex 1 of the Planning Policy for 
Traveller Sites 2015, when it is identified . 
Non -strategic Policy H6  
Isolated New Homes in the Countryside   
Isolated new homes in the countryside  will only be permitted where:  
1.  The home is required to meet the essential needs of a rural worker. It should only be 
permitted where all of the  following criteria can be met:  
a) there is an essential need for permanent attendance of a worker on site;  
b) the need cannot be met by an y existing home or other accommodation at the business 
or in the general locality;  
c) the business is  capable of supporting a full time worker and has a clear prospect of 
remaining so;  
d) the size of the home is appropriate to the rural worker’s family size / economic need 
and it is located adjacent to any existing buildings.  
If accommodation is needed in relation to a new enterprise, then any accommodation should 
be of a temporary nature, such as a caravan or other temporary accommodation, it will only be 
approved for a maximum of three years.  
 
2.  The exceptional quality of design of the building helps to raise standards of design in the 
countryside. The exceptional quality of the design o f the home would:  
a) be truly outstanding, helping to raise standards of design more generally in the 
countryside;  
b) reflect the highest standards in architecture;  
c) significantly enhance its setting;  
d) be sensitive to the defining characteristics of the local area ; and  
e)  protect the local environment . 
 
3. Where such development would represent the optimal viable use of a heritage asset or 
would be appropriate enabling development to secure the future of heritage assets;  
 
4.  Where the development would re -use redundant or disused buildings and lead to 
enhancement in the immediate setting ; or 
 
5.  Where the development would involve the subdivision of an existing residential  building . Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
134 Justification  
9.81 The Framework supports, as an exception, the construction of isolated new homes in the 
countryside where t he home is required to meet the essential need of a rural worker, or the 
building provides exceptional quality of design.   
9.82 For social, economic or environmental reasons it is often preferab le for rural workers to live 
close to their place of work. However, because of continuing high demand for rural homes by 
the general community, the Council considers it is necessary that applications for isolated 
homes in the countryside for rural workers’  occupation fulfil the criteria set out in policy H6. 
Ballam, Greenhalgh, Larbreck, Little Eccleston, Mythop, Roseacre, Thistleton, Treales and 
Wharles are located within the countryside. Given their respective sizes, lack of services and 
facilities, they will not be seen as a focus for new development. Proposals for infill 
development for new homes may be acceptable provided they comply with other policies in 
this Local Plan. Fylde Council will continue to work with L CC to address traffic issues in these 
countryside areas.  
9.83 Policy H6 states that, very occasionally, the exceptional quality of the design of a proposed 
isolated new home may provide the special justification for granting planning permission. 
Such a design should be truly outstanding, for ex ample, in its use of materials, methods of 
construction or its contribution to protecting and enhancing the environment, so helping to 
raise standards of design more generally in rural areas. The value of a building will be found 
in its reflection of the h ighest standards in contemporary architecture, the significant 
enhancement of its immediate setting and sensitivity to the defining characteristics of the 
local area.  
 
Non -strategic Policy H7  
Replacements of, and Extensions to, Existing Homes in the Countryside   
Proposals to replace and / or to extend an existing home in the countryside  will be permitted where 
the following criteria are met:  
a. The replacement or extended home is increased in size by  no more than 33% calculated in 
relation to the ground  floor area of the original home; and  
b. The appearance of  a replacement home respects the character of the surrounding rural 
area and the appearance of an extended home respects the character of the original 
building and the surrounding rural area.  
 
Justification  
9.84 There is an issue in Fylde regarding small rural traditional homes being replaced by much 
larger modern homes. In particular, Fylde is characterised by large former estates with small 
estate workers homes. These small detached or semi -detached cottages are  often demolished 
and replaced by one much larger home.  
9.85 The policy therefore includes a maximum 33% increase in ground floor area for the 
replacement or extension of a home in the countryside.  It is considered that this will ensure Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
135 that such developm ent is proportionate to the size of the original dwelling.  The policy itself 
has a two -pronged approach which considers both the size and appearance of the proposal. 
Evidence collected by the Council demonstrates that fifty one percent of completions of r ural 
homes – excluding barn conversion, caravans and apartments – are four or more bedroomed 
homes (2003 – 2016) . It is vital that the stock of smaller properties in the countryside is 
maintained, thereby providing more affordable properties and enabling p eople to downsize, 
whilst remaining in their local area . 
9.86 Most importantly, the impact on the rural landscape must be considered. Large homes are 
often overbearing in appearance, they dominate the landscape and are surrounded by 
suburban style gardens with ornate walls, gates and floodlighting. The overall impact is to 
make the appearance of the rural area more suburban.  
 
Cross Cutting Themes In Chapter 9:  
Promoting Health and Wellbeing  
Poor housing conditions such as damp conditions or inadequate heating can directly cause ill health. 
Homes that are expensive to heat causes stress for households on low incomes, who suffer from a 
form of deprivation known as ‘fuel poverty’. Poorly adapted homes , for mobility restricted residents , 
undermin e wellbeing.  
Achieving Good Design  
Well -designed homes are attractive in appearance and setting but are also efficient to run and well 
suited to the needs of the occupants, particularly in respect of adaptability as personal circumstances 
change through l ife.  
Strategic Objectives  
The following strategic objectives are achieved in Chapter 9 
Objective 1 : To create sustainable communities  
Objective 3 : To make services accessible  
Objective 5 : To develop socially cohesive, safe, diverse and healthy communities  
Fylde Council’s Corporate Plan  2016 -2020 Priorities  
The following Corporate Plan priorit y will be delivered through Chapter  9: 
• Deliver high standard housing that meets the need in all communities  (A great place to live)  
Fylde Council’s Corporate Plan  2016 -2020 Actions  
The following Corporate Plan action will be delivered through Chapter 9: 
• Provide appropriate provision for Travellers  (A great place to live)  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
136   Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
137 Chapter 10: Health and Wellbeing  
 
Health and Wellbeing  
10.1  The World Health Organisation defines health as ‘…a state of complete physical, mental and 
social wellbeing and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity ’.  Wellbeing is recognised 
as a broader concept, and can be defined as ‘a positive physical, soci al and mental state: it is 
not just the absence of pain, discomfort and incapacity.  It requires that basic needs are met, 
that individuals have a sense of purpose, with which they feel able to achieve important 
personal goals and participate in society ’. 
10.2 The figure below shows that many factors influence our state of health and wellbeing.  
Planning can have a positive effect on these factors.   
Figure 3: The Determinants of Health and Wellbeing in Our Neighbourhoods:  
 
Source: Barton and Grant (2006) based on a public health concept by Whitehead and Dahlgren (1991)  
10.3 Fylde has a higher than average proportion of retired residents, a proportion that is set to 
increase over the coming decades. Whilst health in Fylde is generally good, alcohol 
consumption is a concern and there is evidence that road safety could be improved for older 
residents. There is also a need for activities for young adults and older children.  About 11.7 % 
(1,300) children live in poverty in Fylde. Life expectancy is 6.7 ye ars lower for men and 8.4 
years lower for women in the most deprived areas of Fylde than in the least deprived areas.  
Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
138 Levels of smoking are worse than the England average. Levels of teenage pregnancy are better 
than the England average. In 2012, 21.1% of a dults in Fylde were classified as obese , with child 
obesity on the rise.  Rates of sexually transmitted infections and T urbuculosis  are better than 
average. The rate of new cases of malignant melanoma is worse than average. (Public Health 
England, Fylde Dis trict, Health Profile 2015, produced on 2 June 2015)    . 
10.4 The rate of people killed and seriously injured on r oads is worse than average. Children in 
Fylde are particularly vulnerable as pedestrians or whilst cycling. (LCC Environment Commissioning 
Plan for Fylde 2015 – 16, May 2015).  
10.5 Overall t he general health of people in Fylde is better compared to Lancashire and England 
averages but challenges remain, including:  
• The high proportion of the population over 65, with a proportion not in good health;  
• The high proportion of ‘Killed and Seriously Injured on roads’ in Fylde , is significantly 
worse than average.  
• Alcohol specific hospital stays for under 18s is generally decreasing though not as 
quickly as the national average and is similar to national rates.  Hospital admissions for 
alcohol related harm have decreased in the last couple of years and are the same as 
the national a verage.  Drinking in the population is similar to national averages;  
• Smoking prevalence is significantly lower than the national average in the general 
population and is not significantly different to the national average for routine and 
manual smoking pre valence;  
• The excess winter deaths and fuel poverty in vulnerable groups;  
• The need to maintain levels of physical activity in adults and children;  
• The need to maintain low numbers of early deaths from heart disease and stroke; and  
• The need to maintain lower than England average for obese children and adults.  
10.6 Mortality rates have fallen over the last 10 years. Early death rates from cancer, hea rt disease 
and stroke have fallen and are better than the England averages. Specific identified needs 
include reducing the number of people in Fylde with cardiovascular disease. It is estimated 
that by 2020, 8.8% of all adults in Fylde will have cardiovasc ular disease. This is above the 
predicted rate for England and the second worst rate in the county.  In terms of premature 
mortality and premature mortality considered preventable for various conditions, Fylde 
generally performs better than, or similar to n ational averages for mortality  (LCC Environment 
Commissioning Plan for Fylde 2015 – 16, May 2015).  
10.7 Addressing all health and wellbeing issues requires the co -ordinated efforts of a number of 
agencies, councils and voluntary and community organisations involved in health and 
wellbeing  profession .  LCC is responsible for public health and Clinical Commissioning Groups 
are responsible for individual patients’ health (mainly General Practitioners).  New models of 
care are about  increased effici ency and improved access for patients  across the whole health 
sector.  
10.8 These changes to public sector service delivery (for example in public health) can provide the 
opportunities for different ways of collaborative working to the benefit of Fylde's mo st 
deprived neighbourhoods.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
139 Strategic Policy HW1  
Health and Wellbeing  
The Council will integrate public health principles and planning to help reduce health  inequalities 
by: 
a) Working with health care commissioners to support healthcare facilities and partic ularly to 
improve primary care and mental health care access and facilities;  
b) Working with the Lancashire Public Health Service and the Health and Wellbeing Board on 
planning and health issues , to take account of the three goals in the Lancashire Health and 
Wellbeing Strategy, that the Board will deliver  by 2020 :  
1. Better health – improve healthy life expectancy, and narrow the health gap.  
2. Better care – deliver measureable  improvements in people’s experience of 
health and social care services.  
3. Better value  – reduce the cost of health and social care.  
c) Where required by the priorities of Lancashire County Council and health care 
commissioners, identifying sites for new health care facilities , and with providers of other 
social and community infrastructure to deliver appropriate facilities in accessible locations, 
to meet local needs,  reflecting the spatial distribution of need and the importance of 
accessibility and public tran sport provision;  
d) Seeking land or financial contributions, where appropriate and viable, towards new or 
enhanced healthcare facilities from developers where new housing results in a shortfall or 
worsening of provision;  
e) Safeguarding and encouraging the provi sion of allotments  and garden plots within 
developments and small scale agriculture and farmers markets to provide access to healthy, 
affordable locally produced food options;  
f) Promoting improvements to healthy lifestyles and developing a network of cycling  and 
pedestrian routes  - linking key settlements and service centres, enabling the community to 
improve their health by travelling by more sustainable modes of transport - integrated into 
a wider  multi -functional  green infrastructure network ; 
g) The reduction  of health inequalities and initiatives to facilitate healthier lifestyles will be 
supported, where these can be delivered through the planning system.  
In order to help reduce health inequalities, the Council will require health impact  screening to be 
undertaken for all major development proposals on each Strategic Site (100 or more homes) within 
the Strategic Locations for Development through the submission of a masterplan . A full 
independent Health Impact Assessment will be required if  the screening demonstrates a need.   The 
Health Impact Assessments will be assessed by Lancashire County Council, as the public health 
authority. The outcomes of the screening process should be reflected in the development proposal 
and should be a consider ation in decision -making.  
 
 Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
140 Justification  
10.9 Health and wellbeing considerations are referenced throughout the Local Plan. Policy HW1 , 
above concentrates on three particular aspects, namely the provision of health care services, 
access to healthy food and the requirement for Health Impact Assessments.  
Provision of Health Care Services  
10.10 Clinical Commissioning Groups  (CCG)  are led by family doctors (GPs) and are responsible for 
planning and buying health services in the local area to meet patien ts’ needs.  Their main areas 
of responsibility are the commissioning of hospital and community health services for the local 
people. NHS England commissions primary care, specialised services and health services for 
the Armed Forces. Public Health England and LCC commission public health and health 
improvement services.  CCG’s work with these other commissioners to ensure health  services 
are joined up.  Access to primary care in rural areas can be difficult, particularly for older 
people. Mental health servi ces are provided across Lancashire by Lancashire Care NHS 
Foundation Trust. The Blackpool Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust provides secondary 
care services at Blackpool Victoria Hospital. LCC also provides care services for older people 
and for chil dren and young people, as do a number of private and third sector agencies.  
10.11 The types of health care services provided and the methods of delivery continue to change. 
For example, some CCGs   are developing ‘walk in’ centres for primary care, based in town or 
district centres, whilst others are developing GP led ‘polyclinics’, which are intended to 
provide more specialist facilities than GP surgeries and will therefore take some pressure off 
hospitals.  
10.12 Where LCC, the CCG or other service providers identify a need for a new facility, the Council 
will assist with identifying a suitable site and, if possible, seek to identify land in the Local Plan.  
New housing development may create a nee d for new or expanded health care facilities. The 
Council will seek the advice of the CCG in establishing whether new facilities will be required 
to serve the development, and if this is the case, will seek appropriate developer 
contributions.  
Lancashire H ealth and Wellbeing Board  
10.13 The Lancashire Health and Wellbeing Board is a forum f or key leaders from the  health  and 
care system in Lancashire to work together to im prove the health and wellbeing  of the local 
population and reduce health inequalities. Board members work together to understand their 
local community’s needs, agree priorities and encourage  commissioners to work in a more 
joined -up way. As a result, patients and the public should experien ce more joined -up services 
from the NHS and their local council in the future.  Lancashire Health and Wellbeing Board’s 
vision is that: ‘We want every citizen in Lancashire to enjoy a long and healthy life ’.  The Board 
will do this by: ‘Working together to  deliver real improvements to the health and wellbeing of 
Lancashire's citizens and communities ’.   
10.14 It is the responsibility of the Lancashire Health and Wellbeing Board to:  
• Identify the priority health and wellbeing needs in Lancashire (using the Joint Strategic 
Needs Assessment ). 
• Set priorities based on information gathered from across Lancashire.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
141 • Promote integrated commissioning and provision of services by encouraging part nership 
working.  
Health y New Towns and the Whyndyke Garden Village  pilot programme (demonstrator 
site)  
10.15 The NHS has made a clear commitment to improve the health of the population by integrating 
health and care services into new settlements as communities take shape. The Healthy New 
Towns (HNT) initiative aims to reduce the burden on the health service by put ting health and 
wellbeing at the heart of planning new communities. The programme  will enable the 
development of  neighbourhoods  and communities that support healthier living and lifestyle, 
as well as creating environments in which older and vulnerable peop le can remain 
independent for longer.  The NHS is bringing together clinicians, designers and technology 
experts to re -imagine how healthcare can be delivered in the Healthy New Towns by joi ning 
up the design of the built environment with modern health and care services.  
10.16 Digital technology integrated into the infrastructure of the built environment will open up new 
ways for health and care to be delivered, including telecare and telehealth as well as providing 
the foundation for a wide range of innova tions that can transform the way communities think 
about health and wellbeing. Bespoke software applications will provide creative ways to 
connect people developing new approaches to strengthen local communities. Healthy New 
Towns will provide the opportun ity to plan spaces that support health and wellbeing by 
designing a built environment that promotes healthier  behaviours .   
10.17 The Whyndyke Garden Village  HNT  pilot programme  is one of ten housing developments 
selected as ‘demonstrator sites’ across the  country to act as lead test environments that will 
deliver ambitious plans for building healthy communities.  
10.18 Whyndyke Garden Village , located directly north of Junction 4 of the M55 motorway, has been 
selected as one of the ten HNT demonstrator sites.  The majority of the 91 hectare site is 
located in Fylde Borough with a small part (7.6 Ha) located in Blackpool. An outline planning 
application  has been approved  for 1, 310 home s in Fylde and 90 homes in Blackpool , of which  
at least 20% wi ll be affordable . The ambition for Whyndyke Garden Village  is to provide the 
homes, jobs and services that people need, reducing environmental risks and delivering well 
designed buildings and ur ban spaces which will create the conditions for healthy, active 
lifestyles. Education, employment, leisure, health and residential accommodation will be 
provided on the site with the intention to integrate efficiently and effectively with existing 
settleme nts. 
10.19  The initiatives designed to make Whyndyke Garden Village  a healthy community will be driven 
by the local community focused on reducing long term poor health conditions.  Every aspect 
of the built environment, social integration, community development and transport will be 
designed to provide the opportunity for everyone to easily choose a healthy diet, lifestyle, 
attitude and activity. The real success of ‘Whyndyke  Garden Village ’ as a healthy new town 
will be throu gh community engagement.  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
142 Public Realm  
10.20 Providing a high quality public realm and more opportunities for walking, cycling and public 
transport can offer significant enhancements to health and wellbeing. Encouraging changes 
in behaviour, needs to be targeted appropriately taking into account cult ure, population, 
social and psychological factors and the physical environment.  
Access to Healthy Food  
10.21 The link between the quality of food we eat and personal wellbeing is well  documented. 
Concerns are increasing in the UK over levels of obesity and  the consequent health issues. 
Community food growing schemes including the ‘landshare ’ initiative where local landowners 
lease out their land to local residents to use for food growing purposes, can help counter this 
by providing fresh, affordable food and also promote physical activity and social inclusion. It 
is important, therefore, to s afeguard allotments and other urban land that can support local 
food growing.  
Accessible Greenspaces  
10.22 Access to greenspaces is important for peoples’ health and wellbeing. Access to some of the 
Borough’s most important Green Infrastructure assets is limited .  There are opportunit ies to 
link up the Green Infrastructure network across Fylde, which  are looked at in more detail in 
chapter 13. 
Health Impact Assessments  
10.23 The effect that planning policies and proposals may have on the health of a community can 
be tested through an independent Health Impact Assessment (HIA).  This aims to ensure that 
any adverse impacts are reduced and positive impacts are maximised for all sections of the 
community. LCC is currently exploring the provision of a Hea lth Impact Assessment (HIA) 
template and guidance document.  
10.24 In order to  help reduce health inequalities, health impact screening will be required for all 
major development proposals on strategic sites. However, a full independent Health Impact 
Assess ment will only be required if screening demonstrates a need. Performance Monitoring 
Indicator 11, in Appendix 8, sets out a target / policy outcome to record the number of Health 
Impact Assessments which are submitted with major planning applications.  
  
Strategic Policy HW2  
Community Facilities  
Development proposals for new community facilities  – including developments within the new local 
centres at Warton , Whyndyke  and Whitehills identified on the Policies Map  including Inset plans  - 
which provide for t he health and wellbeing, social, educational, spiritual, recreational, leisure and 
cultural needs of the community, should be co -located where possible, providing mixed uses and a 
range of services in one sustainable and accessible location.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
143 Where new faci lities are required independent of new development, co -location should be 
considered in the most accessible community buildings available, i.e. using a hall or a public house 
as a venue for a post office, or a healthcare facility  several days a week.  
Indic ative sites for new primary schools are identified within the development sites at Queensway 
(HSS1) and Whyndyke (MUS2) and are shown on the Policies Map  including Inset Plans . 
The Council will work with the Education Authority to identify and deliver a site for a new secondary 
school once a need is demonstrated within the plan period.  
A site for a new Church will be reserved on land at the rear of cottages on Lytham Road, in Warton 
– as identified on the Policies Map  – for the re -location of Ho ly Family Church in Warton.  
The loss of any community facilities will be resisted unless it can be demonstrated that the facility ’s 
continued operation  is no longer viable or needed, or can be relocated elsewhere  in a location  that 
is equall y accessible by  the community.  
 
Justification  
10.25 Availability of community facilities can contribute towards community spirit, and can also 
reduce the need to travel by making communities more self -contained.  
10.26 It is projected that there will be a significant shortfall of school places in the Boroug h over the 
plan period and many schools, particularly within Lytham and St Annes, are already at 
capacity.  Lancashire County Council, as the Education Authority , considers that  a provision 
will need to be made for an additional secondary school site within  the timescale of the Local 
Plan. Further information on education provision is set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan  
(IDP) , which  accompanies this Local Plan.   
10.27 There is a lack of reliable, high speed electronic communication in parts of the Borough. LCC 
is leading on the Lancashire Superfast Broadband Project which aims to bring improved 
broadband speeds to businesses and communities in Lancashire, including Fyld e. This will help 
to stimulate and increase business productivity, aid home working opportunities and attract 
investment into Lancashire. Again, further information is set out in the IDP. 
10.28 The protection of leisure, cultural and tourism assets, such a s golf courses and seaside resort 
facilities, is covered in policy EC6 in Chapter 8.  The protection of existing open spaces (Green 
Infrastructure  network ) is covered in policy ENV 3 in Chapter 13.  
Indoor and Outdoor Sports Facilities  
10.29 Many community facilities are also sports facilities. Consequently, the delivery of such 
facilities is based upon the findings of the Built Facilities Review , prepared by Lancashire Sport 
Partnership  in August 2015 . The Facilities Review recommends the provision of indoor tennis 
centres in Fylde, together with approximately 113 more Health and Fitness stations  (i.e. 
treadmills, cycling machines, rowing mac hines etc) , due to current under -provision . Policy 
ENV 4 in Chapter  13 covers the provision of new open space  (the Green Infrastructure 
network) ; open space standards and contributions.  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
144 Strategic Policy HW3  
Protection and Provision of Indoor and Outdoor Sports Facilities   
In order to provide appropriate indoor and outdoor sports facilities for the communities of Fylde, 
the Council will:  
1. Protect existing indoor and outdoor sports facilities, unless:  
a) They are proven to be surplus to need, as identified in an adopted and up to date Needs 
Assessment  1; and/ or  
b) An e quivalent or better quality and quantity replacement  sports  facility  will be created in a 
location well related to the functional requirements of the relocated use and its existing 
and future users . This would be over and above any provision made available through CIL;  
and/ or 
c) The development is for an alternative indoor or outdoor sports facility  the benefits of which 
clearly outweigh the loss of the existing sports facility , (see additional footnote below) ; 
And in all cases:  
d) The proposal would not result in the loss of an area important for its amenity or 
contribution to the character of the area in general; and  
2. Support new indoor and outdoor sports facilities  where:  
a) They are readily accessible by public transport, walking and cycling; and  
b) The proposed facilities are of a type and scale appropriate to the size of the settlement; 
and 
c) They  are listed in the action plan in the adopted Playing Pitch Strategy and / or the Built 
Facilities Review , subject to the criteria in th is policy.  
3.  Make sure that major residential developments contribute, through land assembly  and       
commuted sums , to new or improved sports facilities where development will increase        
demand and / or there is  already  a recognised shortage.  Commuted sums should be  obtained 
in accordance with an up -to-date  adopted Needs Assessment  Action Plan 2. 
 
1. In terms of sports provision, the relevant Needs Assessment will be the Playing Pitch Strategy and Built Sports 
Facility Strategy  
2. The relevant sports  Needs Assessment s and Action Plans  are the  Playing Pitch Strategy and Built Facilities 
Strategy.  
 
Justification  
10.30 Publicly accessible urban open space, play and sports facilities all have a vital role to play in 
helping to promote healthier  lifestyles.  
10.31 The existing outdoor and built sports facilities, both private and public, of the Borough 
represent important assets serving the communities in  which they are located and in some 
insta nces the wider area.  This importance relates to their function and also the amenity value 
and the contribution these facilities make to providing green spaces within the area.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
145 10.32 Any proposal affecting an outdoor sports facility will be judged in relation to the most up -to-
date Playing Pitch Strategy  produced by the Council . Performance Monitoring Indicator 15, 
in Appendix 8, sets out a target / policy outcome to achieve net gains in the provision of sports 
pitches and open space.  
10.33 The type and scale of sports facilities appropriate to a  settlement will depend upon a number 
of factors:  
• The demand and supply factors in relation to the particular outdoor sports 
being catered for, for example, a combined sports facility catering for local 
football clubs in an area which may serve a wider area than the adjacent 
settlement;  
• The classification of the settlement within the settlement hierarchy;  
• The proximity of other settle ments and facilities;  
• Accessibility and infrastructure considerations, for example, traffic impact; 
and 
• Whether there is a deficit of a particular sports facility.  
10.34 In terms of the development of appropriate facilities, this will be determined throug h 
evidence from the Playing Pitch Strategy process, and other work with the community and 
sports bodies, to determine a particular club or community’s needs.  The Council is expected 
to introduce a CIL and the balance between what monies are collected from  Section 106 
Agreements and CIL will be part of this process. The level of contributions will be determined 
through the S106 and CIL setting agenda. The Council has published  a list of investments in 
existing facilities in the Infrastructure Delivery Sched ule, which comprises Appendix 2 to the 
IDP.   
10.35 Developer contributions for outdoor sports facilit ies will be informed by the new Playing Pitch 
Strategy, 2016, which has been  prepared  by Knight Kavanagh & Page ( KKP) Management 
Consultants  in accordanc e with Sport England ’s guidance  (October 2013 ). 
 
Cross Cutting Themes In Chapter 1 0:  
Achieving Good Design  
Health y living should be part of peoples’ everyday lives . Good design can help to shape places so that 
healthy lifestyles are encouraged for example, by supporting Green Infrastructure and safe, 
sustainable transport networks, and the provision of a well -designed network of healthcare services  
and built/indoor sports facilities . Good design can promote community cohesion and significantly 
reduc e the risk of crime.  
Strategic Objectives  
The following strategic objective is achieved in Chapter 10. 
Objective 5 : To develop socially cohesive, safe, diverse and healthy communities  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
146 Fylde Council’s Corporate Plan  2016 -2020 Priorities  
The following Corporate Plan priority will be delivered through Chapter 10: 
• Work with partners to improve health and wellbeing of all residents  (A great place to live)  
Fylde Council’s Corporate Plan 2016 -2020 Actions  
The following Corporate Plan action will be delivered through Chapter 10: 
• Tackle social isolation and health inequalities with Public Health  (A great place to live)   Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
147 Chapter 11: Infrastructure, Service Provision and 
Transport  
  
11.1 A vital element of sustainable development is the provision and delivery of local  services and 
infrastructure. However, lack of infrastructure should not be seen as an obstacle to 
development. Planning should proactively drive and support sustainable economic 
development, an d this includes the delivery of infrastructure. Additionally, the Framework 
requires that planning policies should seek to address potential barriers to investment, 
including any lack of infrastructure.  
What is Infrastructure?  
11.2 Infrastructure has a br oad definition and includes, but is not restricted to the following:  
• Transport : highways, air travel, rail, trams, bus, cycling, pedestrian , bridleways,  coach 
parking  and park and ride  
• Energy : gas and electricity generation and provision  
• Water : supply, wastewater and surface water drainage, flood defences and flood risk 
management  
• Waste Management : refuse collection, disposal and recycling  
• Coastal Defence(s) : hard and soft engineering solutions to overcome coastal flooding 
and sea level rises  
• Flood Alleviation : surface water and bathing water  
• Information and Communications Technology : electronic communications , 
broadband and cable television  
• Education : nursery and pre -school, primary, secondary, further, higher, and adult 
education  
• Health : hosp itals, health centres / GP surgeries , dental practices  and hospices  
• Emergency Services : police, fire and rescue, ambulance, coastguard  
• Green Infrastructure  Network : open space, parks, children’s play areas, sports 
pitches and courts, country parks , accessible natural green space, allotments and 
burial facilities  
• Community Services : libraries, community centres, youth services, social services, 
older peoples support, special needs and disability and places of worship  
• Culture and Leisure : museums and galleries, performance venues, sports and fitness 
centres , swimmimg pools and stadiums  
• Affordable Housing  
• Public Realm  
11.3 The Council has prepared  an Infrastructure Delivery Plan  (IDP) , which identifies  the 
infrastructure required to deliver the Local P lan and how it will be delivered. In doing this, it 
identifies  obstacles to the delivery of the Local Plan and how these will be overcome. The IDP 
also identifies gaps in funding, and therefore informs the CIL, which is a levy the Council will 
use to charge on new developments.  More i nformation on CIL is set out in p olicy INF2 . 
11.4 The Council consulted  on the IDP  and Infrastructure Delivery Schedule alongside the 
Publication  version of the Local Plan.  The Council has engaged with infrastructure providers Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
148 throughout the plan preparation process and the detailed information received from 
infrastructure providers through ongoing dialogue gives greater clarity to the specific 
infrastructure requirements to  deliver the Local Plan.  
11.5 The draft Infrastructure Delivery Schedule, which is to be found at the back of the IDP, lists 
the infrastructure projects that are currently planned, or are known to be required to deliver 
all of the development identified i n the Local Plan, along with the costs, timescales, funding 
sources and who will deliver the infrastructure. The Schedule indicates the certainty of these 
schemes taking place; and it will be updated as new infrastructure requirements are known.  
11.6 There is a shortage of primary school places in Fylde. The need for new primary schools is 
identified in Policy HW2 with provision to be included within development sites at Queensway 
(HSS1) and Whyndyke (MUS2). There may be a need for a new secondary scho ol in the 
Borough within the Plan period, which runs up to 31 March 2032. The Council will work with 
the Education Authority to identify and deliver a site for a new secondary school once a need 
is demonstrated during the plan period.  
  
Strategic Policy I NF1 
Service Accessibility and Infrastructure  
Development will be required to provide essential site service and communications infrastructure 
and demonstrate that it will support infrastructure requirements as set out in the Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan . 
In order for Fylde to protect and create sustainable communities, proposals for development 
should:  
a) Make the most of existing infrastructure by focusing on sustainable locations with the 
best infrastructure capacity;  
b) Minimise any negative impacts on the quality of the existing infrastructure as a result 
of new development;  
c) Mitigate any environmental impacts of new infrastructure provision;  
d) Use sustainable natural resources where appropriate;  
e) Where appropriate, contribute towards improvements to existing i nfrastructure and 
provision of new infrastructure, as required to meet the needs of the development;  
f) Where appropriate, demonstrate how access to services will be achieved by means 
other than the car, and where appropriate, demonstrate how the range of loc al social 
and community services and facilities available will be suitable and accessible for the 
intended occupiers or user(s) of the development; and  
g) In considering development proposals, it may be necessary to co -ordinate the 
timescales for delivery of development with the timescales for the delivery of 
infrastructure.  For large development sites, which may be constructed over a number 
of years and by various developers, it will be necessary to ensure a co -ordinated and 
holistic approach to the delivery  of infrastructure, especially drainage infrastructure Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
149 through the requirement for site wide strategies  through masterplanning  which 
establish principles to be adhered to during the construction process.  
Fylde  Council will work with Lancashire County Coun cil to ensure the delivery of a new secondary 
school in Fylde during the lifetime of the Local Plan.   
The Council will support the delivery of high -speed fibre broadband through the Lancashire 
Superfast Broadband project and communications technology to a ll parts of the Borough and will 
encourage and facilitate its use in line with national policy.  
 
Justification  
11.7 Whilst new infrastructure will be required to deliver the level of development identified in the 
Local Plan, it is important that it is located so that it makes the most efficient use of existing 
infrastructure. Development should be directed toward those settlements that have a good 
range of existing infrastructure and services befo re considering areas where there are deficits 
requiring investment and improvement. However, it is also important that improvements, 
such as electronic  communications and broadband to serve new businesses, are identified and 
that the Local Plan helps make these improvements happen.  
11.8 One way of tackling climate change is by creating sustainable communities. Dispersing 
services and work places over wide areas makes them difficult to serve with public transport. 
In addition, the rural nature of Fylde means  that isolation from services is a particular concern.  
11.9 To ensure Fylde’s infrastructure capacity is maximised, development of Strategic Sites within 
the Strategic Locations for Development should  be masterplanned in accordance with policy 
M1. Developments should be located where there is existing infrastructure capacity, 
wherever possible. Where infrastructure deficiencies exist, the Council is committed to 
achieving a consistent and co -ordinated approach to providing new or improved 
infrastruc ture through partnership working with providers, the development industry and 
other agencies and this is documented in the IDP. 
Developer Contributions  
11.10 Co-ordination and funding of the delivery of new infrastructure and improvements to existing 
infra structure is necessary to ensure that new development does not place an unacceptable 
burden upon existing infrastructure. This will be achieved through the refinement and regular 
monitoring of the IDP, which will sit alongside and inform the Local Plan. The IDP identifies 
the infrastructure that will be required, to accommodate all of the proposed  new  
development in the Borough and when it should be delivered. Where possible, funding for 
delivery of th e infrastructure is identified along with the delivery partners.  
11.11 The Council is required to demonstrate that new development proposed in the Local Plan can 
be supported by the necessary infrastructure. The Council is engaging with infrastructure 
prov iders to determine the key infrastructure capacity issues that impact upon Fylde.  
11.12 The IDP has established the essential infrastructure that will be needed to help deliver all of 
the development identified both within and outside the four Strategic Locations  for 
Development , (see chapters 5 and 6). There are a number of infrastructure providers, 
including the utility services – water, sewerage treatment, electricity, gas and  electronic Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
150 communications .  These bodies are required to co -operat e with the Council on issues of 
common concern in strategic planning under the ‘ Duty to Cooperate.’  Local public sector 
providers, including health and education, are supported by national government sources of 
funding but this is generally aimed at cater ing for existing demand plus some ‘natural’ growth 
and refurbishment / replacement programmes.  
11.13 Increased infrastructure service demand associated with new development is generally 
provided and, or paid for by developers, subject to viability. The way new developments may 
be required to provide infrastructure through planning permissions is changing.  The 
‘developer contributions’ approach reaches separate individual legal agreements under 
Section 106 of the Planning Act. These contributions are also used to mitigate other adverse 
impacts of a new development.  
11.14 From April  2015 the Council’s abili ty to pool Section 106 payments has been restricted3.  
Regulation 123 imposes restrictions on the Council’s ability to secure developer contributions 
for mitigating infrastructure impacts through planning agreements.  It is now only possible for 
a maximum  of five planning agreements to be pooled to contribute to any one infrastructure 
item or infrastructure type.  Larger scale major developments typically have larger and more 
concentrated impacts and so may necessitate site specific infrastructure such as schools, 
community facilities , junction improvements  and sustainable public transport provision .   
11.15 In securing such planning agreements on larger sites, the Council will apply the three statutory 
tests, set out in national policy and in Regulation 12 2 of the CIL Regulations, 2010 and 
repeated below; so as to  avoid duplication with the CIL.   
a. Necessary to make the development acceptable  
b. Directly related to the development  
c. Fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the development  
11.16 In March  2015, Full Council  agreed  to the principle of  introduc ing a standard charge approach 
(the CIL), whereby a levy is charged on owners or developers carrying out built development 
so that they contribute to the costs of providing the infrastructure nee ded to support  new  
development of the area.  The CIL is all about mitigating the impact of new development; it is 
not a shopping list of schemes.  As part of the CIL, the Council will work with consultants to 
develop a draft Charging Schedule and prepare a  Regulation 123 List of all of the infrastructure 
types and projects such as transport, education, leisure and health - that it is intended will be, 
or may be wholly or partly funded by CIL.  Until the Charging Schedule  is adopted, Section 106 
agreements w ill continue to provide the mechanism for collecting developer contributions 
towards essential infrastructure.   
11.17  The opportunity will be taken to secure funding through CIL and other sources to implement 
schemes for environmental enhancements, as outlined in the Council’s Regeneration 
Framework, 2016 - 2032. The Council will support town and parish councils and commu nity 
groups in the development of specific schemes to create or enhance the public  realm.  
  
 
3 Under CIL Regulation 123  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
151 Non -strategic Policy INF2  
Developer Contributions  
Subject to viability, development will normally be expected to contribute towards the mitigation of 
its impact on  infrastructure, services and the environment and contribute towards the 
requirements of the community. Contributions may be secured through a planning obligation and 
through the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL), at such time as the Council has prepared a 
Standard Charging Schedule.  
The types of infrastructure that developments may be required to provide contributions towards 
include, but are not limited to:  
a) Affordable housing;  
b) Utilities and Waste (where the provision does not fall within the uti lity providers 
legislative obligations);  
c) Flood risk management and coastal defences (including strategic flood defence measures 
and local flood risk management measures) and sustainable drainage measures (both on 
site and borough wide, including the retrof itting of sustainable drainage systems – SuDS;  
d) Transport (highway, rail  and tram infrastructure , bus, and cycle / footpath / bridleway 
network and any associated facilities);  
e) Community facilities providing for the health  (i.e. new or enhanced healthcare facilities)  
and wellbeing, social, educational  (i.e. schools) , spiritual, recreational, leisure and cultural 
needs of the community;  
f) The development of Whitehills , Whyndyke  and Warton  to become Local Service Centres , 
including land and buildings  to accommodate new Local Centres  to provide services and 
meet the daily retail needs of the local residents;  
g) Enhancing the functionality, quality, connectivity and accessibility of the Green 
Infrastructure  network  – the network of natural environmental components and green 
and blue spaces (such as outdoor sports facilities, open space, including  Fylde’s  Coastal   
Change Management Area s stretching from Starr Hills to Savick Brook  in the south and 
along the River Wyr e in the north , Lancaster Canal, parks, allotments, play areas, 
enhancing and conserving biodiversity and management of environmentally sensitive 
areas);  
h) Climate change and energy initiatives;  
i) Public realm – the public realm needs to be designed appropriat ely, to reflect the 
character and appearance of an area, including landscaping, street furniture and 
materials and  to ensure  that it is appropriately managed and maintained so as to add to 
the quality and distinctiveness of the particular area.  
Where appro priate, the Council will permit developers to provide the necessary infrastructure 
themselves as part of their development proposals, rather than making financial contributions.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
152 Where a development is made unviable by the requirements of a planning obligat ion, the Council 
will have regard to appropriate evidence submitted by an applicant and consider whether any 
flexibility in the planning obligation is justified.  
 
Justification  
11.18 All new development, regardless of size and scale, places additional demands on services and 
facilities, impacting on their ability to meet the needs of the community. The CIL will create a 
system which will pass the cost of infrastructure improvements on to those developments 
above 100 m2 which are considered to  be of a type viable to charge CIL. This will allow the 
Council greater autonomy over expenditure and ensure strategic infrastructure requirements 
are met along with localised objectives.  
11.19 CIL was introduced in the Planning Act, 2008 (Part 11) and on 6 April 2010 CIL  Regulations 
were passed that enable councils to apply CIL on new developments in their area.  In light of 
the recent changes to the CIL regulations on pooled contributions (Regulation 123) which 
came into force in April 2015, councils cannot collect more than 5 pooled contributions (from 
developments since April 2010) towards a single project or type of infrastructure not covered 
by a CIL infrastructure list/ charging schedule. Regulations have also been passed, along with 
guida nce on the 'meaningful proportion' to be applied to Neighbourhood Development Plans. 
The Localism Act has confirmed the role of CIL in developer contributions and has increased 
the flexibility of the CIL framework. The Council is investigating the preparat ion of a CIL 
Standard Charging Schedule and has undertaken a viability assessment  of the RPO  version of 
the Local Plan to inform this process.   
11.20 The introduction of a CIL charging schedule will not always remove the requirement for 
Section 106 planni ng obligations which will remain to be used in accordance with the tests set 
out within the CIL regulations and set out in paragraph 11.15.  There  may still be exceptional 
instances where a planning obligation is required to make a proposal acceptable, pro vided it 
meets the three statutory tests.  Planning obligations are a key delivery tool, providing the 
opportunity to secure financial contributions which mitigate against the localised impacts of 
development which would otherwise render the proposal unacc eptable in planning terms.  
11.21 Performance Monitoring Indicator 12, in Appendix 8, sets out a target / policy outcome to 
monitor the implementation of infrastructure projects.  
11.22 The IDP identifies particular infrastructure requirements within the Borough that are needed 
to support the Local Plan and ensure delivery of sustainable communities. The CIL and Section 
106 agreements will be vital in supporting the delivery of infrastructure, a long with other 
funding streams. However, the Council recognises that there may be certain development 
proposals which would become unviable with the additional costs of a planning obligation . 
The Council will weigh up the benefits of permitting the develo pment , against the impacts of 
allowing the development to proceed without requiring the full planning obligation . Where 
appropriate, the Council may reduce the costs of the planning obligation required.  In such a 
situation, the applicant will be required to provide a full financial appraisal and will be required 
to bear the cost of independent verification of this financial appraisal.  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
153 Transport Provision    
11.23 An effective and efficient transport system is essential to the economic prosperity of Fylde , it 
also contributes to the creation of sustainable communities . The location and type of new 
development can influence, and be influenced by, the nature of travel patterns.  
11.24 Fylde has a high rate of car ownership, reflecting both the relative b uoyancy of the local 
economy and the need for personal transport in the rural areas which are less well served by 
public transport. The Council recognises that that the existing road network needs upgrading 
and a significant proportion of its population is  dependent on public transport.  
11.25 Highways England is responsible for two main routes through the Borough, the M55 
motorway and the A585(T), known as the Strategic Road Network.   
11.26 Fylde is a two tier authority , with LCC being responsible for the Local Highway network and 
the production of the Local Transport Plan (LTP3) and its Implementation Plan. LTP3 was 
adopted in March 2011 and runs from 2011 -2021.  The LTP refers to the drafting of Highways 
and Transport M asterplans.   
11.27 The Fylde Coast Highways and Transport Masterplan, which was issued for consultation in 
January and February 2015 , was adopted in July 2015 .  The Masterplan includes a number of 
priority  transport schemes, together with public transport  initiatives, that will need to be 
delivered to overcome existing traffic congestion and to accommodate all of the  new  
development planned in the Fylde Coast to the year 2032. It provides a transport evidence 
base to inform future highways and transport st rategy development; it is the basis for future 
decisions on infrastructure planning and strategic priorities for the area, including improving 
public  transport; and includes measures seeking to reduce car dependency and the need to 
travel.  
11.28 The infrequency of trains on the South Fylde railway line is an ongoing concern, as is the lack 
of a direct link to the Blackpool tramway . The South Fylde Line  Community Rail Partnership, 
of which Fylde Council and LCC are members, seeks to increase patronage and revenue and 
help secure the long term future of the line and promote the case for future investment.  
11.29 The Blackpool North railway line to Preston;  the network of quality bus services focused on 
the urban area; and Blackpool Airport, mean that Fylde has other connections . There are, 
however, deficiencies in the transport network as the Strategic Road network is affected by 
traffic congestion at peak periods and there is limited public transport provision in some rural 
areas.   
11.30 Blackpool Airport has seen a decline in passenger numbers in recent years.  The airport has a 
potential role in catering for inward traffic as the visitor economy develops in Blackpool and 
Fylde. Links to the public transport network (train, tram and bus routes) are not fully exploited, 
with no direct bus link to Blackpool North s tation and relatively limited  access to nearby 
Squires Gate station or Starr Gate Tram terminus.  
The Strategic and Local Highway network  
11.31 The Fylde -Blackpool Periphery Strategic Location for Development has good access to 
Junction 4 of the M55 and to the A583, while links to St Annes  and Lytham will be improved 
by the construction of the M55 to Heyhouses (St Annes) Link Road .  The Link Road will provide 
a direct north / south  route across the Moss linking the M55 motorway and Lytham St Annes. Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
154 Planning permission for the link road was granted by the Secretary of State in 2012, as part of 
the proposed Queensway , St Annes ( housing  site HS1). 
Highway schemes in the adopted Central Lancashire Highways and Transport Masterplan  
11.32 Proposals for a new dual carriageway link road - the Presto n Western Distributor Road - and 
a new Junction 2 on the M55  west of Broughton were included in the Central Lancashire 
Highways and Transport Masterplan, which was adopted in March 2013.  The new Distributor 
Road will largely be in Preston, but it will imp rove access to and from south Fylde.   
11.33 The new Preston Western Distributor Road will connect the M55 near Bartle in the north to 
the A583 / Riversway junction at Clifton in the south.  The new Junction 2 on the M55 will be 
located wholly within the boundary of Preston City Council.  T he new Preston Western 
Distributor Road, together with a new railway station at Cottam Parkway, will greatly improve 
access to the Enterprise Zone at Warton, which is currently poorly linked to the strategic 
highway network. In addition, the new Distributor Road will support new housing 
development in north west Preston and ease existing congestion on the local highway 
network and on the motorway at the Broughton junction  (M55 Junction 1)  with the M6 
(Junction 32).  
11.34 Fylde Council supports these proposals and will work with LCC to ensure these major schemes 
facilitate improvements to the road network.  The proposed timetable suggests that the East -
West Link Road  through the new housing development in north -west Pr eston , the Preston 
Western Distributor Road and the Cottam Link Road  will open in 2022 .  The Preston, South 
Ribble and Lancashire City Deal is key to the delivery of the Preston Western Distributor Road.  
Highway schemes in the Fylde Coast Highways and Tran sport Masterplan  
11.35 The Fylde Coast Highways and Transport Masterplan, July 2015  include s the M55 to Fleetwood 
Corridor improvements , the route of which traverses land in both Fylde and Wyre.  Fylde 
Council  and LCC consider that the Blue Route should be safeguarded  until an alternative 
highway solution is proposed  to alleviate congestion on the A585 . The Masterplan suggested 
safeguarding the middle section only, i.e. A588 Breck Road to A586 Garstang Road; and not 
continu ing to safeguard the sect ion running through Fylde. The Roads Investment Strategy, 
announced by Central Government includes improvements to the stretch of highway running 
from Windy Harbour to Skippool. The A585 Skippool – Windy Harbour Improvements, which 
is a Highways England sc heme , comprise  a new bypass of Little Singleton.  This scheme would 
remove the current bottleneck at Five Lane Ends and give the opportunity to improve the 
A585(T) Mains Lane / A588 Shard Road junction.  It could also remove commuter  traffic from 
Singleton .  
 
Strategic Policy T1  
Strategic Highway Improvements   
Land within Fylde Borough is proposed for part of the route of the Preston Western Distributor Road 
which will link up to a new Junction 2 on the M55, and the Cottam Link Road.  Planning permission 
will not be granted for any development in Fylde that would prejudice the construction of these 
roads , which are shown on the Policies Map  including Inset Plans . Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
155 The delivery of the following strategic highway improvements within Fylde will be s upported:  
a. The M55 to Heyhouses (St Annes) Link Road;  
b. The M55 to Fleetwood Corridor improvement s  and 
c. The A585 Skippool – Windy Harbour Improvements.  
 
 
Justification  
11.36 The Local Plan identifies improvements to Fylde’s strategic and local highway network, in 
accordance with the initiatives and projects identified in the Fylde Coast Highways and 
Transport Masterplan , the Central Lancashire Highways and Transport Masterplan  and the 
Lancashire Strategic Transport Prospectus .   
11.37  Proposals  for new roads and for strategic highways improve ments will need to comply with 
the requirements of policy GD7 : Achieving Good Design in Development, policy ENV1  on 
landscape and policy ENV2  on biodiversity  and policy ENV5  on Historic Environment .  The 
Council will  work with LCC, as the Highway Authority, and Highways England, to minimise 
landscape, biodiversity, drainage, severance and noise impacts.  There will be a commitment 
to environmentally sensitive design, mitigation and habitat re storation . 
Warton  Aerodrome  
Strategic Policy T2  
Warton Aerodrome  
The Aerodrome at Warton is a key piece of strategic infrastructure. The Council places great 
importance on the retention and development of its aviation capabilities, particularly in relation to 
military aerospace and information.  
Development proposals within the defined safeguarded area at Warton Aerodrome  will not be 
permitted,  unless the applicant can demonstrate that there would not be any potential for adverse 
impacts on aviation operations, or on defence navigation systems and communications.  
Development proposals within the wider area surrounding Warton Aerodrome will be assessed for 
potential for adverse impacts on aviation operations, and on defence navigation systems and 
communications. Where such impact is identified, planning permission will be refused.  
Development proposals that could compromise the security of the Warton Aerodrome and wider 
BAE Systems site at Warton will not be permitted.    
 
 
Justification  
11.38  Warton Aerodrome forms a key piece of strategic infrastructure; the site is designated as an 
Enterprise Zone and is a major existing employment site, itself of national strategic 
importance. The aerodrome provides a secure military testing facility for air craft assembled 
in the adjoining manufacturing plant. Obviating impacts on the operation of the aerodrome is Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
156 therefore of great strategic importance. Policy T2 therefore places great importance on the 
avoidance of impacts on aviation and communications.  
11.39 Safeguarded areas for Warton Aerodrome are determined in accordance with The Town and 
Country Planning (Safeguarded Aerodromes, Technical Sites and Military Storage Areas) 
Direction 2002 (As Updated). Safeguarded areas are identified on safeguarding ma ps which 
are provided by the operator and certified (in the case of Warton) by the Ministry of Defence. 
The safeguarded area reflects the need to restrict built development within the zone 
immediately surrounding the site, but also the need to restrict the  height of built development 
in wider zones, in order to ensure safety for both aircraft crew and people on the ground. It 
also reflects the need to prevent interference to communication systems.  
Blackpool Airport  
11.40 Blackpool Airport represents both a  commercial and leisure flight facility, and also provides 
an economic hub.   It provides a base for private aircraft, the North West Air Ambulance, 
helicopter flights to service off -shore rigs , pleasure flights  and flights to the Isle of Man .  The 
Blackpoo l Business Park and Squires Gate Retail Park have been developed on disposed airport 
land. The majority of the residual airport land is designated as Green Belt and this will be 
safeguarded  from non -aviation related uses, which do not constitute permitted development .  
However, there is sufficient land within the airport complex outside the Green Belt to facilitate 
further airport operational development.  
 
Strategic Policy T 3 
Blackpool Airport  
The land designated as Green Belt within the airport ,will be safeguarded from non -airport related 
development and the continuing operation and viability of the airport as a sub -regional facility will 
be supported , unless there are overriding operational requir ements that constitute very special 
circumstances and which justify development in the Green Belt . 
Further development required in relation to the operation of Blackpool Airport including Centrica’s 
heliport, or development of ancillary leisure uses, will be located  in accordance with the masterplan 
prepared to guide development that delivers the objectives of the Blackpool Airport Enterprise 
Zone , in the areas outside the Green Belt , which are identified on the Policies Map  including Inset 
Plans , unless th ere are overriding operational requirements that constitute very special 
circumstances and which justify development in the Green Belt.  
The Council will support improvements to surface access (public transport) to Blackpool Airport 
from surrounding areas a nd other transport nodes.  
Blackpool Airport, including Centrica’s heliport will be consulted on all developments within the 
Airport Safeguarding Zone.  
 
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
157 Justification  
11.41 Blackpool Airport is of sub -regional importance, in terms of the Fylde Coast and this is 
recognised in policy T3, which seeks to support its continued operation.  
11.42 The majority of the residual airport lands are designated as Green Belt in order to reta in the 
separation between Blackpool and St Annes. The Council will safeguard the  residual airport 
lands  in the interests of the Airport and the Green Belt.  Sufficient land within the Airport 
complex falls outside the Green Belt to facilitate further airpo rt operational development. 
Development proposals within the Green Belt, whether to provide for airport operational 
development, or other development associated with the Enterprise Zone, would have to 
demonstrate very special circumstances to justify the n eed to use Green Belt land.   
11.43 Certain civil aerodromes including Blackpool Airport are officially safeguarded through 
Circular 1/2003 – ‘Safeguarding Aerodromes, Technical Sites and Military Explosive Storage 
Areas ’. This is necessary to ensure that their operation and development are not inhibited by 
buildings, structures, erections or works which would infringe on protected surfaces, obscure 
runway approach lights or have the potential to impair the performance of aerodrome 
navigation aids, radio aids or telecommunication systems; by lighting which has the potential 
to distract pilots; or by developments which have the potential to increase the number of 
birds or the bird hazard risk. The maps showing the safeguarde d areas  are certified by the Civil 
Aviation Authority.  
11.44 The Government launched the General Aviation Strategy on 28 March 2015, which was the 
culmination of work that began with the General Aviation Red Tape Challenge, intended to 
de-regulate and stim ulate this sector.  The research into the economic value of General 
Aviation found that it adds £3 billion of Gross Value Added (GVA) to the UK economy and 
offers significant benefits to local economies and connectivity.  To tie in with the launch of the 
General Aviation Strategy, the Department for Communities and Local Government published 
updated planning guidance on aerodromes.  The aviation guidance highlighted it was 
important that the planning sector ensures that proposed changes of use do not negati vely 
affect the viability of the aerodrome operation, and that proposed necessary developments 
are enabled to secure the on -going future and potential of the aerodrome as a local and 
national resource (paragraph 41 of the updated aviation guidance, 2015).    
11.45 The updated aviation guidance on aerodromes emphasi sed the need for planning authorities 
to be alert to the extent to which the rapid removal and sale of assets at an aerodrome could 
adversely affect the potential for bringing it back into operati on. The guidance reminds 
planning authorities that a working or former aerodrome could be put forward for 
consideration as a site for mixed use development (the Framework) that includes continuing, 
adapting or restoring aviation services in addition to oth er uses (paragraph 45 of the updated 
guidance, 2015).  The guidance also requires planning authorities to have regard to the extent 
to which an aerodrome contributes to connectivity outside the authority’s own boundaries, 
working together with other author ities and Local Enterprise Partnerships as required by the 
Framework (paragraph 46 of the updated  aviation  guidance, 2015).  
11.46 The guidance stipulates that any change of use from its role as an a erodrome  should only be 
permitted after the planning autho rity has fully considered the extent to which the aerodrome 
has contributed to connectivity outside its own boundaries. In addition, options should be 
explored such as mixed use developments, allowing aviation to be continued, developed or Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
158 adapted alongsid e other land uses (paragraph 47 of the updated guidance, 2015).  Planning 
authorities should consider encouraging owners of airports who intend that there should be 
a final closure and cessation of business to complete full and proper consultation, and 
implement a cooling off or review period in which demolition, asset sale or other disposal of 
key airport equipment does not take place (paragraph 48 of the updated aviation guidance, 
2015).  
11.47 Safeguarded areas for Blackpool Airport are determined in accordance with The Town and 
Country Planning (Safeguarded Aerodromes, Technical Sites and Military Storage Areas) 
Direction 2002 (As Updated). Safeguarded areas are identified on safeguarding maps which 
are provided by the operator and certified (in the case of Blackpool) by the Civil Aviation 
Authority. The safeguarded area reflects the need to restrict built development within the 
zone immediately surrounding the site, but also the need to restric t the height of built 
development in wider zones, in order to ensure safety both for aircraft crew and passengers, 
and for people on the ground. It also reflects the need to prevent interference to 
communication systems and the creation of bird hazard. All planning applications within the  
Safeguarding Area will be the subject of consultation with the operator of the airport.  
Enhancing Sustainable Transport Choice  
11.48 The enhancement of sustainable transport options is essential to help deliver sustainabl e 
development.  Locating development in accessible locations will reduce trips and thus reduce 
air pollution.  Perceptions of travel options need to be managed if reducing the need to travel 
and encouraging a modal shift away from car use to public transpo rt, are to be achieved over 
the plan period.   
11.49 Another key ingredient is the need to deliver reliable , affordable  public transport services  (i.e. 
rail, bus and tram)  in order that public confidence in alternative transport choices increases.  
The need to join the different transport modes and co -ordinate times and routes will ensure 
a comprehensive and coherent sustainable transport network.    
11.50 Transport Statemen ts or Assessments should be submitted in support of major developments 
and any other proposals which would have significant transport implications. Travel Plans can 
be another tool in changing perceptions and reducing the need to travel and they will need to 
be monitored to ensure that they are acted upon.   
11.51 High quality, safe cycle, footpath and bridleway networks , together with the provision of tram 
and bus interchanges between modes of transport  are essential to reducing the number of 
short car journeys, reducing emissions and improving health and fitness. Walking and cycling 
are encouraged as sustainable alternatives to the private car. Improvements to the safety and 
attractiveness of the public  realm and pedestrian and cycle routes which link housing to local 
services and employment opportunities will promote this transport shift.  
Rail Travel  
11.52 Fylde is  served by the following two railway lines and seven railway stations: Preston to 
Blackpoo l North  line with a station at Kirkham and Wesham; and Preston to Blackpool South  
line, with stations at Salwick, Kirkham and Wesham, Moss Side, Lytham, Ansdell and 
Fairhaven, St Annes  and Squires Gate. The Preston to Blackpool North railway line has been  
electrified includ ing track and signal enhancements, leading to greater capacity and service 
reliability ; making the service  fit for  purpose .  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
159 11.53 The Fylde Coast Highways and Transport Masterplan identifies the South Fylde Line (Blackpool 
South to Kirkham and Preston via Lytham St Annes) as a key weakness in the Fylde Coast public 
transport network. The potential of the line could increase significa ntly if possible connections 
with the Blackpool Tramway are considered. L CC is a partner in the European SINTROPHER 
(Sustainable Integrated Tram -based Transport Options for Peripheral European Regions) 
project. The Council secured funding to investigate th e best way of enhancing the role of the 
South Fylde Line in providing a southern gateway to Blackpool and to establish what the most 
viable and cost -effective way of linking the South Fylde Line and the Blackpool Tramway might 
be and what benefits such a l ink might deliver. The study reported in September 2015. It 
considered a number of options for developing the route and for encouraging economic 
growth in the South Fylde and regeneration, particularly in parts of south Blackpool. Two 
potential high value for money interventions have been identified and LCC is now considering 
how these could be taken forward.  
11.54 The new parkway rail station, which will be located west of Cottam, will be accessed off the 
Preston Western Distributor and it is planned to be complete in 2022/23. The station offers a 
parkway service for the Fylde Coast.   
11.55 The adopted  Fylde Coast Highways and Transport Masterplan, July 2015  also refers to a  North 
Fylde Coast Connectivity Study .   
 
Strategic Policy T 4 
Enhancing Sustainable Transport Choice  
In order to secure the long term viability of the Borough and to allow for the increased movement 
of people and goods expected, the Council will work with neighbouring authorities and transport 
providers to improve accessibility across the Borough, improve  safety and quality of life for 
residents and reduce the Borough's carbon footprint. Over the Local Plan period the Council will 
work with the Highway Authority  (LCC) , Highways England, Network Rail and transport providers 
to: 
a) Improve community health and wellbeing by providing alternative means of transport such 
as walking and cycling. This will be achieved through protecting and enhancing the existing 
public rights of way network; the provision of additional footpaths, cycleways and 
bridleways, where appr opriate; and safeguarding land for the provision of a continuous 
footpath, cycleway and bridleway network along Fylde’s coastline;  
b) Reduce the environmental impact of transport through suitable mitigation and  design;  
c) Reduce transport emissions, such as car bon dioxide and other greenhouse gases, by 
encouraging greater usage of public transport facilities;  
d) Reduce congestion in the Key Service Centres of Lytham, St Annes and Kirkham to promote 
competitiveness and enhance the tourism economy;  
e) Prepare and actively promote travel plans for all new developments which generate 
significant amounts of movement, including both employment and residential;  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
160 f) Improve public transport between  the Strategic Locations for Development  and nearby 
town centres , employment areas , tourism developments  and to the rural parts of the 
Borough .  
g) Implement m easures to deliver a shift to public transport, away from car use over the plan 
period , and where appropriate, support , promote  and implement innovative  public  
trans port initiatives ; 
h) Provide a rail / bus / tram interchange  on the South Fylde Line; 
i) Support the shift towards new technologies and fuels by promoting low carbon travel 
choices and encouraging the development of ultra -low carbon / electric vehicles and 
assoc iated infrastructure;  
j) Provide a park and ride at Kirkham and Wesham Railway Station;  
k) Provide improved pedestrian, disabled, cycling and public transport access to and from 
Kirkham and Wesham Railway Station;  
l) Improve and upgrade the North Fylde Railway Lin e and the South Fylde Railway Line , 
including improved service frequency on the latter ; and  
m) Integrate different modes of transport, to ensure a comprehensive and coherent 
sustainable transport network.  
All planning applications for developments that generate significant amounts of movement should 
be supported by a Transport Statement or Transport Assessment, prepared in accordance with the 
Planning Practice Guidance . Any mitigation identified in the Transport Assessment or Transport 
Statement that is required to make the development acceptable must be implemented in 
accordance with the requirements of the Highway Authority.  
 
 
Justification  
11.56 There are opportunities within Fylde to improve the provision  of routes  for cyclists and 
pedestrians. Many of these are identified in the Lancashire Rights of Way Improvement Plan. 
Further improvement is required to provide safe and convenient footpaths  and cycleways  in 
urban, suburban and rural areas. For many journeys, cycling offers an alternative mode of 
transport to the car. Traffic on main roads discourages cycling but a growing network of cycle 
routes with both on -road lanes and off -road cycleways (such as thos e along canal towpaths) 
can make cycle journeys safe and convenient.  
11.57 The adopted  Fylde Coast Highways and Transport Masterplan, J uly 2015 proposes the creation 
of a Fylde Coast Cycle network which will build on work already undertaken between 
Fleetw ood and Starr Gate and in St Annes, as well as the Blackpool Explorer routes and 
initiatives that are underway such as Blackpool Green Corridor initiatives.  Key to the network 
will be the completion of the Fylde Coastal Way, which will ultimately be part of a high 
standard multi -user route linking the Guild Wheel  around Preston  to the (Morecambe) Bay 
Cycle Way.  Whilst much of this route is already off -road, LCC will work towards ensuring that 
the whole length of the Way is a family -friendly, long distance  route, suitable for all users.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
161 11.58 The Climate Change Act, 2008 commits the UK to an 80% reduction in carbon emissions by 
2050. In order to help meet this target, Fylde has an obligation to reduce carbon emissions 
caused by transport. Policy T4 seeks to  address the transport carbon footprint by encouraging 
public transport use, improved public transport facilities, low carbon transport infrastructure 
and creating opportunities for walking and cycling wherever possible.    
Parking Standards  
11.59 The Framework encourages councils to set local parking standards for residential and non -
residential development, taking into account:  
• the accessibility of the development;  
• the type, mix and use of development;  
• the availability of and opportunities for pub lic transport;  
• local car ownership levels; and  
• an overall need to reduce the use of high emission vehicles  and ensure an adequate 
provision of spaces for charging plug -in and other ultra -low emission vehicles .    
Councils should only impose maximum  parking  standards for residential and non -residential 
development where there is clear and compelling justification that it is necessary to manage 
their local road network , or for optimising the density of development in city and town centres 
and other locations that are well served by public transport. In town centres local authorities 
should seek to improve the quality of parking so that it is convenient, safe and secure, 
alongside measures to promote accessibility for pedestrians and cyclists.  
 
Non -strategic Policy T 5 
Parking Standards  
Car parking should, wherever possible, be provided on site so as to ensure there is no detrimental 
effect on highway safety.  
A flexible approach to the level of car parking provision will be applied, dependent on the location 
of the development concerned.  
 
 
Justification  
11.60 The Council is aware of the need to manage car parking on all new developments. Local 
circumstances need to be taken into account when setting local parking standards.  The 
stan dards set will be for the provision of the minimum number of parking spaces on a site.   
11.61 The Council will prepare a Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) on parking standards, 
which will set out local minimum standards which will need to be applied to all new 
developments in Fylde.   
 Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
162 Cross Cutting Themes In Chapter 1 1:  
Promoting Health and Wellbeing  
Well -planned transport infrastructure can provide better walking and cycling facilities  and more 
efficient interchange between modes of transport , benefiting health and wellbeing.  Walking and 
cycling are good forms of exercise increasing cardio -vascular activity and reducing the risk of heart 
related diseases. There are lottery funded ‘cycling for health’ schemes in Fylde.  
Achieving Good Design  
High quality design of new infrastructure and the expansion and integration to existing infrastructure 
can make places more accessible and functional. The layouts of new developments should be designed 
to include safe and secure pedestrian routes and cycleways linking with local services, including public 
transport connections, so as to enable necessary longer trips.  
Strategic Objectives  
The following strategic objective is achieved in this chapter on infrastructure, service provision and 
transport  
Objective 3 : To make services accessible.  
Fylde Council’s Corporate Plan  2016 -2020 Priorities  
• The following Corporate Plan priorities will be delivered through Chapter 11: Improve the 
transport infrastructure and traffic flow  (A vibrant economy)  
• Improve car parking  (A vibrant economy)  
Fylde Council’s Corporate Plan 2016 -2020 Actions  
The following Corporate Plan actions will be delivered through  Chapter 11: 
• Progress the re -opening of the M55/Moss Road link  (A vibrant economy)  
• Support the Fylde Coast Highways and Transport Masterplan projects  (A vibrant economy)  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
163 Chapter 12: Water Management, Flood Risk and 
Climate Change  
 
Climate Change  
12.1 There is a growing body of scientific evidence to suggest that climate change is happening.  
While climate change is recognised  as a global phenomenon, its consequences will be felt at 
the local level from the associated impacts of increasing temperatures,  rising sea levels and 
extreme weather conditions.   
12.2 Fylde’s low lying coastal area will be susceptible to the effects of sea level rise and coastal 
flooding and the Borough will face increasing risk from fluvial, tidal and surface water flooding 
conn ected to extreme weather patterns.   
12.3 Landscape and biodiversity could be eroded as flora and fauna are put under increasing 
pressure and some species and habitats could be lost where they are unable to adapt quickly 
to changing conditions.   
12.4 The potential impacts of climate change will also present a unique challenge for the local 
economy. Tourism accounts for one in ten jobs in Fylde and climate change could lead to 
potential tourism gains and losses.  Extreme weather patterns could also lead to a change in 
agriculture and impact s on the rural economy.  There are also wider economic gains and losses 
connected to climate change mitigation and adaptation. Mitigation relates to reducing the 
impact of human activity on the climate, primarily through r educing greenhouse emissions. 
Adaptation relates to adjustments to natural or human systems in response to climatic factors, 
including changes in rainfall and rising temperatures, which moderate harmful or exploit 
beneficial opportunities.    
12.5 It is li kely that the effects of climate change will be felt disproportionately by those most 
vulnerable in society.  Fylde has an ageing population and extreme weather conditions, such 
as heat waves or prolonged cold weather, could create potential health problem s.   
12.6 The Government has made a long term commitment to tackle climate change.  The 
introduction of the Climate Change Act, 2008 sets a legally binding target of at least 34% 
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2020 and 80% reduction by 2050. The Act also 
created a framework for climate change adaptation, with the production of the first National 
Climate Change Risk Assessment, in 2012.  
12.7 The Planning Act, 2008 introduced the requirement for development plans to include policies 
designed to ens ure that development contributes to the mitigation of and adaptation to 
climate change.   
12.8 The Framework encourages councils to adopt policies that support the government’s 
transition to a low carbon economy.  To achieve this, the planning system shoul d adopt 
proactive policies to mitigate and adapt to climate change.  
12.9 To achieve this locally, managing climate change is a cross cutting theme that runs through  
the Local Plan.  This chapter refers, in particular, to flood risk and water resource management 
and district heating systems , as well as the provision of renewable energy . Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
164 Water Resource Management and Flood Risk   
12.10 Fylde’s water resources include the Irish S ea and  the internationally important Ribble Estuary, 
rivers, streams, canals and ponds. They are vital natural resources that provide wildlife 
habitats and play a key role in recreational activity. In recognition of the importance of water 
as a natural resource,  the European Water Frameworks Directive was issued in 2000. Its 
purpose is to establish a framework for the preservation and improvement of the water 
quality of inland surface waters, transitional and coastal waters and groundwater. The 
overriding objecti ve of the Directive is for all coastal, surface and ground waters to achieve 
‘good’ ecological status by 2015.  
Marine Management Organisation  
12.11 The Marine Management Organisation (MMO) was established following the Marine and 
Coastal Access Act 2009.  As the marine planning authority for England the MMO is 
responsible for preparing marine plans for English in -shore and off -shore waters. The EU 
Directive on marine spatial planning (2014/89/EU) requires marine spatial plans to be in place 
before 31 March 2021.  At its landward extent, a marine plan will apply up to the mean high 
water mark, which includes the tidal extent of any rivers. Marine plans are being developed 
on a rolling programme, with the first plans (East In -shore and East Off -shore) adopted on 2 
April 2014 and the South In -shore and Off -shore plans currently being developed.  The North 
West Marine Plans, which include Fylde, will be del ivered by 2021, with a 20 year view of 
activities. Each plan will be monitored with three yearly reviews. The Government designated 
the Fylde Marine Conservation Zone on 12 December 2013. The Conservation Zone was 
designated to conserve the marine habitat in the sub -tidal sand. The Marine Information 
System http://mis.marinemanagement.org.uk is a dedicated interactive website that brings 
adopted and consultation draft marine plans, their policies, supporting data evidence base 
and information together in on e place.  
 
Figure 4:  Land -use and marine planning systems in practice   
 
 
 
12.12 The MMO is also responsible for issuing marine licences  under the Marine and Coastal Access 
Act, 2009. Amongst other things, a marine licence may be needed for activities involving the 
construction, alteration or improvement of any works, dredging, or a deposit or removal of a 
substance or object below the mea n high water springs mark or in any tidal river to the extent 
of the tidal influence. Alongside marine licences, the MMO also issues consents under the 
Electricity Act, 1989 (as amended), for off -shore generating stations between 1 and 100 
Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
165 megawatts. They are also the authority responsible for processing and determining harbour 
orders and for granting consent under various local Acts and orders regarding harbours.  
Sources of Flood Risk  
12.13 The sources of flood risk are set out below:   
• Pluvial Flooding  – Occurs when an extremely heavy downpour of rain saturates the 
urban drainage system and the excess water cannot be absorbed.  
• Groundwater Flooding  – Occurs when heavy or prolonged rainfall makes the level of 
water underground rise above its natur al surface.  
• Flooding from Ordinary Watercourses  – Happens as a result of water overflowing 
from small streams, brooks and ditches channels.  
• Main River Flooding  – Results from water levels exceeding the bank level of a river.  
• Coastal Flooding  – Results from Sea or Estuary breaching flood defence measures or 
sea levels exceeding the level of the shore.  
Summary of Flood Risk Management Authorities Responsibilities in Lancashire  
12.14 The following authorities and organisations are responsible for flood risk management in 
Lancashire.  
• Environment Agency  – has responsibility for river and coastal flood risk management 
and flooding from reservoirs. They also have respon sibility for Main Rivers and have 
powers of access and to undertake works within the catchment .  They maintain a 
strategic overview of flood risk management.  
• Lancashire County Council (Lead Local Flood Authority and Highways Authority) – 
has responsibl ity for managing  surface water flooding, groundwater flooding, 
highway flooding, ordinary watercourses and reservoirs, have powers to designate 
structures and fea tures that affect flooding or coastal erosion; and managing roads to 
ensure that flooding does not represent a nuisance to road users . LCC also provides 
Land Drainage Consent  and is a statutory consultee in the planning process . (See Table 
6 below).  
• Fylde Council  is a coast protection authority and has powers to perform such duties 
in connection with the protection of land in their area as are conferred or imposed by 
the Coast Protection Act , 1949.  The Coast Protection Act is administered by the 
Depa rtment of the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and is broadly intended to 
allow coastal authorities to carry out capital works, whilst routine maintenance and 
general husbandry of the coast is regarded as a non -statutory local function.  Under 
Section 14 A of the Land Drainage Act , 1991  the Council ha s the powers to undertake 
works to manage flood risk from ordinary watercourses.    
• Water Companies  – manage flood risk from sewers and water transfer infrastructure.  
• Internal Drainage Boards  – are independent  public bodies responsible for managing 
water levels in low -lying areas.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
166 • Riparian Owners  – have various responsibilities including the maintenance of the 
watercourses, clearing obstructions (natural or otherwise) so normal flow of water is 
not impeded.  
 
Table 6: Roles and Responsibilities of Flood Risk Management Authorities  
 Environment 
Agency  Lancashire 
County Council  Water Companies  Fylde Council  
 Strategic 
overview role.  Lead Local Flood 
Authority and 
Highways 
Authority for 
the 
administrative 
area.  Manage flood risk 
from sewers and 
reservoirs.  Powers to perform 
such duties in 
connection with the 
protection of land 
as conferred or 
imposed by the 
Coast Protection 
Act, 1949.  River Flooding  ✓   
Coastal Flooding  ✓   
Surface Water 
Flooding   ✓  
Groundwater 
Flooding   ✓  
Highway Flooding   ✓  
Ordinary 
Watercourses  
✓* ✓*  Under Section 14 of 
the Land Drainage 
Act the Council has 
the powers to 
undertake works to 
manage flood risk 
from ordinary 
watercourses.  
Flooding from 
Sewers    ✓ 
 
Reservoirs  ✓** ✓** ✓** 
* Watercourses are managed by the Lead Local Flood Authority.   While the LLFA has responsibility for consenting and 
works on ordinary watercourses, the EA would still comment on applications in Flood Zones 2 and 3 if the source of 
flooding was from an Ordinary Watercourse.  
** Reservoirs are lar gely owned by the Water Companies who are fundamentally responsible for their management. The 
EA is responsible for regulating reservoirs, and the Lead Local Flood Authority’s Emergency Planning Team has the 
responsibility for their risk assessment.  
Sourc e: Environment Agency, 2014  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
167 Flood Risk Management Plan  
12.15 The Environment Agency and Lead Local Flood Authorit y prepared a joint Flood Risk 
Management Plan for the North West River Basin District.  The final version was published in 
March 2016 .   
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment  
12.16 The Level 1 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment for Fylde 2011 , provides an assessment  of current 
and future levels of flood risk in the Borough. Flooding from rivers and coastal waters is a 
natural process that is difficult to prevent, although incidences can be reduced by building 
flood defences.  However, some human activities contribute  towards an increase in the 
likelihood and adverse impacts of flood events, such as building in the floodplain. Climate 
change also plays a major role in flood risk. Sea levels are rising at an increasing rate and UK 
winters are predicted to become milder and wetter, with summers becoming hotter and drier. 
These factors will lead to increased and new risks of flooding. Through the Local Plan, the 
Council has a key role in water management and reducing the impacts of flooding.  
12.17 The Strategic Flood Risk Assessment for Fylde, 2011 demonstrates that the catchments of two 
main rivers, the Ribble and Wyre, define the main hydrological influences of Fylde and that 
parts of these catchments are tidally influenced. Flood Risk Zone 2 comprises land at moderate 
risk of flooding from rivers and sea, whilst Flood Risk Zone 3 comprises land at high risk of 
flooding from these sources.  
The Fylde Peninsula Water Management Partnership  
12.18 The Fylde Peninsula Water Management Partnership was set up in 2011 as a collaboration 
between the Environment Agency, United Utilities, Blackpool, Fylde and Wyre Councils, LCC 
and Keep Britain Tidy. The partnership has three objectives, to :  
1. Improve  the quality of beaches and bathing waters ;  
2. Improve coastal defence ; and  
3. Reduce the risk of surface water flooding.  
The aim of the partnership is to tackle these issues and the partnership provides the 
opportunity to use collective expertise and resources in the most efficient way.   
The Making Sp ace for Water Group  
12.19 The Making Space for Water Group, comprising Fylde Council, United Utilities, the 
Environment Agency and LCC, also works together to tackle local flooding issues through 
collaborative partnership working and funding.  
 
Strategic Policy CL1  
Flood Alleviation, Water Quality and Water Efficiency  
Planning decisions should follow the sequential, risk -based approach to the location of 
development, as required  by the Framework.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
168 All new development is required to minimise flood risk impacts on the environment , retain water 
quality and water efficiency , and mitigate against the likely effects of climate change on present 
and future generations.  
This will be achieved by:   
a) Ensuring that development incorporates  the most sustainable form of managing surface 
water, subject to the requirement for approval from the drainage authority.  This will be 
expected to be investigated and confirmed as part of any planning application 
submission. It will be necessary to attenuate any discharge of surface water through the 
incorporation of sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) , following the SuDS hierarchy .  This 
would be greenfield run -off rate on greenfield sites.  On previously developed land, 
surface water betterment will be expected.  The preference will be for no surface water 
to discharge to the public sewer, direc tly or indirectly, if more sustainable alternatives 
are available. The priority options for the management of surface water are set out in 
detail in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan .  
b) Supporting the retrofitting of SuDS in locations that generate surface w ater run -off.  
c) Improving water efficiency  standards by m inimising the use of potable mains water in 
new development and i ncorporating measures to recycle and conserve water resources.  
d) Ensuring that new development is directed away from areas at high risk of flooding and 
incorporating appropriate mitigation against flooding in areas of lower risk.  
e) Ensuring that watercourses, which require watercourse consent  are protected from 
encroachment and adverse impacts and that water quality is maintained and im proved.  
f) Seeking to maximise the potential of  the Green Infrastructure  network  within 
developments to  reduce the risk of flooding . 
g) Ensuring that new development does not adversely affect the quality of surface and 
groundwater  resources in Source Protection  Zones  and where possible contributes 
towards improving it.   
h) Ensuring there is no risk of pollution to controlled waters from land contamination on 
previously developed sites.   
i) Ensuring that the layout of new sea defences and coastal protection measures are of an 
appropriately robust design and are fit for purpose.  
j) Ensuring that wherever necessary land is identified to be used for wetland or flood 
storage  through negotiation with landowners . 
Developer contributions will be required for the provision and maintenance of SuDS, where this is 
not provided as part of the development. Contributions will be made through Section 106 
agreements or the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL), as set out in policy INF2 . 
Developer contributions will be required for the repair or replacement of the sea defences and 
coastal protection measures and the maintenance of the sand dunes system. Developer 
contributions will be made through the CIL.  Where appropriate, th e Council will permit developers 
to provide the necessary infrastructure themselves as part of their development proposals, rather 
than making financial contributions.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
169 Justification  
12.20 In accordance with the Framework, inappropriate development in areas at risk of flooding will 
be avoided by directing development away from areas at highest risk. The application of the 
Sequential Test will be required, the aim of which is to steer develop ment to areas with the 
lowest probability of flooding. If, following application of the Sequential Test, it is not possible 
for the development to be located in zones with a lower probability of flooding, the Exception 
Test can be applied if appropriate. T here is more information on these tests in the Framework, 
and in the Planning Practice Guidance . 
Flood Alleviation  
12.21 The most appropriate approach to managing flood risk is to direct development away from 
areas of high flood risk. Where this is not pos sible (having followed the ‘sequential’ and 
‘exception’ tests set out in the Framework) the development should provide wider 
sustainability benefits, be on previously developed land and be able to demonstrate that the 
site/area will be safe and will not in crease flood risk elsewhere. Any site proposed for 
development in high flood risk areas will need to be subjected to more detailed flood risk 
assessment. Farms can have an important role to play in flood risk management, e.g. the use 
of farmland for wetlan d or flood storage.  
12.22 Performance Monitoring Indicator 13, in Appendix 8, sets out a target outcome to minimise  
the amount of inappropriate development in Flood Zones 2 and 3 and to record the number 
of planning applications granted permission for inappropriate development in these Flood 
Zones.  
Managing surface water  
12.23 Urban environments can be highly susceptible to surface water run -off which can lead to 
flooding. The Council will therefore seek to ensure that new development limits water 
discharge levels into local sewers and drains to improve capacity in the network.  
12.24 Development, particularly on greenfield sites should seek to replicate existing drainage where 
possible. Sites that drain into ditches or watercourses should continue to do so and not enter 
the public sewerage system post development.  The preference will be for no surface water 
to discharge to the public sewer, directly or indirectly, if more sustainable alternatives are 
available.  Subject to the detail of the drainage proposals, it may be necessary to co -ordinate 
the delivery of the d evelopment with the delivery of infrastructure.  
Water Efficiency  
12.25 Improving water efficiency will reduce the volume of wastewater generated from 
development, which can contribute towards a reduction in the flow in the sewer system and 
hence a reductio n in the number of spills.  It is important to ensure that new developments 
achieve the minimum standards for potable (drinking) water efficiency.  There is scope to 
collect rainwater to be used within buildings, as well as re -use of ‘grey’ water (that was 
previously used for washing purposes) for watering gardens and other landscaped areas.  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
170 Watercourses  
12.26 Watercourses are important biodiversity assets, forming important habitats for a variety of 
species, including water voles, which are in decline. I n addition to biodiversity, watercourses 
also facilitate land drainage and some of the larger watercourses are important tourism assets, 
particularly the Ribble Estuary  and the Lancaster Canal . 
12.27 The Environment Agency is the consenting authority for main rivers and the L ead Local Flood 
Authority  (LCC)  is the consenting authority for ordinary watercourses.  Land Drainage Consent 
is required to make changes to watercourses.  Development should not unacceptably 
encroach on or restrict acces s to a watercourse. LCC will generally refuse land drainage 
consent applications which seek to culvert sections of ordinary watercourse (further 
information on this can be found in LCC’s Consenting and Enforcement Policy). Buffer strips 
between watercourse s and development will be required to protect and enhance habitat 
value and water quality, while ensuring access for flood defence purposes is retained. The 
width of the buffer will be dependent upon a number of factors, including whether or not the 
waterc ourse is defined as a Main River, the type of development proposed and the findings of 
any ecological surveys accompanying the application. Designs that incorporate watercourses 
into development proposals as a feature will be encouraged and measures should  be 
implemented that deter future development extending into the buffer, including domestic 
gardens.  Further information can be found in LCC’s ‘Ordinary Watercourse Consenting and 
Enforcement Policy on LCC’s website.  
Green Infrastructure  network  
12.28 Provision of Green Infrastructure (including green and blue space) within new developments 
has a major role to play in mitigating against and adapting to climate change, for example by 
reducing CO2 emissions, providing flood alleviation measures  and provid ing sustainable 
drainage systems.  
Groundwater  
12.29 Groundwater resources are an essential source of water for public supply, industry and 
agriculture. The Environment Agency has identified Source Protection Zones close to drinking 
water sources, where the risk of harm from contamination of groundwater is g reatest.  The 
Council consults the Environment Agency on all planning applications where pollution of 
groundwater could be an issue. In order to protect groundwater, the Environment Agency 
may object in principle to, or refuse to permit, some activities.  
12.30 Three Source Protection Zones have been identified, with Source Protection Zone 1 identifying 
the areas of greatest risk. No part of Fylde falls within Protection Zones 1 and 2. However, 
parts of the south eastern edge of the Borough are within Sourc e Protection Zone 3,  including 
part of Freckleton Marsh and areas east of Clifton  also northwards towards the M55. The 
protection of the groundwater resources in these areas is particularly important.   
12.31 Where development potentially impacts on groundw ater, satisfactory mitigation is possible. 
However, there are some types of development which are unlikely to be acceptable within 
Source Protection Zones. Where potential risks to groundwater exist, especially in the vicinity 
of water supply abstractions,  the Council will consult the Environment Agency at an early 
stage.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
171 Flood Defences  
12.32 The man -made coastal defences at Fairhaven Lake and Church Scar - between Ansdell Road 
South and Lytham  Green - have a residual life of less than five years, however, The Island Sea 
Front Area defences  at St Annes  have a longer residual life.  This puts homes , businesses  and 
tourism  at risk of flooding. There is also concern about the condition of Warton Fl ood Banks, 
where there is the potential for a breach of the defences, putting homes, businesses and 
agricultural land at the east end of Lytham at risk.  Mitigation measures are set out in detail in 
the Fylde Coast Protection Strategy.  Policy CL1 therefor e requires developer contributions 
through the CIL for the repair , maintenance , renewal or replacement  of the coastal flood 
defences.  More detail on the Borough’s flood defence requirements is set out in the Fylde 
Coast Protection Strategy, available on t he Council’s website  and in the IDP. 
12.33 The sand dunes form important natural coastal defences along long stretches of the coastline, 
and these naturally occurring Green Infrastructure assets require conservation and 
management. The Fylde Coast Protection Strategy, 2011 identifies the erosion of the sand 
dunes as a key issue and higher sea levels resulting from climate change will increase the rate 
of erosion. Erosion of the sand dunes is also linked to unmanaged human access. More detail 
on the management of the sand dunes is set out in the Fylde Sand Dunes Management Action 
Plan, available on the Council’s website.   
12.34 Developer contributions required under policy CL1 for the repair , maintenance, renewal or 
replacement  of flood defences may also be used for the management of the sand dune 
system.  Enhancement of the nature conservation value of the sand dunes is con sidered in 
polic ies INF2  and ENV2 , as part of the Coastal Strategy.  
 
Strategic Policy CL2  
Surface Water Run -Off and Sustainable Drainage  
Discharge rates should be agreed as part of any pre -application negotiations between the relevant 
parties. New development must incorporate the following sequential attenuation measures:  
a. Store rainwater for later use;  or 
b. The first 5mm of rainfall should in filtrate.  In areas where infiltration rates are slow, e.g. 
soils with a high proportion of clay, then permeable surfaces may be under -drained.  This 
will have the effect of slowed surface water run -off rates;  or 
c. Attenuate rainwater in ponds or open featu res for gradual release into the  watercourse;  or 
d. Attenuate rainwater by storing in tanks or sealed water features for gradual  release into a 
watercourse.  
Where compelling and detailed evidence demonstrates that the above measures are not feasible 
or would adversely affect viability , then the following national discharge  (SuDS)  hierarchy  will be 
considered  in priority order : 
1. Controlled d ischarge of rainwater direct to a watercourse;  
2. Controlled d ischarge of rainwater to a surface water drain;  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
172 3. Controlled d ischarge of rainwater to the combined sewer.  
Development must utilise Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDs) whenever practical; and reduce 
discharge to greenfield run -off rates wherever feasible.  
Proposals for development that will discharge surface water to a public sewer must provide 
compelling evidence that capacity exists in the public sewer including relevant authorisation from 
the appropriate infrastructure provider. Where there is no public sewer capacity the  applicant  must 
provide a detailed technical assessment of how surface drainage will be dealt with. Proposals may 
also need to include an independent assessment of potential solutions, the cost of which must be 
met by the applicant.  
Propo sals may also be required to provide a feasibility assessment for the use of SuDs including 
consideration of the potential design of any scheme and ongoing maintenance arrangements. The 
applicant and the Council will then agree on who should adopt the sche me and be responsible for 
ongoing maintenance. In the majority of cases the latter will rest with the applicant.  
New development will be subject to appropriate conditions or a legal agreement to secure the 
implementation of SuDS and to secure appropriate m anagement and maintenance measures.  
 
Justification  
12.35 Surface water flooding occurs when rainwater does not drain away through the normal man -
made drainage systems or soak into the ground, but lies on or flows over the ground.  Surface 
water run -off, including run -off from agricultural land, can pollute water courses. In addition, 
the amount of surface water that enters the sewer network during storm surges can cause 
spillage into the Ribble Estuary and the sea. There are sewer capacity deficiencies in some 
parts of the Borough, particularly at Lytham and St An nes. Fairhaven and Lytham wastewater 
pumping stations are exceeding the permitted number of spills in the bathing water season, 
as are pumping stations in Blackpool and Preston. These factors have a detrimental impact on 
bathing water quality at St Annes a nd Blackpool. Under the requirements of the Bathing Water 
Directive, signs will be required on the beaches providing information on bathing water 
quality . This could potentially have a detrimental impact upon tourism at St Annes and 
Blackpool.  There is a f ailing shellfish water (Ribble Estuary) which is of concern to Fylde 
Council.   
12.36 It is crucially important that surface water from new development does not enter the 
watercourses, drainage and sewer networks. Surface water from new developments can be 
discharged into a watercourse subject to an approved Consent from the EA (main river) or LCC 
(ordinary watercourse) .  LCC will require evidence to demonstrate that infiltration is not 
possible before other surface water discharge options will be approved. There is a national 
hierarchy to which surface water run -off is to be discharged , which is referenced in Planning 
Practice Guidance (the PPG) : 
Surface water should be dispersed in the following order of hierarchy:  
a. Discharge into the ground (infiltration), or where not reasonably practicable;  
b. Discharge to a surface water body, or where not reasonably practicable;  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
173 c. Discharge to a surface water sewer, highway drain or another drainage system, or where 
not reasonably practicable;  
d. Discharge to a c ombined sewer.  
12.37 Development proposals should robustly demonstrate how foul and surface water will be dealt 
with by the submission of a drainage strategy accompanying the planning application. In terms 
of improving bathing water quality, the requirements of policy CL1 aim to be consistent with 
the Fylde Coast ‘Improving our Bathing Water Action Plan’, as commissioned by the Fylde 
Peninsula Water Management Group. The aim is for surface water run -off rates and volumes 
to be reduced from those that existed prior to developmen t taking place. For previously 
developed land, there is the opportunity to reduce rates to below pre -development rates. 
Implementing these measures will ease the pressure on receiving sewers and watercourses 
during heavy rainfall, which will reduce flood r isk and the frequency of spills.  
12.38 It is a clear priority of the Council that development should not discharge to public sewerage 
system, directly or indirectly, where alternatives are available.  In some circumstances, 
however, discharge to  the publi c sewer, directly or indirectly, may be the only option.  In those 
circumstances, a contribution may be requested to retrofit / divert surface water elsewhere 
in the Borough to negate the impact of discharging surface water to the public sewer.  The 
applic ant will also be expected to mitigate the impact of surface water discharge to the public 
sewer through landscaping schemes and other measures, which will include maximising the 
use of permeable surfaces and grey water and rainwater harvesting measures.  
12.39 The Framework states that councils should promote the use of Sustainable Drainage Systems 
(SuDS) for the management of surface water run -off.  The incorporation of SuDS has been a 
legal requirement since 2014.  SuDS involves creating channels , ditches  and ponds  as part of 
new development proposals so that surface water can drain away naturally. The Floods and 
Water Management Act also places responsibilities on councils to assess SuDS as part of their 
wider remit for flood and pollution control. The Fyl de Peninsula Water Management Group 
has commissioned a project to consider how the retrofitting of SuDS could be implemented 
on the Fylde Coast, so as to reduce the impacts of urban drainage flooding and sewer spillages 
across the Fylde Coast. The Local Pl an supports such projects and  seeks to incorporate 
opportunities to maximise biodiversity into flood defences and SuDS wherever possible . As 
surface water management now falls under the remit of LCC, the implementation of SuDS 
should be in accordance with the principles in the emerging LCC SuDS Guidance document.  
12.40 There are drainage problems in parts of the rural areas which are causing agricultural land to 
flood. In south Fylde there are few watercourses and the flat topography of the landscape 
means water flows slowly. This can result in flooding after heavy rainf all. This is a particular 
issue to the east of Lytham where Liggard Brook and Main Drain discharge into the Ribble 
Estuary. This reinforces the imperative that surface water run -off from new development is 
managed through SuDS, rather than discharging into  the Borough’s watercourses. In addition, 
the Environment Agency is reviewing its assets at the east of Lytham through the development 
of the East Lytham Strategy, and this is expected to reduce the risk of surface water flooding 
in that area. Farms also h ave an important role to play in flood risk management, e.g. the use 
of farmland for wetland or flood storage.  
12.41 LCC is the Lead Local Flood Authority, under the Flood and Water Management Act, 2010 
managing local flood risk including surface water, gr oundwater, and rivers or streams that are Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
174 not main rivers. It is supported by the Environment Agency, United Utilities and Fylde Council.  
LCC is coordinating  the preparation of Surface Water Management Plans for all the districts 
of Lancashire, and these will set out further measures for the management of surface water.  
LCC issued ‘Sustainable Drainage Systems – Local Specifications, Standards and Policies’  which  
will be adopted in 2016 . 
12.42 Surface water flooding is localised  and occurs very quickly in extreme weather so is difficult to 
predict and warn against. It is expected that climate change will result in more short -duration, 
high intensity rainfall and therefore surface water flooding is likely to become an increasing 
problem, particularly within the Borough’s urban settlements  (‘Climate Change Allowances 
for Planners ’, prepared by the Environment Agency) . 
12.43 The Council will seek to ensure that new development reduces the risks arising from surface 
water flooding thr ough attenuation measures. The Council considers SuDs to be integral to 
new development and the use of SuDs must be agreed at an early stage of the proposal  so 
that sufficient space can be allocated. SuDs can also enhance biodiversity opportunities within 
new development. Further information on this issue can be found on the RPSB website at: 
www.rspb.org.uk . Developments on greenfield sites, particularly those requiring the 
preparation of a Development Brief or a Maste rplan will be required to include measures to 
deal with surface water drainage.  
12.44 SuDS can be incorporated into new development in numerous ways and the most  appropriate 
application will depend on issues such as the scheme layout, and the  topography and geology 
of the site and surrounding area.  
Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Generation  
12.45 The UK Government is committed under the Kyoto Protocol to reduce CO² emissions by 2020. 
As part of the Renewable Energy Strategy, 2009 the UK has made a commitment that 15% of 
its energy demand will be met by renewable sources by 2020. The government is a lso 
committed to achieving higher energy standards. Energy efficiency and conservation will 
reduce energy demand and the amount of energy needed from renewable sources.  
12.46 The UK has become a net importer of oil and is dependent on imported gas at a ti me when 
global demand is increasing. The planning system has a key role in assisting in mitigating the 
causes of climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions and encouraging energy 
production from renewable sources. Consequently, the Lancashire Sust ainable Energy Study 
was produced in April 2011 and updated in 2012 for all Lancashire Authorities  
Lancashire Sustainable Energy Study, 2012  
12.47 The Lancashire Sustainable Energy Study concludes that Fylde has the deployable resource 
potential of 61 mega watts by 2030, the equivalent of 5% of Lancashire’s deployable potential.  
The following table provides the breakdown of Fylde’s deployable potential by technology.  
Commercial scale wind provides the highest deployable potential in Fylde.   
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
175  
Table 7: Fylde deployable potential in 2020 and 2030 by technology  
 
Technology  Existing deployment 
at 2011  Total deployment 
2020  Total deployment 2030  
Commercial wind  0.0 28.5  37.8  
Small scale wind  0.0 0.8 1.4 
Plant biomass  2.1 2.2 2.2 
Animal biomass  0.6 1.1 1.4 
Energy from 
waste (Anaerobic 
Digestion)  3.3 2.8 1.0 
Small scale hydro  0.0 0.0 0.0 
Microgeneration 
– Solar  0.1 4.5 11.1  
Microgeneration 
– heat pumps  0.0 2.7 5.8 
Total  6 megawatts  43 megawatts  61 megawatts  
Source: Lancashire Sustainable Energy Study (2012), SQW  
 
Strategic Policy CL3  
Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Generation  – excluding onshore wind turbines  
Renewable and low carbon energy development potential  – excluding onshore wind turbines - is 
significant within Fylde.   Opportunities for renewable and low carbon development, including 
microgeneration, should be maximised, while ensuring that adverse impacts are addressed 
satisfactorily; including cumulative landscape and visual impacts. Pro posed developments will be 
assessed in relation to the following criteria:  
a) The cumulative impact of the renewable and / or low carbon development within Fylde and 
across the boundary  in Blackpool, Wyre and Preston ; 
b) Singular or cumulative impacts on landsc ape and townscape character and value , and visual 
impact from a wide range of vantage points, in accordance with policy ENV1 ; 
c) Impact on local residents (including noise, odour, and reflected light ; 
d) Compliance with policy ENV2 , in particular e cological impact on mammals and birds  on 
protected sites and on the migrato ry routes  and functionally linked land . Project -specific 
Habitats Regulations Assessment  of any renewable and low carbon energy developments 
near to the European -designated sites wi ll be required, and these HRAs will need to Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
176 demonstrate that there will be no likely significant effect on the qu alifying features of these 
sites before they can be granted consent ; 
e) Impacts on land resources, in particular that the development would not be  sited on the 
best and most versatile  agricultural land (grades 1, 2 and 3a) , unless it is demonstrated that 
poorer quality land could not be used instead, and that the benefits of the development 
outweigh the economic and other benefits of the best and most versatile agricultural land 
and any other adverse impacts of the proposal. In the case of solar farms, the most 
compelling evidence must be provided to demonstrate the above. Impacts should also be 
considered on areas of deep peat which function as a carbon store;  
f) That the proposal for renewable and low carbon energy would not ha rm the significance of 
heritage assets  and their settings  unless the proposal meets the requirements of Policy 
ENV5 ; 
g) Community, economic and environmental benefits of the proposal;  
h) Impacts on aviation and defence navigation systems and communications, part icularly 
Blackpool Airport, Warton Aerodrome and the DCSA  Inskip  radio communication facility. 
The avoidance of impacts on these strategically -important facilities should be given great 
weight in decision -making ;  
i) Impacts on highway safety and capacity fro m movements associated with the development  
including construction and decommissioning; and  
j) Impacts on flood risk and drainage, in accordance with policies CL1 and CL2. 
The evidence will be required to demonstrate that any impacts can be avoided or satisfa ctorily 
mitigated but need only be proportional to the scale and type of development.  However, any 
proposed mitigation must be in place prior to the start of development.  
Renewable and low carbon energy proposals within the Green Belt will need to demonstrate  very 
special circumstances where elements of any proposed renewable energy project comprises 
inappropriate development. Renewable and low carbon energy proposals within Areas of 
Separation will be assessed in terms of its impact upon the effect iveness of the gap between the 
settlements in protecting the identity and distinctiveness of settlements. . 
Applicants will not be required to justify the overall need for renewable and low carbon energy 
development, either in a national, regional or local context.  
 
Justification  
12.48 The Council has considered the allocation of appropriate areas of search for commercial scale 
renewable and low carbon energy, in accordance with the Framework.  However, there exist 
a number of constraints in Fylde which can only be considered by specific site -by-site 
assessment. The designation of areas suitable for wind energy development requires 
community support for wind energy development in those areas, but there are no parts of 
Fylde where medium/large scale wind energy development is acceptable in prin ciple due to 
the NATS safeguarding zone designation, requirement for engagement with the MoD, the 
presence of the airport, aerodrome, radar and military radio facilities, and the potential for 
the impact on species linked to the European -designated sites. Accordingly, the policy omits Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
177 wind energy development from the types of renewable energy acceptable, subject to the 
criteria . 
12.49 Policy CL3 encourages and supports the installation of renewable and low carbon energy 
generation within Fylde by providing a criteria based framework to determine applications. 
The policy applies to most types of renewable and low carbon energy generation including, 
but not restricted to solar, biomass generation, hydropower and micro -generation.  
Applications for energy from waste should also be compatible with the Joint Lancashire 
Minerals and Waste Local Plan.  
12.50 The development of most renewable and low carbon energy development within Fy lde will 
require careful consideration due to their potential impacts.  The Department for Energy and 
Climate Change National Policy Statement for Energy, although intended for those schemes 
large enough to be considered Nationally Significant Infrastructu re Projects, provides useful 
guidance on the breadth of considerations and potential impacts of different types of 
renewable energy schemes. The criteria included in the policy reflect the issues that are likely 
to be important within Fylde, but do not con stitute an exhaustive list of considerations that 
may be necessary for a particular type of development or particular location.  
12.51 Potentially damaging effects on European sites of nature conservation value will need to be 
considered, unless the potenti al effects have been resolved.  Project specific Habitats 
Regulations Assessment (HRA) of any renewable and low carbon energy development near to 
the European -designated sites will be required and the HRA should demonstrate that there 
will be no likely significant effect on the qualifying features of these sites before it will be 
granted consent.  Consideration also needs to be given to sites being functionally linked to the  
European -designated sites .   
12.52 Within Fylde, Blackpool Airport and Warton Aerod rome form key pieces of strategic 
infrastructure, each of which is the basis for an Enterprise Zone, with Warton providing a 
military testing facility for aircraft assembled in the adjoining manufacturing plant. Obviating 
impacts on the operation of these sites is therefore of great strategic importance. In addition, 
DCSA  Inskip, located at the edge of the Borough, provides a nationally -important military 
communications facility operated by the Defence Communication Services Agency. The policy 
therefore places great importance on the avoidance of impacts on aviation and 
communications.  
12.53 Fylde includes large areas of Grade 2 (Very Good) agricultural land and the remainder of rural 
land is Grade 3 (Good to Moderate). Information on land class ification is only held in strategic 
form, is not up -to-date and no distinction is made between grade 3a land (which falls into the 
classification of the best and most versatile land) and class 3b (which does not). Nevertheless, 
where the land is shown by t he strategic map as grade 2, it can be reasonably assumed that 
such land is the “best and most versatile”. Where land is shown by the strategic map as grade 
3, it is reasonable to consider that it could be, and even that there is a reasonable likelihood 
that it is the “best and most versatile” land.  
12.54  The Written Ministerial Statement on Solar Energy: Protecting the Local and Global 
Environment made on 25 March 2015  raised concerns that insufficient weight had been given 
to policies protecting the best  and most versatile agricultural land in relation to solar energy 
development. The statement clarified that “any proposal for a solar farm involving the best 
and most versatile agricultural land would need to be justified by the most compelling Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
178 evidence”. Any applicant for solar energy development on land outside the settlements will 
therefore need to provide their own detailed assessment of the land quality, in order to 
demonstrate that it is not grade 1, 2 or 3a land. Otherwise, an applicant will be requi red to 
provide the “most compelling” evidence to justify that the development is necessary.  
12.55 The Framework recognises that  many renewable and low carbon energy projects will 
constitute inappropriate development in the Green Belt and in the Areas of Se paration 
between Kirkham and Wre a Green and between Newton and Kirkham, requiring the 
developer to demonstrate that special circumstances, such as major benefits to the 
environment, exist.  
 
Strategic Policy CL4  
Decentralised Energy networks and District Heating Systems  
Small scale decentralised energy schemes will be encouraged within new developments and as part 
of community -led initiatives.     
All strategic developments , of 100+ homes , will be required to explore the potential for 
decentralised energy supply and district heating / cooling systems.  Strategic developments located 
where a decentralised energy supply or district heating / cooling system is proposed  will be required 
to allow  for future connectivity at a later date or phase unless it can be demonstrated by the 
applicant, having regard to the type of development involved and its design, tha t it is not feasible 
or viable.  
 
Justification  
12.56 The Lancashire Sustainable Energy S tudy, 2012 demonstrated that existing heat demand in 
areas such as Kirkham, St Annes and Warton is significant. This is connected to domestic and 
commercial / industrial heat demand in the areas.  The study concludes that district heating 
is likely to be e conomically viable in areas with significant heat demand in a high proportion 
of buildings, such as apartments .   
12.57 St Annes , Warton and Kirkham provide good opportunities for Combined Heat and Power 
(CHP) and district heating.  Schemes may also be viable as part of strategic locations where 
heat demand is created as part of new residential, employment or mixed use schemes.  
Delivering schemes will be more viable in new development, therefore the policy applies to 
strategic development schemes only (10 0 or more homes or 1000m² of new industrial floor -
space).  
12.58 The Framework recognises that new development should be expected to comply with 
adopted Local Plan policies on decentralised energy supply unless the applicant can 
demonstrate that it is not feasible or viable. The Lancashire Sustainable Energy Study, 2012 
suggests that there is significant potential for solar and heat pump forms of micro -generation 
in Fylde, which is more typically in a domestic setting.  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
179 Cross Cutting Themes In Chapter 1 2:  
Promoting Health and Wellbeing  
The predicted effects of climate change, such as more frequent extreme weather episodes, sea level 
rises and increased flooding will have a detrimental impact on the health and wellbeing of the 
population. Reducing energy use, improving insulation and prom oting renewable energy generation 
in Fylde will help tackle the threat that climate change has on health and wellbeing.  Encouraging 
sustainable energy generation will reduce carbon emissions and associated health problems.   
Achieving Good Design  
The des ign, layout and maintenance of sea defences and coastal protection measures have a 
significant impact on energy use during their initial construction and later repairs. Before applying 
renewable energy technologies to new buildings to reduce carbon dioxide  emissions it is important to 
consider reducing the total energy requirement. This can be achieved by requiring new developments 
to be constructed and operated to higher levels than those required by the statutory Building 
Regulations (i.e. referring to op tional standards).  
Strategic Objectives  
The following strategic objective is achieved in this chapter on water resource management, flood risk 
and addressing climate change  
Objective 2 : To maintain, improve  and enhance  the environment.  
Fylde Council’s Corporate Plan  2016 -2020 Priorities  
The following Corporate Plan priorities will be delivered through Chapter 12: 
• Ensure the security of the coastal defences  (Clean and green)  
• Ensure beaches and bathing waters are clean and safe  (Clean and green)    
Fylde Council’s Corporate Plan  2016 -2020 Actions  
The following Corporate Plan actions will be delivered through Chapter 12: 
• Work with partners to improve the quality of the bathing water  (Clean and green)  
• Deliver the coastal defence proje ct at Fairhaven and Church Scar with the E nvironment 
Agency (Clean and green)  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
180   Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
181 Chapter 13: Conserving and Enhancing the Natural, 
Historic and Built Environment  
 
Landscape  
13.1 The Fylde sub -region is characterised  by its coastline and the gentle undulating landscapes 
which enable long views eastwards towards the Forest of Bowland Area of Outstanding 
Natural Beauty and the Pennines; and Blackpool Tower and the Pleasure Beach rides to the 
west. The landscape is const antly evolving through natural and man -made interventions. It is 
important that these changes are managed in a way that maintains and enhances the 
landscape’s unique and special qualities.  
13.2 Landscape and biodiversity are closely linked and t here are ma ny biodiversity assets that 
characterise the landscape of the Borough. These include field ponds, watercourses, sand 
dunes , salt marshes  and woodland. Fylde’s land resource also includes some of the best and 
most versatile agricultural land in Lancashire. These resources provide important habitats for 
a variety of species. Some habitats are of national and international importance. The openness 
of the Coastal Change Management Area s along Fylde’s Coastline is key to the quality of the 
landscape in these are as which  contain s important coastal habitats.  Of particular importance 
are the Ribble and Wyre Estuar ies, which the Borough shares with neighbouring authorities 
with whom it will adopt a collaborative approach to management.  
13.3 Development needs to res pect and enhance the special significance of areas of biodiversity 
and landscape importance. These resources have many functions, including the provision of 
wildlife habitats, improvement of the visual aspects of the Borough and provision of a high 
quality , attractive landscape which helps make Fylde a  popular  place to live, work and visit.  
 
Strategic Policy ENV1  
Landscape  
Development will have regard to its visual impact within its landscape context and the landscape 
type in which it is situated. Development will be assessed to consider whether it is appropriate to 
the landscape character , amenity and tranquillity within which it is situated, as identified in the 
Lancashire Landscape Character Assessment, December 2000  or any subsequent update . In 
addition:  
a) A landscaped buffer of appropriate depth and species will be provided for development 
that impacts upon land in or adjacent to  the Countryside , and wherever necessary include s 
advanced planting, in order to limit the visual impact of development;  
b) Development proposals will ensure that e xisting landscape features will be conserved, 
maintained, protected and wherever possible enhanced through increased tree  and shrub  
cover including soft edge / transitional areas of planting;  
c) In the event of the lo ss of landscape features, the impact will be minimised or, where loss 
is unavoidable, their like -for-like replacements will be provided. Where such features, Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
182 including trees, woodlands, hedgerows and field ponds, are lost and replaced, measures 
will be put  in place to manage these new features;  
d) Suitable landscape planting of native species, appropriate to its context should be 
incorporated within or, where appropriate, close to new development.  Measures should 
be put in place for the management of such lan dscaping. Specific consideration should be 
given to how landscaping schemes will minimise the rate of surface water run -off; 
e) Details of the ongoing maintenance of all landscaping areas will be presented for approval 
by the Council . 
Coastal Change Management Area s  
The open and coastal character of the Coastal Change Management Area s, which are ident ified on 
the Policies  Map  including Inset Plans , will be protected. Development in the Coastal Change 
Management Area s will only be permitted where the development  meets all of the following 
criteria : 
i. Exceptionally requires a coastal location;  
ii. Is appropriate and in keeping with the open character of the coastline;  
iii. Promotes the conservation, restoration and enhancement of the coastline , predominantly 
the Ribble and Alt Estuaries SPA/Ramsar. Project specific Habitats Regulations Assessments 
(HRAs) will be required for any tourism and coastal defence developments near to the 
Ribble and Alt Estuaries SPA/Ramsar. The HRAs will need to demonstrate that there will be 
no likely significant effect upon European Sites before the tourism and coastal defence 
developments can be granted consent.  
iv. Does not detract from the tourism value or facilities  along the coastline ; 
v. Does not interfere with natural coastal processes , unless the development forms part of an 
agreed programme of sea defence enhancement, in accordance with the Fylde Coast 
Shoreline Management Plan ; 
vi. Does not  impede the function of any existing sea defence structures and wherever possible 
enhances the coastal protection measures;  and 
vii. Accords with the Development Strategy of this Local Plan.  
Where development does occur in these areas, developer contributions w ill be sought for the 
conservation, management and enhancement of important wildlife habitats and the creation of 
new habitats. This will include the improvement and management of Starr Hills Local Nature 
Reserve and the creation of new Local Nature Reserv es. Contributions will be made through  S106 
Agreements and / or  the Community Infrastructure Levy.  
 
 
Justification  
13.4 The landscape of Fylde contributes to the local distinctiveness of the Borough and it includes 
the Lancashire Amounderness Plain National Character Area (NCA).  Development that takes 
place outside settlements introduces urban elements into a rural landsca pe and can introduce Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
183 ‘hard edges’. Such development is likely to change the character of the landscape and is likely 
to be prominent in the gently undulating topography that characterises the Borough. It also 
threatens the functions of the landscape, inclu ding the loss of wildlife habitats such as 
hedgerows and field ponds, in addition to other functions such as recreation and agriculture.  
13.5 In addition to the requirements of policy GD7 : Achieving Good Design in Development, 
development should be based u pon an understanding of its landscape context, so that any 
overall detrimental impact upon the landscape is minimised. This understanding should be 
based upon evidence contained within the Landscape Strategy for Lancashire, 2000, prepared 
by LCC in partnership with the former Countryside Agency and the Lancashire Historic 
Landscape Characterisation, which identified a broad range of landscape character areas 
within Fylde , worthy of conserving, protecting and enhancing:  
• Fylde Coast Dunes (Coastal Dunes)  
• Ribble Marshes (Open Coastal Marsh)  
• Clifton and Hutton Marsh (Enclosed Coastal Marsh)  
• The Fylde (Coastal Plain)  
• South Fylde Mosses (Mossland)  
13.6 In addition, new develo pment adjacent to existing settlements that would impact upon the 
landscape should incorporate a landscaped buffer in order to avoid further ‘hard edges’ being 
visible. It is expected that landscape buffers will predominantly consist of tree planting using  
native species. New infrastructure should also be screened using a landscaped buffer, 
comprising of substantial shelter belts of native planting. Where new highways are effectively 
landscaped using tree planting, such landscaping also has the benefit of f orming a barrier 
against noise and pollution.  The Council will encourage appropriate landscaping on new 
development sites, including tree planting, which complement s existing natural features such 
as hedges and ponds. In rural areas all  tree, shrub and he dge planting schemes should make 
use of native species.   
Coastal Change Management Area s 
13.7 The Coastal Change Management Area s, which are identified on the Policies  Map  including 
Inset Plans , relate to the River Wyre  and its estuary to the north; and to the River Ribble and 
its estuary to the south and the sand dunes and extensive stretches of beach along the coast 
between St Annes and the boundary with Blackpool.  
13.8 The need to control development along coastlines is important for environmental and 
economic reasons. The Fylde Coast Shoreline Management Plan which seeks to ‘hold the line’ 
along the Fylde Coast  and the Catchment Flood Management Plan seek to manage run -off 
rates and minimi se flood risk . Coastlines war rant special protection as they are often sensitive 
to development due to their open character and the fact that they provide habitats for certain 
species of plants, animals and birds. In addition, development should not interfere with 
natural coastal proc esses, such as erosion and deposition.  
13.9 Much of the coastal land resource in Fylde has already been developed, including the main 
urban area of Lytham and St Annes. The remaining undeveloped coast is considered to be one 
of Fylde’s major environmental  assets. It will be protected from development as it will rarely 
be the most appropriate location for new development. The developed coast, by contrast, 
provides opportunities for restructuring and regeneration, such as that set out in Fylde 
Council’s Coas tal Strategy.  Where new development requires a coastal location, the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
184 developed coast will normally provide the best location , provided due regard is paid to the 
Bathing Water Quality Management Plan and the risks of erosion, flooding and land instability.   
  
13.10 Development within the Coastal Change Management Area s must meet the requirements set 
out in policy ENV1  and in national policy and guidance.  Where appropriate, conditions may 
be used to limit the lifetime of development requiring a coastal location to a temporary 
period, or to limit its use or occupancy, and to agree the approach for managing the 
developme nt at the end of its planned life.  
Saltmarshes  
13.11 Vast areas of salt marsh have formed within the outer most parts of the Ribble Estuary.   The 
salt marshes have developed on the landward side of extensive sandbanks and mud flats, and 
are exposed for long periods of time between tides. This has enabled salt tolerant plants to 
grow and form extensive grassy swards, which help to trap further amounts of silt and thus 
raise the general level of the marsh even more.  
13.12 Wide, shallow inter tidal foreshor es and saltmarshes provide an effective, natural method of 
flood protection along the Fylde coastline. They are an integral part of the coastal defence 
system, absorbing the energy, and reducing the damaging effect of storm waves.  
13.13 These natural defen ces absorb much of the force that the hard defences would otherwise 
have to resist. This effectively forms a two tier coastal defence with the saltmarshes as the 
first line of defence.  
13.14 The saltmarshes and inter -tidal mudflats are vitally important for coastal protection, nature 
conservation and the local economy. Sustainable saltmarsh management needs to balance 
the often conflicting socio -economic requirements of commercial, recreational  and coastal 
defence needs with nature conservation  and landscape  interests.  
13.15 An important element of the coast are the sand dunes, which are home to a wide variety of 
specialist plants and animals. They also form part of the flood defence system and provide a 
tourism and recreational resource. Sand dunes are complex systems that are vulnerable to 
increased disturbance  and invasive plant species, as well as weather and sea conditions. The 
Fylde sand dunes will be enhanced, protected and managed to reflect their value to 
biodiversity, as sea defences and  in mitigatin g the effects of climate change, in accordance 
with the  Fylde Sand Dunes Management Action Plan.  Fylde Council is taking the lead on a five 
year project, with partners Blackpool Council and Lancashire Wildlife Trust, to conserve and 
enhance sand dunes between Starr Gate and Lytham Green.  The sand dunes impro vement 
project is being funded by DEFRA, to reduce the risk of coastal flooding and erosion and runs 
until 2021.  
Tranquil Areas  
13.16 The Campaign to Protect Rural England (CPRE) commissioned a survey to establish the 
qualities people value most in the Eng lish countryside.  Nearly three -quarters (72%) of 
respondents said that tranqui llity topped the list.  F ollowing this, the CPRE worked with 
university researchers to map the tranqui llity levels of all areas across England, using a 
rigorous set of indicators to measure tranqui llity.  The evidence that tranquil lity is extremely 
important to the majority of people has validated the CPRE’s campaign to protect tranqui llity Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
185 in England. Tranquil areas  have remained relatively undisturbed by noise and are prized for 
their recreational and amenity value.  
13.17 The CPRE’s tranqui llity maps make it possible to create policies and take decisions about land 
use to protect and enhance tranqui llity and confidently monitor how well the policies are 
working. Tranqui llity is a highly valued characteristic of the English countryside and one of the 
most important indicators of its quality. The identification and protection of Tranquil areas 
complies with the Framework.   
Important Landscape and Biodiversity Features  
13.18 The Fylde landscape contains features of local  and heritage  importance, for example  
hedgerows  which  are under threat from farming practices and new development. Hedgerows 
should be retained, restored and incorporated into new development and  be managed 
accordingly. This will also enable the safeguarding of distinctive field patterns. Trees and 
blocks of woodland that characterise areas  of the landscape should also be safeguarded. Marl 
pit and brick pit ponds  reflect past extraction of clay an d lime and provide an important 
wildlife habitat for aquatic plants and a wide range of aquatic invertebrates and amphibians, 
including some rare species such as great crested newt. These ponds should be conserved. 
Watercourses are important habitats for w ater voles and other species. Some previously 
developed land can also have significant ecological value , and this should be assessed before 
they are proposed for development . 
 
Strategic Policy ENV2  
Biodiversity  
Section 1. Nature Conservation Sites and Ecological networks  
a) The hierarchy of nature conservation sites  
The Council is committed to ensuring the protection and enhancement of Fylde’s biodiversity 
and geological assets and interests. In order to do this, the Counc il will have regard to the 
following hierarchy of nature conservation sites when making planning decisions, according to 
their designation:  
i) International Ramsar Sites  
    Special Areas of Conservation (SAC)  
    Special Protection Areas (SPA)  
    Candida te SACs or SPAs  
The strongest possible protection will be given to sites of international importance , 
predominantly the Ribble and Alt Estuaries SPA / Ramsar site . 
ii) National Nature Reserves (NNR)  
    Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)  
    Marin e Conservation Zones (MCZ)  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
186 iii) Local Geodiversity  Sites  
     County Biological Heritage Sites  
     Local Nature Conservation Sites  
     Local Nature Reserves  
Development that would directly or indirectly affect any sites of local importance will be 
permitted only where it is necessary to meet an overriding local public need or where it is 
in relation to the purposes of the nature conservation site.  
b) Development within or affecting nature conservation sites and ecological networks  
In addition to the provisions of National and European law, and in accordance with national 
planning policy, proposals for development within or affecting the above nature conservation 
sites must adhere to  all of  the following principles:  
i) Development that would directly or indirectly affect any sites of local importance including 
ancient woodland or ancient and veteran trees will be permitted only where it is necessary 
to meet an overriding local public need or where it is in relation to the purposes of the  
nature conservation , or mitigation can avoid affecting site integrity . 
ii) Proposals which  primarily  seek to enhance or conserve biodiversity will be supported in 
principle, subject to the consideration of other Local Plan policies;  
iii) Consideration sho uld be given to the impact of development proposals on the County -wide 
Lancashire Ecological network  and, where possible, opportunities to support the network 
by incorporating biodiversity in and around the development should be encouraged;  
iv) Where devel opment is considered necessary, adequate mitigation measures and 
compensatory habitat creation will be required through planning conditions and / or 
obligations, in order to secure measurable net gains for biodiversity.   Measures should be 
put in place for  the ongoing management of such features.  
Where it has been demonstrated that significant harm cannot be avoided appropriate 
mitigation or, as a last resort, replacement or othe r compensation will be required . The 
location of appropriate mitigation, replac ement or other compensation will be targeted, 
using a sequential approach, as follows:  
• Within the development site;  
• In the immediate locality;  
• Within a Nature Improvement Area within the Borough;  
• Within a Nature Improvement Area elsewhere in the Fylde Coas t; and lastly,  
• Elsewhere.  
Where significant harm resulting from development cannot be avoided, adequately 
mitigated or, as a last resort, replace d or compensat ed, then planning permission will be 
refused.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
187 v) the development of recreation will be in areas which are not sensitive to visitor pressures - 
the protection of biodiversity will be given higher priority than the development of 
recreation in sensitive areas of internationally important nature conservation sites (as 
identified in paragraph (1)(a )(i) above), and on all nature conservation sites and ecological 
networks in situations where there is conflict between the two objectives.  
c) Damage to nature conservation sites and ecological networks  
The following definition of what constitutes damage t o nature conservation sites and other 
ecological assets will be used in assessing developments likely to impact upon them:  
i) loss of the undeveloped open character of a part, parts or the entire nature  conservation site 
or ecological network;  
ii) reducing  the width of part of an ecological network or causing direct or indirect severance of 
any part of the ecological network or of any part of a nature conservation site  including the 
flight path of migratory birds ; 
iii) restricting the potential for movement  of wildlife within or through an ecological network or 
nature conservation site;  
iv) causing the degradation of the ecological functions of any part of the ecological network or 
nature conservation site;  
v). directly or indirectly damaging or severing lin ks between nature conservation sites, green 
spaces, wildlife corridors and the countryside; and  
vi) impeding links to the wider ecological network and nature conservation sites that are 
recognised by neighbouring planning authorities.  
Section 1 (Nature Con servation Sites and Ecological networks)  of this policy applies to all presently 
designated nature conservation sites, which are identified on the Policies Map  including Inset Plans  
and to any nature conservation sites or ecological networks that may be designated in the future 
by appropriate agencies.  The Fylde Ecological Network , comprising the Grassland Network, the 
Wetland and Heath Network and the Woodland Network  has been  ident ified and mapped  by LCC 
and Lancashire Wildlife Trust , in compliance with the Framework  and is accessible on the Planning 
Policy website.  
 
Section 2. Priority Species Protection  
Planning permission will not be granted for development which would have an ad verse effect on a 
priority species  or its habitat,  unless the benefits of the development outweigh the need to maintain 
the population of the species in situ. Should development be permitted that might have an adverse 
effect on a priority species  or its habitat,  planning conditions or agreements will be used to:  
a) Ensure the survival of the individual species affected;  and where this cannot be achieved : 
b) Reduce the disturbance to a minimum;   
c) Provide adequate alternative habitats to  enhance  the viability of the local population  of that 
species ; and  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
188 d) Promote the  conservation , restoration and enhancement of priority habitats , ecological 
networks and the protection and recovery of priority species; and identify and pursue 
opportunities for securing measurable net gains for biodiversity.  
 
 
Justification  
13.19 International Wildlife Sites provide the highest level of protection and include Ramsar sites 
and Special Protection Areas (SPAs). The Ribble Estuary is designated as both a Ramsar site 
and SPA. The Ribble Marshes are also designated as a National Nature Reserve, c overing 4,520 
Ha of intertidal and saltmarsh habitats at the mouth of the Ribble Estuary. The Ribble Estuary 
is of  considerable value to birdlife. It is an important part of the network of wetland sites in 
Western Europe and the most important wildfowl site in the UK.   Marine Conservation Areas 
are nationally important wildlife sites.  Whilst the Fylde Off -shore Marin e Conservation Zones 
lies outside the local plan area it is within the sphere of influence of development with in the 
area and can  therefore justifiably be included within the scope of policy ENV2 .  
13.20 There are five Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs ) in the Borough, which are listed in Table 
8: 
Table 8: Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) in Fylde  
Name of Area  Area (Ha)  
Ribble Estuary  9,120  
Newton Marsh  66 
Lytham and St Annes Dunes  25 
Wyre Estuary  1,493  
Lytham  Coastal Changes  24 
 
13.21 Local Nature Reserves (LNRs) include wildlife or geological features of special interest, which 
provide the opportunity for access to nature or to learn about the natural environment. Local 
Nature Reserves are designated by councils with the support of Nat ural England and many are 
often Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs). In Fylde, the Starr Hills Local Nature Reserve is 
the only LNR in the Borough. The Starr Hills LNR also forms part of the Lytham and St Annes 
Dunes SSSI.  
13.22 In addition to th e statutorily protected sites, Fylde also contains 34 Biological Heritage Sites, 
which are listed in Appendix 7. These sites of nature conservation interest make a significant 
contribution to the biodiversity of Lancashire and will be conserved and protect ed.  
13.23 Geodiversity relates to rocks, minerals, fossils, soils, landforms and natural processes, and 
these play a major role in defining landscapes. The diversity of England’s geodiversity has 
produced a wide range of landforms and soil types. Measures  should be taken to avoid and, Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
189 where appropriate, mitigate any negative effect of development on geodiversity. The Lytham 
Coastal Changes SSSI relates to geodiversity and there is one Local Geodiversity Site in Fylde, 
relating to the stretch of sand dunes from Starr Gate to the coastguard station (north of St 
Annes, opposite the runway to Blackpool Airport), which includes the Starr Hills Local Nature 
Reserve.  
 Mitigation and compensation  
13.24 Section 1, part b) of policy ENV2  sets out the approach to mitigation and as a last resort, 
compensation.  The Council has adopted the Biodiversity Supplementary Planning Document 
2019 (SPD).  The SPD sets out in more detail , guidance on mitigation, compensation and 
enhancement  of habitats  for protected species including Pink Footed Geese .  This will apply 
to both designated sites and habitats outside the designated sites that support species listed 
as being important in the designations of the internationally important sites.  In this poli cy, 
compensation means provision in kind, for example habitat elsewhere which supports the 
same range of species  and / or the same ecological function , rather than financial 
compensation.  It is crucial to the strategic priority of ‘no net loss’ that appro priate mitigation 
or, as a last resort, compensation is made. The location of appropriate mitigation, 
replacement or other compensation must follow the sequential approach set out in section 1, 
part b) and should ideally be as close as possible to the deve lopment site. The immediate 
locality of the site includes nearby sites in  adjoining Local Authority areas .   
13.25 For designated sites or species, mitigation, replacement or other compensation can take place 
as part of the development (during the developm ent process) , in compliance with the Habitats 
Regulations 2010 (as amended) . This compensation may be provided by the applicant direct, 
or through another person or organization, such as a local land manager. It is sometimes 
termed ‘biodiversity offsetting ’.  The SPD includes examples of how habitat mitigation  or 
compensation could be provided and managed.  
13.26 Landowners and farmers in Fylde play a local role in managing land which includes important 
habitats, principally for migratory birds including pink -footed geese.  In relation to the Fylde 
Coast the focus is first on avoiding impacts; where this is not pos sible mitigation options will 
be explored, including providing alternative functionally linked habitat for Special Protection 
Area / Ramsar species.  The SPD includes examples of mitigation options, particularly in 
relation to pink footed geese.  
Enhanceme nt 
13.27 The Plan encourages opportunities to enhance habitat within development sites  where 
appropriate , including within public open space or sustainable drainage schemes.  These 
opportunities  will range from significant habitat creation within larger si tes, to  smaller 
initiatives such as  bat boxes and tree planting on smaller urban sites.  
13.28 There will be opportunities for landowners and farmers to enhance these habitats or create 
new habitats including for farmland birds and pink -footed geese. This will enhance the 
ecological network.  This could be through changes to how farmland and green s paces are 
managed or habitat creation at a larger scale, funded from a variety of sources.  More 
guidance is set out in the SPD.  The SPD will seek the enhancement of Fylde’s natural assets, 
including restoring or adding to natural habitats and other landsc ape features, and the 
creation of habitats where appropriate.   Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
190 New biodiversity features  
13.29 The F ramework stresses the importance of providing net gains for biodiversity ; including by 
establishing coherent ecological networks  that are more resilient to current and future 
pressures . The Framework plus other legislation, regulations and guidance set out both how 
this is to be achieved, and legal duties and requirements for nature conservation.  
Performance Monitoring Indicator 14, in Appendix 8, sets out a target / policy outcome to 
achieve net gains in biodiversity.  Opportunities for new biodiversity features within or near 
to development should be taken. This could be in association with infrastructure, such as 
highways and flood defences.  In particular, tree planting can be effectiv e in screening 
highways and other infrastructure that has a detrimental impact on the landscape. Other 
opportunities can include leaving areas of open space unmown, planting small areas of 
greenspace with wildflower species  and native shrubs  or incorporati ng new or existing ponds  
and SuDs  within or close to new development.  
 Ecological network for Lancashire  
13.30 The Council plays an important strategic role in supporting biodiversity in  Fylde and will:  
a) Protect and safeguard all sites of international, national and local  importance;  
b) support a network of strategic green links between the rural areas  of biodiversity 
value , river  corridors and green spaces to provide an ecological network that will 
provide habitats to support biodiversity and  prevent fragmentation of the natural 
environment; and  
c) support the development of recreation in areas which are not sensitive to  visitor 
pressures.  
13.31 The Lancashire Local Nature Partnership (the LNP) has worked with partner organisations to 
identify a functional ecological network for Lancashire (including Blackpool and Blackburn 
with Darwen).  The network is based on the tiers of designated wildlife sites and the habitats 
that lie within and around them. It seeks to identify how these could be utilised  by species on 
a functional basis, to move between sites. It also provides a foundation for how Lancashire 
fits into other networks regionally, nationally and internationally and sets the context for 
other local networks which may be identified, in line wi th the Framework .   
13.32 Fylde Council supports the principle of the Lancashire Ecological Network and  the Fylde 
Ecological Network, (comprising the Grassland Network, the Wetland and Heath Network and 
the Woodland Network  which are accessible on the Planning Policy website . The Open Space 
Study Update, 2016 recommends that Starr Hills LNR, the Lytham and St Annes Dunes SSSI 
and BHSs are integrated to create a regionally significant nature reserve and to develop and 
impleme nt beach and sand dunes management action plans.    
Developer Contributions  
13.33 The requirement for developer contributions under policies ENV1  and ENV2  should be read 
in conjunction with the requirements for developer contributions under policies ENV 3 and 
ENV 4, as features of landscape and biodiversity value also form important components of the 
Borough’s Green Infrastructure network.  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
191 Open Space (the Green Infrastructure  network )  
13.34 It is vital that the right infrastructure is in place to support future development and this 
includes the Green Infrastructure  network . Green infrastructure is the network of multi -
functional green space and blue space, urban , rural  and coastal , which is c apable of delivering 
a wide range of environmental and quality of life benefits for local communities. The Green 
Infrastructure  network  has a vital role in climate change adaption and mitigation and flood 
alleviation and management. It provides important b iodiversity resources and can boost the 
tourism economy and provide opportunities for recreation. It is also strongly linked to quality 
of place and is proven to attract and retain businesses to an area.  
13.35 The Green Infrastructure  network  should be tak en to mean all open space of public value, 
including, but not limited to:  
• Parks and gardens;  
• Natural and semi -natural greenspaces – including trees and woodlands, urban forestry, 
scrub, grasslands, wetlands, open and running water, wastelands and derelict open land 
and rock areas;  
• Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS);  
• Green corridors – including river and canal banks, cycleways and public rights of way;  
• Outdoor sports facilities (with natural or artificial surfaces and either publicly or privately 
owned) – including tennis courts, bowling greens, sports pitches, golf courses, athletics 
tracks, school and other institutional playing fields and other outdoor sports areas;  
• Amenity greenspace – including informal recreation spaces, greenspaces in and aro und 
housing, domestic gardens and greens;  
• Recreational grounds  and stadia;  
• Provision for children and teenagers - including play areas, skateboard parks, outdoor 
basketball hoops and other more informal areas (such as 'hanging out' areas, teenage 
shelters) ; 
• Allotments, community gardens;  
• Cemeteries and churchyards;  
• Accessible countryside in urban fringe areas;  
• Civic spaces, including civic and market squares, promenades and other hard surfaced 
areas designed for pedestrians;  
• Blue spaces, including Fylde’s coastline, ponds, rivers, canals and other watercourses; and  
• Beaches, including sand dunes.  
13.36 The Framework requires councils to take a strategic approach to maintaining and enhancing 
networks of habitats and green infrastructure; and plan for the enhancement of natural 
capital at a catchment or landscape scale across local authority boundaries. Despite an 
abundance of resources tha t contribute to the Green Infrastructure network, there are 
deficiencies in Fylde and access to some of the Borough’s most important Green Infrastructure 
assets is limited . New evidence has been provided by the Open Space  Study Update and the 
new Playing P itch Strategy , both of which were issued in 2016.  The Open Space Study Update 
identifies the following typologies:  
• Parks and Gardens  
• Natural and semi -natural greenspace  
• Amenity greenspace  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
192 • Provision for children and young people  
• Allotments  
• Cemeteries/church yards  
 
The provision of formal outdoor sports is contained within the Playing Pitch Strategy. There is 
also the opportunity to improve the potential of some of Fylde’s most important assets and 
to link into the Green Infrastructure network in neighbouring authority areas.   
 
Strategic Policy ENV 3 
Protecting Existing Open Space  (Part of the Green Infrastructure  network)  
Existing Open Space is identified on the Policies Map including Inset Plans  denoted by the following 
descriptions:  
• Parks and Gardens  
• Semi -Natural Greenspaces  
• Amenity Greenspace  
• Children’s Play Areas  
• Local Areas and Local Equipped Areas for Play  
• Youth Provision  
• Allotments  
• Cemeteries/Churchyards  
• Football Pitches  
• Rugby Pitches  
• Cricket Pitches  
The areas of Existing Open Space  provide a critically important part of the Green Infrastructure 
network with in Fylde . Existing Open Space will be protected  from inappropriate development , 
having particular regard to the multi -functional benefits of open spaces, as follows:  
a) Existing Open Space , including sports and playing pitches (subject to policy HW3 : Protection 
and Provision of Indoor and Outdoor Sports Facilities ), will be protected unless the 
requirements of paragraph 99 of the Framework are met and the findings of any published  
and adopted  needs assessment are met.  
b) Existing Open Space , including sports and playing pitches (subject to policy HW3 : Protection 
and Provision of Indoor and Outdoor Sports Facilities ), will be protected unless it can be 
demonstrated that any proposal will not have adverse effects contrary to the landscape, 
biodiversity and water management requirements of the Local Plan and the requirem ents 
set out in the other criteria in this policy are met.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
193 c) Development will not be permitted on Existing Open Space  which  is considered essential 
to the setting, character , recreational benefits for residents,  or visual amenities of Key 
Service Centres, Local Service Centres and rural settlements.  
d) Development will not be permitted on Existing  Open   Space  that makes a pos itive 
contribution to the historic environment including the character, appearance and 
setting of conservation areas  and listed buildings , unless the proposal meets the 
requirements of Policy ENV5 . 
e) Development that results in the loss of land used for allotments as shown on the Policies 
Map including Inset Plans  will only be permitted when:  
• Suitable, alternative provision is made that is at least equivalent in size and quality 
to that which will be lost; or  
• It can be demonstrated that there is no longer a community need for the 
allotments.  
f) Fylde’s Public Rights of Way network, comprising footpath s, byways, cycleways and 
bridleways will be protected and opportunities to extend the network will be safeguarded  
from development and  supported where this improves access to key Green Infrastructure 
assets, including areas of Green Belt, the two Areas of Separation, the Coastal Change 
Management Area s and the Lancaster Canal towpath.  
 
 
Justification  
13.37 The Council recognises  the importance of school playing fields and other formal recreational 
sites, as well as allotments, and will resist development proposals involving such sites that do 
not bring a significant gain in terms of open space and recreation facilities, as well a s other 
community benefits. However, any open space identified by the Council as being surplus to 
requirements may be considered for partial development if the quality of remaining open 
space or other open space in the locality is improved as part of the development proposal.  
13.38 Fylde contains significant areas of high quality greenspace that are valuable community assets 
and intrinsic to the character of Key Service Centre, Local Service Centres and Tier 1  and Tier 
2 rural settlements. For example,  Lytham Green is regarded as one of the most important 
green spaces in the Borough and The Green at Wrea Green is the largest green in Lancashire. 
Such important green spaces will be protected.  Performance Monitoring Indicator 15, in 
Appendix 8, sets out a  target / policy outcome to achieve net gains in the provision of open 
space and indoor and outdoor sports facilities . 
13.39 Public rights of way are routes over which the public has a right to pass . Public footpaths are 
for pedestrians only and public bridleways are for pedestrians, horse riders and cyclists. Public 
byways are for pedestrians, horse riders, cyclists and motorised vehicles, subject to the 
character of the way. Policy ENV 3 protects ex isting public rights of way and policy T4 facilitates 
the provision of additional footpaths, cycleways and bridleways where appropriate.  LCC has 
prepared a Rights of Way Improvement Plan.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
194 13.40 Golf courses in the Borough are privately owned but the Council will work with owners to 
ensure their long term viability.  
13.41 An Open Space  Study  Update , together with a new Playing Pitch Strategy  were  issued  in 2016  
and have inform ed the preparation of  the Local Plan .  
 
Strategic Policy ENV 4 
Provision of New Open Space (Part of the Green Infrastructure  network)  
Amenity Open Space  
Within new housing developments comprising ten or more homes the provision of amenity open 
space with facilities for children’s play (i.e. playgrounds and Multi -Use Games areas  including LAPs 
and LEAPs ),  will be required to the following minimum standards (1) : 
• 16m2 per 1 bedroom home  
• 24m2 per 2 bedroom home  
• 32m2 per 3 bedroom home  
• 40m2 per 4 bedroom home  
• 48m2 per 5 bedroom home  
Such safe green open space should be accessible, of high quality and normally be provided as a 
single central usable  facility.  
Housing developments of 100 homes or more will be required to provide double the abov e 
standards.  Developers should provide effective long -term future maintenance of areas of open 
space in accordance with this policy, through the formation of a management company.  
When determining an application for non -strategic sites there is a preferen ce for an off -site 
contribution, in lieu  of on -site provision of open space, to enhance facilities on an adjacent open 
space.  
Where the standards require the provision of open space of less than 0.2 Ha, or where it is agreed 
with the Council that the open  space would be better provided off -site, payment of a commuted 
sum  will be sought to help provide additional or improved open space nearby, where the benefits 
would serve the occupiers of new and existing developments.  Commuted sums will be calculated 
on the basis of the value of the land that would otherwise have had to be made available and the 
costs of laying the land out as public open space and maintaining it for a 10 year period.  
Developer contributions and the Green Infrastructure  network  
Financial contributions will be sought through the Community Infrastructure Levy to assist schemes 
for other safe green open space where there is an identified need, including the provision of 
allotments, trees and woodland.  
Enhancement  
Where there is an identified over -provision of open space in close proximity to the application site, 
the monies generated from the development of the site and development in close proximity to it Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
195 will be used to enhance the quality of, and accessibility t o, the existing open space network. 
Opportunities to link open spaces to create a multi -functional Green Infrastructure network will be 
maximised.  Financial contributions will be sought through the Community Infrastructure Levy  (CIL)  
to assist such scheme s. 
 
 
(1) Policy ENV 4 does not include the provision, protection or enhancement of indoor and outdoor sports facilities.  The provision of 
indoor and outdoor sports facilities is dealt with under policy HW3  in chapter 11.   
 
Justification  
13.42 The Open Space  Study Update, 2016 shows that new provision  of open space and children’s 
play areas will be required as more development takes place , either through new LEAP and 
NEAP provision or by increasing existing LAP provision .  The Open Space Study Update , 2016 
recommends increasing opportunities for activites for young adults and children, in particular, 
through developing opportunites to improve and further expand existing provision to cater 
towards older age ranges. The improvement of the quality and variet y of play equipment is 
recommended as a priori ty in Freckleton and Warton.  Open spaces with facilities for 
children’s play will be sought in association with family housing  and smaller unit 
accommodation . Children’s play facilities will not be required fo r flat developments  and 
sheltered housing . However, these more intensive forms of development are likely to require 
safe green open space for amenity use  around them . The formation and retention of 
management companies, to maintain the network of open space ( the Green Infrastructure  
network ) is considered to be Best Practice.   
13.43 The Council will be flexible in its approach to requiring new open space. The requirement will 
be modified or even removed where it can be shown by the developer that there  is an existing 
over -provision of open space in the locality.  However, the Open Space Study Update , 2016  
recommends that the quality of provision of existing amenity greenspace is sustained or 
improved; and that more formal features, such as benches and la ndscaping are added  in areas 
of deficiency .  In terms of natural and semi -natural greenspaces, the Open Space Study 
Update , 2016  recommends that the potential of the coastal areas are maximised so as to 
provide more formal recreational opportunities .  
13.44 Open space to be provided, or commuted payments to be made, will be fairly and reasonably 
related in scale and kind to the development proposal. Where provision is made off -site, it 
should be of direct benefit to, the occupiers of the new development.  
13.45 The Open Space Study Update , 2016  identifies gaps in provision of certain types of open space  
including the provision of parks and gardens in Warton and Freckleton and in Kirkham and 
Wesham . The shortage of allotments at Lytham, St Annes, and in the Rural Areas  has been 
identified as an issue.  The Open Space Study Update , 2016  recommends that the Council 
works with providers to deliver a more co -ordinated approach to the provision of allotments 
across the Borough including the manageme nt of waiting li sts and the maintenance of sites. 
The Study Update also recommends that existing allotments are serviced by adequate 
ancillary facilities so as to enable maximu m use. Provision of cemeteries and burial provision 
in Fylde should continue to be driven by the  demand for burials and assessment of available 
capacity, as recommended by the Open Space Study Update. Trees and woodlands were not 
considered by the Study. However, Lancashire is one of the least wooded counties in Britain, Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
196 with approximately 5% of its area being woodland, compared to a UK average of around 12%. 
New provision for woodland planting should be encouraged .  
13.46 There are significant Green Infrastructure assets in Fylde that are not currently achieving their 
full potential, particularly in terms of access, recreation and tourism. Of particular importance 
to Fylde, is the 7.5 km of coastline from Starr Gate in the west to Freckleton Marshes in the 
east, which is covered by Fylde Council’s Coastal Strategy  (2015 -2032) . This stretch of 
coastline is a crucial element of Fylde’s tourism assets and important to its long term economic 
success. It contains some of the most  important wildlife areas in Europe, particularly for 
wading birds and wildfowl. The coastline also contains some of the most important open 
spaces in the Borough, from the world class amenity beach, the extensive sand dune network, 
historic Promenade Gard ens and Fairhaven Marine Park, through to Lytham Green. In 
recognition of the importance of the coastline, the Council has prepared and adopted the 
Coastal Strategy .  
Creating linkages within the Green Infrastructure network  
13.47 There may also be opportu nities to create other Green Infrastructure linkages, such as 
connecting the Fylde Coast cycle network with the Guild Wheel cycleway. The Lancashire 
Coastal Way  links the limestone scenery of Arnside and Silverdale and the saltmarshes, 
agricultural land and seaside resorts of Fylde, Blackpool and Morecambe. However, sections 
of the footpath are liable to tidal flooding and may not be passable. Parts of the route pass 
along the seaward side of the sea defences and consist of steep and slippery rocks which are 
difficult to ascend. The Council will support improvements to the condition of this footpath.  
All these initiatives will require collaboration with neighbour ing councils where the route  is 
within their areas, along with other relevant organisations.   
13.48 Opportunities to link resources within the Green Infrastructure network will be maximised, 
taking account of the objectives of the Lancashire Green Infrast ructure Strategy. The linking 
of the Green Infrastructure  network  facilitates the flow of ecological processes, including the 
movement of species. As the climate changes, species may move northwards and the nature 
of the landscape, including the fragmentat ion of habitats and the permeability of the 
landscape, can limit their ability to move.  
13.49 High quality green routes, particularly those linking a residential area with a town, district or 
local centre, can encourage people to walk and cycle and will im pact upon quality of place and 
improvements to health and wellbeing, referred to in chapter 11. Linking towns and rural 
settlements to the landscape through a  Green Infrastructure  network will also improve access 
to open spaces. The key resources and oppor tunities for linkages and enhancements are 
identified in the Open Space Study  Update, 2016 . 
13.50 In order to maximise  the benefits of Green Infrastructure, Fylde will work with its 
neighbouring authorities to ensure that the network is not restricted by administrative 
boundaries.  Further cross boundary working will be required so as to enable the development, 
delivery an d implementation of a strategic Green Infrastructure network (including green 
space and blue space) across the Fylde Coast and into neighbouring parts of Lancashire.  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
197 Conserving and Enhancing the Historic and Built Environment  
13.51 The main objective of the historic and built environment section in this chapter is to protect , 
conserve  and enhance  Fylde’s historic environment including its many heritage assets and 
their settings .  
Heritage Assets  
13.52 Heritage assets are buildings, monuments, sites, places or landscapes that have heritage 
significance. Such assets include designated heritage assets such as listed buildings and 
conservation areas and locally important assets such as locally listed buildings and locally 
important areas , including landscapes. Where a proposed development will result in 
substantial harm or total loss of a designated heritage asset, consent will only be granted 
where it can be demonstrated that the substantial public benefits outweigh that harm or loss 
as set out in the Framework.  
Built Heritage Strategy  for Fylde  
13.53 The Built Heritage Strategy for Fylde (2015 to 2032) aims to provide an overview of how the 
Council will conserve the historic environment of the Borough and promote awareness of the 
value of our shared heritage : ‘To ensure that the distinctive heritage of the Borough is fully 
appreciated and recogni sed and that this strategy and associated action plan will seek to 
protect, conserve and enhance its built heritage for the overall benefi t of the community.’ 
(paragraph 2.1 , Built Heritage Strategy, 2015)  The objectives of the Built Heritage Strategy are:  
i. To bring about an understanding as to why it is important to have a Built Heritage 
Strategy for the Borough from an economic, social and cultural perspective.  
ii. To bring about a general awareness of the meaning of ‘heritage asset’ in the context 
of the Strategy and to affirm the Council’s commitment to protecting existing and 
potential assets that together will comprise the built heritage of the Borough.  
iii. To promote a general awareness of legislation, planning policy and the important 
responsibilities and roles of national bodies and organisations in built heritage 
matters.  
iv. To bring about an appreciation of the diverse heritage assets of the Bo rough and the 
steps needed to create a framework for the protection and conservation of these 
important assets.  
v. To promote community participation in heritage matters, including the role that  
community groups, amenity bodies and individuals might play in the promotion and 
appreciation of the built heritage of the Borough.  
vi. To draw together a series of key issues from the Strategy to form the basis of an 
implementation programme and action plan to bring about plans, policies and 
projects aimed at identifying, protecting, managing, conserving and enhancing the 
heritage assets of the Borough.  
vii. To ensure that the Strategy provides the framework for the full incorporation of built 
heritage matters into  the policies developed within the Borough -wide Local Plan and 
as a consequence the two documents are fully aligned.     
Heritage Statements  
13.54 Development proposals relating to a heritage asset should be supported by a Heritage 
Statement. The level of detail provided should be proportionate to the asset’s importance, in Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
198 accordance with national planning policy.  Statements should be prepared havi ng regard to 
guidance prepared by Historic England and the Built Heritage Strategy for Fylde .   
  
Strategic Policy ENV 5 
Historic Environment  
Proposals for development should conserve, protect and, where appropriate, enhance  the 
character, appearance , significance and historic value of Fylde’s designated and undesignated 
heritage assets, in particular:  
• The classic seaside resort of St Annes with its seafront, Victorian and Edwardian 
architecture and pier, together with the Promenade and Ashton Gardens.  
• The formal resort of Lytham  with the Windmill and Green, and the cultural assets based 
around Lowther Pavilion and Garden, Lytham Hall and its historic parkland.  
• The historic market town  of Kirkham and  
• The two planned model rural settlements of Singleton and Thistleton.   
In addition the Council will : 
• Adopt and implement  the Built Heritage Strategy for Fylde , together with the provision of 
further guidance, in the form of a web based resource for developers who propose to alter 
listed buildings . 
• Promote heritage -led regeneration including : The Heritage Parks Initiative  – connecting the 
key historic parks and gardens of Lytham and St Annes ; Visual Corridors  – enhancing key 
routes, approaches and gateways into Lytham, St Anne s and Kirkham ; enhancing the 
commercial and resort core of St Annes to create a vibrant seaside resort; protecting and 
enhancing the heritage of Lytham; and revitalising the commercial core of Kirkham . 
• Produce Conservation Area Appraisals and Management Pl ans. 
• Identify opportunities to promote the district’s heritage assets through tourism, culture and 
economic development, including Fairhaven Lake.  
• Seek to identify local heritage assets.  
• Seek opportunities for safeguarding the future of any heritage assets at risk including 
Lytham Hall.  
• Work with partners to design and manage the public realm in historic areas.  
• Look for opportunities for new development within the Borough’s Conservation A reas and 
within the setting of heritage assets to enhance or better reveal their significance.  
Listed Buildings  
Fylde’s Listed Buildings and their settings will be conserved and, where appropriate, enhanced. A 
proposed development which results in a ny harm  to or l oss of the significance  of a listed building 
and / or its setting  will be refused and  only be permitted where any harm is justified by the public Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
199 benefits of the proposal.  Proposals will only be granted in exceptional circumstances where they 
can b e clearly justified in accordance with national planning guidance on heritage assets.  
In addition  to the requirements of national policy, applications for works to listed buildings including 
alterations, extensions, changes of use or new development within its curtilage or setting must have 
regard to  the significance of the heritage asset including it s archaeological and historic interest .  
Proposals involving the total or substantial loss of a heritage asset, or the loss of the elements that 
contribute to its significance will be refused.  Proposals will only be granted in exceptional 
circumstances wh ere they can be clearly justified in accordance with national planning guidance on 
heritage assets and  all of  the following will be required as part of the justification to provide 
evidence that:  
a. Other potential owners or users of the site have been sought  through appropriate 
marketing where the marketing includes the offer of the unrestricted freehold of the asset 
at a price that reflects the buildings condition and;  
b. Reasonable endeavours have been made to seek funding for the heritage assets conversion 
and; 
c. Efforts have been made to find charitable or public authorities willing to take on the 
heritage asset.                
Where the loss of the whole or part of a heritage asset is approved this will be subject to an 
appropriate condition or planning obliga tion to ensure that any loss will not occur until a contract 
is in place to carry out the development that has been approved.  
Where development proposals lead to less than substantial harm to the significance of a designated 
heritage asset, this harm shall  be weighed against the public benefits of the proposal, including 
securing its optimum viable use, having special regard to the desirability of preserving the building, 
its setting and any features of special architectural or historic interest it possesse s. 
Conservation Areas  
Proposals within  or affecting the setting of  any of the ten designated conservation areas in Fylde, 
listed below, or within any additional conservation areas designated during the lifetime of the Local 
Plan, should conserve or enhance those elements that make a positive contribution to their special 
character and appearance and setting. Pr oposals that better reveal the significance of these areas 
will also be supported.  
• Lytham (Town Centre ) 
• Lytham Avenues  
• Kirkham  
• St. Anne’s on Sea (Town Centre)  
• Ashton Gardens / Porritt Houses (St Annes)  
• St. Anne’s Road East  
• Singleton  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
200 • Thistleton  
• Larbreck  
• Wrea Green  
There will be a presumption in favour of the retention of buildings and / or features which make a 
positive contribution to the special character and appearance of a conservation area. Demolition , 
or other substantial loss  or harm  to the significa nce of a building or feature - including trees, 
landscapes, spaces (public or private open space) and artefacts  – that make a positive contribution  
to the Conservation Area , will only be permitted where this harm is outweighed by the public 
benefits of the proposal .  Such proposals must be accompanied by clear details of the proposal and 
justify the harm in line with national policy.  
Proposals should:  
a. Be appropriate to their  context including setting, scale, density and physical 
characteristics;  
b. Preserve or enhance features making a positive contribution . In particular , design, 
massing and height of any building should closely relate to adjacent buildin gs and 
should not have an unacceptable impact on townscape and landscape;  
c. Not have an unacceptable impact on historic street patterns or roofscape;  
d. Not result in the loss of open space  (the Green Infrastructure network) ; 
e. Retain individual features of interest, e.g. doorways, cobbles, trees, hedges, railings and 
garden walls;  
f. Reinforce distinctiveness of the area, reflecting the local pallet of materials  and local 
building styles .  
Public Realm and the Historic Environment  
The public realm needs to be d esigned appropriately, to reflect the special quality of the historic 
environment including landscaping, street furniture and materials.  The public realm needs to be 
appropriately managed and maintained, in accordance with the Built Heritage Strategy for Fylde, so 
that it adds to the character, quality and distinctiveness of the herita ge asset.  
Registered Historic Parks and Gardens  
Proposals  that result in harm  to the significance of a  Registered Historic Park and Garden  or its 
setting  will not be permitted.  
Proposals affecting any of the following three Registered Historic Parks and Gardens  or newly 
designated Historic Parks and Gardens : 
• Ashton Gardens, St Annes  
• Promenade Gardens, St Annes  
• Lytham Hall Park, Lytham  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
201 should ensure that development does not cause harm  to the enjoyment, layout, design, quality,  
character, appearance or setting of that landscape, cause harm to key views from or towards these 
landscapes or  prejudice their future restoration.  
Locally important heritage assets  
Fylde has a number of assets of historic interest, which whilst not statutorily protected, make an 
important contribution to the distinctive character of the area.  Th ese include Fairhaven Lake, 
Clifto n Hall, Singleton Hall, Memor ial Park in Kirkham, Lytham Park cemetery gardens and the 
Lancaster Canal.  The Council recogni ses the importance of these assets and will therefo re designate 
such assets through a Local List to strengthen the presumption in favour of their  conservation .   
Development which would remove, harm or undermine the significance of a locally important 
heritage asset, or its contribution to the character of the area, will only be permitted where robust 
evidence can demonstrate that  the public benefits of the development would outweigh the harm  
based on a balanced judgement . 
Where the loss of a locally listed asset is permitted, the following will be required:  
a. Survey and recording of the asset which may include archaeological investi gation, 
which should be deposited with the local Historic Environment Record.  
b. The replacement building  must be of a suitable quality and design and contribute to 
enhancing local character and identity.  
c. The salvage and reuse of materials and special feature s on site or nearby.   
Scheduled monuments and other archaeological remains  
Development which would result in harm to the significance of a scheduled monument or other 
nationally important archaeological sites  will not be permitted  unless it can be demonstrated that 
the public benefits which cannot be met in any other way would clearly outweigh the harm . 
Where there is known or potential non -designated archaeology, developers will be expected  to 
investigate the significance of any archaeology prior to the determination of an application for the 
site.  Where this demonstrates that the significance is equivalent to that of designated archaeology, 
proposals which cause harm to or loss  will not be supported.  
Where proposals affect non -designated archaeology of local significance, this  will be a material 
consideration when determining any planning applications for development.  
Developers need to undertake research at  an appropriate early stage to  establish whether or not 
archaeology exist s or whether there is the potential for it to exist in order to inform decisions in 
respect of the site . 
Where it can be demonstrated that the substantial public benefits of any proposals outweigh the 
harm, the Council will need to consider the significance of remains and seek to ensure mitigation of 
damage through preservation of the remains in situ  as a preferred solution. Where this is not 
justified, the developer will be required to make adequate provision for excavation and recording 
before and / or during development.  Proposals should also demonstrate how the public 
understanding and appreciation of such sites could be improved.  
 Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
202 Design Briefs  
Design Briefs will be prepared by the Council, to guide landowners, developers  and civic amenity 
groups, where proposed new developments may have an impact on heritage assets, including listed 
buildings, conservation areas and registered historic parks and gardens.  
 
Justification  
13.55 The Local Plan has a key role in improving the appearance and character of the built 
environment, whilst being able to adapt to social and economic conditions and a changing 
climate.  Policy ENV 5 sets out how the Council will seek to conserve Fylde’s historic 
environment and promote awareness of the value of our shared heritage.   
Listed Buildings  
13.56 Listed Buildings are protected by legislation and Historic England keeps an up -to-date register 
of all listed buil dings and those at risk. Fylde contains over 200 Listed Buildings. There is one 
Grade I Listed Building in the Borough – Lytham Hall – which is also on the Historic England 
Buildings at Risk register.  The target / policy outcome of Performance Monitoring Indicator 
16, in Appendix 8, is for a reduction in the number of  heritage assets on Historic England’s ‘At 
Risk’ register by the end of the plan period in 2032.   
13.57 Over the years, many listed buildings have been altered and adap ted, the majority of which 
have been the subject of listed building consent approvals. In the case of listed buildings, the 
interior is often as important as the exterior and so it is essential that owners and occupiers 
of these buildings are aware of thei r statutory obligations in respect of any planned changes.  
In view of the importance of these buildings, it is essential that the Council has an up -to-date 
inventory of all its listed buildings. One of the principal reasons for having this record is so that 
any previous changes, which have occurred, can form a baseline from which future changes 
can be then considered. Another reason for compiling an inventory is so that the ‘significance’ 
of the building – its historical value, setting, external appearan ce and internal qualities can be 
assessed and recorded. This will assist significantly in the future assessment of  development 
proposals that may impact on its character.  
13.58 The Council is considering through the Built Heritage Strategy , the provision of further 
guidance for potential developers  who propose alterations to listed buildings, in the form of 
a web based resource.  This resource could be developed outlining the nature and significance 
of listed buildings, legislative requirements, guidance o n assessing the impact on the 
significance of a building and the process of managing applications for listed building consent.  
Local Lists of Buildings  
13.59 Local heritage can be significant and go well beyond nationally designated assets.  It is highly 
probable that there are many unlisted buildings of particular significance and quality in Fylde 
that have little by way of formal recognition or protection.  
13.60 Historic England strongly supports the compilation of local lists and has produced guidance 
for councils in preparing them. A local list of heritage assets in Fylde, which do not meet the 
criteria for statutory listing will be produced. The local list will protect buildings and other Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
203 features which are locally distinctive, or have particular importance to the local community 
which deserve recognition. Policy ENV 5 will also apply to the heritage assets on the local list.   
13.61 In formulating a local list, it will be necessary to carefully draw together a clear methodology 
of how buildings might initially be selected and how they might be ultimately chosen.  The 
public would have a role to play in making suggestions and a draft list would then be 
considered against the criteria to be applied. The criteria used would be established using 
available guidance and practice established elsewhere. There are examples where local listing 
has been undertaken by using a small but specially commissioned panel with a mix of skills 
that would include a community representative. The draft local list of buildings would be 
judged against the set criteria, perhaps similar to that used  for the compilation of national lists 
but recognising the fact that the buildings ultimately chosen would not have the same 
significance as those on the national list.  
13.62 Once locally listed, the building would have special status and any development proposals that 
might affect its character or setting would be subject to detailed scrutiny. In view of the 
importance of some buildings, it may be appropriate to introduce Article 4 directions with the 
objective of preventing potentially damaging ‘permitte d development’. However, it will be 
equally important to persuade building owners and the public in general as to the significance 
of particular buildings and the role they play in conserving them .  
Conservation Areas  
13.63 Conservation areas are defined in national legislation as ‘areas of special architectural and 
historic interest, the character and appearance of which is desirable to conserve or enhance ’. 
Councils designate conservation areas and have a duty to re -assess,  from time to time, the 
scope for further designations.  At the present time, there are 10 designated conservation 
areas in the Borough and these are varied in character. Lytham (Town Centre ) is the largest 
and is centred on its commercial centre with its historic street  pattern and contains impressive 
groups of mid to late 19th Century villa scale development, artisan housing and imposing 
public buildings, Lowther Gardens and the extensive frontage Green, overlooked by Victorian 
villa development, are included. Lytham Avenues  is an impressive late nineteenth century 
suburban development laid out under the Town Improvement Acts containing tree lined 
avenues with attractive Victorian properties fronting onto them. It al so incorporates a series 
of large mansions and associated development fronting onto the Ribble Estuary.  
13.64 Kirkham  is based around its historic core and medieval street pattern centred  on the Market 
Square, linked by Church Street to St. Michael’s Church which acts as a centrepiece for the 
area. It also contains attractive groups of town houses along Poulton Street. The Memorial 
Park, in Kirkham, is an open landscape of local interest i n relation to the historical elements 
of its layout.  
13.65 St. Anne’s  contains three separate albeit adjoining conservation areas – the Town Centre (St. 
Anne’s on Sea),  Ashton Gardens / Porritt Houses and St. Anne’s Road East . The former two, 
when taken to gether, effectively comprise the whole of the original planned Victorian resort 
town based around a grid iron street plan. These areas contain a fine collection of commercial 
buildings and stone fronted villas arranged around the town park, Ashton Gardens.  St. Anne’s 
Road East  is based around this principal tree lined avenue linking the town centre with the 
outer suburbs and contains a significant number of Victorian and Edwardian villas set within 
large plots with extensive areas of tree cover being a majo r characteristic of the area.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
204 13.66 The Borough also contains two rural ‘planned’ model villages in Singleton  and Thistleton  
associated with the development of large country estates and the ancient hill top hamlet of 
Larbreck .  Wrea Green  takes the form of a traditional rural settlement once comprising of 
individual farms surrounding a green and now containing a mixture of Victo rian, Edwardian 
and more contemporary development forming an attractive peripheral enclosure. The parish 
church, the  green and backdrop of trees contribute to the rural character of the conservation 
area.  
13.67 Legislation requires councils to prepare ch aracter appraisals and subsequent management 
plans for conservation areas. These are aimed at evaluating their essential characteristics and 
are subsequently  used to  identify future proposals for preserving and enhancing the area. 
They become important pla nning documents.  The Council will prepare up to date  appraisals 
and management plans as soon as possible .  
13.68 The Council has received requests for its consideration of designating additional conservation 
areas in specific locations and also amendments to existing boundaries. A review of existing 
conservation area boundaries would best be undertaken when the particular appraisal is 
undertaken. With regard to new designations, this would be undertaken by way of a  
‘characterisation study’ whereb y specific areas of the Borough can be mapped to identify 
locations with specific historic character. In this regard, LCC’s Urban Extensive Survey would 
be of specific assistance. Any potential areas for designation would need to be agreed by the 
Council i n principle and public engagement undertaken.  
13.69 Some of the present conservation areas are the subject of Article 4 Directions that bring within 
control certain forms of development, which otherwise would not require planning 
permission.  Future appra isals and management plans w ill assess the appropriateness for new 
or revised Article 4 Directions, tree preservation orders and the potential for other controls 
including those that further limit advertisements on commercial buildings.  
13.70 Advice to pr operty owners, in the form of leaflets, or on the Council’s website, has proved 
useful. There is specific value in providing guidance and information in relation to 
conservation issues and the  Built Heritage Strategy for Fylde promotes this type of initiative.  
13.71 The three town centre conservation areas have been the recip ients of ‘regeneration’ 
initiatives, each having the objective of preserving and enhancin g its particular character and 
appearance. These initiatives  have included buildin g refurbishment, soft and hard 
landscaping, new street furniture and works of public art. F uture regeneration initiatives will 
form an integral part of the conservation area apprai sals and subsequent management plans.  
13.72 Historic England offers practical advice on the process of appraisals and management plans 
including guidance which is suitable for volunteers who wish to be engaged in the process.  
13.73 The Council will take the lead role in preparing a Good Design SPD, which will include a section 
setting out best practice in terms of new development within conservation areas.  
Public Realm  
13.74 In the case of conservation areas, the design, management  and maintenance of the public 
realm is an important element of the character and a particula rly important indicator of the 
quality of place.   Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
205 13.75 In the context of heritage assets, i.e. conservation areas, histori c parks and gardens and in the 
vicinity of listed buildings, the public realm needs to be designed  appr opriately, to reflect the 
special quality of the area including landscaping, street furniture and materials and that the 
areas are appropriately managed and maintained so that they  add to the character, quality  
and distinctiveness of the particular conservation area.  
13.76 A design code could be applied to historic areas (potentiall y as part of conservation area 
appraisals and linked into the Council’s regeneration i nitiatives), with a subsequent 
maintenance strategy, agreed to include all the appro priate partners required for its 
implementation.  
13.77 As regards the development of an approach to the design of and future  management  of the 
public realm in historic areas, there is the opportun ity to work with other partner 
organisations, including LC C.  
13.78 St Annes  has been the subject of a multi -million pound investment strategy, commencing in 
the year 2000. This has been aimed at revitalising the physical environment of the Town 
Centre through an extensive programme of building restoration and an integrated scheme  of 
street and space enhancement. This has been achieved by way of developing a distinctive 
approach, building on the traditions of the town’s architecture and location albeit with a 
contemporary style .  The scheme has included repaving, street furniture, the restoration of 
architectural features such as garden walls, soft landscaping bespoke to the town, street 
furniture and an extensive programme of public art. The scheme so far has included The 
Square, Wood  Street, Orchard Road, Garden Street, Park Road , Clifton Drive South and 
specific improvements to the Promenade. The scheme is to continue and additional streets 
and spaces are programmed for improvement with a view to completing the scheme over the 
next few years.  
13.79 The two adjoining suburbs of An sdell and Fairhaven share the vibrant and  attractive 
Woodlands Road, which has been the subject of a regeneration scheme, having taken place 
within two phases. The scheme has included, traffic management, new paving, tree planting, 
distinctive street furni ture and the restoration and enhancement of the frontage to the 
Institute, now a listed building. A third phase is programmed for the  current  financial year , i.e. 
2015 / 16 and will effectively extend the theme of the first two phases.  
13.80  Fairhaven (Th e Lake) was conceived as a purpose built coastal resort, laid out to a town plan 
dating from 1894. The lake, formed in part through natural coastal features, is a centrepiece 
of the resort – now suburb – and is to be the subject of a major initiative. This incorporate s 
the creation of a new coastal defence – effectively as new sea wall – that will include a new 
promenade and enhanced car parking facility. This initiative will be accompanied by an 
ambitious plan to enhance the landscape of the lake environme nt and some of the feature 
buildings, based on an appreciation of the historic significance of the landscape. The scheme 
in total, amounting to some £11m, will take place over the next few years. The linkages to 
Woodlands Road and the railway station will be part of the longer term plan.  
13.81 The Council has had a good track record in developing an approach to the regeneration of 
heritage assets within the built environment in Lytham and St Annes.  The Council has in place 
its Regeneration Framework, which  runs from 2016  to 2032 and identifies locations that are 
the subject of initiatives for the upgrading of buildings and public realm improvements.  
Enhancement schemes have been carried out in Lytham where the Council, in partnership Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
206 with the Lytham St. An ne’s Civic Society, undertook an improvement scheme to Clifton Street, 
which included the  reinstatement of verandas, forecourt paving, tree planting, new street 
lighting and other street furniture.  
13.82 The physical regeneration of the historic environmen t along the distinctive coastline in Lytham 
and St Annes is required to maintain the visitor market and support wider tourism and boost 
the local economy.  The role and importance of Fylde’s heritage assets in providing an iconic 
identity to the seafronts at Lytham and St Annes is also explored further in Chapter 8 of this 
Local Plan.  
13.83 Kirkham town centre has been the subject of small scale building refurbishment schemes that 
have been successful.  More recently a concerted programme of public realm improvements 
has been launched as a joint initiative with LCC. This has included an exten sive programme of 
repaving, which has had a dramatic effect on upgrading the retail environment of the Town 
Centre. Through a programme of public f unding and contributions from proposed 
developments on the periphery of the Town, it is likely that the town centre environmental 
programme will progress and will be completed early in the plan period.  The regeneration 
initiatives in Kirkham are having a positive benefit on enhancing the heritage of the town and 
supporting the local economy.  
13.84  Funding has been secured for some small scale enhancements to Wesham. Fylde Council will 
work alongside the town council and local community to draw together improvements 
envisaged as being around the War Memorial, creating an enhanced focal point.  
13.85 Wrea Green Parish Council has expressed a desire to undertake some enhancements to the 
conservation area, which is, for the most part, focused on The Green. This could include new 
street lighting, consolidation of street furniture, traffic management around  The Grapes  Public 
House  and improved surfacing. Discussions with the Parish Council are under way to develop 
the proposals.  
13.86  As a result of developer contributions, some modest funding has been secured for public 
realm enhancements to the local envi ronment of Staining. Additional funding has been 
secured for improvements to some of the public open spaces within Staining . A scheme for  
the enhancement of Staining will be agreed between the Parish and Borough. It will be 
implemented early in the plan period.  
Registered Historic Parks and Gardens  
13.87 The Borough presently contains three historic parks and gardens which are included on the 
National Register, held by Historic England. These are Ashton Gardens , Promenade Gardens  
and Lytham Hall Par k, all of which are Grade II. Ashton Gardens has been the subject to 
extensive refurbishment and was the recipient of a significant Lottery Grant in addition to 
funding support from the Council. The completed scheme is an important and integral 
element of the broader regeneration programme for St. Annes.  
13.88 The Promenade Gardens, St Annes, occupies a pivotal posi tion on the seafront and is an 
impressive landscape laid out in the late nineteenth century. It contains open  landscape, a 
rockery, grotto and waterfall, formal areas of lawn with bed ding and a number of artefacts 
including decorative shelters, many of which are listed buildings in their own right. In 2008, a 
restoration and management plan was prepared and approved in principle by Fyl de Cou ncil. 
The gardens are very well maintained but the general infrastructure requires restoration and Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
207 repair. It is intended to fully restore the gardens in line with av ailable resources. The cost of 
full refurbishment is considerable and could be under taken on a phased basis.  
13.89 Lytham Hall is the centrepiece of the adjoining parkland. The designated Historic P ark and 
Garden  also includes the adjoining Home Farm. The current restoration plans for the Grade I 
Hall are accompanied by a restoration programme for parts of the historic landscape 
immediately surrounding it. The parkland attached to the hall extends to some 80 acres  and 
contains many landscape features including extensive tree plantations which are the subject 
of tree preservation orders. The grounds of Lytham Hall are now open to the public as historic 
parkland and consideration is being given to the provision of a more attractive link between 
Lytham Hall and the Town Centre.  
13.90 In addition to the parks and gardens included within the national list, there are a number of 
historic open landscapes that are of local interest. These include Fairhaven Lake, Clifton Ha ll, 
Singleton Hall, Memorial Park in Kirkham, Lowther Gardens, Lytham Green and  Lytham Park 
cemetery gardens . The Council  intends to undertake research into establish ing the historic 
importance of these landscapes (and any other potential candidate s) and c onsider the 
possibility for a ‘local list’. The Lancashire Gardens Trust has indicated that it would be 
supportive of such an initiative and would provide assistance in undertaking the research 
needed.  
13.91 It will be wholly appropriate to protect, resto re and enhance historic parks, both of national 
and local significance. Opportunities for f unding support will be pursued with Fairhaven Lake 
being the subject of a historic appra isal and feasibility study for potential Heritage Lottery 
Funding support. Po tential  proposals for Fairhaven will take account of the coastal defence 
works that a re planned and ensure that the works will be complimentary to the heritage value 
of the site.  
13.92 It should also be recognised  that the maintenance, mana gement and improvement of open 
landscapes is an on -going issue. Particular recognition should be  paid to  ‘Friends Groups’ and 
other community organisations who have undertaken inv aluable work in the management 
and improvement of  parks and this on -going involvement is crucial.  
13.93 Development proposals that could affect the character and setting of a historic park or garden 
will be the subject of particular scrutiny if development is proposed which may have an impact 
on its sig nificance.  
13.94 In terms of the restoration of registered Historic Park and Gardens, the emphasis has been 
and will remain of a gen uinely  faithful restoration and reinstatement of the landscape through 
an understanding of its historical development – land scape character, materials, planting and 
uses as they have impacted on its character. This has been the case in Ashton Gardens and in 
the proposals for Lytham Hall Park and Promenade Gardens.  
Scheduled Monuments  
13.95 At the present time, there are no designated scheduled monum ents in the Borough. If a site 
were to be scheduled in the future, then the requirement  of the relevant acts would be 
followed with the necessary consultation carried out includi ng the involvement of Historic 
England.  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
208 Archaeolo gy  
13.96 There are a known number of sites within the Borough with archaeological significance as well 
as potentially undiscovered sites.  Archaeological excavations have taken place at the Roman 
fort at Dowbridge, in Kirkham. There is a possibility of unfound archaeological remains within 
the historic market town of Kirkham.  Evidence has come to light in Elswick and Clifton where 
archaeolog y has provided clues to the lifestyle of mediaeval rural settlement s in Fylde. Rural 
settlements at first clustered around the Manor House, before later spreading and developing 
into linear settlements. The Borough contains two rural ‘planned’ model rural settlements in 
Singleton and Thistleton,  associated with the development of large country estates .   
13.97 The Council will continue to liaise with LCC on these issues. In the case of particularly 
important sites, the Council will request that LCC prepares a specific brief setting out what is 
required  of the developer in respect of archaeological information that will be required to 
accompany a planning or listed building application.  
13.98 In addition, there are heritage assets of local interest t hat may not meet the criteria for 
statutory designation but merit protection.  
Cross boundary working on Heritage Assets  
13.99 There are significant benefits in assessing where inter authority working across the Fylde Coast 
Authorities could be beneficial; exchanging ideas and approaches to different aspects of 
heritage and sharing scarce resources. One example is in the case of B lackpool Council where  
a pilot  approach is being developed to create a local list of buildings. There may also be merit 
in producing joint publications and advice notes on generic issues. Blackpool Council is also 
developing an ‘outreach’ project which en gages community groups and schools in promoting 
the value of heritage and conservation. Joint working and knowledge sharing could be very 
beneficial in the implementation of the Built Heritage Strategy for Fylde and the associated 
Action Plan and will be a chieved through the 'Duty to C ooperate '. 
 
Cross Cutting Themes In Chapter 1 3:  
Promoting Health and Wellbeing  
The maintenance of the Green Infrastructure network, comprising of green and blue spaces provides 
areas for nature conservation and recreation, which have a positive impact on health and wellbeing.  
Access to high quality open spaces can make an important contribution to the health and wellbeing 
of communities (the Framework).  Planning policies should protect and enhance public rights  of way 
and access.  Councils should seek opportunities to provide better facilities for users, for example by 
adding links to existing rights of way networks (the Framework).  In the same way , the protection and 
enhancement of the built environment, in ter ms of Fylde’s heritage assets , have a positive effect on 
wellbeing.   
Achieving Good Design  
The high quality design and the creation or enhancement of the existing Green Infrastructure  
network  will enhance the character of the built and natural environment, ensuring effective place 
shaping across Fylde.  It is essential that new development is in keeping with the character of the 
area; and also results in the maintenance and enhancement of Fyld e’s built environment and the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
209 protection of heritage assets, in line with the Built Heritage Strategy for Fylde  and the Council’s 
intention to prepare a ‘Good Design in Conservation Areas ’ document . 
Strategic Objectives  
The following strategic objective i s achieved in this chapter on the Natural, Historic and Built 
Environment  
Objective 2 : To maintain, improve  and enhance  the environment.  
Fylde Council’s Corporate Plan  2016 -2020  Priorities  
The following Corporate Plan priorities will be delivered through  Chapter 13: 
• Deliver high quality parks and open spaces  (Clean and green)  
• Recognise the significance of our heritage assets  (A great place to live)  
• Maximise the natural assets of our coast an d countryside by improving their facilities  (A great 
place to visit)  
Fylde Council’s Corporate Plan  2016 -2020  Actions  
The following Corporate Plan action s will be delivered through Chapter 13: 
• Develop and implement a policy to protect our heritage  (A great place to live)  
Maximise the natural assets of our coast and countryside by improving their facilities  (A great place 
to visit)Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
210   Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
211 Glossary  
 
Accessible, Accessibility  
These terms, in relation to transport and other services, refer both to proximity of services and the 
ability of the community to use those services.  
Affordable Housing (Definitions from the Framework (2021) ) 
Housing for sale or rent, for those whose needs are not met by the market (including housing that 
provides a subsidised route to home ownership and/or is for essential local workers); and which 
complies with one or more of the following definitions:  
a) Affordable housing for rent: meets all of the following conditions: (a) the rent is set in accordance 
with the Government’s rent policy for Social Rent or Affordable Rent, or is at least 20% below local 
market rents (including service charges where applicabl e); (b) the landlord is a registered provider, 
except where it is included as part of a Build to Rent scheme (in which case the landlord need not be 
a registered provider); and (c) it includes provisions to remain at an affordable price for future eligible  
households, or for the subsidy to be recycled for alternative affordable housing provision. For Build to 
Rent schemes affordable housing for rent is expected to be the normal form of affordable housing 
provision (and, in this context, is known as Affordab le Private Rent).  
b) Starter homes: is as specified in Sections 2 and 3 of the Housing and Planning Act 2016 and any 
secondary legislation made under these sections. The definition of a starter home should reflect the 
meaning set out in statute and any su ch secondary legislation at the time of plan -preparation or 
decision -making. Where secondary legislation has the effect of limiting a household’s eligibility to 
purchase a starter home to those with a particular maximum level of household income, those 
restrictions should be used.  
c) Discounted market sales housing: is that sold at a discount of at least 20% below local market value. 
Eligibility is determined with regard to local incomes and local house prices. Provisions should be in 
place to ensure housi ng remains at a discount for future eligible households.  
d) Other affordable routes to home ownership: is housing provided for sale that provides a route to 
ownership for those who could not achieve home ownership through the market. It includes shared 
ownership, relevant equity loans, other low cost homes for sale (at a price equivalent to at least 20% 
below local market value) and rent to buy (which includes a period of intermediate rent). Where public 
grant funding is provided, there should be provision s for the homes to remain at an affordable price 
for future eligible households, or for any receipts to be recycled for alternative affordable housing 
provision, or refunded to Government or the relevant authority specified in the funding agreement.  
Anaer obic Digestion  
A biological process that produces a gas principally composed of methane and carbon dioxide, 
otherwise known as biogas. These gases are produced from organic wastes such as livestock manure, 
food processing waste, etc.  
Areas of Separation  
Areas of countryside  separating existing settlements and associated built -up areas that contribute to 
preserving the open  gaps that protect the distinctive identity of the individual settlements. Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
212 Development within an Area of Separation is restricted  to prevent harm to the effectiveness of the 
gap between the settlements that would compromise the function of the Area of Separation,  prevent 
the merging of settlements and the loss of the individual identity and distinctiveness of each 
settlement.  
Bathing Water Directive  
Aims to protect public health and the environment from pollution of bathing waters.  
Best and Most Versatile Agricultura l Land  
Land in grades 1, 2 and 3a of the Agricultural Land Classification. Fylde does not have any grade 1 
agricultural land.  
Biodiversity  
The whole variety of life encompassing all genetic, species and ecosystem variations.  
Biomass  
Also known as biofuels  or bioenergy, is obtained from organic matter either directly from plants or 
indirectly from industrial, commercial, domestic or agricultural products. The use of biomass is classed 
as a ‘carbon neutral’ process because the carbon dioxide released during the generation of energy 
from biomass is balanced by that absorbed by plants during their growth.  
Business Use  
This is defined by any or all of the following:  
• an office other than financial and professional services;  
• research and development of products or processes; or  
• light industry appropriate in a residential area.  
Caravan  
Caravan means any structure designed or adapted for human habitation which is capable of being 
moved from one place to another (whether by being towed, or by being transpor ted on a motor 
vehicle or trailer) and any motor vehicle so designed or adapted.  
Central Lancashire  
The city of Preston, South Ribble and Chorley.  
City Region  
The term recognises that large towns and cities act as the focus for jobs, services and faciliti es for 
extensive hinterlands. Three have been identified in the North West, based on Merseyside, Central 
Lancashire and Greater Manchester.  
Classic Resort  
The term Classic Resort was envisaged by the former North West Development Agency as a hallmark 
award ed to resorts to demonstrate that they have achieved an outstanding level of service delivery 
and environmental quality.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
213 Climate Change  
A changing climate, which can be attributed directly or indirectly to human activity that alters the 
composition of the  global atmosphere.  
Coastal Change Management Areas  
The River Wyre and its estuary to the north; and the River Ribble and its estuary to the south and the 
sand dunes and extensive stretches of beach along the coast between St Annes and Blackpool.  
Coastal defences  
Refers to sea defences against flooding and erosion. Hard defences are generally expensive short -term 
options (often up to 30 years), such as sea walls. Soft defences are often less expensive long -term 
options and are usually more sustaina ble, such as sand dunes.  
Community Facilities  
Community facilities provide for the health and wellbeing, social, educational, spiritual, recreational, 
leisure and cultural needs of the community.  
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL)  
A levy allowing local a uthorities to raise funds from owners or developers of land undertaking new 
building in their area. The money can be used to fund the infrastructure needed as a result of 
development.  
Comparison goods  
The provision of items not purchased on a frequent bas is (e.g. clothing, footwear, and household 
goods).  
Conservation Areas  
Areas designated by the Council which are considered of special architectural or historic interest, the 
character of which it is desirable to conserve or enhance.  
Convenience goods  
The provision of everyday essential items (e.g. food, drinks, and newspapers).  
Conversions  
Generally means the change of use of a building from a particular use, classified in the use classes 
order, to another use. The term can also mean the sub -division o f residential properties into self -
contained apartments or maisonettes.  
Decentralised energy  
Local renewable energy and local low carbon energy usually but not always on a relatively small scale 
encompassing a diverse range of technologies.  
Decentralised Energy network / District Heat network   
Primarily the generation of energy close to the user and where appropriate, the recovery of the surplus 
heat (combined heat and power – CHP) for purposes such as building space heating and domestic hot 
water production. CHP is often used in District Heating networks, with the heat generated as a by -Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
214 product of electricity generation being pumped into homes, either as hot water or as steam, through 
networks of reinforced pipes.  
Design Codes   
Design codes set out design principles aimed at delivering better quality places, for example the 
requirements for streets, blocks, massing and so forth, or they may focus on landscape, architectural 
or building performance issues (for example, increasing energy effici ency).  Codes are focused around 
those design characteristics that are important to achieve, and they establish and firmly fix the ‘must 
have’ design elements. In so doing codes help to provide continuity in quality and consistency over 
time.  To achieve t his aim, design codes often build upon a design vision in a masterplan, or other site 
or area -based vision. Sometimes they may evolve out of a design and development framework. In 
both circumstances the set of design instructions which make up the design c odes will reflect the 
particular requirements of the place.  
Designated Areas  
Areas that have been awarded a statutory designation because of their special features or qualities, 
e.g. National Parks, Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty, Green Belts, Sites o f Special Scientific 
Interest and historical and archaeological sites.  
Designated Heritage Asset  
A World Heritage Site, Scheduled Monument, Listed Building, Protected Wreck Site, Registered Park 
and Garden, Registered Battlefield or Conservation Area desi gnated under the relevant legislation.  
Development  
Legally defined in Section 55 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 as, ‘the carrying out of 
building, engineering, mining or other operations in, on, over or under land, or the making of any 
material  change in the use of any buildings or other land ’. 
Development Plan Documents  
These documents, including the Local Plan, will together form the Development Plan for the area.  
Employment Land  
Land allocated in development plans for business, industrial and storage/distribution uses (B1, B2 and 
B8 use classes).  
Employment Uses  
Any undertaking or use of land that principally provides paid employment.  This could include any type 
of employment use, including agriculture, and may not be restricted to B1, B2 and B8 land uses.  
Enterprise Zones  
Enterprise Zones allow areas with economic potential to create the new business and jobs that they 
need, with positive benefits across the wider economic area. Simplified planning and business rates 
discounts ap ply in Enterprise Zone areas, giving the capability to develop innovative ways to address 
specific local challenges.  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
215 Examination in Public (EiP)  
This is designed to test the soundness of the documents produced to form the Development Plan for 
the area, including the Fylde Local Plan.  
Exception Test (Flood Risk)  
If, following the application of the Sequential Test, it is not possible for development to be located in 
zones with a lower probability of flooding, the Exception Test should be applied if necessary.  
Farm Diversification  
The development of a variety of economic activities linked to working farms, designed to support farm 
income and use surplus land, e.g. forestry, leisure, tourism.  
Flood Risk Assessment  
An assessment of the likelihood of flo oding in a particular area in order that development needs and 
mitigation measures can be carefully considered.  
Flood Risk Management  
The process of balancing the needs of flood defence with the needs of the environment and people.  
Flood Risk Zone 1  
Land at low risk of flooding from rivers and sea. This zone comprises land assessed as having a less 
than 1 in 1,000 annual probability of river or sea flooding.  
Flood Risk Zone 2  
Land at moderate risk of flooding from rivers and sea. This zone comprises l and assessed as having 
between a 1 in 100 and 1 in 1,000 annual probability of river flooding, or between a 1 in 200 and 1 in 
1,000 annual probability of sea flooding in any year.  
Flood Risk Zone 3  
Land at high risk of flooding from rivers and sea. This zo ne comprises land assessed as having a 1 in 
100 or greater annual probability of river flooding, or a 1 in 200 or greater annual probability of 
flooding from the sea in any year.  
Foreshore  
The area between the lowest level of tide to the highest level of t ide. 
Foul Water  
Kitchen, bathroom and trade waste that enters the sewer system.  
Frontage  
The part of a building that faces onto the public realm.  
Fylde Coast sub-region  
The Fylde Coast sub -region encompasses the area covered by the unitary authority of Bla ckpool 
Council and the two -tier area covered by LCC and the Councils of Fylde and Wyre.  The area, covering Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
216 384 sq. km, stretches from the Ribble Estuary in the south to Morecambe Bay in the north and the 
Forest of Bowland moorlands in the east.  
Geodiversity  
The variety of rocks, minerals, fossils, soils, landforms and natural processes.  
Green Belt  
Areas of lan d where development is tightly controlled. The purposes of Green Belt are to check the 
unrestricted sprawl of large built -up areas; to prevent neighbouring towns from merging; to safeguard 
the land in the countryside  from encroachment; to preserve the sett ing and special character of 
historic towns; and to aid urban regeneration by encouraging the recycling of derelict and other urban 
land.  
Green Infrastructure network  
The network of natural environmental components and green and blue spaces (i.e. ponds, ri vers, 
lakes, swales) including (but not limited to): hedges, outdoor sports facilities, coastal habitat, grassland 
and heathland, cemeteries, churchyards and burial grounds, agricultural land, allotments, community 
gardens and urban farms, moorland, greens , open spaces, degraded land, private gardens, wildlife 
habitats, parks, fields, land in the countryside , woodlands, street trees, ponds, lakes, waterways.  
Groundwater  
Water that exists beneath the earth’s surface in underground streams and aquifers.  
Gypsies and Travellers  
As defined in Planning Policy for Traveller Sites , Gypsies and Travellers are persons of nomadic habit 
of life whatever their race or origin, including such persons who on grounds only of their own or their 
family’s or depe ndants’ educational or health needs or old age have ceased to travel temporarily, but 
excluding members of an organised group of travelling showpeople or circus people travelling 
together as such.  
Habitats  
Ecological or environmental areas that are inhabited by a particular species of animal, plant or other 
type of organism.  
Health and Wellbeing (definitions provided by the World Health Organisation)  
• Health  A state of complete physical, mental and social wellbeing and not merely the absence 
of diseas e or infirmity.   
• Wellbeing  A positive physical, social and mental state: it is not just the absence of pain, 
discomfort and incapacity.  It requires that basic needs are met, that individuals have a sense 
of purpose, which they feel able to achieve import ant personal goals and participate in 
society.  
Heritage Asset  
A building, monument, site, place, area or landscape identified as having a degree of significance 
meriting consideration in planning decisions, because of its heritage interest. Heritage asset  includes 
designated heritage assets and assets identified by the Council (including local listing).  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
217 Historic Environment  
All aspects of the environment resulting from the interaction between people and places through 
time, including all surviving physica l remains of past human activity, whether visible, buried or 
submerged, and landscaped and planted or managed flora.  
Housing Needs Assessment  
A survey that estimates the number of households within an area that are in need of affordable 
housing and / or ho using that meets their specific requirements.  
Infrastructure  
Infrastructure has a broad definition and includes, but is not restricted to the following which  are 
needed to support housing, industrial and commercial uses : 
• Transport : highways, air travel, rail, bus, cycling, pedestrian and park and ride;  
• Energy : gas and electricity generation and provision;  
• Water : supply, wastewater and surface water drainage, flood defences and flood risk 
management;  
• Waste management: refuse collection and disp osal, recycling;  
• Information and communications technology : electronic communications , broadband and 
cable television;  
• Education : nursery and pre -school, primary, secondary, further, higher, and adult education;  
• Health : hospitals, health centres / GP surge ries and hospices;  
• Emergency services : police, fire service , ambulance  and HM coastguard ; 
• Green infrastructure  network : open space, parks, children’s play areas, sports pitches and 
courts, accessible natural green space, allotments and burial facilities;  
• Community services : libraries, community centres, youth services, social services, older 
peoples support, special needs and disability and places of worship;  
• Publ ic realm  
• Affordable Housing  
• Culture and leisure : museums and galleries, performanc e venues, sports and fitness centres.  
Infrastructure Delivery Plan ( the IDP)  
The IDP is a supporting document to the Local Plan. Its purpose is to provide background evidence 
regarding the physical and social infrastructure likely to be needed to support identified development 
in the Borough over the plan period. It sets out a baseline as sessment of existing infrastructure 
provision and provides an indication of the existing capacity and shortfalls of all types of infrastructure. 
The document will be updated and monitored regularly and will assist in future delivery of 
infrastructure requi rements.  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
218 Infrastructure Services   
Services necessary to serve development, e.g. roads and footpaths, electricity, water and sewer 
services.  
Integral Garage  
An integral garage is a building for parking vehicles, attached to another building, such as a hou se. 
Typically, integral garages have three walls, a roof and a door opening large enough for vehicles to 
enter the building. Select integral garages also have doorways from the garage to the connecting 
building.  
Inward Investment  
New business investment or  expansion of an existing investment into an area from  outside.  
Key Service Centre  
Towns or rural settlements  which act as service centres for surrounding areas, providing a range of 
services including: retail, leisure, community, civic, health and education facilities and financial and 
professional services. They should have good public transport links to surrou nding areas, or the 
potential for their development and enhancement.  
LAP 
Local Area for Play (and informal recreation), aimed at very young children. Minimum size 0.01ha, 
minimum dimensions 10 x 10 metres, minimum activity zone of 100 square metres, minim um 
separation distance between activity zone and boundary of dwellings 5 metres.  
LEAP  
Local Equipped Area for Play (and informal recreation), aimed at children who can go out to play 
independently. Minimum size 0.04ha, minimum dimensions 20 x 20 metres, mi nimum activity zone of 
400 square metres, minimum separation distance between activity zone and the habitable room 
facade of dwellings 20 metres.  
Large Developed Sites in the Countryside  
Large developed sites in the Countryside  are those sites listed withi n Policy GD5  only . 
Legibility  
The degree to which a place can be easily understood so that people can find their way around (way -
finding).  
Listed Buildings  
Buildings of special architectural or historic interest listed by the Secretary of State for Culture, Media 
and Sport on the advice of Historic England. Buildings are graded to indicate their relative importance  
(i.e. Grade I, Grade II* and Grade II ). 
 
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
219 Local distinctiveness  
The positive features of a place and its communities that contribute to its special character and sense 
of place.  It includes the form of a place, the way it is used, buildings – density and mix, height and 
massing, urban structure, grain, landscape and building traditions.  
Local Enterprise Partnership  
A partne rship between local authorities and businesses to help determine local economic priorities 
and lead economic growth and job creation within its local area. The  Partnerships  carry out some of 
the functions previously carried out by the regional development agencies which were abolished in 
March 2012.  
Local Housing Needs  
These apply when employment, social and economic consequences lead people to choose or 
demonstrate a need to live or remain in a locality where accommodation is not available to them.  
Local Nature Reserves  
Sites designated under terms of the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act, 1949 and 
owned, leased or managed under agreement by local authorities. They are places with wildlife or 
geological features that are of special interest.  
Local Planning Authority  
The Borough, District, Unitary or County Council with the responsibility of planning for that area.  
Local Service Centre  
Settlements which provide a more limited range of services to the local community, compared to Key 
Service Centres.  
Local Transport Plan (LTP)  
A five -year integrated transport strategy, prepared by a county council or unitary authority in 
partnership with the community, seeking funding to help provide local transport projects. The plan 
sets out the reso urces predicted for delivery of the targets identified in the strategy.  
Main Rivers  
Main Rivers under the terms of the Water Resources Act, 1991 and the Land Drainage Byelaws.  The 
prior written consent of the Environment Agency is required for any propose d works or structures in, 
under, over or within 8 metres of the top of the bank of the main river watercourse.  
Main Town Centre Uses  
Retail development (including warehouse clubs and factory outlet centres); leisure, entertainment 
facilities , the more inte nsive sport and recreation uses (including cinemas, restaurants, drive -through 
restaurants, bars and pubs, night -clubs, casinos, health and fitness centres, indoor bowling centres, 
and bingo halls); offices; and arts, culture and tourism development (inclu ding theatres, museums, 
galleries and concert halls, hotels and conference facilities).  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
220 Major Development  
The term ‘major development’ is taken to be as defined by The Town and Country Planning 
(Development Procedure) (England) Order 2010.  
Massing  
The combined effect of the height, bulk and silhouette of a building or group of buildings (in three 
dimensions).  
Micro -generation  
Small -scale on -site low carbon and renewable energy technologies which generate less than 45KW 
heat and 50KW for electricity. The y mostly harness solar energy such as wind, photovoltaics, solar 
thermals, biomass, hydro and heat pumps. Micro -generation can also refer to community scale energy 
which may fall within these capacities.  
National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)  
The Framework sets out the Government’s planning policies for England and how they are expected 
to be applied. It must be taken into account in the preparation of local and neighbourhood 
development plans and it is a material consideration in pl anning decisions.  The original version of the 
Framework was published in March 2012. A revised version of the Framework was published in July 
2018, and a further version with minor revisions was published in February 2019.  A further revised 
version was pub lished in July 2021.  All references to the Framework refer to the revised version 
published in July 2021 , except where specified to the contrary in the text. This Fylde Local Plan  to 2032 
(incorporating Partial Review)  incorporates revisions to ensure that  the Local Plan remains compliant 
with the Framework.  
Natura 2000 sites  
A network of nature protection areas  in the territory of the European Union . It is made up of Special 
Areas of Conservation  (SACs) and Special Protection Areas  (SPAs) designated respectively under the 
Habitats Directive  and Birds Directive . The network includes both terrestrial and marine sites ( Marine 
Protected Areas ). 
Nature Conservation  
The protection, management and promotion of wildlife habitats for the benefit of wild species, as well 
as the communities that use and enjoy them.  
Neighbourhood Development Pl ans 
A plan prepared by a parish council or neighbourhood forum for a particular neighbourhood area.  
Non Strategic Sites  
Sites that could accommodate between 10 and 99 homes.  
Open space  (part of the Green Infrastructure network)  
All open space of public value, including not just land, but also areas of water (such as rivers, canals, 
lakes and reservoirs), which offer important opportunities for sport and recreation and can act as a 
visua l amenity.  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
221 Pitch   
As defined in Planning Policy for Traveller Sites, ‘ pitch’  means a pitch on a Gypsy and Traveller site and 
‘plot’  means a pitch on a Travelling Showpeople site (often called a ‘ yard’).  This terminology 
differentiates between residential pitches for Gypsies and Travellers and mixed -use plots for Travelling 
showpeople, which may / will need to incorporate space or to be split to allow for the storage of 
equipment.  
Place making  
It is impo rtant that new developments take account of layout, landscaping and accessibility in order 
to be sympathetic to their location, as well as enhancing the area where previous opportunities may 
have been missed.  The design of streets, the Green Infrastructur e network  and the wider public realm 
can further encourage community cohesion, identity and pride.  
Planning Policy  
Planning policy provides the framework to guide and manage the development of land and buildings 
and sets out future proposals for an area.  
Plot 
As defined in Planning Policy for Traveller Sites, ‘ pitch’  means a pitch on a Gypsy and Traveller site and 
‘plot’  means a pitch on a Travelling Showpeople site (often called a ‘ yard’).  This terminology 
differentiates between residential pitches for Gyp sies and Travellers and mixed -use plots for Travelling 
Showpeople, which may/will need to incorporate space or to be split to allow for the storage of 
equipment.  
Priority Habitats and Species  
Species and Habitats of Principle Importance included in the En gland Biodiversity List, published by 
the Secretary of State under section 41 of the Natural Environment and Rural Communities Act, 2006.  
Registered Historic Parks and Gardens  
A park or garden included on the Register of Parks and Gardens of Special Histor ic Interest in England , 
as determined by Historic England.  
Regional Spatial Strategy (RSS)  
Regional planning policy issued by the Secretary of State. In July 2010, the Government announced 
the revoc ation of Regional Spatial Strategies.  
Renewable and low carbon energy  
Includes energy for heating and cooling as well as generating electricity. Renewable energy covers 
those energy flows that occur naturally and repeatedly in the environment from the wind, the fall of 
water, the movement of the oceans, from th e sun and from biomass and deep geothermal heat. Low 
carbon technologies are those that can help reduce emissions (compared to conventional use of fossil 
fuels).  
Rural Area  
An open swath of land that has few homes or other buildings, and not very many peo ple. 
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
222 Rural Diversification  
The expansion, enlargement or variation of the range of products or fields of operation of a rural 
business (branching out from traditional farming activities, for example new income generating 
enterprise like renewable energy,  tourism and food processing).  
Rural settlement  
A group of homes in a predominantly rural area with some community facilities and employment 
activity, but smaller than a town.  
Section 106 Agreements or Planning Obligations  
Section 106 (S106) of the Town an d Country Planning Act, 1990 allows a Local Planning Authority to 
enter into a legally -binding agreement or planning obligation with a landowner / developer in 
association with the granting of planning permission. S106 agreements or planning obligations ar e a 
way of addressing matters that are necessary to make a development acceptable in planning terms.  
Sequential Test (Flood Risk)  
The Sequential Test aims to steer new development to areas with the lowest probability of flooding. 
The overall aim is to stee r new development to Flood Zone 1. Where there are no reasonably available 
sites in Flood Zone 1, local planning authorities allocating land in local plans or determining planning 
applications for development at any particular location should take into acc ount the flood risk 
vulnerability of land uses and consider reasonably available sites in Flood Zone 2, applying the 
Exception Test if required. Only where there are no reasonably available sites in Flood Zones 1 or 2 
should the suitability of sites in Flo od Zone 3 be considered, taking into account the flood risk 
vulnerability of  land uses and applying the Exception Test if required.  
Serviced accommodation  
Serviced accommodation refers to tourism accommodation and includes hotels, guest houses , hostels, 
B and B’s and Inns (definition taken from the Fylde Coast sub -regional Visitor Accommodation Study , 
2009 ) 
Spatial Planning  
Spatial planning goes beyond tradi tional land use planning to bring together policies for the 
development and use of land with other programmes which influence the nature of places and how 
they function.  
Special Areas of Conservation  
Areas given special protection under the European Union ’s Habitats Directive, which is transposed 
into UK law by the Habitats and Conservation of Species Regulations 2010. Special Protection Areas: 
Areas which have been identified as being of international importance for the breeding, feeding, 
wintering or the  migration of rare and vulnerable species of birds found within European Union 
countries. They are European designated sites, classified under the Birds Directive.  
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA)  
A procedure (set out in the Environmental Assessmen t of Plans and Programmes Regulations 2004), 
which requires the formal environmental assessment of certain plans and programmes, which are 
likely to have significant effects on the environment.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
223 Sub-region  
An area covering more than one local authority area , i.e. Fylde Coast or Central Lancashire . 
Sustainability Appraisal  
Appraisal of plans, strategies and proposals to test them against the four broad objectives set out in 
the Government’s sustainable development strategy ‘A Better Quality of Life: A Strateg y for 
Sustainable Development for the UK’, published in 1999.  
Sustainability Statement  
A Sustainability Statement is required to be submitted as part of a design and access statement 
accompanying applications for major development.  The statement should se t out how the 
development will contribute to the reduction of energy consumption and the production of renewable 
and low carbon energy generation technology.  
Sustainable Development  
The most commonly used definition is that of the 1987 World Commission on Environment and 
Development, the Brundtland Commission: ‘development which meets the needs of the present 
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own nee ds’. The UK Sustainable 
Development Strategy Securing the Future set out five ‘guiding principles’ of sustainable 
development: living within the planet’s environmental limits; ensuring a strong, healthy and just 
society; achieving a sustainable economy; promot ing good governance; and using sound science  
responsibly.  
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS)  
A means of controlling surface water run -off as close as possible to its origin before it enters a 
watercourse.  
Townscape  
The urban equivalent of landscape; the overall effect of the combination of buildings, changes of level, 
greenspaces, boundary walls, colours and textures, street surfaces, street furniture, uses, scale, 
enclosure and views.  
Transport Assessment  
A Transport Assessment is a comprehensive and sys tematic process which sets out transport issues 
relating to a proposed development. It identifies what measures will be taken to deal with the 
anticipated transport impacts of the scheme and to improve accessibility and safety for all modes of 
travel, part icularly for alternatives to the car such as walking, cycling and public transport.  
Transport Statement  
A simplified version of a transport assessment where it is agreed the transport issues arising out of 
development proposals are limited and a full trans port assessment is not required.  
Travelling Showpeople  
As defined in Planning Policy for Traveller Sites, Travelling Showpeople are members of a group 
organised for the purposes of holding fairs, circuses or shows (whether or not travelling together as 
such). This includes such persons who on the grounds of their own or their family’s or dependants’ Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
224 more localised pattern of trading, educational or health needs or old age have ceased to travel 
temporarily, but excludes Gypsies and Travellers.  
Travel Plan  
A long term management strategy for an organisation or site that seeks to deliver sustainable 
transport objectives through action and is articulated in a document that is regularly reviewed.  
Trunk Road  
A road for which the Secretary of State for Transport is  legally responsible. Highways England is 
responsible for discharging the Secretary of State’s duties, including the planning, funding and 
execution of maintenance and other works.  
Urban Areas  
Comprising of the Key Service Centres of Lytham (including Ansdell), St Annes and Kirkham, together 
with the Local Service Centres of Freckleton, Warton and Wesham.  
Vitality and Viability  
The factors by which the economic health of a town centre can be mea sured.  
Windfall Sites  
Sites which have not been specifically identified as available in the Local Plan process.  They normally 
comprise previously developed land that has unexpectedly become available.   
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
225 Appendices  
 
1. Schedule of saved policies from the Fylde Borough Local Plan (As Altered), 
October 2005  and policies from the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (as adopted) that are 
superseded by policies in the Partial Review  
2. Housing Trajectory  
3. Retail – Town, District and Local Centre Boundaries Review  
4. Holiday Area(s) Boundary Review  
5. Sea Front Area(s) Boundary Review  
6. Existing Employment Sites Review  
7. Biological Heritage Sites in Fylde  
8. Performance Monitoring Framework  
9. Evidence Base  
 
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
226  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
227 Appendix 1:  Schedule of saved policies from the Fylde 
Borough Local Plan (As Altered), October 2005  and 
policies from the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (as adopted) 
that are superseded by policies in the Partial Review   
 
This is a schedule of saved policies from the Fylde Borough Local Plan (As Altered) October 2005 , 
whic h are to be replaced by policies in the new Fylde Local Plan to 2032  (incorporating Partial 
Review) , or are addressed by the National Planning Policy Framework (known as the Framework), 
or are no longer required.  
The following policies from the Fylde Borou gh Local Plan (As Altered), October 2005 were saved via 
two Directions under Paragraph 1(3) of Schedule 8 to the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004, 
from the Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government:  
• Fylde Borough Local Plan, May 2003 = 18 September 2007; and  
• Fylde Borough Local Plan As Altered, October 2005 = 2 October 2008  
Only two policies in the Fylde Borough Local Plan (As Altered), October 2005 were not saved and they 
were:  
• Policy HL1 – The Quantitative Housing Issue / Affordable Housing; and  
• Policy TR9 – Car Parking Within New Developments.  
The table below sets out which of the saved Fylde Borough Local Plan (As Altered), October 2005 
policies are replaced by:  
• Policies in the Fylde Lo cal Plan to 2032  (incorporating Partial Review) ; 
• National Policy set out in the NPPF ; and  
• Those policies which are no longer required.  
 
Policies in the Fylde 
Borough Local Plan (As 
Altered), October 2005  To be replaced by policies in 
the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 
(incorporating Partial 
Review)  To be replaced 
by the 
Framework  No longer 
required  
SP1 – Development within 
settlements  Policy GD1  - Settlement 
Boundaries    
SP2 -Development in 
Countryside Areas  Policy GD4  – Development in 
the Countryside    Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
228 Policies in the Fylde 
Borough Local Plan (As 
Altered), October 2005  To be replaced by policies in 
the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 
(incorporating Partial 
Review)  To be replaced 
by the 
Framework  No longer 
required  
SP3 – Development in 
Green Belt  Policy GD2 – Green Belt    
SP4 – Kirkham Prison  Policy GD5  – Large 
Developed Sites in the 
Countryside  and Green Belt    
SP5 – Conversion of 
Existing Buildings Outside 
Settlements  Policy H7 - Replacements of, 
and Extensions to, Existing 
Homes in the Countryside    
SP6 – Conversion of 
agricultural buildings to 
residential use  Policy GD8  – Demonstrating 
Viability  
and 
Policy EC2 – Employment 
Opportunities  
and 
Policy EC7 –Tourism 
Accommodation    
SP7 – Large Developed 
sites in the Countryside  Policy GD5  – Large 
Developed Sites in the 
Countryside  and Green Belt  
and 
Policy EC6 – Leisure, Culture 
and Tourism Development    
SP8 – Expansion of Existing 
Business and Commercial 
Operations  Policy EC2 – Employment 
Opportunities    
SP9 – Diversification of the 
Rural Economy  Policy EC2 – Employment 
Opportunities  
and 
Policy EC6 – Leisure, Culture 
and Tourism Development  
   Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
229 Policies in the Fylde 
Borough Local Plan (As 
Altered), October 2005  To be replaced by policies in 
the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 
(incorporating Partial 
Review)  To be replaced 
by the 
Framework  No longer 
required  
SP10 , SP11 , SP12 , SP13  – 
Agricultural Workers 
Dwellings, Rural Business 
set up  Policy GD8  – Demonstrating 
Viability  
and 
Policy H7 - Replacements of, 
and Extensions to, Existing 
Homes in the Countryside  
and 
Policy EC6 – Leisure, Culture 
and Tourism Development    
SP14  – Special Needs 
Dwellings in the 
Countryside  Policy H7 - Replacements of, 
and Extensions to, Existing 
Homes in the Countryside    
SP15  – North of BAE 
Runway  Policy T2 – Warton 
Aerodrome    
SP16  – Weeton Camp  Policy GD5  – Large 
Developed Sites inthe 
Countryside  and Green Belt    
HL2 – Development 
Management Criteria for 
Housing Proposals  Policy GD7  – Achieving Good 
Design in Development    
HL3 – Rural Exception Sites 
Affordable Housing  Policy H6 - 
Isolated New Homes in the 
Countryside    
HL4 – Enlargement and 
Replacement of Rural 
Dwellings  Policy H7 - 
Replacements of, and 
Extensions to, Existing 
Homes in the Countryside    Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
230 Policies in the Fylde 
Borough Local Plan (As 
Altered), October 2005  To be replaced by policies in 
the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 
(incorporating Partial 
Review)  To be replaced 
by the 
Framework  No longer 
required  
HL5 – House extensions  Policy GD7  – Achieving Good 
Design in Development and 
Policy H7 - 
Replacements of, and 
Extensions to, Existing 
Homes in the Countryside    
HL6 – Design of Residential 
Estates  Policy GD7  – Achieving Good 
Design in Development     
HL7 and HL8 – Sites for 
Travelling Showpeople  Policy H5 – Gypsies,  
Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople’s Sites    
EMP1  -  Business and 
industrial land allocations  Policy EC1 - Overall Provision 
of Employment Land and 
Existing Employment Sites    
EMP2  – Existing Business 
and Industrial Areas  Policy EC1 - Overall Provision 
of Employment Land and 
Existing Employment Sites    
EMP3  – Business and 
industrial uses outside 
defined areas  Policy EC2 – Employment 
Opportunities    
EMP4  – Buffer Zones and 
landscaping on industrial 
areas  Policy ENV1  - Landscape    
EMP5  – Hazardous 
Installations   Paragraph 97 of 
the Framework   
TR1, TR2, TR3 and TR4 – 
Pedestrians, Bridleways, 
Cyclists and Public 
Transport  Policy T4 - 
Enhancing Sustainable 
Transport Choice    Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
231 Policies in the Fylde 
Borough Local Plan (As 
Altered), October 2005  To be replaced by policies in 
the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 
(incorporating Partial 
Review)  To be replaced 
by the 
Framework  No longer 
required  
TR5 – Large scale 
development and public 
transport  Policy M1 – Masterplanning 
the Strategic Locations for 
Development  
and 
Policy T4 – Enhancing 
Sustainable Transport 
Choice    
TR6 – Existing Car Parks    √ 
TR7 – Additional on street 
parking    √ 
TR8 – Additional off street 
parking    √ 
TR10  – Car park 
development criteria    √ 
TR11  – Safeguarded land 
for the Fylde Coast Easterly 
By-Pass    √ 
TR12  – Warton By -Pass    √  
TR13  – St Annes to M55 
Link Road  Policy T1 – Strategic 
Highway Improvements    
TR14  – Safeguarded land 
around Blackpool Airport  
 Policy T3 – Blackpool Airport    
TR15  – Motorway Service 
Centres    √ 
TREC1  – Provision of 
Holiday accommodation  
 Policy EC7 -  Tourism 
Accommodation    Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
232 Policies in the Fylde 
Borough Local Plan (As 
Altered), October 2005  To be replaced by policies in 
the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 
(incorporating Partial 
Review)  To be replaced 
by the 
Framework  No longer 
required  
TREC2  – Secondary Holiday 
Areas     
√ 
TREC3 – Tourist 
Accommodation outside 
Lytham St Annes  
 Policy EC7 –Tourism 
Accommodation     
TREC4  – Ribby Hall Leisure 
Village  
 Policy EC6 – Leisure, Culture 
and Tourism Development    
TREC5  – Major Tourism 
Development   Paragraphs 90 
and 91 of the 
Framework   
TREC6 and TREC7  – Static 
Holiday  Caravan and Chalet 
Sites and Touring Caravan 
and Camping Sites  
 Policy EC7 –Tourism 
Accommodation     
TREC8  – New tourism and 
leisure facilities within the 
seafront at St Annes / 
Fairhaven  
 Policy EC6 – Leisure, Culture 
and Tourism Development     
TREC9  – Re-development 
of St Annes Pier  
 Policy EC6 – Leisure, Culture 
and Tourism Development    
TREC10  – Rural 
Recreational Development  
 Policy EC6 – Leisure, Culture 
and Tourism Development     Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
233 Policies in the Fylde 
Borough Local Plan (As 
Altered), October 2005  To be replaced by policies in 
the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 
(incorporating Partial 
Review)  To be replaced 
by the 
Framework  No longer 
required  
TREC11  – Lancaster Canal 
Corridor  Policy INF2  – Developer  
Contributions  
and 
Policy EC6 – Leisure, Culture 
and Tourism Development  
and  
Policy ENV 3 – Protecting 
Existing Open Space ( Part of 
the Green Infrast ructure 
network)  
and 
Policy ENV 5 – Historic 
Environment     
TREC12  – Indoor Sports 
provision  Policy INF1  - Service 
Accessibility and 
Infrastructure  
and  
Policy HW3  –  
Protection and Provision of 
Indoor and Outdoor Sports 
Facilities   
   
TREC13  – Existing areas of 
Public Open Space  Policy ENV 3 – Protecting 
Existing Open Space ( Part of 
the Green Infrastructure 
network)    
TREC14  – Safeguarded 
Recreational Areas    √ Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
234 Policies in the Fylde 
Borough Local Plan (As 
Altered), October 2005  To be replaced by policies in 
the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 
(incorporating Partial 
Review)  To be replaced 
by the 
Framework  No longer 
required  
TREC15 and TREC16  – Golf 
Courses and other outdoor 
facilities requiring 
extensive areas of open 
land   Paragraph 84 of 
the Framework   
TREC17  – Amenity Open 
Space and Children’s play 
facilities within housing 
developme nt Policy ENV 4- Provision of 
new Open Space ( Part of the 
Green Infrastructure 
network)    
TREC18  – Development on 
Allotments  Policy ENV 3 – Protecting 
Existing Open Space ( Part of 
the Green Infrastructure 
network)    
TREC19  – Development 
and ancillary leisure uses in 
the area of Blackpool 
Airport  Policy T3 – Blackpool Airport    
EP1 – Environmental 
improvement areas    √ 
EP2 – Open Spaces of 
special local character 
within Towns and Villages  Policy ENV 3 – Protecting 
Existing Open Space ( Part of 
the Green Infrastructure 
network)    Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
235 Policies in the Fylde 
Borough Local Plan (As 
Altered), October 2005  To be replaced by policies in 
the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 
(incorporating Partial 
Review)  To be replaced 
by the 
Framework  No longer 
required  
EP3 - Development within 
a Conservation Area  
EP4 – Change of use or 
additions to a Listed 
Building  
EP5 - Demolition of a Listed 
Building  
EP6 – Historic Parks and 
Gardens  
EP7 and EP8 – Removal of 
local features  Policy ENV 5 – Historic 
Environment    
EP9 – Advertisement 
Designs  Policy GD7  – Achieving Good 
Design in  Development    
EP10  – Important habitats  Policy ENV2  - Biodiversity    
EP11  – New development 
in rural areas  Policy ENV1  - Landscape    
EP12 and EP13  – Trees, 
Woodlands and 
Hedgerows  Policy ENV 3 – 
Protecting Existing Open 
Space ( Part of the Green 
Infrastructure network)    
EP14  – Landscape planting 
in new development  Policy ENV 4 – Provision of 
new Open Space ( Part of the 
Green Infrastructure 
network)    
EP15 , EP16 and EP17  – 
Nature Conservation, SSSIs, 
BHSs  Policy ENV2  - Biodiversity    Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
236 Policies in the Fylde 
Borough Local Plan (As 
Altered), October 2005  To be replaced by policies in 
the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 
(incorporating Partial 
Review)  To be replaced 
by the 
Framework  No longer 
required  
EP18  – Existing natural 
features  Policy M1 – Masterplanning 
the Strategic Locations for 
Development  
and 
Policy ENV1  -  Landscape    
EP19  – Special Protected 
Sites  Policy ENV2  -  Biodiversity    
EP20  – Open Coastline  Policy ENV1  - Landscape    
EP21  - Archaeology  Policy ENV 5 – Historic 
Environment    
EP22  – Protection of 
agricultural land  Policy GD1  – Settlement 
Boundaries    
EP23  – Development that 
would affect coastal 
waters, rivers, etc , 
EP24  – Development 
affecting ground water  
EP25  – Sewage and 
Sewage Treatment Works  Policy CL1 – Flood 
Alleviation, Water Quality 
and Water Efficiency  
and 
Policy INF1  - Service 
Accessibility and 
Infrastructure    
EP26  – Air Pollution   Paragraph 186 
of the 
Framework   
EP27  – Noise Pollution   Paragraph 185 
and 187  of the 
Framework   
EP28  – Light Pollution   Paragraph 185 
of the 
Framework   
EP29  – Contaminated Land  Policy GD9  – Contaminated 
Land    Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
237 Policies in the Fylde 
Borough Local Plan (As 
Altered), October 2005  To be replaced by policies in 
the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 
(incorporating Partial 
Review)  To be replaced 
by the 
Framework  No longer 
required  
EP30  – Flood Risk  Policy CL1 – Flood 
Alleviation, Water Quality 
and Water Efficiency  
and 
Policy CL2 – Surface Water 
Run-off and Sustainable 
Drainage  Paragraph s 159-
169 of the 
Framework   
EP31  – The Fylde Aquifer    √ 
SH1 – Primary Shopping 
Frontages at Kirkham  Policy EC5 - 
Vibrant Town, District and 
Local Centres    
SH2 – Secondary Shopping 
Frontages at Kirkham  Policy EC5 - 
Vibrant Town, District and 
Local Centres    
SH3 – Primary Shopping 
Frontages at St Annes  Policy EC5 - 
Vibrant Town, District and 
Local Centres    
SH4 – Secondary Shopping 
Frontages at St Annes  Policy EC5 - 
Vibrant Town, District and 
Local Centres    
SH5 – Primary and 
Secondary Frontages of St 
Annes Town Centre  Policy EC5 - 
Vibrant Town, Distri ct and 
Local Centres    
SH6 – Wood Street Lytham  Policy EC5 - 
Vibrant Town, District and 
Local Centres    
SH7 – Primary Shopping 
Frontages at Lytham  Policy EC5 - 
Vibrant Town, District and 
Local Centres    Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
238 Policies in the Fylde 
Borough Local Plan (As 
Altered), October 2005  To be replaced by policies in 
the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 
(incorporating Partial 
Review)  To be replaced 
by the 
Framework  No longer 
required  
SH8 – Secondary Shopping 
Frontages at Lytham  Policy EC5 - 
Vibrant Town, District and 
Local Centres    
SH9 – Land uses 
appropriate to a town 
centre  Policy EC5 - 
Vibrant Town, District and 
Local Centres    
SH10  – Small Scale 
shopping within local 
shopping centres and 
villages  Policy EC5 - 
Vibrant Town, District and 
Local Centres    
SH11  – Sites for 
foodstores, community 
facilities or local health 
centres  Policy EC5 - 
Vibrant Town, District and 
Local Centres    
SH12  – Local shopping 
centres – changes from 
retail to non -retail uses  Policy EC5 - 
Vibrant Town, District and 
Local Centres    
SH13 and SH14  – Proposals 
for retail development at 
edge of centre and out of 
centre sites  Policy EC5 - 
Vibrant Town, District and 
Local Centres  Paragraphs 87-
91 of the 
Framework   
SH15  – Small scale retail 
units outside defined 
centres  Policy EC5 - 
Vibrant Town, Distr ict and 
Local Centres  Paragraph 89 of 
the Framework   
SH16  – Restaurants, cafes 
and hot food takeaways in 
defined centres  Policy EC5 - 
Vibrant Town, District and 
Local Centres    
CF1 – Provision of 
Community Facilities  Policy INF1  - Service 
Accessibility and 
Infrastructure    Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
239 Policies in the Fylde 
Borough Local Plan (As 
Altered), October 2005  To be replaced by policies in 
the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 
(incorporating Partial 
Review)  To be replaced 
by the 
Framework  No longer 
required  
CF2 – Site for a new school 
at Mowbreck Lane, 
Wesham  Policy HW2  – Community 
Facilities    
 
 
CF3 – Re-development of 
redundant school sites    √ 
CF4 – Development of 
children’s day nurseries 
and nursery schools  Policy INF1  - Service 
Accessibility and 
Infrastructure    
CF5 – Development of 
residential care facilities  Policy INF1  - Service 
Accessibility and 
Infrastructure    
CF6 – Community use of 
school facilities    √ 
CF7 – Overhead power 
lines within conservation 
areas    √ 
CF8 – Major 
telecommunications 
development   Paragraph  115 
of the 
Framework   
CF9 – Development of 
wind turbines  Policy CL3 – Renewable and 
Low Carbon Energy 
Generation  – excluding 
onshore wind turbines    
 
This is a schedule of policies from the Fylde Local Plan to 2032, which are to be superseded by the 
policies in the Partial Review of the Fylde Local Plan to 2032.  
 
 
 Policies in the Fylde Local Plan to 2032 to be superseded by the 
Partial Review.  
 
1. Policy DLF1 : Development Locations for Fylde  
 
2. Policy GD4 : Development in the Countryside  
 Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
240 3. Policy GD7 : Achieving Good Design in Development  
 
4. Policy EC5: Vibrant Town, District and Local Centres  
 
5. Policy H1: Housing Delivery and the Allocation of Housing Land  
 
6. Policy H6: Isolated New Homes in the Countryside  
 
7. Policy ENV1 : Landscape  
 
8. Policy ENV2 : Biodiversity  
 
9. Policy ENV3 : Protecting Existing Open Space (Part of the Green 
Infrastructure network)  
 
 
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
241 Appendix 2:  Housing Trajectory  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
242  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
243  010002000300040005000600070008000900010000
01002003004005006007008009001000
2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 2026-27 2027-28 2028-29 2029-30 2030-31 2031-32
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21Housing Trajectory
Homes delivered Residual homes required Cumulative homes delivered Cumulative homes requiredFylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
244   Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
245 Appendix 3: Retail – Town, District and Local Centre 
Boundaries Review   
 
Proposed changes  
TOWN CENTRES  
Lytham   
1. Extension of boundary along north side of Market Square to include (8) The Lytham Clinic.  
2. Exclusion of C3 dwellings east of road on Hastings Place and extend boundary to include council 
offices to the west of the road.  
3. Exclusion of C3 dwellings near Methodist Church on Westby Street  
4. Extension of boundary west on southern side of Church Road to include as far as number 19 
(number 17 is residential)  
5. Exclusion of numbers 8, 9, 10 Queen Street and draw boundary more tightly around the backs of 
properties on Church Road.  
6. Extension of boundary north -west to include Fire  Station, Art Society Headquarters, Garage, 
Stringers, Booths, Scouts and Sea Scouts.  
7. 14 Queen Street is a café but difficult to include within the boundary of the town centre.   
St Annes   
1. Inclusion of St David’s Road South within the boundary, with propo sed exclusion of one unit on 
St Alban’s Road.  
2. Contraction of boundary to the north west to exclude Ashton View along St George’s Road; 
Ashton Garden Court, 6 dwellings and former Petros House on St Andrews Road North.  Further 
contraction of the boundary t o exclude the tracks of the South Fylde Rail Line and an area of 
landscaping to the north of North Crescent.  
3. Contraction of boundary on St Anne’s Road West to exclude gardens to the front of apartments.  
4. Extension of boundary on Clifton Drive South (numbers  304 to 288) to include bank, A2 offices 
and Public Offices. Extension of boundary on Clifton Drive South (number 325) to include A2 
office.  
5. Extension of boundary on Orchard Road (number 25 – Westmorland House Government Offices 
‘odd’ and numbers 28 – 36 ‘even’) to include job centre and range of A2, D1 and B1 units.  
6. Extension of boundary on Park Road (Numbers 13 – 19 ‘odd’ and 26 – Adele House ‘even’) to 
include A1, A2, Sui Generis (Nail bar).  
7. Extension of boundary along Richmond Road between Westmoreland  Government Offices and 
Adele House to include job centre and A2 offices.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
246 8. Contraction of boundary to rear of St Andrew’s Road South to follow property boundaries, not 
the railway line.   
Kirkham  
1. Extension of boundary to include number 27A Station Road.  
2. Contraction of boundary to delete Birley Street (East Side).  
DISTRICT CENTRES  
Ansdell  
1. Exclusion of two units at the north west of Woodlands Road.  
LOCAL CENTRES  
Freckleton  
1. Extension of boundary to north to include The Plough Public House and Lorenzo’s Restaurant.  
2. Contraction of boundary to north of Preston Old Road to exclude numbers 5 – 9. 
3. Contraction of boundary to south of Preston Old Road to exclude number 32.  
Alexandria Drive, St. Annes  - no change  
Headroomgate Road, St. Annes  - no change  
St. Alban ’s Road St. Annes  - no change  
St. David’s Road North, St. Annes  - proposed amendment (extension) – numbers 191 and  
            191A St David’s R oad North  
NEW LOCAL CENTRES  
Warton  - This is proposed to have a new Local Centre by the end of the Plan period.  
Whitehills  (Fylde -Blackpool Periphery Strategic Location for Development)  – This is proposed to have 
a new Local Centre by the end of the Plan period.  
Whyndyke  - This is proposed to have a new Local Centre by the end of the Plan period.  
 
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
247 Appendix 4:   Holiday Area (s) Boundary Review  
 
‘Primary Holiday Area’ designation is not a term which is still considered to be relevant.  There is no 
need to distinguish between Primary Holiday Areas as Secondary Holiday Areas were not taken 
forward in the Local Plan at the Preferred Option stage , the Revised Preferred Option stage  or the 
Publication stage . 
‘Holiday Area’ is considered to be a more appropriate designation.  
North Promenade, St Annes  
Two hotels lie within the previous  Primary Holiday Area on North Promenade .  They do not form a 
contiguous frontage as they are at opposite ends of the previous  Primary Holiday Area .  It is not 
considered that they represent an area.  
Holiday Area designation does not now apply at North Pro menade, St Annes . 
South Promenade, St Annes  
The previous Primary Holiday Area at South Promenade, St Annes has been split into two smaller 
areas:  
i. Designate from St Ives Hotel to Mode Hotel as one Holiday Area; and  
ii. Designate from the Grand Hotel to the Carl ton Hotel as one Holiday Area.  
Clifton Drive South, St Annes  
1. Designate the cluster of five hotels from Numbers 305 to 299 on Clifton Drive South in St Annes as 
a Holiday Area.  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
248  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
249 Appendix 5:  Sea Front Area(s) Boundary Review  
 
The North Promenade and South Promenade Sea Front Area, St Annes  
The North Promenade and South Promenade Sea Front Area is to be reduced in size and is to be 
renamed ‘The Island ’ Sea Front Area in policy EC6 on Leisure, Culture and Tourism Development, in 
Chapter 8, due to the unique concentration of such large scale us es within its defined area.  The car 
parks are not suitable to be included in this policy. The Promenade Gardens are different in character 
to the Sea Front Area, due to their historic nature and their designation as a Historic Park and Garden.  
Action:  Take the Island Sea Front Area forward.  
Fairhaven Lake Sea Front Area, Ansdell / Fairhaven  
Fairhaven Lake forms a high quality, historic and distinctive heritage asset, the area is very different 
in character from the Island Sea Front Area due to its historic character. The Leisure, Culture and 
Tourism Development policy is therefore not relevan t.  Rather, Fairhaven Lake  should be subject to 
policy ENV 5: Historic Environment  in Chapter 13. 
Action:  Remove the Fairhaven Lake Sea Front Area.  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
250  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
251 Appendix 6:   Existing Employment Sites Review  
 
SITE NAME  RECOMMENDATION  
Lytham  
Preston Road, Lytham  Edge of settlement employment area, including 
boat storage area. This area should remain in 
employment use.  If however its partial 
redevelopment becomes integral to overcoming 
access constraints on the remaining 
undeveloped lands nort h of Liggard Brook, then 
any scheme should include employment uses.  
Dock Road, Lytham  Edge of settlement employment area. The 
remaining employment premises should be 
protected against further residential 
development.   
Boundary Road, Lytham  Low grade, ed ge of settlement industrial estate 
comprising a mix of larger companies and 
smaller engineering / motor trade occupiers. The 
industrial estate should therefore be retained 
and protected as an established local 
employment area. The lack of alternative infil l / 
expansion options suggest that the former 
Stanways Site should be retained for 
employment uses.  
AXA/AEGON  Offices, Ballam Road, Lytham  Area is in active use by three key local employers 
and should be protected.  
AXA Building, North Warton Street, Lytham  Area is in active use and should be protected.  
Jubilee House, Lytham  Large, multi -storey office building in a prominent 
location close to the Lytham  Sea Front. In active 
use should be protected.  
St Annes   
Scafell Road, Snowdon Road, Everest Road 
Industrial Area, St Annes  Low grade, edge of settlement industrial estate 
with trade and office uses. The industrial estate 
should be retained and protecte d as an 
established local employment area.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
252 SITE NAME  RECOMMENDATION  
Blackpool Airport, Squires Gate, Blackpool 
Airport Corridor  Good quality mixed -use employment area. 
Office uses should be protected from further 
retail / food development.  
Town Hall, St Annes  Established offices in St Annes Town Centre  
Westmorland House, St Annes  
 Established offices in St Annes Town Centre ; 
prior approval granted for change of use to 25 
residential apartments  
Queensway Industrial Estate, Snowdon Road, St 
Annes  Although the estate is generally of low quality, it 
is a useful source of budget accommo dation to 
local bad neighbour occupiers. This includes 
waste disposal services. The estate is almost fully 
occupied and most land and property is well 
used.  
There is a 3.8ha greenfield expansion site to the 
east which could be connected to the existing 
industrial estate via Snowdon Road or Scafell 
Road, expansion options elsewhere are 
constrained by adjacent uses (housing and 
Blackpool Airport). The industrial estate should 
therefore be retained and protected as an 
established local employment area. The la ck of 
alternative infill/expansion options suggest that 
the allocated expansion site should be retained 
for employment uses.  
Kirkham  
St Georges Park, Kirkham   High quality office park, with main road 
frontage, along with a large factory. Successful 
office park and the only significant source of high 
quality offices outside of Whitehills Business 
Park. The area should be protected for office 
uses only.  
Kirkham T rading Park  Good quality, successful trade park which is 
almost fully occupied. It should therefore be 
protected for employment uses.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
253 SITE NAME  RECOMMENDATION  
Progress Mill, Orders Lane, Kirkham  Successful, multi -let scheme. In particular it 
provides some of the only small storage units 
and ‘starter’ office suites in the borough. It 
should therefore be protected.  
Marquis Street/Richard Street, Kirkham  Established urban industrial estate providing 
budget / moderate accommodation to local 
firms.  At present most of these prop erties are in 
use. 
Wareing’s Site, Blackpool Road, Kirkham  Rural facility for a large local employer. New 
build facility for a key local employer.  
Freckleton  
Naze Lane, Freckleton  Small, rural industrial estate in an isolated 
location to the south  of BAE Systems, Warton. 
The industrial estate provides accommodation 
for a key local employer and should be 
protected. However, access to the estate (via 
Freckleton and along rural roads) is constrained.  
Freckleton Boatyard, Freckleton  Active boatyard. The facility should be adopted 
as an employment area in the development plan  
Warton  
BAE Systems, Warton  Secure aircraft production facility, including 
runways and wind tunnel.  Boundary of  
established area may alter if – through Call for 
sites it is decided to release some of land 
proposed for BAE for retail / Local Centre  
Land Registry, Warton  Active government office, which should be 
retained in employment use.  
Former RAF Camp, Hillock Lane, Warton  Good quality, self -contained research and 
development facility, including a vehicle test 
track, in rural location. The area should be 
protected.  
Braithwaites Yard Business Park, Warton  The farm now operates as a small 
industrial/trade  estate.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
254 SITE NAME  RECOMMENDATION  
Freckleton Boatyard, Warton  Active boatyard. The facility should be adopted 
as an employment area in the development plan  
Wesham  
Whitworth Street, Wesham  Operational factory with no known plans for 
relocation. Area should be protected for 
emplo yment use.  
Mill Farm, Fleetwood Road, Wesham  Small, informal business park in converted farm 
buildings on a main road location. Farm has 
diversified to become a small business park.  
Whitehills  
Whiteh ills Park  Good quality business park, on a main road 
location close to the Blackpool / Fylde boundary. 
A premier business park for Fylde.  
Blackpool and  Fylde Industrial Estate, Whitehills  A key employment area for Fylde, well located 
on the boundary with Blackpool  and close to the 
terminus of the M55. The estate should 
therefore be protected  
Peel Hall Business Village, Peel Road, Whitehills  Small, good quality established rural business 
park.  
Newton  
Dingle Farm Rural Business Park, Newton  Farm conversion to pro vide a workshop scheme 
in an isolated rural location. The farm now 
operates as a small business park.  
 
Wrea Green  
Brook Mill, Station Road, Wrea Green  Large converted mill in an edge of settlement 
location. Moderately successful multi -let 
scheme, providing budget / moderate quality 
premises for local firms. It is the only source of 
employment space in Wrea Green and should 
therefore be protected.  
 Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
255 SITE NAME  RECOMMENDATION  
Clifton 
Clifton Marsh Depot, Clifton  Moderately successful multi -let scheme 
providing smaller workshop accommodation to 
local motor trade firms.  
Weeton  
Mythop Lodge, Mythop Road, Weeton with 
Preese  The farm now operates as a small business park 
(albeit  currently vacant ) and is the only 
employment area north of the M55.  
Greenhalgh  
Laleham, Bradshaw Lane , Greenhalgh  Facility producing toiletry goods and distributing 
them.  These premises should be protected.  
Salwick  
Westinghouse Springfields, Salwick  Nationally important licensed nuclear facility 
which the occupier intends to retain in the long 
term.  
 
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
256  
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
257 Appendix 7:   Biological Heritage Sites in Fylde  
 
Fylde Summary Listing  
Site  Name  Grid 
Reference  Flora / Fauna  
Lytham  Foreshore Dunes 
and Saltmarsh  SD330275  Coastal Habitats, Flowering Plants and Ferns, 
Butterflies and Moths, Mosses and Liverworts, 
Molluscs  
Clifton Hospital Site, 
Lytham St Annes  SD336279  Coastal Habitats, Flowering Plants and Ferns, Mosses 
and Liverwort s, Molluscs  
Royal Lytham St Annes 
Golf Course  SD337282  Coastal Habitats, Flowering Plants and Ferns  
Lytham Hall Woods, 
Lytham St Annes  SD357281  Birds  
St Annes’s  Old Links Golf 
Course and Blackpool 
South Railway Line, 
Lytham St Annes  SD315305  Coastal Habitats, Flowering Plants and Ferns  
Pond West of Chain Lane, 
Staining  SD349355  Ponds, Flowering Plants and Ferns  
Westby Clay Pit, Westby 
with Plumptons  SD356310  Amphibians, Flowering Plants and Ferns  
Great Plumpton Sidings, 
Westby with Plumptons  SD387336  Artificial Habitats, Flowering Plants and Ferns  
Willowmead Park Swamp 
(Moss Side), Westby with 
Plumptons  SD387305  Mammals  
Lytham Moss  SD351305   
Smithy Farm Pond, 
Staining  SD352364  Ponds, Flowering Plants and Ferns  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
258 Shard Bridge Field Ditch, 
Skippool  SD368408  Flowering Plants and Ferns  
Skippool Marsh and 
Thornton Bank  SD358414   
Warton Brows, Bryning 
with Warton  SD415269  Grassland, Flowering Plants and Ferns  
Freckleton Naze, 
Freckleton  SD434278  Flowering Plants and Ferns, Grassland, Coastal 
Habitats  
Pippy Lane Banks, Newton 
with Clifton  SD468291  Birds, Artificial Habitats  
River Ribble, Lower Tidal 
Section, Lea, Newton with 
Clifton, Freckleton, 
Penwortham, Hutton 
(Preston / South Ribble)  SD478286  Habitat Mosaic, Coastal Habitats, Rivers and Streams, 
Artificial Habitats, Flowering Plants and Ferns  
Savick Bridge, Lea, Preston  SD477298  Swamp and Fen, Flowering Plants and Ferns  
Lea Marsh, Lea, Preston  SD481293  Coastal Habitats, Flowering Plants and Ferns  
St George’s Park Swamp, 
Kirkham  SD413324  Flowering Plants and Ferns  
Wesham Marsh, Medlar 
with Wesham  SD419337  Habitat Mosaic, Birds , Flowering Plants and Ferns  
Freshfield Farm Pond, 
South, Freckleton  SD435307  Molluscs, Other Invertebrates  
Freshfield Farm Pond, 
North, Freckleton  SD435309  Mosses and Liverworts, Other Invertebrates  
Medlar Meadows, Medlar 
with Wesham  SD420351  Birds  
Medlar Ditch, Medlar with 
Wesham  SD421355  Flowering Plants and Ferns  
Bucks Moss Wood, Salwick  SD460323  Woodland and Scrub  
Deepdale Wood, Salwick  SD471315  Woodland and Scrub  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
259 SFL Springfields Works 
Ponds, Salwick  SD475315  Amphibians  
River Wyre – Upper Tidal 
Section, Out Rawcliffe / 
Little Eccleston with 
Larbreck (Wyre)  SD405413  Coastal Habitats, Flowering Plants and Ferns  
Lancaster Canal, whole 
length in Lancashire  SD527302 to 
SD521767  Artificial Habitats, Flowering Plants and Ferns  
Lytham Moss Copses, 
Lytham St Annes  SD341298  Birds  
Black Poplar at Newton 
Crossroads, Newton  SD44633125  Flowering Plants and Ferns  
King Edward VII and 
Queen Mary School 
Playing Fields Margins, 
Lytham, St Annes  SD337278  Coastal Habitats, Flowering Plants and Ferns  
River Wyre – Upper Tidal 
Section, Out Rawcliffe / 
Little Eccleston with 
Larbreck  SD405413  Coastal Habitats, Flowering Plants and Ferns  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
260   Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
261 Appendix 8: Performance Monitoring Framework  
 
Monitoring  
The purpose of this Performance Monitoring Framework is to identify the key indicators  that will be 
used to monitor the delivery of policies contained in the Local Plan.  
Monitoring is an essential part of the planning process. By monitoring the progress toward achieving 
objectives using targets and indicators, contingency plans can be introduced if policies are failing, or 
policies can be adapted in light of changing circumstances.   Targets and indicators, along with the 
results of the monitoring process,  will be reported through the Authority Monitoring Report (AMR).   
The AMR is a key component of the Local Plan and measures the success of policies against a series of 
national and local indicators.  It aims to show whether policies are achieving their ob jectives and 
whether sustainable development is being delivered, whether the assumptions and objectives behind 
policies are still relevant and whether the targets in the Local Plan are being met.  The AMR is made 
up of a series of documents which will be u pdated annually as and when information becomes 
available.  
The Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act (as amended by the provision of the Localism Act, 2011) 
requires that authorities publish Monitoring Reports, at least yearly, to report progress on the 
implementation of the Local Development Scheme (i.e. the timetable for the preparation and 
adoption of the Local Plan) and the extent to which the policies in the Plan are being delivered.  The 
requirement to produce ‘Authorities Monitoring Report s’ came into  effect on 15 January, 2012.  These 
reports will be a key method of reporting on the progress of the Local Plan.  They will include the 
reporting of indicators which is an important tool in measuring whether delivery of the Local Plan is 
on course and whet her any actions are needed to address issues raised through the monitoring 
process such as under or over delivery of certain policies.  They will also enable a picture of trends to 
be established over time, which may highlight emerging issues, which will i nform the review of the 
Local Plan.  
The Council will also keep under review the wider contextual issues, national, regional and local levels, 
which impact upon the Borough and the Local Plan, which is essential as the Local Plan timescale runs 
from 1 April  2011 to 31 March 2032.  It is anticipated that the macro -economic climate will change 
over this timescale and that this could impact on the Plan.  The regular review of the evidence base, 
including key documents such as the SHMA; the monitoring of wider c ontextual information and the 
monitoring of the policies are key in assessing whether the Local Plan will need to be reviewed.  
The Performance Monitoring Framework of key policies in the Local Plan, set out below,  identifies 
indicators relevant to the obje ctives of the Local Plan. Monitoring will help to identify how well the 
policies are working and also identify any deficiencies in the performance of policies . If any Trigger for 
Action points are reached , this will  invoke the Contingency/Action required: these are set out in the 
table .    
The Local Plan seeks to manage development in Fylde, which will require efficient and effective 
delivery of development proposals and service improvements. Implementation of these will require  
action by a range of public, private and voluntary organisations.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
262 The Local Plan will be monitored at the end of each  financial year in March, so as to ensure that its 
policies are effective and reflect changing circumstances nationally, sub -regionally a nd locally.  The 
Framework sets out four tests of soundness which the Local Plan is expected to conform to, one of 
which is that the Plan needs to be ‘effective’ (the Framework). One of the ways effectiveness can be 
demonstrated is that the Plan is able to  be monitored.  
The Performance Monitoring Framework sets out the key performance indicators and their targets 
during the Local Plan period, to 2032.    
There are seven teen performance monitoring indicators  in the Local Plan. This  relatively small 
number of  targets has been chosen for inclusion in the Performance Monitoring Framework so as to 
avoid duplicate, unreliable or difficult to collect indicators; to ensure that the indicators chosen align 
closely with the strategic objectives and the key planning po licies and to focus on achievable targets 
in accordance with the Local Plan’s vision for Fylde.  Indicators and targets have not been set out for 
every policy in the Local Plan.   
The indicators aim to monitor the performance of the key policies, rather th an measure  wider  
outcomes . The seven teen  performance  monitoring indicators have reliable data sources,  baseline 
information, where appropriate, and achievable targets.  The AMR will assess the performance of the 
Local Plan against the indicators and targets in the Performance Monitoring Framework.  Where this 
indicates that targets are not being met, the Council will, where possible, seek to remedy poor 
performance prior to any review of the targets.  Where possible, the same indicators will be used 
throughout the life of the Local Plan.  However, some indicators and targets may change as 
information becomes  more or less readily available, as objectives are achieved, or as new priorities 
are set.  When this occurs, the AMR will explain the changes and track the new indicators and targets. 
In the longer term, the results of the monitoring will be used to revie w the Local Plan.  
 Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
263 Indicator
Number  Local Plan Policies  Performance 
Monitoring 
Indicator(s)  
 Target / Policy 
Outcome  
 Trigger for Action  Contingency / Action  Key Delivery 
Partners  
 
1 S1: The Settlement 
Hierarchy;  
DLF1 :Development 
Locations for Fylde;  
and 
H1: Housing 
Delivery and the 
Allocation of 
Housing Land  
  Annual net homes 
completions against 
the residual number 
required for 2019 -
2032 of 368 homes 
per annum . 
 Annual net homes 
completions  to be at 
least  the residual 
number required for 
2019-2032 of  368 
homes  per annum.  (1) Failure to deliver 95% of 
the residual number over a 
3-year rolling period, i.e. 
1,049 net homes over 3 
years; (2) Failure to deliver 
85% of the requirement over 
a 3-year rolling period, i.e. 
938 net homes over 3 years 
(3) Failure to deliver 75%  of 
the requirement over a 3 -
year rolling period, i.e. 828 
net homes over 3 years  
 (1) Prepare and publish an 
action plan setting out key 
reasons for the situation and 
actions the Council and other 
parties need to take; (2) Plan for 
a 20% buffer on the Council’s 
five year housing land supply, if 
necessary by bringing additional 
sites forward into the supply; 
(3) the presumption in favour of 
sustainable development as set 
out in the Framework would 
apply. A review of housing 
allocation policies will be 
conducted, t o consider the 
need to allocate sites in order to 
prevent the continuation of the 
operation of the presumption in 
favour of sustainable 
development.  
 Fylde Council,  
Developers, 
Housing 
Associations  
and 
Infrastructure 
Providers.  
 Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
264 Indicator
Number  Local Plan Policies  Performance 
Monitoring 
Indicator(s)  
 Target / Policy 
Outcome  
 Trigger for Action  Contingency / Action  Key Delivery 
Partners  
 
2  S1: The Settlement 
Hierarchy;  
DLF1 : Development 
Locations for Fylde;  
and 
H1: Housing 
Delivery and the 
Allocation of 
Housing Land  
 Number of years’ 
supply of housing 
deliverable within 5 
years (plus the 
required buffer) 
calculated using the 
Liverpool approach .  
 To have a minimum of 
5 year s’ supply (plus 
the required buffer) of 
housing land  
calculated using the 
Liverpool approach . Having fewer than 5 years’ 
supply (plus the required 
buffer) calculated using the 
Liverpool approach  Consider granting planning 
permiss ion for sites of between 
10 and 15 homes on sites not 
allocated in the plan, adjacent 
to the settlement boundaries of 
the Strategic Locations for 
Development.  Fylde Council,  
Developers, 
Housing 
Associations  
and 
Infrastructure 
Providers.  
 
3  S1: The Settlement 
Hierarchy;  
DLF1 : Development 
Locations for Fylde;  
and 
H1: Housing 
Delivery and the 
Allocation of 
Housing Land  
 Total number of 
homes (net) delivered 
within the plan period 
measured against the 
Housing Trajectory .  
 To deliver a minimum 
of  7,275 homes  (net) 
over the plan period 
from 1 April 2011 to 
31 March 2032.  20% shortfall on the 
cumulative requirement of 
the Housing Trajectory  Consider reviewing site 
allocation policies  Fylde Council,  
Developers, 
Housing 
Associa tions  
and 
Infrastructure 
Providers.  
 Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
265 Indicator
Number  Local Plan Policies  Performance 
Monitoring 
Indicator(s)  
 Target / Policy 
Outcome  
 Trigger for Action  Contingency / Action  Key Delivery 
Partners  
 
4 DLF1 : Development 
Locations for Fylde;  
SL1, SL2, SL3 and 
SL4: Strategic 
Locations for 
Development;  
SL5: Development 
Sites outside the 
Strategic Locations 
for Development;  
and 
H1: Housing 
Delivery and the 
Allocation of 
Housing Land  
 Proportion of net 
homes completed in 
the Strategic Locations 
for Development 
(taken together). 
Proportion of net 
homes complet ed in 
the Non -strategic 
Locations . Cumulative homes 
completed from the 
start of the Plan 
period on 1 April 2011 
located within -  
 
Strategic Locations for 
Development:  90%  
Non -strategic 
Locations:  10%  Cumulative homes 
completed from the start of 
the Plan period on 1 April 
2011 located within -  
Strategic Locations for 
Development:  fewer than 
80%  
Non -strategic Locations  
more than 15%  Consider the reasons for the 
imbalance in delivery compared 
to the ta rget and whether there 
are any obstacles to delivery 
affecting sites in particular 
locations.  Fylde Council,  
Housing 
Associations,  
Developers 
and 
Infrastructure 
Providers.  
 
5 EC1: Overall 
Provision of 
Employment Land 
and Existing 
Employment Sites  Employment land 
take -up : cumulative 
take -up of allocated 
employment land for 
employment 
development from the 
start of the plan 
period on 1 April 2011, 
compared to the 
requirement of 60.6 
Ha (gross 
requirement) during 
the plan period 
divided pro -rata.  Cumu lative take -up of 
land for employment 
development from the 
start of the plan 
period on 1 April 2011, 
to be at least 90% of 
the requirement of 
60.6  Ha (gross 
requirement) at the 
end of the plan period.  
 Cumulative take up of 
allocated employment land 
for employment 
development less than 50% 
of the expected pro -rata 
amount, or more than 150% 
of the expected pro -rata 
amount.  Where take up of allocated 
employment land for 
employment development is 
higher than expected, consider 
review of allocation polici es. 
Where take -up is lower, 
consider whether there are 
obstacles to take -up on 
particular sites that could be 
overcome.  Fylde Council, 
Businesses,  
Developers,  
Investors and  
Infrastructure 
Providers.  
 Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
266 Indicator
Number  Local Plan Policies  Performance 
Monitoring 
Indicator(s)  
 Target / Policy 
Outcome  
 Trigger for Action  Contingency / Action  Key Delivery 
Partners  
 
6 EC3 Lancashire 
Advanced 
Engineering and 
Manufacturing 
(AEM) Enterprise 
Zone at BAE 
Systems, Warton  Cumulative additional 
jobs created in Fylde 
over the plan period 
to date as a direct 
consequence of the 
incentives provided by 
the Enterprise Zone  Cumulative additional 
jobs created in Fylde 
in line with projection  Cumulative additional jobs 
created in Fylde varies from 
projection by more than 50%  Review whether the annual 
housing requirement for Fylde 
remains aligned with jobs 
growth within the borough as a 
whole.  Fylde Council, 
Businesses, 
Deve lopers 
and Investors.  
7 EC4 Blackpool 
Airport Enterprise 
Zone  Cumulative additional 
jobs created in Fylde 
over the plan period 
to date as a direct 
consequence of the 
incentives provided by 
the Enterprise Zone  Cumulative additional 
jobs created in Fylde 
in line with projection  Cumulative additional jobs 
created in Fylde varies from 
projection by more than 50%  Review whether the annual 
housing requirement for Fylde 
remains aligned with jobs 
growth within the borough as a 
whole.  Fylde Council, 
Busines ses, 
Developers 
and Investors.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
267 Indicator
Number  Local Plan Policies  Performance 
Monitoring 
Indicator(s)  
 Target / Policy 
Outcome  
 Trigger for Action  Contingency / Action  Key Delivery 
Partners  
 
 8 H2: Density and 
Mix of New 
Residential 
Development  
 Density of completed 
housing development 
sites. To be calculated 
using a net 
developable site area 
of 60% of the site area 
for strategic sites. . 30 homes per hectare  
or more achieved on 
completed new -build 
sites representing at 
least 90% of the 
dwellings within those 
sites in any given year 
in Strategic Locations 
for Development, Key 
Service Centres, Local 
Service Centres and in 
Tier 1 : Larger Rural 
Settlements  and Tier 
2: Smaller Rural 
Settlements.  To be 
calculated using a net 
developable site area 
of 60% of the site area 
for strategic sites.  30 homes per hectare or 
more achieved on completed 
sites representing 75% or 
fewer of the dwellings within 
those sites i n any given year 
in Strategic Locations for 
Development, Key Service 
Centres, Local Service 
Centres and in Tier 1: Larger 
Rural Settlements and Tier 2: 
Smaller Rural Settlements. . 
To be calculated using a net 
developable site area of 60% 
of the site area for strategic 
sites.  Review how the policy is being 
applied, the age and 
circumstances of the planning 
permissions to which the 
completions relate where the 
target was not met; if the policy 
has been applied accurately to 
the permissions which led to 
the t rigger being applied, 
consider whether the policy 
needs to be reviewed.  Fylde Council, 
Housing 
Associations,  
Registered 
Providers, 
HCA, private 
landlords and 
Developers.  
 Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
268 Indicator
Number  Local Plan Policies  Performance 
Monitoring 
Indicator(s)  
 Target / Policy 
Outcome  
 Trigger for Action  Contingency / Action  Key Delivery 
Partners  
 
9 H2 Density and Mix 
of New Residential 
Development  Proportion of 
dwellings with full 
planning permission 
and on sites which are 
not yet completed 
that will have: 1 
bedroom; 2 
bedrooms; 3 
bedrooms; 4 
bedrooms; 5 or more 
bedrooms. 
Information will be 
derived from the 
approved planning 
applications.  At least 50% of 
dwellings to have 1, 2  
or 3 bedrooms. At 
least 33% of dwellings 
at non -strategic 
locations to have 1 or 
2 bedrooms. These 
targets will be 
adjusted in response 
to the findings of 
future Housing Needs 
Assessments 
conducted on behalf 
of the Council.  Less than 50% of dwellings 
to have 1, 2 or 3 bedrooms. 
Less than 33% of dwellings at 
non-strategic locations to 
have 1 or 2 bedrooms. These 
triggers will be adjusted in 
response to the findings of 
future Housing Needs 
Assessments conducted on 
behalf of the Council.  Review how the policy  is being 
applied, the age and 
circumstances of the planning 
permissions where the target 
was not met; if the policy has 
been applied accurately, 
consider whether the policy 
needs to be reviewed.  Fylde Council, 
Housing 
Associations, 
Registered 
Providers, 
HCA, private 
landlords and 
Developers.  
 10 H4: Affordable 
Housing  Percentage of market 
housing schemes of 10 
or more homes 
granted planning 
permission that 
provide 30% 
affordable homes . All market housing 
schemes of 10 or more 
homes to provide 30%  
affordable homes.  Fewer than 90% of market 
housing schemes of 10 or 
more homes granted 
planning permission in any 
given year provide 30% 
affordable homes.  Consider the circumstances of 
the permissions granted that 
have led to the trigger. If a 
generalised  viability problem is 
indicated, consider a review of 
the requirement in the policy.  Fylde Council,  
Housing 
Associations,  
Registered 
Providers,  
HCA, private 
landlords and 
Developers.  
 11 HW1 : Health and 
Wellbeing  Number of Health 
Impact Assessments 
(HIA) submitted 
alongside major 
planning applications 
on Strategic Sites .  Health Impact 
Assessments (HIA) 
submitted alongside 
all major planning 
applications  on 
Strategic Sites . 
 Planning Application for a 
Strategic Site validated 
without a Health Impact 
Assessment having been 
submitted  Review how the requirement 
for HIAs is being implemented.  Fylde Council,  
Lancashire 
Public Health 
and   
Health 
Agencies.  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
269 Indicator
Number  Local Plan Policies  Performance 
Monitoring 
Indicator(s)  
 Target / Policy 
Outcome  
 Trigger for Action  Contingency / Action  Key Delivery 
Partners  
 
 12 INF2 : Developer 
Contributions  Number, Type and 
Location of 
Infrastructure Projects 
delivered . All projects listed 
within the IDP 
delivered, or 
commenced delivery, 
during the plan period.  
 Failure to deliver a project 
that then results in a delay 
to the delivery of 
development sites allocated 
in the plan.  Work with  lead organisations 
and developers to unblock 
delivery of infrastructure 
projects. If necessary review 
alternative ways of meeting the 
infrastructure need.  Fylde Council,  
Developers 
and 
Infrastructure 
Providers.  
 13 CL1: Flood 
Alleviation, Water 
Quality and Water 
Efficiency;  
SL1, SL2, SL3  and 
SL4: Strategic 
Locations for 
Development;  and  
SL5: Development 
Sites outside the 
Strategic Locations 
for Development  Number of planning 
applications granted 
permission for 
inappropriate 
development in Flood 
Risk Zones 2 and 3 .  No planning 
applications granted 
permission for 
inappropriate 
development in Flood 
Zones 2 and 3.  Planning application for 
inappropriate development 
in Flood Risk Zones 2 and/or 
3 granted planning 
permission contrary to 
Environment Agency advice.  Consider how the policy is being 
applied  Fylde Council 
and 
Environment 
Agency.  
 14 ENV2 : Biodiversity  Change in areas  of 
land covered by local, 
national or 
international policy 
protections for 
biodiversit y, or areas 
provided for 
biodiversity in 
mitigation through 
developments . Net gains in areas of 
land specifically 
dedicated to and 
protected for 
biodiversity.  Fall in areas of land 
specifically dedicated to and 
protected for biodiversity . Consider whether the fall in the 
areas of dedicated land has 
been offset by more effective 
use of the area of land that 
remains for biodiversity. If not, 
consider a review of how the 
policies have been applied.  Fylde Council,  
Lancashire 
County 
Council,  
Natural 
England and 
Lancashire 
Wildlife Trust.  
 Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
270 Indicator
Number  Local Plan Policies  Performance 
Monitoring 
Indicator(s)  
 Target / Policy 
Outcome  
 Trigger for Action  Contingency / Action  Key Delivery 
Partners  
 
 15 ENV3 : Protecting 
Existing Open 
Space (the  Green 
Infrastructure 
network);  
and 
HW3:  Protection 
and Provision of 
Indoor and 
Outdoor Sports 
Facilities   
 Amount of indoor and 
outdoor sport, 
recreation and open 
space gained, and lost 
to other uses  , 
measured both by 
number and type of 
facilities, and by 
amount of space of 
each type (with 
reference to the 
typology used in the 
Open Space Study) . Net gains in indoor 
and outdoor sports 
facilities and open 
space provi sion.  Unexpected specific losses of 
facilities (without like for like 
replacement).  Consider how the policy is being 
applied, whether any means 
exist of preventing or mitigating 
any loss.  Fylde Council,  
Sport England, 
Lancashire 
Sport, parish 
and town 
coun cils, 
sports clubs,  
schools and  
Developers.  
 
 16 
 
 ENV5 : Historic 
Environment   
 Number of Heritage 
Assets on Historic 
England’s ‘At Risk’ 
register.  Number of 
heritage assets at risk 
on Fylde’s Local List of 
Heritage Assets (once 
established).  
 Reduction in the 
number of heritage 
assets on the Historic 
England’s ‘At Risk’ 
register. Reduction in 
the number of 
heritage assets 
considered to be “at 
risk” on the local list of 
heritage assets once 
established.  
 Identification of a heritage 
asset newly listed on “at 
risk” register. Periodic 
increase in the number of 
heritage assets on the “at 
risk” register in the borough. 
Identification of a locally 
listed h eritage asset that 
could be at risk through 
periodic review.  Consider how the Council can 
contribute to measures to 
improve the condition of the “at 
risk” heritage assets. Consider 
whether the policy is 
contributing to the neglect of 
heritage assets, and if so, 
consider whether the policy 
should be reviewed.  Fylde Council,  
Historic 
England,  
Developers 
and architects.  
 
 
 Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
271 Indicator
Number  Local Plan Policies  Performance 
Monitoring 
Indicator(s)  
 Target / Policy 
Outcome  
 Trigger for Action  Contingency / Action  Key Delivery 
Partners  
 
17 EC1: Overall 
Provision of 
Employment Land 
and Existing 
Employment Sites  
 Cumulative additional 
jobs created in Fylde 
from the start of the 
plan period  Cumulative additional 
jobs created in Fylde 
in line with projection  Cumulative additional jobs 
created in Fylde varies from 
projection by more than 50%  Review whether the annual 
housing requirement for Fylde 
remains aligne d with jobs 
growth within the borough as a 
whole.  
 Fylde Council, 
Businesses, 
Developers 
and Investors.  
 
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
272  
 Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
273 Appendix 9:  Evidence Base  
 
Comprehensive List of Evidence  
Regulations  
Below are the regulations that the Local Plan must comply with:  
➢ Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) (Regulation 2012)  
➢ Town and Country Planning Regulations 2004  
➢ Community Infrastructure Levy Regulations (2010 , 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015 ) 
 
General  
Below is a list of general evid ence that has been  used to inform the Local Plan.  
➢ Ambition Lancashire Sustainable Community Strategy (2005 -2025) , 2008 edition  
➢ Commissioning Plan for Fylde 2015 -16, May 2015  
➢ Fylde Borough Area Profile 2012  
➢ Fylde Borough Council Authority Monitoring Report s 
➢ Fylde Borough Council Corporate Plan  
➢ Fylde Borough Local Plan (as Altered: October 2005)  
➢ Fylde Cultural Strategy , December 2013  
➢ Fylde Local Plan Interim Sustainability Appraisal , 2012  
➢ Fylde Local Plan Sustainability Appraisal Scoping Rep ort, 2010  
➢ Fylde Sustainable Community Strategy 2008 -2018  
➢ Fylde Sustainable Community Strategy Delivery Plan 2011/12  
➢ Fylde Authority Monitoring Report  
➢ National Planning Policy Framework , 2012  
➢ National Planning Policy Framework, 2018  
➢ National Planning Policy Framework, 2019  
➢ National Planning Policy Framework, 2021  
➢ Planning Practice Guidance (PPG: March 2014  to June 2021 ) 
➢ North West of England Regional Spatial Strategy to 2021 , 2008  
➢ Parish Plans  
➢ Saint Anne’s on the Sea Neighbourhood Development Plan, 2017  
➢ Bryning -with -Warton Neighbourhood Development Plan, 2017  
➢ Sites Assessment Background Paper , 2016  
➢ Economic Viability Assessment of the Emerging Fylde Local Plan to 2032  
➢ Area of Separation Background Paper , November 2014  
➢ Strategic Site s Assessment , December 2015  
➢ Fylde Community Safety Partnership - Strategic Assessment 2015   
➢ Settlement Hierarchy Background Paper 2016  
➢ Housing Needs and Requirement Background Paper 2020  
➢ Five Year Housing Land Supply Annual Position Statement 2020  
➢ Implica tions of NPPF19 for FLP32  
➢ References to NPPF12 within the Fylde Local Plan to 2032  
 Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
274 Provision of homes in Fylde  
Below is a list of housing evidence that has been  used to inform the Local Plan.  
➢ Fylde Coast Housing Strategy , 2009  
➢ Fylde Coast Strategic Housing Market Assessment , 2008  
➢ Fylde Coast Strategic Housing Market Assessment , 2014  
➢ Fylde Coast SHMA Addendum 1 (November 2014) (including Rural Housing Needs Study)  
➢ Fylde Coast SHMA Addendum 2 (May 2015)  
➢ Fylde Addendum 3: Analysis of the OAN i n light of  the 2014 -based SNPP and SNHP ( 2017)  
➢ Fylde Housing Land Availability Schedule (published annually)  
➢ Fylde Housing Needs and Demand Study update , 2007  
➢ Fylde Housing Needs Assessment , 2012  
➢ Fylde Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment  (SHLAA)  (2012  and 2015)  
➢ Homes and Communities Agency Design and Quality Standards , 2007  
➢ Investing in our Homes and Community – Fylde Coast Local Investment Plan 2011 -2014  
➢ Lancashire Sub -Regional Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation and Related Serv ices 
Assessment , 2007  
➢ Planning Policy for Traveller Sites , 2015  
➢ Fylde Coast Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment , 2014  
➢ Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment Update , 2016  
➢ Speciali sed Housing Background Paper,  2016  
 
Fylde Economy  
Below in a list of economy -related evidence that has been used to inform the Local Plan  
➢ Fylde Borough Council Regeneration Framework , 2010  
➢ Fylde Regeneration Framework , 2016 
➢ Fylde Coast Retail Study , 2011  
➢ Fylde Coast Retail Study Update , 2013  
➢ Fylde Coast S ub-regional Visitor Accommodation Study , 2009  
➢ Fylde Economic Development Strategy and Action Plan 2008 -2021  
➢ Fylde Employment Land and Premises Study , 2012  
➢ Fylde Business and Industrial Land Schedule , 2015 
➢ Fylde Sub -Region Employment land Review: Summary St atement , 2010  
➢ Lancashire County Economic Assessment , 2011  
➢ Planning for Growth Statement , 2011  
➢ Plan for Growth , 2011  
➢ Lancashire Enterprise Zone (Warton) Local Development Order No.1 , 2012  and 2015  
➢ Lancashire Enterprise Zone (Warton) Phase 1 Masterplan, 2014  
➢ Lancashire Strategic Economic Plan , 2014  
➢ Lancashire Growth Deal (2015)  
➢ Locally Set Floorspace Threshold , 2014  
➢ Lytham St Anne’s ‘2020 Vision’ for the Visitor Economy and ‘Classic Resort’ Status , 2009  
➢ St Anne’s Seafront Masterplan , 2008  
➢ Inde pendent Assessment of the Economic Prospects of Fylde ( 2017)  
➢ Blackpool Airport Enterprise Zone - Memorandum of Understanding November 2016  
➢ Blackpool Airport Enterprise Zone Draft Masterplan, 2017   Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
275 Climate Change, Renewable Energy and Flood Risk 
Below is a list of evidence in relation to climate change, renewable energy and flood risk that has 
been used to inform the Local Plan  
➢ Draft Blackpool and Fylde Coast Protection Strategy , 2011  
➢ Regional Flood Risk Appraisal , 2008  
➢ Fylde Strategic Flood Risk Assessment , updated 2011  
➢ Lancashire and Blackpool Local Flood Risk Management Strategy 2014 -2017 (2014)  
➢ Lancashire Climate Change Actions for Tomorrow 2009/2010  
➢ Lancashire Climate Change Strategy (2009 – 2020)  
➢ Lancashire Preliminary Flood Risk Assessment , 2011  
➢ Landscapes sensitive to wind development in Lancashire , 2005  
➢ Lancashire Sustainable Energy Study 2011 and update 2012  
➢ North West River Basin Management Plan , 2009  
➢ UK Renewable Energy Strategy , 2009  
➢ Regional Floo d Risk Appraisal , 2008  
➢ Ribble Catchment Flood Management Plan , 2009  
➢ Ribble Flood Risk Management Plan , 2014  
➢ North West England and North Wales Shoreline Management Plan , 2010  
➢ Water Cycle Strategy for Blackpool and Central Lancashire , 2011  
 
Natural Environment and Heritage  
Below is a li st of evidence in relation to the natural environment and heritage that has been  used 
to inform the Local Plan.  
➢ Biodiversity Action Plan for Lancashire , 2001  
➢ Fylde Coast Cultural Strategy 2009 -2014  
➢ Fylde Council Coastal Strategy  (2015 -2032) , 2015  
➢ Fylde Green Infrastructure Strategy , 2011  
➢ Fylde Open Space, Sport and Recreation Study : Strategy and Action Plan , 2008  
➢ Fylde Open Space Study Update, 2016  
➢ Fylde Playing Pitch Strategy and Action Plan, 2016  
➢ Fylde Playing Pitch Strategy Assessment Report, 20 16 
➢ Fylde Sand Dunes Management Action Plan , 2008  
➢ Lancashire Historic Towns Survey , 2006  
➢ Built Heritage Strategy  for Fylde , 2015  
➢ Landscape Strategy for Lancashire – Landscape Character Assessment , 2000  
➢ Landscape Strategy for Lancashire – Landscape  Strategy , 2000  
➢ Marine Policy Statement , 2011  
➢ North West Green Infrastructure Guide , 2008  
➢ A Local List of Lancashire’s Unregistered Historic Designed Landscapes , 2013  
➢ Strategic Site Options: Landscape Assessment, 2016  
➢ Lancashire Ecological Network Approach , 2013  
➢ Improving our Bathing Waters across the Fylde Peninsula Action Plan  
 
  Fylde Local Plan to 2032 (incorporating Partial Review)  
276 Infrastructure and Transport  
Below is a list of infrastructure and transport evidence that has been  used to inform the Local 
Plan.  
➢ Fleetwood – Thornton Area Action Plan – Appendix B: Sustainable Transport Strategy  
➢ Fylde Car Park Strategy , 2013  
➢ Lancashire Local Transport Plan 3 (2011 -2021) and Implementation Plan  
➢ Central Lancashire Highways and Transport Masterplan, 2013  
➢ Fylde Coast Highways and Transport Masterplan, 2015  
➢ The Lancashire Strategic Transport Prospectus, 2016  
➢ Lancashire Minerals and Waste Local Plan  Core Strategy  (2009 -2021)  
➢ Lancashire Minerals and Waste Site Allocations and Development Management Policies DPD 
Part One and Part Two, September 2013  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© Fylde Borough Council copyright 20 21 
Date: December 2021                          Review Date: N/A 
Our Ref: FLP32incPR                            Authorised by: Julie Glaister Planning Policy Manager  