1 
 HARLOW LOCAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN  
 
SCHEDULE OF  MAIN MODIFICATIONS TO ACCOMPANY FINAL REPORT , 5 NOVEMBER 2020  
 
 
This Schedule  is ordered by chapter and modification number and contains the policy reference/paragraph n umber and page number  for each modification . 
 
Deleted text , maps or other figures are  shown with a  red str ike-through ; additions  and replacements  are underlined  in green . Dots denote where the 
paragraph/policy continues before/after the text shown in the modification.  
 
Due to insertions of new paragraphs, the paragraph numbers will subsequently change. These changes have not been indicated in this schedule .  
The p olicy and p aragraph numbers referred to in this schedule  are those  found in the Pre-Submission Publication version of the Local Plan . 
 
The Pre-Submission Publication version of the Local Plan  and Policies Map  are available on the Council we bsite at www.harlow.gov.uk  or by 
clicking here and here, respectively.  
  2 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
CHAPTER 5 
MM1  Chapter intro  
New para after para 5.2  
Page 36  The four Garden Town Communities will be well connected and not considered in isolation to the urban fabric of Harlow. The 
master plan processes for these sites must  integrate  with and regenerate neighbouring areas of Harlo w. 
Policy HGT1  
Page 38  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(continues on next 
page)  
 
 1. (d) Gilston Area (including seven villages)  - delivering approximately……  
 
2. The design, development and phased delivery of each Garden Town Community  must accord with……  
As the focus of the Garden Town, Harlow Council will expect the design, development and phased delivery of each Garden Town 
Community to accord with all the follo wing principles…  
…… 
(c) …...including heritage assets,  Green Infrastructure, the public realm, community facilities……  
 
(d) a Strategic Master Plan must be developed for each of the Garden Town Communities  in accordance general conformity  with 
the Harlow an d Gilston Garden Town Spatial  Vision and Design  Charter  Guide  …… 
 
(e) …..be consistent with and adhere to the any relevant Design Codes;  
 
(f)……with the proposed development to mitigate any impacts of the new Garden Town Communities , to meet the……  
……..  
(i)……accessible and safe transport system which  reduces car use and  maximises the use……………and the new Garden Town 
Communit yies; 
…… 
(k) develop  Compliance with  specific parking standards which recognise that car ownership will need to be accommodated 
without impacting on the quality of place whilst making the best use of land;…  
 
(l) Create distinctive environments which relate to the surrounding area  and, take full account of topography and landform, 
protect or enhance  the natural and historic landscapes , and systems and wider historic environment , Green Infrastructure and 
biodiversity. The layout should respond to and extend where possible the existing network of Green Wedges and Green Fingers 
in the district ; 
… 
 
(o) a Heritage Impact Assessmen t will be required to inform the design of the Garden Town Community to ensure heritage 
assets within and surrounding the site are conserved or enhanced and the proposed development will not cause harm to the 
significance of a heritage asset or its setting . Only where harm cannot be avoided should appropriate mitigation measures be 
incorporated into the design  as identified through the Heritage Impact Assessment ; 
 3 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
MM1  
cont.  Policy HGT1  
Page 38  
cont.  (p) key transport interventions (such as M11 J 7/7a) and provision of sustainable transport (providing viable alternatives to the 
private car) will  need to be agreed prior to the development being permitt ed. Measures to ensure future upkeep/maintenance of 
sustainable transport provision will be required…  
 
(q) Inclusion of any measures necessary to safeguard wildlife sites beyond the district boundary in accordance with Policy WE 3a  
 
Developers will be expected to make a fair and reasonable contribution to the strategic highway and other infrastructure 
requir ements set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  
 
Para 5.27   
 ……The development is required to provide community facilities including Early Years facilities, a two -form entry  primary school 
and two sites of at least 2.1ha and 2.9ha in area for primary school provision and at least 10ha of land in addition to  appropri ate 
contributions (including the provision of land)  towards a new secondary school……  
 
Para 5.28  
 …… These include works to widen the B183 Gilden  Way, a left turn slip road from the new M11 Junction 7a, a link road approach 
to the Strategic Housing Site East of Harlow northern access road, and linkages into walking and off -road cycle networks the 
provision of direct bus/walk/cycle access and linkag e to/through the Newhall site as part of the Sustainable Transport Corridor 
improvements (to be consistent with the mitigation terms of the planning permission granted for the Newhall development). 
Linkages into other walking and off -road cycle networks wi ll be required . In addition to Epping Forest’s access requirement, Harlow 
will require the provision of an additional access road s to the south unless it can be shown that a third access is not required . 
Suitable highway improvements will need to be agreed  overall with Essex County Council as the Highway Authority ……….  
 
Para 5.29  
 …… a new two-form entry  site of at least 2.1ha in area for a primary school, and  at least 10ha of land in addition to  
appropriate……  
 
Para 5.32  
 ……a new two-form entry  site of at least 2.5ha in area for a  primary school……  
 
CHAPTER 7 
MM2  
 Policy HS1  
Page 53  
 
 The Local Plan identifies sites to deliver at least 9,200 dwellings during the Local Plan period (1 April 2011 to 31 March 20 33). 
 
In view of the lead time for bringing forward the Strategic Housing Site East of Harlow, together with the sites at Newhall and the 
Princess Alexandra Hospital, this will be provided in accordance with a stepped requirement  of 361 dwellings per annum from April 
2011 to March 2024 and 501 dwellings per annum from April 2024 to March 2033.  4 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
MM2  
cont.  HS1 Justification  
Fig 7.1  
Page 53  
 Completions at 31 March 2017      2019  1,436   2,463  
Commitments at 31 March 2017    2019  4,122   4,723  
Strategic Housing Site East of Harlow  2,600  
Policy HS2 sites    834 
Additional requirement                         1,042  
TOTAL SUPPLY           9,200   10,620 
Surpl us over 9,200 requirement   1,420  
 
HS1 Justification  
Para 7.6  
Page 53  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Local Plan must ensure there is sufficient supply of market, affordable and specialist  dwellings to meet Harlow’s Objectively 
Assessed Housing Need (OAHN) of 7,400  6,820  dwellings. T o contribute to affordable housing need, and the regeneration of the 
district and to help meet the wider needs of the Housing Market Area , an additional 1,800  2,380  dwellings are provided  
proposed , giving a total requirement  of 9,200 dwellings during the Local Plan period. As at 31 March 2019, 2,46 3 dwellings had 
been completed and there were 4, 723 dwelling commitments, leaving a further requirement for 2, 014 dwellings. Anticipated 
sources of supply are shown in Fig. 7.1.  The projected surplus over the requirement allows for flexibility, possible slippag e of 
large sites and for some permissions to lapse.  Since the start of the Local Plan period, 5,558 dwellings  have been granted  
planning permission, which have contributed towards meeting this  housing requirement. This leaves sites for 1,042 dwellings to 
be identified …… 
 
 
HS1 Justification  
Para 7.18  
Page 54  
 The number of dwellings apportioned to Harlow in the 2017 update is was 7,409 which equates to 337 dwellings per annum over 
the Local Plan period. This figure is was used as the basis for the OAHN in when preparing  the Local Plan.   
 
 
HS1 Justification  
New para after 7.18  
Page 54  However, in June 2020, the Office for National Statistics published more up to date 2018 -based household projections  which 
form the latest available starting point to estimate housing need.   Using these lower projections  as the starting point but adjust ed 
for longer term migration trends, suppressed household formation and market signals , the 2020 SHMA update  indicates  the 
OAHN for the HMA as a whole is 48,9 15 dwellings and within this 6, 820 dwellings for Harlow.  
     
HS1 Justification  
Para 7.23  
Page 55  ….The requirement is 1,800  2,380  above the OAHN identified in the 2017 SHMA  2020 SHMA update  to meet Harlow’s 
affordable housing and regeneration needs, to help meet the wider needs of the Housing Market Area , and provides an 
additional buffer….  
 5 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
HS1 Implementation  
New paras after para 
7.24  
Page 56  National planning policies require a five -year supply of deliverable housing sites on adoption of the Local Plan and subsequently . 
 
To ensure that a five -year supply is achieved, a stepped requirement  is proposed for the Local Plan period. The need for a 
stepped requirement  arises because a significant number of homes will be delivered on large residential sites at Newha ll, the 
Strategic Housing Site East of Harlow and at the Princess Alexandra Hospital. These  will be delivered in the later part of the 
Local Plan period.  
 
As Harlow is a former New Town with tightly -drawn boundaries and a planned nature, with distinctive G reen Wedges which are 
uniquely important to the district’s distinctive green character, there is less scope to deliver housing sites  at an early date  to fulfil 
a five -year housing land supply as may be the case in a large district.  
 
A requirement  of 361 dwellings per annum has therefore, been identified for the period of 2011/12 to 2023/24. Using this figure to 
calculate under -supply from previous years and applying a 20% buffer will deliver a n initial  six-year supply of deliverable dwellings 
to comply with national planning policies. From 2024/25 to the end of the Local Plan period, an increased requirement  of 501 
dwellings per annum has been set to meet the 9,200 dwelling requirement overall (see Appendices 1 and 2 for the supply 
calculation and anticipated trajectory ). 6 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
MM3  Policy HS2  
Page 57  In addition to the Strategic Housing Site East of Harlow (Policy HS3), to meet the housing requirement of 9,200* dwellings during 
the Local Plan period, the following sites are allocated.  
 
 
 
REF.  LOCATION  DWELLING 
CAPACITY  
1 Princess Alexandra Hospital   650 550 
2 The Stow Service Bays  70 
3  Land east of Katherines Way, west of Deer Park  69 
4 3 Lister House,  Staple Tye Mews, Staple Tye Depot and  
The Gateway Nursery  42 30 
5  South of Clifton Hatch  36 
6 4 Riddings Lane  35 
7  Kingsmoor Recreation Centre  35 
8 5 The Evangelical Lutheran Church, Tawneys Road  35 
9  Land east of 144 -154 Fennells  23 
10 6 Pollard Hatch plus garages and adjacent land  20 
11  Land between Second Avenue and St. Andrews Meadow  16 
12 7 Coppice Hatch and garages  16 
13 8 Sherards House  15 
14 9 Elm Hatch and public house  13 
15  Playground west of 93 – 100 Jocelyns  12 
16 10 Fishers Hatch  10 
17 11 Slacksbury  Hatch and associated garages  10 
18 12 Garage blocks adjacent to Nicholls Tower  10 
19 13 Stewards Farm  10 
20  Land between Barn Mead and Five Acres  10 
21 14 Pypers Hatch  10 
 Total Dwellings Allocated  1,147  834 
 
 
 
See changes to Policies Map in separate schedule  7 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
MM4  Policy HS3  
Page 58 -59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(continues on next 
page)   Developers must produce a Strategic Master Plan based on in general conformity with the Harlow and Gilston Garden Town 
Charter  Design Guide and in partnership with….  
 
The development must:  
 
(a) provide integrated, well -planned and sustainable development that reflects the overarching design principles of the Harlow 
and Gilston Garden Town Spatial  Vision and Design Charter  Guide ; 
 
 (b) include the provision of Green Wedges and Green Fingers, (incorporating public natural/semi -natural  open space ) within the 
development to link with the existing network of Green Wedges and Green Fingers in the district  and opportunities to enhance 
the biodiversity of the area ; 
 
(c)  provide local highway solutions to address the impact on the wider strategic road network, (including necessary links to 
the new Junction 7a on the M11);  
 
(d) include the provision of direct walk/cycle/bus access  and link to the Newhall site as part of the Sustainable Transport 
Corridor;  
 
(e) provide footpaths, cycleways and bridleways within the development and link them to the existing Harlow network and 
adjacent networks in the Epping Forest District;  
 
(f) prov ide necessary  community  infrastructure, including, but not limited to ,: 
(i)  a new primary school of at least 2.9ha site area;  
(ii)  in addition to any necessary contributions, the provision of land for at least 10ha for a secondary school if required by the 
Strategic Master Plan;  
(iii)  child care and Early Years  provision ; 
(iv) youth services;  
(v)  healthcare facilities;  
(vi)  multi -purpose community space and facilities;  
(vii)  allotment  provision ; 
(viii) indoor and outdoor sports facilities, which may be shared -use; 
(ix)  neighbourhood equipped areas for play and locally equipped areas for play.  
health centres and education facilities , as set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP);  
 8 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
MM4  
cont.  Policy HS3  
Page 58 -59 
cont.  (d)  provide footpaths, cycleways and bridleways within the development and link them to the existing Harlow network  
(e)provide indoor and outdoor sports facilities, which may be shared -use, neighbourhood equipped areas for pla y and locally 
equipped areas for play;  
(g)  provide for appropriate local retail facilities, similar to  Neighbourhood Centres (incorporating an element of employment 
use) and Hatches elsewhere in Harlow;  
 
(g)  provide for appropriate community facilities as set out in the IDP such allotment provision, youth services and libraries;  
 
 
 (h) a Heritage Impact A ssessment will be required to inform the design of the Garden Town Community to ensure heritage 
assets within and surrounding the site are conserved or enhanced and the proposed development will not cause harm to the 
significance of a heritage asset or its  setting . Only where harm cannot be avoided should appropriate mitigation measures be 
incorporated into the design as identified through the Heritage Impact Assessm ent; 
 
 (i) be designed sensitively to take full account of topography and landform;   
 
 (j) provide sustainable drainage solutions and flood mitigation measures for areas of the site which are identified in the Stra tegic 
Flood Risk Assessment;  
 
(k) provide satisfactory water supply and waste water network infrastructure for occupants;  
 
(l) provide and contribute to public art within the development; and  
 
(m) include any measures necessary to safeguard wildlife sites beyond the district boundary in accordance with Policy WE 3a; 
 
Infrastructure, including social infrastructure, must be delivered at a pace which meets the needs of the proposed developmen t 
throughout the construction of the site.  
 
Any application for development on the site i n the form of individual or part/phased development will be assessed on  should be 
in general conformity with a Strategic Master Plan which has been endorsed by the Council as well as  the Harlow and Gilston  
Garden Town Charter  Design Guide .  
 
Developers will be expected to make a fair and reasonable  contribut eion towards  the strategic highway and other infrastructure 
requirements set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  proportionate with the impact that the development would have on them.  9 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
MM4 
cont.  HS3 Implementation  
New para after para 
7.43 
Page 60  The Strategic Housing Site East of Harlow forms part of a wider Garden Town Community, the northern part of which has been 
proposed for allocat ion in the emerging Epping Forest District Local  Plan for 750 dwellings, which will be subject to the 
preparation  of a Strategic Master Plan. With regards to part e(ii) of Policy HS3, if the Strategic Master Plan indicates that the 
secondary school is not required within the Harlow district part of the site, then consideration will be given to appropriate  
alternative  development and associated infrastructure having regard to the policies in the Local Plan, and the balance of uses 
within the Strategic Site as a whole.  
CHAPTER 8 
MM5  Policy ED1  
Page 65  
 
 ….up to 18.8 ha of land for  B1 (a, b and c)  uses will be delivered  is allocated  at Harlow Business Park at The Pinnacles and at 
the Harlow Enterprise Zone at London Road.  
 
Proposals for non -B1 use on these sites will require strong justification.   
 
A further 2.2 ha of land will be delivered for employment uses (B1a, B1b, B1c, B2 and B8)   at Templefields.  
 
Table unchanged  
TOTAL EMPLOYMENT PROVISION     20 ha    21 ha   
 
 
ED1 Justification  
Para 8.7  
Page 65  
 
Para 8.10  
Page 66  
 
Para 8.11  
Page 66  
 ……expansion of Princess Alexandra Hospital will strengthen these growth sectors. London Road, which forms part of the 
Enterprise Zone, has been specifically identified to facilitate the Research and Development sector of the local economy. 
Warehouse and ge neral industrial uses on this site will therefore  require strong justification . 
 
….this concluded that 10 to 24 ha of land for  office s floorspace  (B1a)  and 68 ha of for industrial uses  floorspace  (B1b, B1c, B2 
and B8)  should be planned for during the period of 2016 to 2033.  
  
For Harlow, the document identified the need to plan for a further 2 to 4 ha of land for office s floorspace  (B1a)  and 16 ha of for 
industrial uses  floorspace  (B1b, B1c, B2 and B8)  between 2016 and 2033.  
 
….in order to develop the Economic and Prosperity Strategy  for Harlow and to reflect the Harlow Economic Development 
Strategy 2017  to satisfy the strategic demand  for growth sectors in the Garden Town. …   
 10 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
Policy ED2  
Page 67  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ED2 Protecting Existing Employment Floorspace  Areas  
 
Existing strategic  e Employment sites Areas  at The Pinnacles, Templefields, and London Road  Burnt Mill, Staple Tye, Bush Fair 
and Church Langley  will be retained and enhanced for a mix of office, industrial and warehouse uses and other associated 
activities in accordance with Policy PR1 .  
 
The Enterprise Zone at London Road will facilitate the Research and Development Sector and other associated a ctivities. 
Employment uses which are not related to the Research and Development sector will therefore require strong justification.  
 
Grow -on space will be supported on existing allocated  e Employment sites Areas  and on future employment sites identified a t 
The Pinnacles (ED 1-01) and Templefields (ED 1-03).  
 
Neighbourhood Service Areas at The Stow, Bush Fair and Staple Tye  will be protected in accordance with Policy PR2  and the 
provision of……  
 
Existing employment sites and Neighbourhood Service Areas are identified on the Policies Map.  In all the above cases, 
developers will be expected to work with Broadband service providers to ensure that the provision of future proofed high spee d 
Broadband infrastructure is available to occupiers and this should be by fibre connection wherever possible.  
 
See change to Policies Map in separate schedule.  
 
ED2 Justification  
Para 8.16  
Page 67  
 The district’s existing eEmployment aAreas and Neighbourhood Service Areas, as set out in this policy at Templefields, London 
Road and The Pinnacles  and shown on the Policies Map,  continue to make an important contribution………….  
…..….The Council will continue to implement the masterplan for London R oad. In respect of London Road North, this policy will 
ensure that the site continues to deliver Research and Development uses to support the overall economic development strategy 
for Harlow.  The Local Development Order for London Road North lists development uses permitted on the site , other uses will 
require strong justification.     
 
MM5  
cont.  ED2 Justification  
New para after 8.17  
Page 68  
 To continue to support existing knowledge -based industries, and to promote the development of new ones such as creative 
industries, high speed broadband is, therefore essential. Policy ED2, along with Policy IN4, aims to improve and secure the 
delivery of high speed broadband infrastructure.  
 
ED2 Implementation  
New para after  
para 8.19  
Page 68  
 
 
 When submitting an application, developers for new Employment Areas will be expected to provide information to demonstrate 
how they have sought to secure high speed broadband provision as part of their proposals.  11 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
CHAPTER 10 
MM6  Policy WE1  
Page 81  Changes to Green Belt designation – see changes to Policies Map in separate  schedule  
WE1 Justification  
New para after para 
10.8 
Page 81 In addition to the release  of the land for the S trategic Housing Site East of Harlow from the Green Belt, further minor changes to 
the Green Belt boundaries have been made to take account of a.) the proposed Garden Town Community in the Epping Forest 
district west of Harlow ; b.) existing development  in the Green Belt; and c.)  to establish stronger, more clearly defined boundaries 
following ph ysical features on the ground. These changes all accord with national planning policies, including meet ing the 
except ional circumstances required for changing Green Belt boundaries . 
MM7  Policy WE1  Changes to Green Wedge and Green Finger designation – see changes to Policies Map in separate schedule  
MM8  Policy WE2   
Page 84  
 WE2 Green Belt, Green Wedges and Green Fingers  
 
Harlow is surrounded by Green Belt and  has a network of Green Wedges and Green Fingers allocated on the Policies Map.  
 
The purposes  of the Green Belt are to:  
• check the unrestricted sprawl of large built -up areas;  
• prevent neighbouring towns merging into one another;  
• assist in safeguarding the countryside from development;  
• preserve the setting and special character of historic towns, and  
• assist in urban regeneration by encouraging the recycling of derelict and other ur ban land.     
 
The roles of the Green Wedges are to:…….  
 
………(b)  provide Green Infrastructure, including open spaces for sport, recreation and quiet contemplation, ; wildlife corridors, ; 
footpaths, cycleways and bridleways, ; and rivers, canals, ponds, lakes and other bodies of water ;…..…….  
 
…….. The roles of the Green Fingers are to:…………  
 
……..( b) provide Green Infrastructure, including wildlife corridors, ; footpaths, cycleways and bridleways; and rivers, canals, 
ponds, lakes and other bodies of water; ………… 12 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
MM9  Policy WE3   
Page 86  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(continues on next 
page)  
 General Strategy for Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
 
All biodiversity and geodiversity assets in the district will be preserved and enhanced. Assets of sufficient importance have  a 
designation. The types of asset designations are:  
 
(a)  National designations (e.g. Sites of Special Scientific Interest)  
(b)  Local designations (e.g. Local Wildlife Site or Local Nature Reserve)  
(c)  Ancient woodland  
(d) Aged or veteran trees outside ancient woodland  
 
Nationally and locally designated assets are identified on the Policies Map.  
 
Internationally Designated Wildlife  Sites  
  
1. Development proposals which may have an adverse impact on any internationally designated wildlife site, either alone or in -
combination, must satisfy the requirements of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations, determining site -specific 
impacts and avoiding or mitigating against impacts identified.  
 
Nationally Designated Wildlife sites  
  
2.  Development which would harm the nature conservation or geological interest of a nationally important wildlife site, as sh own 
on the Policies Map, will not be supported, unless:  
  
(a) it is required in connection with the management or conservation of the site; or  
  
(b) the development provides appropriate avoidance or mitigation measures and,as a last resort, provides comp ensation to offset 
any adverse impacts on the interest features of the site; or  
  
(c) there are imperative reasons of overriding public interest for the development; and  
  
(d) there is no alternative to the development.  
 13 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
MM9  
cont.  Policy WE3   
Page 86  
cont.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Compensation for the harm will be required.  
  
Locally Designated Sites of Wildlife Value  
  
3. Development on, or which negatively affects, a Local Wildlife Site or Local Nature Reserve, as shown on the Policies Map, w ill 
not be supported unless:  
  
(a) local development needs significantly outweigh the nature conservation value of the site; and  
  
(b) the development provides appropriate avoidance or mitigation and, as a last resort, provides compensation measures to off set 
any detriment to the nature conservation interest on the site.  
WE3 Implementation  
New para after  
para 10.26  
Page 86  
 Designated biodiversity and geodiversity assets are allocated  on the Policies Map. The order of asset type follows the hierarchy 
in this policy (i.e. within the district Sites of Special Scientific Interest are the highest order asset type). Non-designated assets of 
biodiversity and geodiversity importance, which extend the geodiversity and network of biodiversity and open spaces across th e 
district, are identified in Evidence Base studies.  
 
WE3 Implementation  
Para 10.27  
Page 86  ……in accordance with their level of international,  national, regional or local importance.  
MM10  
 Policy WE3a (n ew 
Policy after WE 3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(continues on next 
page)  WE3a Safeguarding Wildlife Sites beyond the District Boundary   
 
Development in the plan area, either alone or in combination with other plans or projects, may have an adverse effect on the 
integrity of the Epping Forest Special Area of Conservation (SAC) as a result of disturbance from recreational activities or air 
pollution from increased vehicle movements.                                                                                                       
 
Where significant effects on the Epping Forest SAC alone or in combination are likely, a project level Habitats Regulation 
Assessment may be required.   
 
Development may also have an adverse effect on Hatfield Forest Site of Special Scientific Interest (SS SI) as a result of 
disturbance from recreational activities.  
 
In relation to Epping Forest and/or Hatfield Forest, development will be required if necessary to include avoidance or mitiga tion 
measures as set out in the respective Mitigation Strategies to b e adopted by the Council which may include:  
 
(a) provision of informal greenspace for recreation within the application site  
 
(b) provision, or a contribution towards, suitable alternative natural greenspace off -site 
 14 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
MM10  
cont.  Policy WE3a (n ew 
Policy after WE 3) 
cont.  
 
 
 
 
 
  (c) the improvement of existing nearby recreational opportunities   
 
(d) financial contributions towards strategic access management measures in Epping Forest or Hatfield Forest as appropriate  
 
(e) financial contributions or other measures to improve air quality in Epping Forest  
 
(f) monitoring of the impacts of new development on these wildlife sites to inform the refinement of any necessary mitigation 
requirements.  
 
Where necessary, contributions towards the measures set out in the Epping Forest Mitigation Strategy will be sought from 
developments within the Epping Forest Recreational Zone of Influence (ZOI) in order to mitigate and avoid in -combination effects 
on the Epping Forest Special Area of Conservation (SAC). If necessary c ontributions will also be sought to address any in -
combination air pollution impacts .   
 
Policy WE3a  
Justification  Whilst there are no European designated sites within the district boundary, there are three which are located within sufficie nt 
proximity that there could be impact pathways arising from development in the Local Plan such that th e integrity of the sites 
could be affected. These are Epping Forest SAC , Wormley -Hoddes donpark Woods SAC and the Lee Valley SPA/Ramsar site. 
However, of these the habitats regulation assessment produced in support of the plan demonstrates that only in the case of 
Epping Forest SAC is an adverse effect likely unless satisfactory avoidance or mitigation is put in place.  Adverse effects may 
arise  due to disturbance from recreational activities as a result of the additional population in the area and air pollution from 
additional vehicle movements through the forest.  In addition, adverse effects may arise in the case of Hatfield Forest, a 
national ly designated SSSI, due to disturbance from recreational activities.  15 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
Policy WE3a  
Implementation  A visitor survey  undertaken in 2017 found  that 75% of visitors to Epping Forest arise from within 6.2 km of its boundary which 
can be considered the core recreational catchment area or ‘zone of influence’. This only involves a small part of the south o f the 
district.  In the case of Hatfield Fore st, however, the catchment area extends to 14.6 km, which includes the whole of the district 
and all four proposed Garden Town Communities.  Further visitor surveys will be undertaken from time to time for monitoring 
purposes  and may result  in changes to these zones of influence.     
 
In order to avoid potentially adverse effects on these two sites due to recreational pressure from new residents, the Council s 
concerned are working with Natural England and the site owners to develop suitable mitigation strategies which will be formally 
adopted as supplementary planning guidance in due course.  If necessary, new development in the district will be expected to 
include or provide the avoidance and/or mitigation measures set out in these strategie s which will be updated from time to time 
to take account of new scientific evidence or monitoring information.  In the case of the large housing site East of Harlow, which 
lies  outside the zone of influence of Epping Forest SAC but well within that of Ha tfield Forest SSSI, strategic green infrastructure 
will be required within the development to maximise its self -sufficiency for informal recreation and this may meet the necessary 
requirements.     
 
In terms of air quality, it is estimated that 99% of all additional vehicle movements through Epping Forest SAC during the pl an 
period will arise from growth in Epping Forest district rather than the neighbouring authorities including Harlow.  Natural E ngland 
agree that growth in Harlow district will have a small or negligible effect and in this instance it would be reasonable for a ir quality 
mitigation measures to be the responsibility of Epping Forest district.  Nevertheless, in case the position changes in future, 
criterion (d) is included in Policy WE 3a above.  
 
Policy WE3a will be implemented in the context of co -operation between the Councils and other bodies concerned with the 
protection of each site. Harlow Council is committed to this co -operation an d, following full discussion and agreement , will 
formally adopt supplementary planning guidance setting out any necessary requirements for development within its district.  
 
CHAPTER 11 
MM11  Policy SIR1   
Page 91  
 
 
 …….The  Policies Map identifies infrastructure items which require safeguarding or have a land use implication….  
 
See change to Policies Map in separate schedule.  
 
 
SIR1 Justification  
Para 11.18  
Page 93  
 The Princess Alexandra Hospital NHS Trust is currently considering options to meet its future service requirements including the 
potential option to relocate to an alternative location in the Harlow and Gilston Garden Town. Two potential sites are being 
considered, the first in the Gilston area to the north and the second to the east of Harlow within the Epping Forest district. The 
location will be determined through a Strategic Outline Business Case.  has approved a preferred way forward for the provision o f 
a new hospital. This option comprises the development of a new state of the art local acute hospital at land within the Eppin g 
Forest portion of the East of Harlow Garden Community.  
 16 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
SIR1 Justification  
New paras after para 
11.18  
Page 94  
 In the event that the Hospital is relocated, land at Princess Alexandra Hospital may be redeveloped for housing with a capaci ty of 
up to 550 homes (see Policy HS2). In the event that the Hospital is not relocated and re mains in situ, the redevelopment of the 
site for healthcare purposes will be supported and taken forward in accordance with the agreed master plan to be prepared by 
the Hospital Trust. Under the latter option, surplus land may be identified which could acc ommodate approximately 100 new 
homes. The purpose of the master plan would be to provide certainty for the Hospital Trust, to allow for the phased delivery of its 
strategic long -term objectives for healthcare provision and investment.  
 
New and improved healthcare facilities play an important role in sustaining the Harlow and Gilston Garden Town and the Counci l 
will work with the hospital and all relevant parties to help deliver this.  
 
SIR1 Justification  
New paras after para 
11.23  
Page 94 The Council will seek the best use of existing infrastructure as well as providing the best possible opportunity to provide 
additional infrastructure capacity. The Council also supports the use of smart energy solutions to support low carbon 
development s. Developments should consider the incorporation of energy storage, demand side response, smart metering and 
smart heating controls to optimise the efficient use of heating and power systems.  
 
The Council recognises that decarbonisation may lead to increased uptake of heat pumps, electric heating, electric vehicles and 
renewable energy.  Developments should seek to ensure that electrical infrastructure is designed to accommodate a future 
increase in electricity demand and renewable energy generation through appropriately sized substations and consideration of 
three phase supply to domestic properties.  
SIR1 Justification  
New para after para 
11.30  
Page 95  
 When there is a capacity constraint and improvements in off -site infrastructure are  not  programmed, planning permission will 
only be granted where the appropriate infrastructure improvements to the satisfaction of the relevant water and sewerage 
undertak er will be completed prior to occupation of the development.  
 
MM11  
cont.  SIR1 Implementation  
New para after 
para 11.34  
Page 96  Household Waste Facilities  
 
The Council will work together with Essex County Council to consider and deliver greater capacity, where appropriate, for the   
local  management  of  household  waste  which  serves Harlow. Collaboration will be required with Hertfordshire County Counc il 
in respect of waste needs for the wider Garden Town area. Any facilities should be of a sufficient size and capacity that meet s 
the needs of this growth and situated within an easily accessible location within the catchment areas of the new Garden Town 
comm unities.  
 
MM12  Policy SIR2   
Page 96  
 …… 
5 6. Cambridge Road where it enters Harlow from Hertfordshire to the east of the District  
6. 7. Vehicular and pedestrian access points to the north of the Town Centre  
7. 8. Vehicular and pedestrian access points at as you first enter the strategic employment sites    
 …… 
 17 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
CHAPTER 13 
MM13  Policy PL1  
Page 103  …..….(a) it is supported by a design rationale based on an understanding and analysis of local context and character, taking into 
consideration the adopted Harlow Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document (SPD), the Harlow and Gilston Garden 
Town Spatia l Vision and Design Charter Guide , the services and access chapter of the Essex Design Guide, and relevant 
national guidance;  
 
(b) it protects, enhances or improves local distinctiveness without restricting style and innovation , whilst  taking account of local 
character and context , including  patterns of development, urban form and landscape character, Green Infrastructure including 
trees and landscaping, building typology , detailing and materials front boundary treatments  and the histori c environment;  
 
(dc) it responds to the scale, height, massing, architectural detailing , and materials and front boundary treatments  of the 
surrounding area , and is visually attractive  and respects its context without restricting style and innovation ; 
 
(cd) it provides appropriate physical, legible and safe connections with surrounding streets, paths, neighbouring development 
and Green Infrastructure;  
……………….  
 
MM14  Policy PL3  
Page 105  
 
 New development will be expected to deliver high standards of sustainable design and construction and efficient energy usage , 
taking account of predicted changes to heating and cooling requirements as a result of climate change.  Such development will 
be supported where it meets or exceeds the minimum standards requir ed by Building Regulations.  
MM14  
cont.  PL3 Justification  
Para 13.16  
Page 105  
 This policy encourages applicants to consider the impact of their development and seek ways to address the effects, above and  
beyond those measures required by Building Regulations. The preferable amount by which the minimum Building Regulations 
standards should be exceeded is set out in the Implementation section of this policy, and is based on policy recommendations of 
the UK Green Building Council which were, in part, derived from the now -defunct Code for Sustainable Homes Level 4 standard.  
 
PL3 Justification  
New para after existing 
para 13.16  
Page 105  This policy assists in the delivery of the Local Plan Strategic Vision, which states that, by 2033, new development will miti gate 
and adapt to the effects of climate change. It also reflects le gislation enacted in 2019, which amends the Climate Change Act 
2008 so that, in 2050, UK greenhouse gas emissions are at least 100%  lower than the 1990 baseline , as opposed to the original 
Act which required a reduction of at least 80% . 
 
 18 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
PL3 Implementation  
Para 13.17  
Page 105  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Building Regulations set out the minimum requirements for the conservation of fuel and power.  Development will be 
encouraged to  exceed the minimum standards required by Building Regulations. Where exceeded, t he amount by which the 
minimum standards should be exceeded is preferably at least 19%. The Council supports development that follows the principles 
of sustainable constructio n, and encourages developers to deliver schemes which adopt a fabric -first approach to development 
and meet the performance and quality set by appropriate standards, such as Passivhaus, Home Quality Mark (HQM) and 
BREEAM UK New Construction 2018.  The asso ciated guidance suggests measures to reduce energy consumption and carbon 
dioxide emissions, which should include the consideration of:  
(a) appropriate layout and building orientation to maximise solar gain in the winter;  
(b) the use of Green Infrastructure, such as trees and rain gardens;  
(c) efficient use of all roof and vertical surfaces for the installation of low carbon technologies and green roofs;  
(d) integrating passive ventilation, such as wind catchers, or low energy options where mechanical ventilation or cooli ng is 
required;  
(e) generating energy from on -site renewable or low -carbon energy systems;  
(f) the use of local, sustainable and energy efficient materials; and  
(g) the re -use of existing resources.  
PL3 Implementation  
New paras after para 
13.17  
Page 105  
 
 
 
 
 
(continues on next 
page)  
 Development proposals must demonstrate how the reduction of energy consumption and carbon dioxide emissions is being 
considered. The wellbeing of building occupants must also be addressed within the design and layout, by minimising  risks of 
overheating and providing adequate daylight and ventilation.  These factors can be addressed by:  
 
(a) incorporating a range of natural heating and cooling measures as part of the design and layout, including passive 
ventilation (or low -energy op tions where mechanical cooling is required) and ensuring appropriate building layout and orientation;  
(b) incorporating the use of Green Infrastructure, such as trees and rain gardens;  
(c) including passive design measures such as window sizing, thermal m ass, building orientation and shading;  
(d) generating energy from on -site renewable or low -carbon energy systems, including on -site electricity generation for major 
development;  
(e) ensuring the efficient use of all roof and vertical surfaces for the insta llation of low carbon technologies and green roofs;  
 19 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
MM14  
cont.  PL3 Implementation  
New paras after para 
13.17  
Page 105  
cont.  
  (f) considering room layout, depth, height and window opening for optimum daylighting.  
(g) evaluating the risk of overheating and evidencing through modelling to support the design decisions, such as the use of 
dynamic simulation and thermal modelling to analyse a building’s performance in terms of energy usage and internal 
temperatures;  
(h) maintaining good indoor air quality by providing sufficient ventilation to purge any pollutants such as emissions of 
formaldehyde & volatile organic compounds (VOCs) from building materials and surface finishes, as well as stale air from othe r 
activities suc h as cooking, bathing, etc.;  
(i) using local, sustainable and energy -efficient construction materials which consider adaptation to and mitigation of the 
impacts of climate change;  
(j)  re-using existing resources.  
 
Where a low -carbon district heating sche me is proposed, the Council will expect the scheme to demonstrate that any proposed 
heating and cooling systems have been selected in line with the following order of preference:   
 
(a) if possible, connection with heat distribution networks which exist at the time;  
(b) site-wide heat network fuelled by renewable energy sources;  
(c) communal network fuelled by renewable energy sources;  
(d) individual Air Source Heat Pump.  
MM15  PL3a Green Belt (new 
policy before PL4  on 
Page 106)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(continues on next 
page)  
 Development on land designated as Green Belt will be severely restricted to ensure it continues to fulfil the five purposes o f the 
Green Belt.  The essential characteristics of Green Belts are their openness and their permanence.  Substantial weight will be 
given to any harm to the Green Belt when assessing planning applications.  
  
New buildings are inappropriate in the Green Belt with the following exceptions:  
a. buildings for agriculture and forestry ; 
b. appropriate facilities for  outdoor sport, outdoor recreation and cemeteries ; 
c. the extension and alteration of an existing building providing the original building is not disproportionately increased in 
size;  
d. a replacement building for the same use providing it is not material ly larger ; 
e. limited affordable ho using for local community needs.  
 
The following forms of development are not inappropriate providing they preserve the openness of the Green Belt and do not 
conflict with its purposes:  
a. limited infilling or the partial or complete redevelopment of previously developed land ; 
b. mineral extraction ; 
c. engineering operations ; 
d. local transport infrastructure which requires a Green Belt location ; 
e. the re -use of buildings of permanent and substantial construction ; 
f. development under a Community Right to Build Order . 
 20 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
MM1 5 
cont.  PL3a Green Belt (new 
policy before PL4  on 
Page 106)  
cont.  Other development is inappropriate development in the Green Belt and will only be permitted in very special circumstances.  
 
Such circumstances only exist if the potential harm to the Green Belt by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm, is 
clearl y outweighed by other considerations.  
 
Development must not adversely affect the role or function of adjacent land which forms part of a Green Wedge or Green Finger . 
PL3a Justification   
 The Green Belt is a national policy designation, the fundamental aim of which is to pr event unrestricted urban sprawl  as well as a 
number of other purposes as set out in national planning policies.  
 
Since the Ministry of Housing and Local Government Circular in 1955, which recommended that Local Planning Authorities 
should establish Green Belts, the Green Belt has had great importance attached to it by subsequent Governments. As such, it i s 
protected from inappropriate development through both national and local planning policies. The construction  of new buildings 
and other development which does not meet the criteria of this policy would, therefore, not be supported, unless very special  
circumstances exist.  
 
Harlow lies within the Metropolitan Green Belt which surrounds London and, although only a  small amount of designated land 
lies within the district boundary, its protection is important to preserve the character and setting of the town.  
 
The Green Belt links with the wide -ranging Green Infrastructure in the district, including the Green Wedges and Green Fingers. 
The Green Belt in Harlow also provides a physical link with the overall Green Belt and wider countryside in the surrounding 
Epping Forest and East Hertfordshire districts.  
 
The purpose of this policy is to continue to protect the Green B elt in Harlow from inappropriate development, as such 
development would conflict with the Green Belt purposes and be harmful to the Green Belt.  
 
As detailed in other Local Plan policies, Harlow’s Green Wedges and Green Fingers make a significant and impor tant 
contribution to the district’s Green Infrastructure, by providing a number of roles and functions for the benefits of visitor s, 
residents and wildlife.  
 
One of the functions is to provide access to wider countryside and other open spaces and, therefo re, most Green Belt land in 
Harlow adjoins, or is near to, land designated as Green Wedge or Green Finger. To assist with the protection of the Green 
Wedges and Green Fingers afforded by other Local Plan policies, this policy ensures that any development i n the Green Belt 
does not adversely affect the roles and functions of adjoining or nearby Green Wedge or Green Finger land.  21 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
MM15  
cont.  PL3a Implementation  The purposes of the Green Belt are set out in national planning policies, as follows:  
1. to check the unrestricted sprawl of large built -up areas;  
2. to prevent neighbouring towns merging into one another;  
3. to assist in safeguarding the countryside from encroachment;  
4. to preserve the setting and special character of historic towns; and  
5. to assist in urban regeneration, by encouraging the recycling of derelict and other urban land.  
 
Whilst these purposes are not weighted in terms of significance, national planning policies recognise that the fundamental ai m of 
the Green Belt is to provide permanently open land to prevent unrestricted urban sprawl.  
 
Small -scale development can include householder applications, sports related development, recreation, cemeteries and 
community uses.  
 
For development relating to renewable energy, v ery special circumstances may include the wider environmental benefits 
associated with increased production of energy from renewable sources.  
 
MM16  Policy PL4  
Page 106  …………  
(b)      it is for essential  infrastructure , including  and local transport infrastructure , which  must  demonstrate s a requirement for a 
Green Wedge or Green Finger location and demonstrates it is of benefit to the wider community ; 
 
(c) it is for the alteration, extension or  replacement of buildings , provided that the new building/buildings are in the same use 
and not more harmful than what is being replaced ; 
 
(d) it constitutes strategic infrastructure development which can demonstrate  that it  is of benefit to the wider com munity.  
 
………….  
 
(e d) it demonstrates that the roles and functions and historic significance  of the Green Wedges and Green Fingers (as set out 
in policy WE2)  are preserved, enhanced and not adversely affected; and  
 
(f e) it demonstrates……………  
 
Where development includes replacement uses, redevelopment, extensions or alterations, it must meet all the following criteria:  
 
(f)  it does not result in a greater negative impact on the roles and functions of the Green Wedges and Green Fingers than 
the existi ng development;  
 
(g)  it does not result in disproportionate additions to the original building(s); and  
 
(h)  any replacement buildings must be in the same use.  22 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
MM17  Policy PL8   
Page 112  Development should contribute  to and enhance biodiversity or geodiversity assets , to ensure a net gain in biodiversity……  
 
……….The greater the significance of the asset, the greater the weight that is given to the asset’s protection.  Distinction will be 
made between the hierarchy of in ternational, national and locally designated and non -designated sites so that the level of 
protection afforded is consistent with their status.  
 
(a) it creates new biodiversity and protects geodiversity assets and creates links to  conserves and enhances  existing 
biodiversity and geodiversity assets;  
(b) where (a) is not possible , it includes the protection and enhancement of appropriate and effective measures to mitigate 
the negative effects on  existing biodiversity and geodiversity assets;  
(c) where there is a residual impact, it includes provision for compensatory measures to be secured off -site; 
(c d) where it can be demonstrated that protection and enhancement of it creates new biodiversity and creates links to  existing 
biodiversity and geodiversity assets . is not possible, appropriate measures must mitigate the negative effects on these assets  
MM18  Policy PL9  
Page 113  
 
 
 
 
 All development proposals must minimise and, where possible, reduce all forms of pollution and contamination. For air quality, 
the acceptability or otherwise of a proposal will be determined with reference to the relevant limit values or National Air Q uality 
Objectives  as they relate to human health or biodiversity …… 
 
……  Where it can be demonstrated that pollution and/or contamination is unavoidable, appropriate measures must mitigate the 
negative effects of the development. Where adequate mitigation cannot  be provided, development will not normally be permitted.  
PL9 Implementation  
Para 13.55   
Page 114  
 The Council may will require assessments of any pollution and/or contamination   a Preliminary Risk Assessment  of land 
considered to be contaminated to be undertaken and submitted, which identify any existing pollution and/or contamination, and 
the impacts of the development and any necessary mitigation and/or compensatory measures. …..  
……The Council may also impos e conditions to control and manage pollution and contamination levels. Further investigations, 
assessments, long -term maintenance regimes and validation reports may also be required if land is  
contaminated.  
 
PL9 Implementation  
New para after  
para 13.55  
Page 114  Where contaminated sites have the potential to mobilise  contaminants, or where there is a high -risk development  proposal within 
a vulnerable ground water area, mitigation  
measures must ensure the risks to groundwater are  minimised.  
 
 23 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
MM19  Policy PL10  
Page 114 -115 
 …..14. Water Quality  
Development must not adversely affect  cause deterioration to water quality, including quality of waterways and other bodies of 
water, identified Source Protection Zones (SPZ), Aquifers and all other groundwater. Development must aim to improve such 
water quality.  
 
New development adjacent to water courses should see k to include restoration and deculverting. The culverting of water courses 
should be avoided. Where the applicant can demonstrate that deculverting or other river enhancements are unfeasible, a 
financial contribution will be sought to restore another secti on of the same watercourse.  
 
New development adjacent to designated main rivers must provide and maintain an undeveloped buffer zone, of at least eight 
metres, to the watercourse. Such development must also include a long -term scheme to protect and enhance  the conservation 
value of the watercourse.  
 
 
…..32(a) it must not increase the risk of flooding elsewhere and must aim to reduce flood risk overall ; …..  
…..32 (c) flood  finished floor levels of development in Flood Zones 2 and 3 should be situated above the 1% (1 in 100 years) 
plus climate change predicted maximum water level, plus a minimum watertight depth finished floor level of 300mm above the 
normal  predicted water level; …..  
…..2 (d) proposed development in Flood Zone 3b must be ‘water compatible’ or ‘essential’ development ….. 
…..32 (gh) flood flow routes should be preserved  configured to enable surface water to drain ;….. 
…..32 (hi) where necessary, planning permission will be cond itional upon flood protection and/or runoff control measures being  
operative before other works.  the submission and approval of a drainage management strategy that addresses all forms of flood 
risk. 
 
Development within identified Critical Drainage Areas ma y, 
depending on the outcomes of a specific flood risk assessment, be required to contribute to funding for the delivery of appro priate 
flood alleviation schemes …… 
 
 
…..4 3 Waste Water and Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS)  
 
Development proposals should identify how there is sufficient surface water, foul drainage and treatment capacity which can s erve 
the development. Surface and foul water systems must be separate.  
 
The use of SuDS  in all development proposals, including the retrofitting of SuDS, is encouraged and will be supported. Where 
SuDS are required, the drainage scheme must meet the following criteria:……  
 
……… 4 3 (c) achieve  greenfield  runoff rates in line with the guidance o f the non -statutory technical standards for sustainable 
drainage ;…….  24 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
MM19 
cont.  PL10 Justification  
Para 13.57   
Page 116  
 
 
 This policy will ensure that the quality of drinking water is maintained, avoiding harmful polluting developments which affec t its 
quality. The requirement for development adjacent to designated main rivers to provide an undeveloped buffer zone will ensure  
the enhancement and protection of local biodiversity, provide space for flood water and provide access for maintenance. The 
necessity for a scheme to protect and  
enhance the conservation value of a watercourse, and to aim to improve water quality, is requ ired by the Water Framework 
Directive and/or the Tham es River Basin Management Plan.  
PL10 Justification  
New paras after para 
13.61  
Page 116  
 A number of Critical Drainage Areas have been identified  based on the results of the Harlow Surface Water Management Plan. 
The risk of surface water flooding in these areas needs to be reduced and drainage improved.  
 
The requirement that any proposed development in Flood Zone 3b must be ‘water compatible’ or ‘essential’ development is in 
accordance with nation al guidance and the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment.  
 
PL10 Implementation  
New paras after para 
13.63  
Page 116  
 The Water Cycle Study emphasises the importance of non - residential development meeting a level of BREEAM  compliance 
regarding water efficiency. The meeting of BREEAM 'Excellent' rating for water efficiency in non - residential buildings is, therefore, 
supported.  
 
Harlow contains a significant number of older buildings which  will not be as efficient with water use as modern buildings. 
Measures to retrofit such buildings to increase their energy efficiency are, therefore, encouraged.  
 
PL10 Implementation  
Para 13.67   
Page 117  …...(d) where possible, flood storage should be maximised through the use of  Green Infrastructure and by providing level - for-
level, volume -for-volume floodplain compensation for development within the 1 -in-100-year (plus climate change) extent . 
 
PL10 Implementation  
Para 13.68   
Page 117  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 In terms of surface water flooding, the general aim should be to  
discharge surface run off as high up the following hierarchy of drainage options as reasonably practicable:  
1. into the ground (infiltration);  
2. to a surface water body;  
3. to a surface water sewer, highway drain, or another drainage  system;  
4. to a combined sewer.  
1. store rainwater for later use;  
2. use infiltration techniques, such as porous surfaces in non - clay areas;  
3. attenuate rainwater in ponds or open water features for gradual release, inc luding the use of SuDS;  
4. attenuate rainwater by storing in tanks or sealed water features for gradual release, including the use of SuDS;  
5. discharge rainwater direct to a watercourse;  
6. discharge rainwater to a surface water sewer/drain;  
7. discharge rainwater to the combined sewer.  
 
 25 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
MM19 
cont.  PL10 Implementation  
New paras after para 
13.68  
Page 117  
 It is expected that space is created for flooding to occur by  restoring the functional floodplain, wherever possible, through a  
reduction of development footprint within Flood Zone 3b.  
 
Water -compatible development and essential development are  referred to in this policy. As defined by national guidance, water -
compatible development includes flood control infrastructure, sewage transmission and pumping stations, navigation facilities  
and water -based recreation (excluding sleeping accommodation). Essential development includes essential transport 
infrastructure which has to cross the area at risk, wind turbines and essential utility infrastructure, such as power station s, which 
requires the location for operational reasons.  
 
PL10 Implementation  
Para 13.72   
Page 117  
 ……The Essex SuDS Design Guide provides guidance on local  
standards for water quality and water quantity from developments and guidance on SuDS design. Developers should also 
consider national guidance on natural flood management techn iques and working with natural processes, which seek to protect, 
restore and emulate the natural functions of catchments, floodplains and rivers.  
 
PL10 Implementation  
New paras after  
para 13.72  
Page 117  All proposed development must engage the actions and  measures as specified by the Thames River Basin Management Plan, 
where feasibly possible and reasonable. Developers should liaise with the Environment Agency on such actions and measures.  
 
Appropriate arrangements for foul water must be identified where the local public sewer network does not have adequate  capacity. 
Developers must demonstrate how any upgrades of the existing sewerage network, to alleviate capacity issues, would be 
delivered in advance of the development. New development  must connect to mains foul drainage, but a foul drainage assessment 
may be required if non -mains foul  drainage is proposed.  
MM20  Policy PL11   
Page 118  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 …..(d) the extent to which the development would enhance , or better reveal, the significance of the heritage asset;…….  
 
……Where development affects a heritage asset or its setting, an appropriate management plan, which includes a Heritage 
Statement , must be in place  submitted to conserve and enhance the asset and its setting.  
 
Where  proposals affect or are adjacent to sites of known or suspected archaeological interest a desk -based or field evaluation 
should be submitted.  
 
Where the heritage asset is at risk and the development would conflict with other policies of the Local Plan, it must be 
demonstrated that the development represents the asset's optimum viable use and is necessary to secure the future 
conservation of the a sset and that any negative impacts are outweighed.  
 26 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
PL11 Implementation  
Para 13.79  
Page 119  National policies and guidance outline the rationale behind the designation of heritage assets, with special architectural or  historic 
interest being at the core of any designation decision . Proposals for enabling development would be assessed having regard to 
Historic England’s latest guidance on enabling development. National policies also set out the hierarchy of significance of historic 
assets.  
 
 
 
CHAPTER  14 
MM21  Policy H 3 
Page 127 ……..(e)  effective measures are proposed to minimise the effects of noise and disturbance.  
 
The effectiveness of this policy and the one -in-five restriction should be reviewed two years after the adoption of this Local Plan.  
 
MM22  Policy H5   
Page 129  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 All new dwellings should be at least Building Control Regulations Part M4(2) standard for accessible and adaptable homes to m eet 
the occupiers’ future needs.  
To ensure that new homes are both accessible and adaptable to meet the changing needs of occupants:  
 
(a) all new dwellings should be  at least Building Regulations Part M4(2) standard for accessible and adaptable homes; and  
 
(b) Iin addition,  major residential development , a suitable propor tion of  should provide  Building Control  Regulations  Part M4(3) 
standard dwellings for wheelchair users should be provided based on . The proportion is set out in  the latest Strategic Housing 
Market Assessment (SHMA) or other appropriate evidence directly re lated to the housing needs of Harlow.  
 
The provision of specialist housing developments will be supported on appropriate sites that will meet the needs of older peo ple 
and other groups.  
 
Only where circumstances exist where it can be demonstrated by the applicant that it is not practically achievable or financially 
viable to deliver this policy will new development be exempt from these requirements.  
H5 Justification  
New para before para 
14.23  
Page 129  
 National planning guidance states that a policy requiring wheelchair accessible dwellings should only be applied to those 
dwellings where the local authority is responsible for allocating or nominating a person to live in that dwelling. Consequent ly, the 
Council will negoti ate a proportion of wheelchair adaptable (market and affordable housing) and/or wheelchair accessible 
(affordable housing only) dwellings, as appropriate, based on the latest Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) or other 
additional appropriate eviden ce directly related to Harlow’s housing needs.  27 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
H5 Justification  
New paras after para 
14.25  
Page 129  Harlow has an ageing population, which has important implications for the future delivery of housing over the Local Plan peri od. 
Essex County Council (ECC) is the provider of social care in Harlow. ECC’s approach to Independent Living (Extra Care) 
encourag es the provision of specialist accommodation in Essex as a means by which older people can continue to live healthy 
and active lives within existing communities. For Harlow, the evidence base (the Housing LIN SHOP@ tool ) predicts a need for  
104 units of E xtra Care accommodation (i.e. ‘whole market demand’) in addition to the current Extra Care provision in the district. 
This provision is in addition to the requirement for other specialist accommodation such as sheltered housing.  
 
It is ECC’s intention to f acilitate the development of at least one 60 unit Extra Care scheme in the next five years in Harlow to meet 
Adult Social Care demand in the district. In addition to the Evidence Base mentioned previously, ECC will be publishing an 
updated Market Position Statement in 2019 setting out its intentions for the provision of Extra Care across the county, which will 
also inform this Local Plan. This approach to meeting the specialist accommodation needs of older people is intended to reduc e 
the demand for residen tial/nursing home care across the county. Extra Care schemes are part of a wider accommodation pathway 
to enable older people to remain as independent as possible, with the right housing and support to meet their needs.  
MM23  Policy H6  
Page 130  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A range of housing types and sizes, across a range of tenures, must be provided in major residential development.  
The Council will support community -led housing developments on appropriate sites.  On new housing developments, an 
appropriate mix of housing  tenures, types and sizes will be expected to be provided, in order to create balanced communities 
which reflect Harlow’s housing needs and local character. To achieve this, developers should take into account the latest Str ategic 
Housing Market Assessment , or other additional appropriate evidence directly related to Harlow’s housing needs.  
 
Where appropriate and in accordance with policies in the Local Plan, the following types of housing should be provided:  
 
(a) affordable housing;  
(b) accessible and adap table housing;  
(c) self-build and custom -build housing plots;  
(d) community -led housing.  
Fig. 14.1:  
H6 Justification  
Page 130  
 Range of housing types, sizes and tenures  
MARKET HOUSING  Dwellings  % 
Flat 1 Bedroom  170 6.8 6.6 
2+ Bedrooms  30 1.2  
House  2 Bedrooms  610 24.4 23.9 
3 Bedrooms  1,690  67.6 66.3 
4 Bedrooms  50 0.02 2.0 
5+ Bedrooms  - - 
Total Market Housing  2,550  
 AFFORDABLE  HOUSING  Dwellings  % 
Flat 1 Bedroom  100 2.9 3.0 
2+ Bedrooms  550 16.1 16.4 
House  2 Bedrooms  940 27.6 28.1 
3 Bedrooms  1,400  41.1 41.8 
4+ Bedrooms  360 10.5 10.7 
Total Affordable Housing  3,350  28 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
MM24  Policy H8  
Page 132  Major residential development must  provide  In residential developments of more than 10 dwellings,  it will be expected that  at least 
30% affordable housing is provided .  
 
Reduction of this percentage  will require an independent viability assessment.  may be permitted for viability reasons.  Any 
reduct ion or non -agreement between the developer and the Council will require an independent viability assessment.   
 
Affordable housing within a development will normally be provided on -site unless exceptional circumstances should require it to be 
provided elsewhere with the agreement of the Council. Applicants will be required to submit justification for off -site construction or 
financial contributions.  
 
Affordable housing provision will be expected to have regard to the recommended tenure mix iden tified in the latest Evidence 
Base on housing need and affordable housing products defined in current national planning policies.  
 
Affordable housing will be incorporated into the overall design layout to avoid significant clustering of affordable housing.  The 
design of affordable housing should make it indisti nguishable from market housing.  
 
Legal agreements with the Council will ensure that affordable housing benefits, for both affordable rented and intermediate 
housing, are secured for first and subsequent occupiers and retained as affordable.  
MM25  Policy H9  
Page 133 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Development of housing sites greater than 50 dwellings must include 5% of serviced plots for self -build, as evidenced by the Self -
Build Register, unless such inclusion would render the development unviable.  
 
Housing sites of greater than 50 dwellings must include the provision of fully serviced plots for self or custom build housing  within 
each phase to ensure as far as possible the continuous availability of such plots throughout the development.   
 
The number  of such plots is to be negotiated on a phase by phase basis given the evidence of the Self -Build Register at the time. 
The arrangements to secure these plots as part of the planning permission and for their marketing to prospective purchasers a re 
also to be agreed with the Council.  
 
Development of the serviced plots must commence within one year of the completion of the related phase of the allocated site.  If 
the serviced plots have not commenced within this timeframe, they may revert to conventional devel opment and marketing. Proof of 
adequate marketing of the plots to those on the self -build register will be required.  
 
All plots for self -build or custom -build housing must be fully serviced.  
 
Only where circumstances exist where it can be demonstrated by t he applicant that it is not practically achievable or financially 
viable to deliver this policy will new development be exempt from this requirement.  
 
The provision of such plots on sites of less than 50 dwellings will also be encouraged.  29 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
H9 Implementation  
Para 14.46  
Page 133  
 The Strategic policies indicate the sites that will contain an element of self -build or custom -build housing. In addition, other allocated 
sites will be expected to make a contribution to meet the demand.  Policy H6 identifies that developers must provide self -build and/or 
custom build housing as part of the dwelling mix.  The Council encourages developers and land owners to consult the Council ’s 
register  to establish the current demand for self -build and cu stom -housebuilding and meet that demand accordingly.  
CHAPTER 15 
MM26  Policy PR7  
Page 146  … 
(a) for units larger than 2,500 sq m, evidence has been provided to demonstrate that  the unit has been actively marketed to the 
satisfaction of the Council for  an agreed period of up to  at least two years  to ensure such large units are protected wherever 
possible;  
… 
CHAPTER 16 
MM2 7 Policy L1   
Page 153  L1 Open Spaces, Play Areas , Allotments  and Sporting Provision and Facilities in Major Development  
In major development and depending on demonstrable need,  public open space,  and play space, and, where appropriate , 
allotments and sporting provision and  facilities are required , together in all c ases with  to be provided (or upgraded in the case of 
existing facilities), along with   their ongoing  management and maintenance.  
MM28 Policy L3  
Page 155  … 
In major developments, public art should be provided and maintained. The form of public art in each case should be discussed 
with the Council at the earliest opportunity.  
… 
L3 Implementation  
New para before para  
16.16   
Page 155  
 If providing public art in major development would not be achievable  or viable , developers will be required to demonstrate this by 
submission of an independent viability appraisal or report . 
 30 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
MM29 Policy L4 Health and 
Wellbeing (new Policy)  
Page 156  The Council will seek to deliver development and growth which has a positive impact on the health and wellbeing of residents,  and 
address issues of health deprivation and health inequality in the district in accordance with the objectives of the Harlow He alth and 
Wellbeing Strategy and in response to the various Evidence Base sources.  
 
When promoting development, applicants should consider the impact on the health and wellbeing of new and existing residents, 
having regard to the following principles:  
 
(a) infrastructure required to encourage physical exercise, including sport and recreation facilities, walking, and cycling and 
bridleway routes;  
 
(b) the provision of accessible open space, Green Infrastructure and landscaping;  
 
(c) the provision of new o r enhanced healthcare facilities, working with the relevant health authorities;  
 
(d) the location and links between community facilities, homes, education and employment opportunities and sustainable travel 
options;  
 
(e) the provision of opportunities to g row food and avoiding unhealthy eating options; and  
 
(f) good quality design, having regard to the Essex Design Guide, which incorporates active design principles.  
 
Applicants may be required to prepare a Health Impact Assessment  to determine the extent o f potential health impacts from 
development proposals and set out appropriate mitigation measures.   
MM29 
cont.  
 L4 Justification  
Page 156  The Council wants all residents to live in environments that support good health and wellbeing and is committed to ensuring that 
residents benefit from the positive impacts that development and infrastructure growth can have on health and wellbeing. This  is 
further supported through the outcomes of the Harlow Health and Wellbeing Strategy. Along with polic ies in the Local Plan as a 
whole, this policy ensures that development proposals have considered measures that will improve the health and wellbeing of 
residents and not contribute towards further worsening health issues across the district.  
 
The principle s set out in this policy have been informed by the Town and Country Planning Association’s Guide 8: Creating health 
promoting environments, which states that good living environments can have a positive impact on health equalities. This poli cy 
has also bee n developed having regard to health and wellbeing issues identified in Harlow, as evidenced by the Essex Joint 
Strategic Needs Assessment and Public Health Profiles produced by Public Health England.  
 
The Harlow and Gilston  Garden Town partners are also developing a health framework using the NHS Healthy Towns Criteria, 
which will set out projects or interventions that could be enhanced in proposed developments and other opportunities for impr oving 
health and wellbeing acros s the Garden Town . Once complete it will be endorsed by the Garden Town local authorities and the 
Health and Wellbeing Boards.  31 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
L4 Implementation  
Page 156  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(continues on next 
page)  
 Implementation  
This policy refers to the Essex Design Guide which addresses health and wellbeing through the following sections:  
 
• Landscape and Greenspaces  
• Layout Design  
• Street and Roads  
• Internal Design Details  
 
• Architectural Details  
• Thematic sections dealing with:  ageing populations; digital and smart technology; active design; health & wellbeing itself  
 
The Essex Design Guide, alongside the Harlow Design Guide and the Harlow and Gilston Garde n Town Vision and Design Guide, 
should be used to help design good qualit y schemes that limit adverse impacts on and promote health and wellbeing in the first 
instance. These will help ensure that health and wellbeing are addressed at the earliest possible, conceptual / design stage of any 
development. This is necessary to help  enable smoother and timelier progress through the development and planning application 
process.  Accordingly, supporting master -planning  work for larger developments will be required to ensure that these matters are 
addressed from the outset.  
 
Where appro priate, this policy supports the use of Health Impact Assessments (HIA) for certain types of developments. HIAs allow 
the Council to assess the impact that the proposed development will have on the health and wellbeing of residents. These 
assessments ensur e that the Council can work with developers to optimise the positive impacts on the health and wellbeing of 
potential development and reduce, remove or mitigate any identified unintended consequences that may arise on health from the  
submitted proposal.  
Applicants should refer to the Essex wide HIA guidance, updated and agreed by the Essex local authorities, which assists in the  
preparation of HIAs.  
 
This policy also refers to active design principles which have been produced by Sport England in partnership  with Public Health 
England and is embedded in the Essex Design Guide. Active design is about designing and adapting where we live to encourage 
activity in everyday lives. It is a combination of ten principles that promote activity, health and stronger com munities through built 
design and is an important consideration for new development proposals.   
 
To support the Local Plan objective of improving the overall health and wellbeing of residents, the Harlow Health and Wellbei ng 
Strategy and the Essex Joint He alth and Wellbeing Strategy will be a material consideration in the determining of planning 
applications.  
 
 
 
 
 MM29  
cont.  L4 Implementation  
Page 156  
cont.  32 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
CHAPTER 17 
MM3 0 
 Policy IN1   
Page 159  
 1. Sustainable Accessibility  
All development should have regard to the modal hierarchy as set out in the Strategic Policies   below : 
 
TOP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BOTTOM  1. Opportunities to reduce travel 
demand and the need to travel  
2. Vulnerable road user needs such as 
pedestrians and cyclists  
 
3. Public transport passenger needs  
4. Powered two wheeler user needs 
such as mopeds and motorbikes  
 
5. Other motor vehicle user needs  
  
Major development proposals should i dentify  ways to reduce the use of the car and promote alternative ways to travel and this 
should be detailed in a supporting Travel Plan.  
 
New developments including redevelopments, changes of use and Town Centre and transport interchange improvements will be 
required to link to , or provide public transport services which  link, to the existing cycleway, footway, public right of way and 
bridleway network, and, where appropriate………..  
MM3 1 Policy IN2  
Page 161  Development must meet the following criteria:  
 
(a) it would not cause a severe residual cumulative  significant detrimental  impact on highway congestion and movement;  …… 
MM3 2 Policy IN4  
Page 163  1. Broadband Provision in Major Development  
Major development should contribute towards the provision of infrastructure suitable to enable the delivery of high -speed 
broadband services across the Harlow area. Developers will be expected to work with Broadband service providers to ensure that 
the pro vision of  future proofed high speed Broadband infrastructure is available, including connections to buildings, and this 
should be by fibre connection wherever possible …………..  
 
……..2. Broadband Infrastructure Development  
Broadband infrastructure development  must be accompanied by a report which meet s the following criteria:……….  
 33 
 Mod No.  Policy No./Paragraph 
No. 
 Modification  
 
MM3 3 Policy IN6  
Page 165  Planning permission will only be granted for development if the provision is secured for related infrastructure, affordable housing, 
services, facilities and environmental protection and any other planning contributions  which are necessary to make the 
development acceptable in planning terms, directly related to the de velopment, and fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind.  
 
The provision of such requirements shall be secured either as part of development proposals, through the use of conditions 
attached to planning permissions, or through planning obligations. W here it can be demonstrated that provision on -site is not 
feasible then provision elsewhere, or a financial  contribution towards this provision, will be required.  
 
Where a planning application extends beyond the district boundary, prior agreement for the p rovision and location of any 
necessary obligations will need to be obtained from relevant parties.  
 
Where the submission of a viability assessment has been justified, the Council will require an independent review of the viab ility of 
the scheme to be prepa red, the costs of which shall be met by the developer. Where it is accepted that planning contributions are 
reduced below the requirements set out in policies of the Local Plan, a viability review mechanism will be required to enable  a fully 
policy complia nt level of contributions to be achieved over the lifetime of the project. Other than in exceptional circumstances, 
viability assessments will be made publicly available.  
 
IN6 Implementation  
Para 17.34  
Page 165  
 Planning obligations are negotiated on a case -by-case basis. The approach to development viability, including how it should be 
taken into account in decision making, should be in accordance with national planning guidance. Viability review mechanisms w ill 
be considered on an individual basis taking into consideration matters such as the scale and phasing of the development and m ay 
be required both early and late in the development process. Further guidance will be available in an Adopted Planning Obligat ions 
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD). Where developers believe that viability is an issue, applicants will need to make a 
submission to the Council which should include the following:  
 
(a)  a financial viability appraisal;  
(b)  a statement outlining the  benefits and risks of not meeting the policy requirements and the site being delivered 
immediately.  
 
 
  34 
 MM34 – Appendix 1  
OLD TABLE:   
  
 
NEW TABLE:  
HOUSING LAND SUPPLY CALCULATION  
As at 31 March 2019, using the Sedgefield method.  
A. Requirement to be delivered in the plan period  9200  
B. Requirement to be delivered by 31 March 2019 (361 x 8)    2888  
C. Completions by 31 March 2019  2463  
D. Under supply since start of plan  425 
E. Further requirement to 31 March 2024 (361 x 5)  1805  
F. Total requirement to 31 March 2024 (D + E)  2230  
G. Requirement including 20% buffer  2676  
H. Annualised requirement (G ÷ 5)  535 
I. Supply from proposed allocations (19/20 to 23/24)  248 
J. Commitments as at 31 March 2019  2981  
K. Total supply as at 31 March 2019  3229  
L. Years supply (K ÷ H)  6.0 years  
  
35 
 MM35 – Appendix 2  
OLD GRAPH:  NEW GRAPH:  
  
 
