Hartlepool Local
Planning Framework
    Hartlepool Local Plan 
         May 2018Leader’s Foreword 
 
“As the Leader of Hartlepool Counc il I am proud to endorse this  Publication Local Plan for 
the Borough. The Local Plan is i ncredibly important as it will set the planning framework for 
the next 15 years. It contains policies that will help Hartlepo ol achieve its Vis ion for future 
growth and prosperity with a wide range and choice of homes and  jobs within a high 
quality environment.  Hartlepool has so much to offer, with its fantastic marina, a g reat coastline an d a beautiful 
rural environment on our doorstep . In recent years there have b een major achievements 
through regeneration, improvements  to local communities and inv estment in housing and 
new businesses.  The rebuilding of the Hartlepool C ollege of Further Education a nd major investment in 
Cleveland College of Art and Design , improvements to retail fac ilities and the transport 
interchange - all in the heart of  the town centre - are positiv e signs of how the town is 
moving forward. There has also been significant investment in o ther areas such as 
Queens Meadow Business Park where we have the most successful E nterprise Zone in 
the Tees Valley and a new Fire Brigade administrative and train ing centre being built.  
 Looking ahead, the town is well p laced to benefit from future g rowth in offshore wind and 
renewable energy and o ther ‘green’ industries and this Local Pl an will ensure that the 
planning framework supports this  ambition through land allocati ons and infrastructure 
provision.  I believe that the growth propos als within the Local Plan will benefit Hartlepool and its 
residents through attracting sign ificant inward investment and the associated jobs and 
opportunities that will result fr om growing our economy. I will  certainly be looking to secure 
the highest possible quality o f design and environment for all development within the 
Borough.  There are still many challenges  that need to be tackled, in par ticular the issues of empty 
homes, affordable homes, unemploy ment, improving leisure facili ties, vacant shops and 
environmental protection and en hancement. Hopefully this Local Plan will contribute 
towards achieving these aims al ongside other strategies which a re in place. 
 Hartlepool has a strong traditi on of working together in partne rship with the local 
community and with the private and public sector and this has s tood us in good stead in 
drawing together these planning policies. I believe that this L ocal Plan provides a strong 
and effective planning policy fram ework that will help the town  achieve its ambitions whilst 
providing protection to its most attractive and sensitive asset s including the historic 
environment and proud heritage.”  Councillor Christophe r Akers-Belcher 
Leader of Hartlepool Borough Council 
  LIST OF CONTENTS  
 
Chapter Section Page  
      1 Introduction 1  
      2 The Local Plan in Context 6  
      3 The Borough of Hartlepool 9  
      4 Spatial V ision, Themes and Objectives 14  
      5 
 The Presumption in Favour of Sustainable Development 
Policy SUS1: The Presumption in Favour of Sustainable 
Development 17 
17  
      6 The Locational Strategy 
Policy LS1 Locational Strategy 18 
25   
 
 
7 Minimising and Adapti ng to Climate Change 
Policy CC1: Minimising and adapting to Climate Change 
Policy CC2: Reducing and Mitigating Flood Risk 
Policy CC3: Renewable and Low C arbon Energy Generation         
Policy CC4: Strategic Wi nd Turbine Developments 
Policy CC5: Large Scale Solar Photovoltaic Developments 28 
33        
36 39 42 44  
 
    
8 
  Infrastructure 
Policy INF1: Sustainable Transport Network 
Policy INF2: Improving C onnectivity in Hartlepool  
Policy INF3: University Hospital of Hartlepool 
Policy INF4: Community Facilities Policy INF5: Telecommunications 46 
52 
52 57 57 60  
 
   
 
9 
 Quality of Place 
Policy QP1: Planning Obligations 
Policy QP2: Compulsory Purchase Orders Policy QP3: Location, Accessibili ty, Highway Safety and Parking  
Policy QP4: Layout and Design of Development Policy QP5: Safety and Security Policy QP6: Technical Matters Policy QP7: Energy Efficiency Policy QP8: Advertisements 62 
64 
65 68 72 74 76 79 81  
 
      
 
10 Housing 
Policy HSG1: New Housing Provision 
Policy HSG1a: Ensuring a Suffi cient Supply of Housing Land  
Policy HSG2: Overall Housing Mix Policy HSG3: Urban Local Plan Sites Policy HSG4: The South West Extens ion Strategic Housing Site 
Policy HSG5: High Tunstall Strategic Housing Site 
Policy HSG5a: Quarry F arm Housing Site 
Policy HSG6: Wynyard H ousing Developments 
Policy HSG7: Elwick Village Housing Development Policy HSG8: Hart Village Housing Developments Policy HSG9: Affordable Housing Policy HSG10: Housing Market Renewal   
Policy HSG11: Extensions  to Existing Dwellings 
Policy HSG12: Residential annexes Policy HSG13: Gypsy and Traveller Provision 82 
91 
91 95 96 99 103 104 109 112 114 117 118 119 120 122  
 
             
 
 Chapter Section Page  
11 Strengthening the Local Economy 
Policy EMP1: Prestige Employmen t Site Wynyard Business Park 
Policy EMP2: Queen’s Meadow Business Park Policy EMP3: General Employment Land Policy EMP4: Specialist Industries Policy EMP5: Safeguarded land for new Nuclear Power Station 
Policy EMP6: Underground Storage 123 
130 
131 133 135 138 138  
 
    
 
     12 Protecting, Managing and Enhancing the Rural Area 
Policy  RUR1: Developm ent in the Rural Area 
Policy  RUR2: New Dwellings O utside of Development Limits 
Policy  RUR3: Farm Diversification Policy  RUR4: Equestrian Development Policy  RUR5: Rural Tourism  Policy  RUR6: Rural Services 140 
144 
146 147 149 150 151  
 
    
 
13 Retail and Commercial Development 
Policy RC1: Retail and Commercial centre Hierarchy 
Policy RC2: The Town Centre Policy RC3: Innovati on and Skills Quarter 
Policy RC4: Avenue Road / Raby R oad Edge of Town Centre Area 
Policy RC5: The Brewery and Str anton Edge of Town Centre Area 
Policy RC6: East of Stranton Edge of Town Centre Area 
Policy RC7: Lynn Street E dge of Town Centre Area 
Policy RC8: Mill House Edge of Town Centre Area Policy RC9: Park Road Wes t Edge of Town Centre Area 
Policy RC10: West Victoria R oad Edge of Town Centre Area 
Policy RC11: York Road South Edge of Town Centre Area 
Policy RC12: The Marina Retail and Leisure Park Policy RC13: West of Marina Way Retail and Leisure Park 
Policy RC14: Trincomalee Whar f Retail and Leisure Park 
Policy RC15: Tees Bay Retail and Leisure Park Policy RC16: The Local Centres Policy RC17: Late Night Uses Area Policy RC18: Hot Food Takeaway Policy Policy RC19: Main Town Cent re Uses on Employment Land 
Policy RC20: Business Uses in the Home Policy RC21: Commercial Uses in Residential Areas 152 
158 
162 164 167 169 171 173 174 175 177 178 183 185 187 190 192 194 198 201 202 203  
 
                   
 
14 Leisure & Tourism Development 
Policy LT1: Leisure and Tourism  
Policy LT2: Tourism Deve lopment in the Marina 
Policy LT3: Development of Seaton Carew Policy LT4: Tourism Accommodation Policy LT5: Caravan Sites and Touring Caravan Sites 
Policy LT6: Business Touris m, Events and Conferencing 204 
208 
210 212 214 215 216  
 
    
 
 Chapter Section Page  
15 Historic Environment 
Policy HE1: Heritage Assets 
Policy HE2: Archaeology  Policy HE3: Conservation Areas Policy HE4: Listed Build ings and Structures 
Policy HE5: Locally Listed Buildings and Structures 
Policy HE6: Histori c Shopping Parades 
Policy HE7: Heritage at Risk 217 
221 
222 224 226 227 228 230  
 
     
 
16 Natural Environment and Green Networks 
Policy NE1: Natural Environment 
Policy NE2: Green Infrastructure Policy NE3: Green Wedges Policy NE4: Ecological Networks Policy NE5: Playing Fields Policy NE6: Protection of Incidental Open Space 
Policy NE7: Landscaping along main transport corridors 231 
243 
249 252 256 258 259 260  
 
     
 
 
  LIST OF SUPPORTING INFORMATION 
 
No List of Appendices Page  
1 Glossary of Terms 261  
2 List of Key National Guidance , Plans, Policies and Strategies  280  
3 List of Regional Plans, Policies, Guidance and Strategies 282   
4 List of Local Plans, Policie s, Guidance and Strategies 284  
5 List of Evidence Base Documents 285  
6 Sites of Nature Cons ervation Importance 287  
7 Regionally Important Geologica l/Geomorphologic Sites 289  
8 Buildings of Special Architectu ral or Historical Interest 290   
9 List of Local Centres in Hartlepool 294  
10 Existing and Potential Componen ts of an Ecological Network 2 95  
11a   Compatibility of Local Pl an allocations with Health & Saf ety Executive 
Consultation Zones for Major Ha zard Establishments and Major 
Accident Hazard pipelines 300  
11b Consultation Zones for Majo r Hazard Installations  306  
11c Consultation Zones for Major Accident Hazard Pipelines 307  
11d Consultation Zones for Nu clear Power Station 308  
12 The Monitoring Framework 309  
13 List of 2006 Hartlepool Local  Plan policies superseded by th is Local 
Plan 373  
14 Table 7 Methodology 377  
                    
 
No List of Charts Page  
1 Hartlepool Local Development Framework 2  
2 Key Stages Leading to Adopt ion of the Local Plan 3  
 
No List of Tables Page  
1 Hartlepool Key Facts 11  
2 Hartlepool SWOT Analysis 13  
3 Local Plan Objectives and Hartlepool Ambition 15  
4 Transport Challeng es and Ambitions of t he Tees Valley 46  
5 Key Utilities Issues 59  
6 Housing Target Breakdown 83  
7 Summary Demonstrating Supply o f Deliverable Housing Sites 86  
8 Future Housing Supply Over the Next 15 Years 87  
9 Housing Stock Mi x in the Borough 93  
10 Housing Mix Definitions 94  
11 Affordable Housing Definitions 115  
12 Recommendations from the Em ployment Land Review 127  
13 Retail & Commercial Centre mai n function, characteristics & unit size 154  
14 Retail & Commercial Centre Hie rarchy for main town centre us es 157  
15 Hierarchy of International, Nat ional and Locally Designated Sites 235  
16 Example of Ecosystem Service s applied to an area of Woodland  238  
17 Benefits of High Quality Green  Infrastructure Network 246  
 
   No List of Graphs Page  
1 Delivery Trajectory of Housi ng Sites over the next 15 years 9 0  
 
No Diagram Page 
1 Key Diagram 24 
2 The South West Extension 98  
3 High Tunstall Concept Plan 102  
4 Wynyard Concept Plan 108 
5 Edge of Town Centre Areas 165 
6 Retail and Leisure Parks 182  
7        Town Centre sub areas 197  
8 Ecological Networks  257  
        
  11. INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1 The Government has illustrat ed the importance of local auth orities having an up-
to-date Local Plan in place to help guide development. They hav e stated that 
local authorities must have “produced” a Local Plan by early 20 17 or risk being 
put into special measures and ha ving a Local Plan produced for the town by the 
Government. As such the local au thority has set out a delivery framework for the 
Local Plan within the Local Development Scheme which was update d in 
November 2016 to reflect a slight  delay in the production of th is Publication 
Local Plan. For clarity the plan period is 2016-31 (15 years) a nd housing 
completions from the start of April 2016 are taken into account .  
 
What is the Hartlepool Local Development Framework? 
1.2 The Hartlepool Local Developm ent Framework (HLDF) brings to gether and 
integrates policies for the us e and development of land with ot her policies and 
programmes which influence the nature of places and how they fu nction. 
Documents within the HLDF will ensure the most efficient use of  land by 
balancing competing demands in accordance with a clear, distinc tive and 
realistic vision of how the ar ea will develop and change within  a demonstrable 
context of sustainable development.  
 1.3 The Local Development Framework will comprise documents kno wn as 
Development Plan Documents (DPD`s)  (which includes neighbourhood plans)  
and Supplementary Planning Docum ents (SPD`s) (see Chart 1). 
These will form the statutory Development Plan for Hartlepool a nd will 
essentially replace the 2006 Hart lepool Local Plan. The Develop ment Plan 
Documents establish the main p olicy framework and must include:   
 A Local Plan setting out the spatial vision, spatial objective s and core 
strategic policies for the area; 
 DPDs containing waste and minerals policies; and 
 A Policies Map. 
 1.4 Currently the Borough Council  is working on a number of add itional documents 
within its LDF which are intend ed to provide further advice and  information to 
developers and decision makers, and are not intended as an undu e burden 
upon development. These include:  
 Residential Design SPD 
 Residential Extensions SPD 
 
1.5 The Borough Council has alr eady adopted the following docum ents within its 
LDF:  
 Transport Assessments & Trav el Plans SPD  (January 2010)  
 Statement of Community Invo lvement (SCI) (January 2010) 
 Tees Valley Joint Minerals & Waste DPDs (September 2011) 

 Green Infrastructure SPD (February 2014) 
 New Dwellings Outside of the Li mits to Development (August 201 5) 
 Seaton Carew Regenerati on SPD (September 2015) 
 Local Development Scheme (LDS) (October 2015) 
 Planning Obligations  SPD (November 2015) 
 Authorities Monitoring Report 2014/5 (endorsed December 2015) 2Chart 1: Hartlepool Local Development Framework 
 
                        
 
     
 
  
 
The Local Plan  
1.6 The Local Plan is the key Develo pment Plan Document within the Local 
Development Framework. The Local P lan sets out the spatial visi on and 
strategic objectives for the Boro ugh for the next 15 years. The  plan contains a 
suite of policies to assist in de livering the spatial vision an d objectives, all of the 
policies contained within the plan  are considered to be strateg ic policies.  It has 
been produced following earlier c onsultation on the Issues and Options 
Discussion Paper in 2014. Chart 2  illustrates the delivery stag es of the Local 
Plan through to adoption and is based on the timetable in the L ocal 
Development Scheme November 2016. 
 1.7 Several Neighbour hood Development Plans are currently being  progressed for 
different neighbourhoo d planning areas wit hin the borough (the Rural 
Neighbourhood Plan, the H eadland Neighbourhood  Plan and the Wyn yard 
Neighbourhood Plan).  Nei ghbourhood plans must be in general co nformity with 
the strategic policies of the Loc al Plan. All of the policies i n the Local Plan are  LOCAL DEVELOPMENT FRAMEWORK 
A portfolio of local development and other 
documents  
 Local Development Documents  Other 
Documents Development Plan 
Documents Supplementary Planning 
Documents Hartlepool Local Plan 
Tees Valley Minerals & Waste DPD 
Hartlepool Local Plan Policies Map 
Neighbourhood Plans 
Travel Plans and Transport 
Assessments SPD 
Hartle pool Green Infrastructure SPD 
Trees and Development SPD 
Planning Obligations SPD 
Shop Fronts SPD 
Residential Design SPD 
New Dwellings outside of 
Develo pment Limits SPD 
Seaton Carew Masterplan SPD 
Statement of Community Involvement 
Authorities Monitoring Report 
These documents will 
comprise the Development Plan for the area and ultimately replace the 
2006 Local Plan. These documents help to give further 
information and detail to support the Development Plan Documents. These 
Documents and the highlighted Development 
Plan 
Documents must be prepared.  3strategic policies. A neighbour hood plan attains the same legal  status as the 
Local Plan once it has been made. A t this point it comes into f orce as part of the 
statutory development plan. Appl ications for planning permissio n must be 
determined in accordance with the development plan, unless mate rial 
considerations indicate otherwise.  
 
 
1.8 The plan should be read as a whole. Each policy is accompan ied by a pre-
amble setting out the context to the policy.  
 
 
Chart 2: Key Stages Leading to the Adoption of the Local Plan ( estimated timescales 
as outlined in the Local Development Scheme) 
 
      
 
 
 
         
1.9 This Publication Local Plan takes account of consultation r esponses from the 
Preferred Options stage and also  other key strategies and progr ammes. The 
document also reflects national policy objectives including rec ent changes 
towards encouraging sustainable growth.
1 In particular the Publication Local 
Plan seeks to build on the unique issues and opportunities faci ng the Borough   
including expanding the town’s  economy, providing a range and c hoice of 
housing and improvin g and enhancing its na tural and heritage as sets.  
 
1.10 This Local Plan sets out clearly what kind of place the ar ea will be in the future, 
the changes that will be needed to  make this happen, and how th is will be 
achieved. It defines the spatial vision for the Borough as it i s anticipated to be by  
2031. This has been developed from  the vision of the Sustainabl e Community 
Strategy 2014:  
 
 “Hartlepool will be a thriving, respectful,  inclusive, healthy, ambitious and 
outward-looking community, in an attr active and safe environment, where 
everyone is able to rea lise their potential.”  
 
                                                           
1 Paragraph 14 of the National Pl anning Framework 2012 – The Pre sumption in Favour of Sustainable 
Development  Pre-Production 
and Evidence 
Gathering 
 
 
 
Nov 2013 Issues and 
Options 
Published 
 
 
 
May 2014 Preferred  
Options 
Published 
 
 
 
May 2016  
Preparation of 
Publication 
Document  
 
 
Sep-Oct 2016 
Submission of 
Local Plan to 
Secretary of 
State 
 
March 2017 Independent 
Examination of  
Local Plan 
 
 
March 2017 – 
March 2018 Inspector’s 
Report 
Published 
 
March 2018 Adoption of 
Local Plan 
  
 
May 2018 Consideration of 
Responses on 
Preferred 
Options   
Consultation 
  
Jul
y-September 
Consultation on 
Publication  
Document 
 
 
December 2016 
  41.11 The Local Plan establishes a spatial strategy, objectives and plann ing policies 
which will contribute towards the delivery of this vision by se tting the planning 
framework for development. The Local Plan needs to strike a bal ance between 
providing a level certainty fo r development whilst retaining an  e l e m e n t  o f  
flexibility to adapt to changing circumstances which may occur over the plan 
period. This document does however  identify all strategic devel opment locations 
and main development sites, however leaves flexibility over how  these can be 
developed subject to certain criteria. The sites are identified  on a Policies Map, 
which sits alongside the Local Plan. 
  
Supporting Documents 
1.12 This Publication Local Pl an has been guided by and is supp orted by a number 
of pieces of evidence base, inc luding but not limited to the fo llowing documents: 
 
 A  Sustainability Appraisal which shows how the policies in this Publication 
Local Plan meet our sustainabili ty objectives and has informed the 
preparation of the Local Plan to ensure it is the most appropri ate plan for the 
Borough;  
 
 A  Habitats Regulations Assessment  which assesses the impact of this 
Publication Local Plan on site s designated as of European impor tance for 
their nature conservation value; 
 
 A  Local  Infrastructure Plan which identifies infrastructure is required to 
support planned growth and developm ent, potential sources of fu nding, 
timescales and delivery responsibilities 
 
 A  Strategic Housing Market Assessment and Addendum which assesses 
the housing need and requirements across the various Wards with in the 
Borough and helps to establish the level of housing required ov er the plan 
period.   
 
 A  Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment which considers the 
appropriateness of sites put forwar d for consideration as housi ng sites. 
 
 A n  Employment Land Review which assesses the employment land within 
the Borough and assesse s the appropriateness of sites, level of  employment 
land and recommends a number of  de-allocations or re-allocation s to ensure 
the level of employment land allocated within the new Local Pla n is 
appropriate. 
 
 A  Open Space, Sport and Recreation Audit and Assessment  which 
assesses the provision of a range of types of open space across  t h e  
Borough. 
 
 A  Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment which assesses the 
need a demand for gypsy and traveller and travelling show peopl e 
accommodation over the plan period.  
 
 A  Consultation Statement which  outlines the consultation process 
undertaken previously to inform the preparation of this Local P lan.  5 
 
 
1.13 Copies of these docum ents are available at: 
 
Planning Services Civic Centre 
Victoria Road 
Hartlepool TS24 8AY 
 
1.14 They are also available to view at the Hartlepool Central Library on York Road or 
the branch libraries. Alternativel y they can be viewed on the B orough Council’s 
website:  
 
www.hartlepool.gov.uk  
 
  
Consultation Event 62.  THE LOCAL PLAN IN CONTEXT 
   
2.1 The Local Plan must reflect  national policy and should also  take account of 
other relevant policies from sub- regional and local strategies.  These form part 
of the evidence base and help inf orm the preparation of the Loc al Plan.  This 
Publication Local Plan has been prepared having regard to ensur ing viability 
and deliverability of development. 
 
National Planning Policy Context 
2.2 The Localism Act (2011) seeks to shift power from central g overnment to local 
councils, communities and individuals. The Act gives local comm unities 
greater control over what happens  in their area through the int roduction of 
Neighbourhood Plans, Neighbourhood Development Orders and Commu nity 
Right to Build Orders.  Such plans and/or orders will assist in influencing the 
future of the place people live and work, they will need to be in general 
compliance with the Local Plan and are expected to support grow th rather 
than being used as a mechani sm to prevent development.  The Borough 
Council is embracing the concep t of Neighbourhood Planning and there are 
currently three Neighbourhood Pl ans (NP) being developed; The R ural NP, 
The Headland NP and Wynyard NP. 
 2.3 The Localism Act also led to the abolition of Regional Plan ning in the form of 
the Regional Spatial Strategy (RSS). This has implications on c ertain  Local 
Plan policies, particularly in relation to housing targets, str ategic site 
allocations and renewable and energy efficiency requirements. L ocal 
authorities are able to determine their own targets and policie s, although these 
need to be justified by local e vidence. Although many of the pr inciples of the 
RSS are embraced within the Local Plan , in the case of housing targets 
Hartlepool Borough Council has r e-assessed its housing evidence  base which 
has led to a revision of its growth targets. These are explaine d in detail in the 
Housing Chapter of this document.  
  2.4 The Government is  promoting a strong ‘Planning  for Growth` agenda which 
seeks to encourage the planning syst em to support long term sus tainable 
growth particularly in helping to deliver new housing and econo mic growth.  
The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF)  consolidates this aim and 
establishes a presumption in f avour of sustainable development,  encouraging 
local authorities to plan positively for growth.  
 2.5 In further support of the economic growth agenda, in March 2010 the 
Government announced the introduc tion of a new generation of En terprise 
Zones (EZs). Enterprise Zones aim to encourage business develop ment by 
providing financial incentives a nd simplified planning regimes.  As part of the 
Tees Valley Enterprise Zone, thr ee sites within Hartlepool have  been given EZ 
status and Local Development Or ders have been prepared and adop
ted to 
provide a simplified planning process. These LDO’s were refresh ed in March 
2015 and will be in place for a further three years.  
 2.6 The Marine and Coastal Access Act (2009) requires local aut horities taking 
decisions that affect the UK’s mar ine areas to do so in accorda nce with the  7Government’s Marine Policy Stat ement and, once adopted, the rel evant 
Marine Plan. 
 
Sub Regional Policy Context 
2.7 The five Tees Valley local authorities work closely togethe r and alongside the 
Local Enterprise Partnership (L EP) and Tees Valley Combined Aut hority on a 
range of issues including plann ing policy, economic regeneratio n, 
infrastructure provision, housing matters and environmental con cerns. The five 
Tees Valley Authorities establis hed a Combined Authority on the  1st April 2016 
and will elect a Mayor in 2017. The Combined Authority will be a strategic 
authority with powers over transport, economic development and regeneration.  
 2.8 The Tees Valley Strategic Economic Strategy (2014) provides  a framework for 
economic growth for the sub-regi on, aiming to make the Tees Val ley more 
competitive on a national and int ernational basis. Two over-rid ing ambitions 
include the transition to a high value, low carbon economy and to create a 
more diversified and inclusive economy. It identifies key growt h sectors and 
highlights other conditions and in frastructure requirements tha t need to be 
addressed in order to achieve sub-regional growth.  
 2.9 The Tees Valley authorities and TVU have worked together to  prepare funding 
bids including an Enterprise Zone  submission, a green infrastru cture plan and 
a strategic infrastructure plan.  
 2.10 The Tees Valley authorities and TVU have also worked toget her to produce a 
joint Minerals and Waste Core Strategy and Site Allocations DPD . On an 
individual basis, neighbouring au thorities are engaged in regul ar liaison as 
part of their duty to cooperate and have bi-monthly meetings at  P l a n n i n g  
Policy Manager level to ensur e co-ordinated working. 
 
Local Policy Context 
2.11 At a local level the Local Plan has been informed by a ran ge of policies, 
strategies and evidence base r eports. The Sustainable Community  Strategy
2 
“Hartlepool’s Ambition 2014” sets t he overarching framework and  identifies the 
strategic policies and priorities to be pursued by the Borough Council and its 
partners. The Sustainable Communi ty Strategy sets specific aims  a n d  
priorities for Jobs and the Ec onomy, Lifelong Learning and Skil ls, Health and 
Well Being, Community Safety, E nvironment, Housing, Culture and  Leisure 
and Strengthening Communities. 
  2.12 An Economic Regeneration Strategy
3 (ERS) has been prepared and was 
endorsed in April 2014.  The ERS responds to the Economic Asses sment of 
the Borough and provides a clear  framework for economic growth,  
regeneration activities and skills development over the next 10  years. The 
ERS incorporates a three year act ion plan to 2017 which takes r ealistic 
account of available resources and reflects the policies includ ed in the  Local 
Plan.  
 
                                                           
2 Sustainable Community Strategy 2014  
3 Economic Regeneration Strategy 2014   82.13 This Hartlepool Vision was published in 2014 and represent s the first step in 
creating a radical new blueprint to revitalise the centre of Ha rtlepool, spark the 
town’s wider regeneration and lay the foundation for its future  prosperity. It 
aims to create major new business, leisure and retail facilitie s, increase the 
town’s profile as a visitor destination and produce a host of n ew job 
opportunities. The Local Plan takes account of the aspirations of The Vision 
and helps to facilitate the deliv ery of The Vision by implement ing policies 
which are supportive of those aspirations. 
   
  93. THE BOROUGH OF HARTLEPOOL  
 
Hartlepool in Context 
3.1 Hartlepool is located on the nor th-east coast to the north of t he River Tees. 
The Borough of Hartlepool cover s an area of approximately 9400 hectares 
(over 36 square miles) and has a population of around 92,500 (m id 2015). The 
Borough comprises the main town of Hartlepool, the seaside reso rt of Seaton 
Carew and an attractive rural hinterland within which lie the v illages of 
Greatham, Hart, Elwick, Dalton Piercy and Newton Bewley.  
 3.2 To the south of Hartlepool i s the wider Teesside conurbatio n which includes 
the boroughs of Middlesbrough, Sto ckton on Tees and Redcar and Cleveland, 
and which together with Hartlepool  and Darlington makes up the Tees Valley 
sub-region. Bordering Hartlepool t o the north is the administra tive area of 
County Durham.  
 3.3 Hartlepool is relatively c ongestion free and is well connec ted to other parts of 
the region and beyond by road vi a the A689 and A179 and the A19  T r u n k  
road, and by rail through a direct rail link to York and London  as well as links 
to Newcastle, Sunderland and Middl esbrough. However with the an ticipated 
growth over the plan period there is a need to improve the infr astructure 
accordingly to ensure that the transport networks are not negat ively impacted 
upon by additional volume. Equally there also is a need to ensu re that the 
public transport networks are enhanced.  
 3.4 Hartlepool has a long and proud hi story, with the original sett lement of 
Hartlepool dating back to Saxon times. Originally an important religious 
settlement the town’s early devel opment resulted from the exist ence of a safe 
harbour and its role as a port for the city of Durham and subse quent grant of a 
Royal Charter from King John in 1201.  
 3.5 The main phase of Hartlepool’ s expansion took place from th e mid 19
th 
Century with the building of a new railway and docks to serve t he export of 
coal. The town continued to expand over the next 100 years as p ort trade 
increased and the development of  heavy industries including ste el making, 
shipbuilding and manufacturing.  L ike most industrialised towns  in the north of 
England, Hartlepool has suffered ov er the last half century fro m structural 
reform of these industries and the town has had to look for new  opportunities 
to diversify the economy.  
 3.6 Over the past 20 years Hartle pool has experienced some tran sformational 
changes through public and private investment which was stimula ted by the 
development of Hartlepool Marina and investment in the town cen tre and 
continued with investment in the historic fabric of the histori c Headland for its 
intrinsic heritage value and for tourism and development of hig h quality and 
prestige business parks at Wyny ard and Queen’s Meadow. This suc cess was 
recognised in the successful hosting of the Tall Ships Race in 2010. The 
town’s regeneration is continuing  with ongoing investment in ho using renewal 
and the completion of flagship de velopments such as Hartlepool College of 
Further Education, the creation of a new transport interchange and the One  10Life Centre. Permissions for a new College of Art and Design bu ilding on the 
Depot site on Church Street will help with the rejuvenation of that area.  
 
Looking Ahead 
3.7 Despite these achievement s, Hartlepool today is faced with a number of 
challenges and opportunities. Unem ployment levels have remained  
consistently above national levels and there remains a need to continue to 
explore opportunities for busines s development, growth, and inv estment. Key 
opportunities exist within the po rt area and the town’s busines s parks to 
support large scale investment in growth industries such as off shore wind and 
renewable energy and other eco-i ndustries. The designation of t hree sites 
within Hartlepool as Enterprise Zones will continue to help rea lise these 
opportunities. The potential deve lopment of a new nuclear power  station and 
availability of prime investment land within the marina and at Wynyard 
Business Park provide scope for si gnificant economic  growth in  line with Tees 
Valley ambitions to create 25, 000 jobs over the next ten years.  
 3.8 The town centre remains a pri ority location for investment.  It forms a key hub 
for economic and social activit y and its appearance and vitalit y can influence 
decisions of businesses, commercial investors and visitors. It is important that 
previous regeneration investment  is built upon and refreshed an d that 
commercial and retail and leisure facilities are consolidated a nd improved. The 
Hartlepool Vision recognises the need to improve the connectivi ty between the 
town centre and the Marina and seeks to make improvements in th e Church 
Street area to enhance the experience for pedestrians.  
 
3.9 Although Hartlepool is serv ed by a good range of housing pr ovision, there are 
specific issues relating to an oversupply of poor quality, low demand terraced 
housing, particularly surrounding the town centre, and a shorta ge of affordable 
and executive housing . There is also a need to provide new homes to meet 
the demands of growth in household formation and to support eco nomic 
growth.  Sites are available with in the existing built up area of the town to meet 
some of this demand; however, there is a need for some expansio n on 
greenfield land to meet these r equirements and to support the e conomic 
growth ambitions of the Borough.  
 
Hartlepool Facts and Figures   
3.10 Table 1 on the following page gives an overview of the Bor ough in terms of 
key facts and figures and helps to highlight where the town sta nds in 
comparison to England and Wales as a whole.   
  
Understanding our Strengths and Weaknesses 
3.11 Recognising the Borough’s st rengths and weaknesses is impo rtant in setting 
the context for the spatial vision and overall policy framework . Table 2 
illustrates the SWOT (Strengths , Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats); 
reflecting the current sit uation within the Borough.   11Table 1 – Key Facts about Hartlepool  
 
Key Facts about Hartlepool Hartlepool England & Wales
Resident Population mid 2015 92,500 57,885,400 
Population age 0-15 mid 2013 17730 (19.1%)10,242,400 
(18.8%) 
Population ag e 16-44 mid 2013 36,100 
(39.4%) 21,792,400 (40%)
Population age 45-retirement mid 2013 16,650 (18%) 11,985,820 (22%)
Population age retirement and over 14,800 
(16.1%) 10,460,350 
(19.2%) 
Number of Households (2013) 40,648  23,267,000 
Area (hectares) 9,386 15,101,270 
Population Density (persons per hectare) 9.8 3.6 
Household tenure – owner occupied 
(2014) 60.2% 63% 
Household tenure – Rented from social 
landlord (2014) 23.1% 19% 
Household tenure – Pr ivate rented (2014) 16% 17% 
Population working age (2008) 55,500 36,641,700 
Economically active (2015) 71.4% 73.6 
% in employment (2014) 64.2% 74.5 
Gross weekly pay all full time workers 
(2015) £495.20 £529.60 
% of working age recei ving key benefits 
(2014) 35.8% 14.2 
% of households with no car (2011) 35.3% 26.8 
Crimes per 1000 population 
 – total offences (2008/09) 98.1 92.0 
Obese Adults 2015 30.6% 23.0% 
Life Expectancy (2014) 
Male  
Female  
77.8 81.6  
79.1 82.8 
Causes of Death per 100,000 under 75 
years 
Cancer (2012–14) 
Heart Disease/Stroke (2012-14) 
Smoking Related aged 35+ (2012-14) 
All causes considered preventable (2012 
-2014)  
177.7 
90.1 
390.2 226.6  
141.5 
75.7 
274.8 182.7 
Number of Students achieving NVQ1 and 
above 2015 82.6% 84.9% 
Number of Students achieving NVQ2 and 
above 2015 69.1% 73.6% 
Number of Students achieving NVQ3 and 
above 2015 50.2% 57.4% 
Number of Students achieving NVQ4 and 
above 2015 24.3% 37.1%  12Key Facts about Hartlepool Hartlepool England & Wales
No qualifications (2015) 11.8% 8.6% 
Number of Conservation Areas 8 N/A 
Number of Listed Buildings 213 N/A 
Number of Scheduled Monuments 8 N/A 
Protected wrecks 1 N/A 
Number of cinemas  1 N/A 
Leisure centres 4 N/A 
Allocated green wedges  3 N/A  13Table 2: Hartlepool SWOT Analysis 
 
Strengths  Weaknesses  Opportunities  Threats  
 Successful allocation 
& development of Enterprise Zones 
 Compactness of main 
urban area 
 Expanding population 
 Sense of community 
 Partnership working 
 Good track record in 
delivering physical regeneration 
 Diverse, high quality 
and accessible natural environment 
 Diverse range of  
heritage assets including the maritime, industrial and religious  
 Availability of a variety 
of high quality housing 
 Successful housing 
renewal 
 High levels of 
accessibility by road  
 Lack of congestion 
 Good local road 
communications 
 Direct rail link to 
London 
 Good local rail 
services 
 Active and diverse 
voluntary and community sector 
 Positive community 
engagement 
 Successful event 
management 
 Small business and 
SME development 
 Growth of visitor 
market  
 High quality tourist 
attractions  
 High quality expanding 
educational facilities   Perceived image 
 Location off main 
north-south road corridor 
 High deprivation 
across large areas of the town 
 Low employment 
rates and high level of worklessness 
 Legacy of declining 
heavy industrial base 
 Small service sector
 Imbalance in the 
housing stock  
 Shortage of 
adequate affordable housing 
 Poor health 
 Low level of skills 
 High crime rates 
 Exposed climate 
 Range and offer of 
retail facilities  
 Reductions in public 
resources have affected regeneration and employment levels.  
 Number of Heritage 
Assets currently considered at risk.  
  Young population, possible 
asset for future prosperity 
 Can improve the economy 
and the growing house choice thus improving the recent stabilisation of population levels 
 Availability of land to enable 
diversification of employment opportunities  
 Potential for development of 
major research, manufacturing and distribution facilities on A19 corridor 
 Potential for further tourism 
investment 
 Potential for integrated 
transport links 
 Major high quality 
employment opportunities at Victoria Harbour, Queens Meadow and Wynyard Park  
 Success of Tall Ships races 
and opportunity to bid for the event in the future 
 Potential New Nuclear 
Power Station 
 Renewable Energy and Eco 
Industries 
 Developing indigenous 
business start-up and growth.  
 The deep water Port 
facilities   Closure of major 
employer/s 
 Expansion of area 
affected by housing market failure 
 Climate change 
and rising sea levels 
 Lack of financial 
resources / budget deficits 
 Increasing car 
ownership and congestion 
 Declining hospital 
facilities 
 Competition from 
neighbouring out of town retail parks
 Competition from 
outlying housing markets  
 Uncertainty in 
relation to Council budgets 
 Uncertainty in 
relation to government funding programmes 
 Not expanding 
infrastructure to reflect growth ambitions 
 No further 
government backing for housing market renewal areas. 
 Austerity 
measures putting 
severe pressure on public services.
  144.   LOCAL PLAN  SPATIAL VISION, THE MES AND OBJECTIVES  
 
A Spatial Vision for Hartlepool 
4.1 The Local Plan sets out the vision of what Hartlepool will be in 2031 indicating 
the main patterns of development and the types and form of deve lopment that 
will help achieve this vision. T he vision represents the spatia l interpretation of 
the Sustainable Community Strat egy for Hartlepool (Hartlepool’s  Ambition 
2014) which states: 
 
“Hartlepool will be a thriving, respectfu l, inclusive, healthy, ambitious and 
outward-looking community, in an attr active and safe environment, where 
everyone is able to realise their potential.”  
4.2 Reflecting this vision the Local Plan seeks to achieve: 
 
 the creation of a healthy local economy (“thriving” and “ambit ious” 
community), 
 the creation of mixed communiti es with all services to hand (“ respectful” and 
“inclusive” community), 
 provision of opportunities for recreational activities (“healt hy” community), 
 improvement of transport links (“outward-looking” community) 
 improvements to the quality and design of housing and associat ed areas 
and the boroughs natural and histor ic environment (“attractive 
environment”), and 
 reduction of the opportunities for crime and improvements in r oad safety 
(“safe environment”) 
 4.3 The Local Plan vision is that:  
“Hartlepool by 2031 will be a more sustai nable community having achieved the 
substantial implementation of its key regeneration areas as set out within the 
Hartlepool Vision; raised the quality and standard of  living; increased job 
opportunities through developing a strong,  diverse and thriving local economy 
which contributes positively to the s ub-regional economy; maximised quality 
housing choices and health  opportunities to meet, in full, the current and future 
needs of all residents. The built, histor ic and natural envir onment will have 
been protected, managed and enhanced, and will contribute to making 
Hartlepool a safe and attractive place to live, and an efficient and sustainable 
transport network will integrate its commu nities within the Tees Valley City 
Region and beyond. The town  will have become a focal destination for visitors 
and investment.” 
 
York Road Primar y Sho pping Area  15How will the Local Plan develop from Hartlepool’s Ambition?   
4.4 The eight themes of ‘Hartlepool’ s Ambition’ 2014 (the Sustainab le Community 
Strategy for Hartlepool) provide  the basis of the spatial objec tives for the Local 
Plan as shown in Table 3 on the follo wing page.  
 
Table 3: Local Plan  Objectives and Hartlepool’s Ambition 
 
‘Hartlepool’s 
Ambition’ Themes Spatial Objectives for the Local Plan Local Plan Policies
Jobs and the 
Economy, 
Lifelong Learning and 
Skills.  
1. To diversify the economic base of 
Hartlepool and promote an entrepreneurial culture to create more employment opportunities for local people. 
2. To develop Hartlepool as a destination of choice for inward investment.  
3. To enhance the tourism offer. 
4. To support the development of educational and training facilities that will develop a skilled workforce.
5. To facilitate development in the key investment areas in the Borough. 
6. To continue to protect and enhance the vitality and viab ility of the Town 
Centre. 
 LS1, INF1, INF2, 
INF5, CC3, HSG3-8, EMP1, EMP2, EMP3, EMP4, EMP5, RC1 – RC21, NE1, NE2, LT1, LT2, LT3, LT4, LT5, LT6, RUR5 
Strengthening 
Communities, 
Community Safety, 
Housing, 
Health and Wellbeing  
7. To make Hartlepool a safer place by 
reducing crime and t he fear of crime 
and anti-social behaviour. 
8. To support growth in the housing sector and improve the choice, quality and affordability of all types and tenures of housing. 
9. To strengthen social cohesion and reduce inequalities by protecting and encouraging access to local facilities. 
10. To encourage healthier and more sustainable lifestyles. 
 INF3, INF4, QP3, 
QP4, QP5, HSG1-13, NE1, NE2, NE3, NE5, NE6, RC18,   16‘Hartlepool’s 
Ambition’ Themes Spatial Objectives for the Local Plan Local Plan Policies
Environment 
(excluding Transport) 
Culture and Leisure  
11. To protect, promote and enhance 
the quality and distinctiveness of the Borough’s natural , rural and built 
environment. 
12. To protect and enhance the Borough’s unique historic 
environment, cultural heritage and 
coastline. 
13. To reduce the causes and minimise the impacts of climate change. 
14. To maximise the re-use of previously developed land and buildings. 
15. To reduce the causes and minimise impacts of climate change in particular through the delivery of renewable and lo w carbon energy 
development. 
15.  To provide a safe, attractive and 
well-designed environment. LS1, CC1, CC2, 
CC3, CC4, CC5,  QP4, QP7, HSG3, NE1, NE2, NE3, NE4, NE5, NE6, EMP6, RUR1, LT2, LT3, HE1, HE2, HE3, HE4, HE5, HE6, HE7
Environment 
(Transport)  
16.   To ensure the provision of a safe, 
efficient and sustainable transport network, accessible to all. 
17.   To strengthen transport links with 
the Tees Valley sub-region, region and beyond. 
 LS1, INF1, INF2.  
  175.0 THE PRESUMPTION IN FAVOUR  OF SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
 
5.1 The purpose of the planning system is to achieve sustainabl e development, 
the Government’s National Plan ning Policy Framework (NPPF) has adopted 
the widely used United Nations def inition of sustainable develo pment: -  
 
“Development that has the ability to meet the needs of the present without 
compromising the ability of future gener ations to meet their own needs’. 
 
5.2 The NPPF sets out a `presum ption in favour of sustainable d evelopment’. The 
presumption strongly encourages pl anning authorities to allow d evelopment, 
without delay, which meets the development needs of the area. 
 5.3 Sustainable devel opment includes three key aspects: social,  environmental 
and economic; all three aspects are mutually dependant and loca l authorities 
must seek social, environmental  and economic gains jointly and 
simultaneously.  
 
SUS1 : The Presumption in Favour  of Sustainable Development  
 
When considering development proposals the Borough Council will  take a 
positive approach that reflects the presumption in favour of su stainable 
development contained in the Nat ional Planning Policy Framework . It will 
always work proactively with applicants jointly to find solutio ns which mean 
that proposals can be approved w herever possible, and to secure  
development that improves the economic, social and environmenta l 
conditions in the area. 
 
Planning applications that accord with the policies in this Loc al Plan (and, 
where relevant, with policies in neighbourhood plans) will be a pproved 
without delay, unless material c onsiderations indicate otherwis e. 
 
Where there are no policies relevant to the application or rele vant policies are 
out of date at the time of making the decision then the Borough  Council will 
grant permission unless material c onsiderations indicate otherw ise – taking 
into account whether: 
 
a) Any adverse impacts of granti ng permission would significantly 
and demonstrably outweigh the benefits, when assessed against 
the policies in the National Planning Policy Framework taken as  a 
whole; or 
b) Specific policies in that Fr amework indicate that developmen t 
should be restricted.  186.   THE LOCATIONAL STRATEGY 
   
6.1 One of the key characteristics of Hartlepool is that it is a vibrant community 
with development contained within a compact urban area, small v illages and 
attractive rural and coastal areas. The Local Plan seeks to mai ntain and 
enhance the attractiveness of Hartlepool and its setting as a q uality place in 
which to live, work and visit. 
 6.2 For many years the strat egy for the Borough has been based on compact 
urban growth. This has been secured by the strict control of de velopment to 
locations within defined limits to development in the form of a n urban fence 
around the main urban area, villa ge envelopes around the villag es and 
specific limits around the Wynyard area.  
6.3 Keeping future development within these limits could protec t the attractive 
open countryside around Hartlepool but would severely constrain  t h e  
opportunities for providing eco nomic growth and a wide choice o f housing, 
including affordable and high co st low density housing, leading  to higher 
density development within the ur ban area. If sufficient previo usly developed 
‘brownfield’ sites cannot be identified this could result in de velopment on areas 
of amenity greenspace and could lead to town “cramming” and hav e resultant 
impacts on the health of the popul ation due to insufficient gre en spaces for 
recreation.  
 
6.4 In 2009 the port owners indica ted their intentions not to p roceed with the 
anticipated mixed use development o f Victoria Harbour and have expressed 
their intension to focus on port-related development including offshore wind 
and sustainable energy solutions . This is fully supported by th e Borough 
Council and is reflected by the Enterprise Zone designation of the port and the 
Local Development Order which supports it. It is hoped that the  growth in the 
renewables sector at the port wi ll create new high skilled jobs  and significantly 
boost the economy. 
 6.5 Assessment of other alternativ e large brownfield regenerati on sites indicated 
that there are few viable alter natives to Victoria Harbour for housing and this is 
reflected in the findings of the 2015 Strategic Housing Land Av ailability 
Assessment (SHLAA).  
 6.6 Clearly the existing strat egy based on compact urban growth  through the 
development of mixed use regenerat ion areas on brownfield land is no longer 
tenable. 
 6.7 In the preparation of this Publication Local Plan the Borou gh Council has 
conducted research into future housing need in the Borough thro ugh the 
production of the SHLAA and also t he Strategic Housing Market A ssessment 
(SHMA) which have acted as the basis for the development of pro viding sites 
to meet the housing n eed over the plan period. This tasks the B orough Council  19to deliver approximately 6,0004 units between 2016 and 2031. Of these 
approximately 4,0005 have current planning permi ssion and therefore it is 
necessary for the plan to alloca te sites for the remainder. 
  
6.8 To ensure sustainable growt h to 2031 the development of Har tlepool will be 
based on a strategy of balanced urban growth with most expansio n being 
concentrated in areas adjoining the existing built up area and adjacent to 
areas of strong economic growth but ensuring growth occurs in a  controlled 
way and is delivered alongside infrastructure improvements whic h allow 
Hartlepool to grow in sustainable manner. 
 
Constraints and Infrastructure 
6.9 The Locational Strategy takes  account of known and anticipa ted constraints. 
This includes the careful cons ideration of development on land close to: 
 
 Areas of Flood Risk and Cr itical Drainage Areas 
 Major Road infrastructure 
 Nuclear and Hazardous Industry Consultation Zones (see appendi ces 11a – 
11d) 
 High Voltage Overhead Cables  
 High Pressure Gas and Ethyl ene Pipelines (s ee appendices 11a a nd 11c) 
 Internationally and Nationally designated Nature Conservation  
 Nationally and locally prote cted Heritage sites assets 
 High quality landscape featur es including Ancient Woodlands 
 The best and most versatile  agricultural land.  
 Noisy or polluting sites. 
 
6.10 In terms of infrastructure, land should be capable of bein g adequately served 
with: 
 
 An efficient and safe local transport network 
 An adequate water supply system  
 Adequate surface and f oul mains drainage 
 Easily accessible Utility Services  
 Suitable Green Infrastructure 
 
Limits to Development 
6.11 In order to control development  and to protect the countryside,  it is necessary 
to define precisely limits to development around the main urban  area of 
Hartlepool, Wynyard and the villa ges. These limits to developme nt are defined 
on the policies map.  
    
                                                           
4 This figure is explained further  in the housing chapter but in cludes recommendations from the SHMA 
and also takes account of demolit ions an element to take accoun t of previous under-delivery.  
5 This includes sites/permissions which are considered deliverab le within the Plan period – a number 
of other permissions not considered deliverable for various rea sons including demand, viability etc. 
have been excluded.   20Strategic Gaps 
6.12 The western extension of housing development beyond the ex isting limits can 
be developed in a sustainable form, however it is imperative to  maintain the 
strategic gaps between the town  and the surrounding villages, p articularly in 
the vicinity of Hart and Great ham villages where the urban edge  i s  i n  c l o s e  
proximity to the villages – fur ther built development within th ese gaps could, 
over time, lead to the villages  joining with the urban area and  losing their 
identities. The strategic gap has  been included to ensure the v illages maintain 
their identities.  
 
 New Housing Provision 
6.13 The locational strategy is to prioritise, economically via ble, brownfield land and 
other suitable and available si tes inside the existing urban ar eas for  new 
housing whilst allowing a contro lled westward expansion of the town into 
greenfield land adjacent to the existing boundary of the built up area. In 
addition a limited number of sites in the villages of Hart and Elwick are 
suggested together with an element of growth at Wynyard Park, t o the north of 
the employment allocation north o f the A689 to help create a su stainable 
community where people can live and work. This is to: 
 
 provide a range and choice of locations, 
 consolidate and integrate the existing and extended built up a reas, 
 help to deliver major improvem ents in infrastructure across th e Borough, 
 support the planning and implementation of community facilitie s according 
to clear defined locations and principles, 
 maintain the strategic gaps between the town and surrounding v illages 
particularly in the vicini ty of Hart and Greatham.  
 
Employment Land for a  Growing Local Economy 
6.14 The Locational Strategy propos es to provide a varied range  of employment 
sites at the right locations acr oss the Borough to enable Hartl epool to develop 
a high value low carbon economy. This will include keeping part s of Wynyard 
as a Prestige Employment site for business development, maintai ning higher 
quality sites and sites for general industry and specialist ind ustry sites such as 
chemicals. The strategy also reflects the Tees Valley Minerals and Waste 
Core Strategy. 
 
 Nuclear Power Station 
6.15 Hartlepool has been shortlis ted as a potential location fo r a new replacement 
nuclear power station and as such this plan is required to safe guard land to 
ensure that a new power sta tion is deliverable if needed.  
 6.16 Any new build in this locat ion would comprise a large scal e and technologically 
complex construction project.  Once operational it would make a
n important 
contribution to the UK’s futur e needs for low carbon, secure an d affordable 
energy. 
 
6.17 As it is a scheme of nationa l significance, a decision on whether a 
development consent order should be granted would be made by Go vernment 
once an application has been submitted to and considered by the  Planning  21Inspectorate.  The Government’s decision on whether to grant co nsent, or not, 
will be informed by national poli cy, a detailed environmental i mpact 
assessment prepared by the applicant, a local impact report pre pared by the 
relevant local authority (ident ifying any positive, neutral and  negative impacts 
of the project), and any other m atters considered important and  relevant.  In 
preparing its local impact report, the local planning authority  would appraise 
the proposed development’s compli ance with local policy and gui dance, albeit 
there is no requirement for loc al authorities to include dedica ted policies for 
Nationally Significant Infrastruc ture Projects within local pla ns. 
 
 Infrastructure to Support Development 
6.18 The assessment of some of the key areas of infrastructure which will need to 
be delivered to support the growth  of the Borough over the plan  p e r i o d ,  
including a new bypass to the north of Elwick Village and a new  grade 
separated junction at the A19 to c reate a “third” main access p oint into 
Hartlepool, is considered within the Local Infrastructure Plan,  however, it is not 
anticipated that there are any i ssues which would question the deliverability of 
the development and the Borough Council are actively engaging w ith 
developers and funding bodies to ens ure timely delivery of the necessary 
infrastructure to support the development sites.   
  
 Supporting the Town Centr e and Retail Centres 
6.19 The strategy proposes to c ontinue to protect the town cent re in order to ensure 
its vitality and viability and s upport priorities for that area . The Local Plan will 
ensure that the hierarchy of ret ail and commercial centres are maintained and 
that their role, function, vita lity and viability are maintaine d and enhanced in 
the future. 
 
 Promoting Leisure and Tourism 
6.20 The Locational Strategy for Leisure and Tourism is to stro ngly encourage and 
promote the growth of local t ourism and leisure industry, conce ntrating 
development in the key tourist areas of the town centre, The Ma rina, Seaton 
Carew and the Headland.  
 
Health 
6.21 Public Health England6 have stated that “England is facing an obesity 
epidemic.” Nationally by the time  children enter primary school ,  1  i n  5  a r e  
already overweight or obese and by the time they leave primary school, the 
figure increases to 1 in 3. Evidence indicates that childhood o besity 
disproportionately affects those who are from deprived areas, w ith prevalence 
in the most deprived 10% of areas in England. In 2013, an estim ated 62% of 
the adult population were overweight or obese and by 2034 this estimate is 
predicted to rise to 70%. 
 6.22 The poor health and wellbeing outcomes associated with obe s i t y  a r e  v a s t ;  
obese adults are less likely to b e in employment and are more l ikely to face 
discrimination and suffer from health conditions such as sleep apnoea, type 2 
diabetes, heart disease and some cancers. 
                                                           
6 Public Health England, National mapping of weight management s ervices, December 2015.   22 
6.23 The Borough Council does not want the number of residents above national 
average obesity and ill health to continue to rise and tackling  the causes of 
obesity has the possibilities to reduce a number of health ineq ualities across 
the borough. This local plan has taken into account the health statistics for the 
borough and sought to form policies that will help improve the health of 
residents. Of particular importance is the location of developm ent, the ability to 
access sustainable modes of transport, green spaces and leisure  facilities. 
Furthermore there is a need to tackle other causal links such a s high levels of 
depravation and access to unhealthy food outlets.  
 
Historic Environment 
6.24 The Borough Council will, thr ough the policies of the Loca l Plan, look to 
preserve and/or enhanc e the heritage assets and wider historic environment of 
the Borough.  
 
         
 
         Green Infrastructure 
6.25 The strategy is to prote ct and enhance existing green wedg es and to create 
new ones as part of development at the South Western extension and 
Wynyard. A new green corridor will be established on land forme rly allocated 
for employment a t Golden Flatts. 
  
Safeguarding the Natural Environment 
6.26 The Borough Council will l ook to protect, manage and activ ely enhance the 
biodiversity, geodiversity, land scape character and green Infra structure assets 
of the Borough.  Adverse effects , including recreational distur bance, can result 
from new housing, employment, r etail, leisure and tourism oppor tunities. 
Mitigation, for the recreational  disturbance of European site b irds, needs to be 
effective and should be chosen from a range of diverse and flex ible measures. 
 23
These include, but are not lim ited to, Sustainable Alternative Natural Green 
Space (SANGS), a financial cont ribution to the management of co astal issues 
and information packs.  In deliv ering development, applicants s hould be 
required to demonstrate how this  type of mitigation will be det ailed and how 
costs have been identified for de livery. Mitigat ion will be del ivered through the 
Mitigation Strategy and Deliver y Plan and other mechanisms. 
  
 Marine Environment  
6.27 The coast continues to play an important role in Hartlepoo l’s economy and 
environment, and is a major asset for local communities.  The B orough 
Council has had regard to the UK’s Marine Policy Statement deve loping local 
plan policies and it will liaise with the Marine Management Org anisation in the 
production of the North East Marine Plan. 
   
  24Diagram 1: Key Diagram 
  
 25LS1: Locational Strategy  
The development of Hartlepool will be based on a strategy of ba lanced urban 
growth with expansion being concentrated in areas adjoining the  existing 
built up area and adjacent to areas of strong economic growth b ut ensuring 
growth occurs in a controlled way and is delivered alongside lo cal and 
strategic infrastructure improvem ents which allow Hartlepool to  g r o w  i n  
sustainable manner. The key new element of strategic infrastruc ture 
proposed is a bypass to the north of Elwick Village along with a new grade 
separated junction on the A19 which will create a third high qu ality and safe 
access from the A19 into Hartlepool. 
 
The introduction of multi-functiona l Green Infrastructure as pa rt of these 
proposals is essential to ensure high quality development that offers 
opportunities for recreational and leisure and mitigates agains t the potential 
effect on the landscape chara cter and the environment. 
 
Protection will be given to the  rural character of the Borough avoiding 
coalescence between the urban areas of Hartlepool and surroundi ng villages.  
To maintain the separate charact er of directly neighbouring rur al settlements, 
the generally open and undevelope d nature of the following stra tegic gaps, 
as shown on the Policies Map, w ill be expressly protected:   
1) Hartlepool and Hart 
2) Hartlepool and Greatham 
3) Billingham and Newton Bewley 
 
Development within these strategi c gaps will only be permitted where: 
(a) It would not diminish the p hysical and/or visual separation ; and 
(b) It would not compromise the in tegrity of the gap either ind ividually or 
cumulatively with other existing or proposed development; and 
(c) The landscape setting of the s ettlements would not be harme d.  
 
Development will be focused in areas of lower flood risk where possible and 
must comply with policy CC2. 
 
Between 2016 and 2031 provision will be made through granting p lanning 
permission and the allocation of l and in this plan for at least  6 , 1 5 0  n e w  
dwellings, 4,350 net a dditional jobs and 1950m2 retail / community floorspace.
 
New housing development will be l ocated within (as shown on the  Policies 
Map): 
4)     The urban area on suitable  and deliverable brownfield si tes; 
5)    A south west extension of the town (which benefits from o utline 
planning permission) of approxim ately 1250 new dwellings in 
accordance with policy HSG4; 
6)    An extension of the town at High Tunstall of approximately 1200 
new dwellings in accordance with policy HSG5 and ; 
7)  Sites at Wynyard of approx imately 732 new dwellings in 
accordance with policy HSG6;  268 )    E x t e n s i o n s  o f  t h e  v illages of Elwick (HSG7 - approximately 35 
dwellings) and Hart (HSG8 - a pproximately 50 dwellings). 
 
Development for employment uses will be located at land committ ed for (as 
shown on the Policies Map):  
9 )    A  P r e s t i g e  E m p l o y m e n t  L o c a t i o n  a t  W y n y a r d  B u s i n e s s  P a r k  a s  
identified in Policy EMP1 and comprising approximately 35 
hectares (ha) of available land; 
10)      Higher Quality Employ ment site at Queen’s Meadow 
(approximately 45ha available) as  identified in Policies EMP2; 
11)  General Employment sites at the Southern Business Zone 
(approximately 24ha available) and Oakesway (approximately 
19ha available) as identified in Policy EMP3; 
12)  Specialist industrial sites at The Port (approximately 60h a 
available) and North Graythorp (a pproximately 18ha available) a s 
identified in policy EMP4. Other land for specialist industry i s not 
available as it sits within the o wnership of existing occupiers . 
 
A strategic site of approximately 140 ha will be safeguarded ne ar to the 
existing power station for a potential new Nuclear Power Statio n (EMP5) as 
shown on the  Policies Map.  
 
Areas suitable for wind turbine development are identified in P olicy CC4 and 
on the Policies Map. 
 
The vitality and viability of centres in the Borough will be pr otected and 
enhanced. Depending on scale, town centre uses will be directed  towards the 
most appropriate centre in the hierarchy. The defined hierarchy  a n d  
sequential preference of the centres in the Borough are detaile d below and 
shown on the Policies Map: 
 The Town Centre. 
 Edge of Town Centre sites. 
 Retail and Leisure Parks. 
 Local Centres.  
 
The role of Hartlepool Marina as a regional, national and inter national visitor 
location will be supported and developed. 
 
Key locations for leisure and tourism developments as detailed on the 
Policies Map are: 
13)   Town Centre; 
14)   The Marina;  
15)   Seaton Carew; or 
16)   The Headland. 
 
As a Borough with a rich maritime  and Christian history and a f ast growing 
tourism economy relating to this, protection and enhancement of  built and 
natural heritage assets is a priority. 
 
A network of new and existing Green Wedges will be protected fr om  27development, managed and enhanced (as shown on the Policies Map ) as 
identified in policy NE2. 
 
Development will be located or designed so as not to have, eith er directly or 
indirectly, an adverse impact on the integrity of International ly designated 
nature conservation sites. The i mpact of a development must be considered 
both alone as well as in combina tion with other plans and progr ammes. 
Where impacts would otherwise ha ve an adverse effect, mitigatio n measures 
will be required in advance that  meet the Habitats Regulations.   
The Port, Marina and Town Centre  287. MINIMISING AND ADAPTI NG TO CLIMATE CHANGE  
 
7.1 Climate change is one of the most serious challenges to the  economy, natural 
environment, historic environment and our communities. The impa cts of 
climate change which are predicted for th is area include: 
 
 Increased likelihood of severe w eather events including heat w aves and 
storms. This will impact on agric ulture, the natural and histor ic environment, 
human health, buildings and trans port infrastructure for exampl e. The 
impacts could have results such as reduced productivity in the business 
sector, increased demand for services, and changed crop pattern s. 
 Increased risk of coastal flooding and erosion linked to sea l evel rise; this 
impact may be less marked than other parts of the UK, but could  still have 
an impact on Hartlepool’s coast. 
 7.2 The 2008 Climate Change Act established the world’s first l egally binding 
climate change target. The Act set out that the UK should aim t o reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions by at l east 80% (from the 1990 baselin e) by 2050. 
 
7.3 The December 2015 Paris c limate conference adopted the firs t-ever 
universally, legally binding glo bal climate deal with 195 count ries including the 
UK. The agreement sets out a global action plan to tackle clima te change by 
limiting global warming to well below 20C and aim to limit the increase to 
1.50C, since this would significan tly reduce risks and the impacts of climate 
change. The agreement is due to ent er into force in 2020. Gover nments 
agreed to come together every five years to set more ambitious targets as 
evidence and science evolve. Th e Borough Council supports this ambition and 
are monitoring the progress of  the agreement and will amend pol icies in the 
future if the law requires. 
 7.4 The Council understands that  climate change is an important  issue which 
requires pro-active partnership a ction. In seeking to minimise the risk of further 
climatic changes and to reduce t he impact of climate change the  Council is 
continuing to adapt the way it oper ates its services and influe nce the attitudes 
and actions of residents, and businesses; For example: 
 In 2009 the Borough Council, si gned up to the European Union’s  ( E U ' s )  
Covenant of Mayors initiative, which is a written commitment to  go beyond 
the EU target to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 20% by 2020 . The 
Council has produced a Sustainable Energy Action Plan (SEAP), w hich 
outlines the steps that may be ta ken to exceed the 20% target.  
 The Borough Council has adopted a Sustainable Construction Str ategy 
which looks at all stages of construction from design and plann ing through 
to renovation and demolition of i ts own estate, and covers buil dings and 
infrastructure such as highways. 
 The Borough Council has carried out substantial work to improv e the 
energy efficiency of its buildings including the use of photo-v oltaic panels to 
generate electricity and voltage op timisation units to reduce t he amount of 
electricity used.  29 The Borough Council is working hard to change the behaviour of  residents, 
staff and businesses through awareness raising events, activiti es and 
communications.  
 The Borough has a well established service for domestic recycl ing including 
doorstep collection of paper, gla ss, plastics, cardboard, cans and garden 
waste.  
 
7.5 The Borough Council will c ontinue to work with partners to introduce new 
initiatives to address climate change implications with the aim  of achieving or 
preferably exceeding nat ional targets. The Council will also su pport wider sub-
regional initiatives, such as t he Teesside Carbon Capture and S torage project, 
that will help to reduce CO 2 emissions into the atmosphere and promote Tees 
Valley’s position as a major loc ation for the process and chemi cal sectors. 
 
Meeting the Challenge  of Climate Change 
7.6 Planning has a major role to  play in helping to adapt to an d reduce the 
environmental, social and economic  impacts of climate change. T his 
Publication Local Plan adopts this as a fundamental principle a nd incorporates 
a range of policy measures to hel p ensure that development take s place in the 
most achievable and sustainable  manner. For example planning de cisions will 
take into account the location, d istribution, design, energy ef ficiency and layout 
of development proposals.  
 7.7 In terms of location, alt hough there is an unavoidable need  to build on 
greenfield sites in order to meet the housing need, support and  
encouragement is given to the devel opment of brownfield land. M uch of the 
Borough’s brownfield land is l ocated within the urban limits, b uilding in these 
areas not only removes an often blighted site from the Borough but it can 
provide home and jobs in locati ons that are currently linked to , or have the 
potential to be linked to, a sust ainable infrastructure network  and thus 
preventing the need to expand t he urban limits and/or build upo n parcels of 
green space across the Borough . The Borough Council recognises the need to 
encourage the use of more sustai nable modes of transport and re duce the 
number of car journeys as they are a major contributor to CO
2 emissions. On 
development sites, particularly  those in less sustainable locat ions and or major 
developments, the introduction of more sustainable travel optio ns such as 
public transport, electric vehicl e charging infrastructure and cycle routes will 
continue to be encouraged and requi red and where necessary secu red via 
condition or legal agreement.  
 7.8 Increased rainfall, rises in sea level and more frequent fl ooding events are 
consequences of climate change. Development should therefore av oid those 
areas which are most vulnerable to flooding such as flood plain s and 
unprotected coastal zones. The Environment Agency has establish ed a three 
tier flood zone hierarchy, wit h flood zone three being the most  susceptible to 
flooding. Development should be avoided in higher risk flood zo nes, unless 
there are outweighing social,  economic and/or regeneration bene fits and in 
such cases appropriate design solutions must be adopted to mini mise the 
impact of flooding. Development can contribute to increased flo od events as 
development can reduce the amo unt of permeable land and increas e the level  30of surface water run-off into drainage systems and water course s. Measures to 
reduce this impact, such as the use of Sustainable Drainage Sys tems (SuDS) 
or alternative water retention or recycling schemes will contin ue to be 
encouraged where appropriate.  
 7.9 The Borough`s natural envir onment and habitat networks are susceptible to 
climate change but can also help to offset its impact. The natu ral environment 
is a vital resource, acting as b oth a carbon store and helping to mitigate 
against the effects of heavy rain fall. The natural environment can help reduce 
the rate of surface water run- off and the intensity of flood ev ents thereby 
protecting people, their homes and businesses. Green infrastruc ture provides 
shade and absorbs heat so can also  help moderate temperatures i n urban 
areas, helping to create a comfor table outside environment for residents and 
visitors. Development will be r equired to incorporate an approp riate provision 
of green space within the development and in some instances may  also be 
required to contribute to the wider  strategic green infrastruct ure network. 
Further advice relating to the pr ovision of green infrastructur e in and/or around 
development sites can be obtai ned in the Planning Obligations S PD and 
Residential Design SPD. 
 
7.10 Hartlepool has an extensive and varied coastline incorpora t i n g  a  r o c k y  
headland, a harbour, sandy beaches, sand dunes and a river estu ary. The 
coastline is important for rec reational, economic, heritage and  habitat reasons 
and includes areas designated as Ramsar Sites, Special Protecti on Areas 
(SPA) and Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI). As a mar itime authority 
the Borough Council has to consi der any impacts that coastal sq ueeze
7 may 
have on the Borough. The Borough Council aims to protect and en hance the 
Borough’s coastline but recognises that there can be conflict b etween the 
                                                           
7 Where coastal habitats can diminish in quantity and/or quality  as they are ‘squeezed’ between the impact of 
rising sea levels and a fixed landward boundary.  
 31need to protect urban areas from coastal flooding and the need to protect the 
integrity of the SPA and Ramsar s ite. In some instances natural  
erosion/processes may be the best option to protect the integri ty of the SPA 
and Ramsar site but in other inst ances sea defences may be requ ired. The 
Borough Council will work close ly with key agencies including t he Environment 
Agency, Natural England and the Marine Management Organisation to ensure 
that appropriate solutions are i dentified to address such issue s. 
 7.11 Recycling is important as a means of reducing waste. If wa ste is not recycled it 
is usually disposed of in landfill sites which can result in th e release of 
greenhouse gases which contribute to climate change. Recycling reduces the 
need for raw materials and in general recycling is more energy efficient and 
results in fewer carbon emissions. In support of the Borough Co uncil’s 
commitment to mitigating and adapting to climate change, recycl ing facilities 
and the use of sustainable construction methods will be encoura ged. The use 
of locally sourced material can  further assist in improving the  local economy as 
well as reducing transport costs  and their associated emissions . 
 7.12 Re-using vacant buildings can also be seen as a recycling measure and is 
often more environmentally efficient in terms of preserving nat ural resources 
than demolition and rebuilding. W hilst it is not always viable to do so, where 
appropriate, the Borough Council will encourage and support the  re-use and 
refurbishment of vacant and unde r-used buildings. The Borough C ouncil will 
also encourage, through support, advice and/or grants, homeowne rs and 
businesses to carry out improvements to existing buildings, to make them less 
vulnerable to climate impacts. 
 
7.13 Energy efficient buildings, together with the provision of  renewable energy 
technologies, are seen as a positive mechanism for assisting in  addressing 
climate change and tackling fuel poverty. The energy efficiency  of buildings 
and the provision of renewable e nergy projects will be encourag ed.  
 7.14 With regard to renewable energy  provision in new residenti al and commercial 
development, it is considered ap propriate and reasonable to req uire that all 
major development or those withi n particularly unsustainable lo cations should 
secure, a minimum of 10% of th eir energy supply from decentrali sed and 
renewable or low carbon sources.
8 
 7.15 In the first instance the Borough Council wi ll encourage d evelopers to draw 
energy supply from decentralis ed, renewable or low carbon energ y supply 
systems that already exist or to w ork with other developers to create energy 
supplies that a variety of users  can tap into. This may prove m ost effective in 
mixed use areas such as Wynyard o r the town centre. The Borough  Council 
recognises that this requiremen t must not overburden developers  to the extent 
that it would render a scheme unv iable. Therefore if this requi rement cannot 
                                                           
8 Until a commencement order is in  place that repeals section 1( 1) of the Planning and Energy Act (2008) then 
the provisions within the Act a llow the LPA to apply local requ irements within polices .  The Deregulation Act 
(2015) only seeks to make amendm ents to the Planning and Energy  Act (2008) with regard to residential 
development. So notwithstanding an y commencement order the prov isions within the policy will always apply to 
non-residential development.   32be met then justification must be provided, the most appropriat e justification 
would be a viabi lity assessment. 
 7.16 The Borough Council has a fl exible approach to ensuring th at all 
developments seek to address the issues surrounding climate cha nge and 
understands that it may not always be feasible, due to design l imitations or 
structural issues, to provide such infrastructure on site. If i t can be 
demonstrated that such on site pro visions are not possible, the n the equivalent 
energy saving will be sought, or a  combination of both energy e fficiency and 
energy provision. If none of the above are physically possible then the 
equivalent monetary value of con tribution to a carbon managemen t fund will 
be required. The Borough Council operates a flexible approach t o establishing 
where the money attributed to  the carbon management funds could  be spent. 
 
 
 
   33CC1: Minimising and adap ting to climate change 
The Borough Council will work wit h partner organisations, devel opers and 
the community to help minimise a nd adapt to climate change by: 
 
1) Encouraging development on suit able brownfield sites within the 
urban limits and other areas that are, or have the potential to  be, 
well served by sustainable forms of transport and by encouragin g 
sustainable travel options such as enhancing public transport 
provision, cycle and pedestrian provision. 
 
2) Requiring that major developments9 include opportunities for 
charging electric and hybrid vehicles.  
 
3) Locating development in areas of low flood risk wherever pos sible 
and incorporating appropriate measures to minimise flood risk 
such as sustainable drainage systems and the use of porous 
materials along with water r etention and recycling. 
 
4) Encouraging environments that are resilient and adaptive to the 
effects of climate change and protect, promote and enhance 
biodiversity including maintain ing and enhancing habitat 
networks and green infrastructure, and managing coastal 
squeeze. 
 
5) Encouraging the reduction, reuse and recycling of waste and the 
use of locally sourced materials. 
 
6) Encouraging the re-use, adaptation and repair of existing 
buildings and vacant floors wherever possible along with 
supporting energy efficiency improvements on existing buildings  
wherever possible. 
 
7) Ensuring that development is e nergy efficient (see policy QP 7). 
 
8) Encouraging development that that utilises technologies incl uding 
solar panels, biomass heating, wind turbines, photovoltaic cell s 
and combined heat and power to generate renewable energy; and 
encouraging developers to provide infrastructure for the provis ion 
of renewable energy and local ser vices at the earliest possible  
stage. 
 
9) Requiring that major development (either new build or conver sion) 
must secure where feasible and viable, a minimum of 10% of thei r 
energy supply from decentralised and renewable or low carbon 
sources.  
a) Where development, does not fall within the threshold 
above, on site renewables will be sought on a case by case 
                                                           
9 Major development is defined wi thin the glossary in Appendix 1.   34basis.  
b) Where it can be demonstrated that it is not feasible10 t o  
provide such energy generation measures on site then the 
provision of the equivalent energy saving can be made by 
improving the building fabric or a combination of energy 
provision and energy saving measures that equates to the 
equivalent of 10%. 
c) In cases where there is justification that the above cannot 
be achieved then a contribution to a carbon management 
fund will be required.  
d) The renewable or low carbon energy technologies must be 
made operational before any new  or converted buildings are 
occupied.   
e) Where specific opportunities exist, development will be 
encouraged to connect to existing decentralised and 
renewable or low carbon sources. 
 
The Borough Council will have regard to the viability of all pr oposals, if, due 
to viability reasons, it is not possible to satisfy the criteri a above then a 
robust viability assessment must be submitted. 
 
 Reducing and Mitigating Flood Risk 
7.17 Following flooding in 2007,  the government commissioned a review (The Pitt 
Review, 2008), which recommended urgent changes in the way the country is 
adapting to the increased risk of  flooding.  This included an i ncreased focus on 
addressing surface water flood risk through the enactment of th e Flood and 
Water Management Act (2010). Under  the Act, Hartlepool Borough Council 
became a Lead Local F lood Authority. 
 7.18 Hartlepool recorded eight y flooding incidents between 2014  and 2017 and the 
total estimated cost of these incidents was approximately £709. 000.  The 
causes of flooding were primarily highway flooding, records of local flooding 
showed an impact on properties, gardens, car parks and allotmen ts. No 
internal flooding to properties o ccurred during this period and  there is limited 
information available on the number, extent and impacts of hist oric events in 
Hartlepool. A flooding record s heet has been completed since 20 15 outlining 
flooding issues and actions taken to remedy this. 
  7.19  Hartlepool has taken a pro- active approach to the long te rm reduction of flood 
risk through development based on the sequential approach to ma naging 
flood risk. In 2016 the Borough Council commissioned a Strategi c Flood Risk 
Level (SFRA) Level 1. The SFRA Level 1 published in 2017 update s the SFRA 
Level 1 published in 2016 using the most up- to-date flood risk  information and 
also taking into account the most  recent national planning poli cy and 
guidance. The Report identified seve ral areas where more a more  detailed site 
                                                           
10 Feasibility, in this i nstance, relates to th e ability to physic ally provide the renewable energy 
infrastructure. The matter of v iability (which in planning term s relates to cost) is considered in the final 
paragraph of policy CC1.   35specific assessment was required to inform the Council as to wh ether 
proposed development sites were s uitable for allocation with re gards to flood 
risk. This led to the commissioning of a Level 2 SFRA Site Scre ening Report 
which was published in 2017 and, based on the available modelli ng data, 
provided recommendations to the Council for each policy area/si te as to the 
likely suitability of devel opment in terms of flood risk.   
 7.20 The findings of the SFRA have been used to inform the deve lopment of the 
local strategy, this flooding policy and policy QP7 in a bid to  ensure that the 
Borough Council fulfils its duties and powers set out in the Fl ood and Water 
Management Act (2010) and in par ticular the duty to contribute to sustainable 
development as set out within t he Planning and Compulsory Purch ase Act 
(2004) and repeated thought  the NPPF and NPPG. Specifically the  S F R A  
Level 2 provided the evidence base for undertaking the Flood Ri sk Sequential 
Test which determined that the Fl ood Risk Exception Test was re quired for a 
number of proposed development sit es. The Flood Risk Exception Test was 
undertaken for these sites using a methodology agreed with the Environment 
Agency. All of the sites/areas passed the 1st part of the Excep tion Test and all 
were assessed as being able to pass the 2nd part of the Excepti on Test but 
with the proviso that this woul d need to be further assessed th rough a flood 
risk assessment in the event of a planning applic ation. The Exc eption Test 
included recommendations for the si te allocation policies for t he sites that 
were tested; that flood risk miti gation criteria be added to th e policies. These 
criteria have been incl uded in this Local Plan.     
 7.21  More vulnerable development, such as housing, will be loc ated outside of 
areas of flood risk and this is a key part of the sequential te s t  f o r  a l l  t h e  
proposed residential allocations. Any areas of higher flood ris k have been 
incorporated into Green Infrastr ucture projects such as the Gre en Wedge at 
the South Western Extension wh ich includes Greatham Beck and it s 
associated areas of flood risk.  
 7.22 Developments in higher ri sk areas will only be supported w here it is essential 
to meet the Borough’s strategic regeneration priorities and com plies with the 
national sequentia l and exceptions tests or appropriate legisla tion applicable 
at the time. 
 7.23  The 2017 SFRA Level 1 states that surface water flooding is prevalent across 
the borough, particularly in the eastern part along the urbanis ed coastal plain.  
The higher, more rural ground to the west of the district is le ss at risk, 
although in settlements such as Hart and Dalton Piercy the risk  is higher. The 
Environment Agency has not formally designated any Critical dra inage Areas 
(CDAs) within the Hartlepool District.  The 2010 Level 1 SFRA p roposed a 
number of CDAs. The 2010 SFRA Level 2 narrowed down the number of 
CDAs to four, of which three were confirmed by HBC as part of t he SFRA.  
These are at The Slake/Middle Warren Watercourse, Tunstall Farm  Beck at 
West Park and The Stell. The fourth, at Tunstall Farm Beck near  Stranton, 
was confirmed by HBC following further investigation.  Surface water drainage 
must be considered for development as well as the effect on exi sting sewers 
and watercourses, this must form part of any detailed flood ris k assessments.  36Any increased flood risk must be managed and the Borough Counci l will 
encourage management of this throug h the use of Sustainable Urb an 
Drainage Systems (SuD S) and the opportunity  for Green Infrastru cture.  
 7.24  The Tees Valley Authorities Lo cal Standards for Sustainable Dra inage has 
been produced by a working group fr om the Local Authorities of Hartlepool, 
Middlesbrough, Redcar and Clevel and, Stockton-on-Tees and Darli ngton 
Borough Councils. The document forms the local standards for th e Local 
Authorities and, together with t he National Standards, strongly  promotes the 
use of SuDS. The document will be updated annually and is avail able on the 
Borough Council’s website.  
 
7.25 Developments that will r equire flood risk assessments incl ude the following: 
 in flood zone 2 or 3 includi ng minor development and change of  use 
 more than 1 hectare (ha) in flood zone 1 
 less than 1 ha in flood zone 1, including a change of use in d evelopment 
type to a more vulnerable class, where they could be affected b y sources 
of flooding other than rivers and the sea (for example surface water 
drains, reservoirs) 
 in an area within flood zone 1 which has critical drainage pro blems as 
notified by the Environment Agency 
 
7.26 The written flood risk assessment can be in any format but  must include the 
relevant plans, surveys and asse ssments as well as a flooding h istory for the 
specific site. The applicant shal l check with the local plannin g authority for any 
site specific requirements, e.g. for producing detailed hydraul ic models. 
   
 
CC2: Reducing and Mi tigating Flood Risk 
 
 All new development proposals will be required to demonstrate how they will 
minimise flood risk to people, pr operty and infrastructure from  all potential 
sources by: 
 
1) Avoiding inappropriate developm ent in areas at risk of flood ing and 
directing the development away from areas at highest risk, appl ying the 
Sequential Test and if necessary th e Exceptions Test, in accord ance 
with national policy and the Hartlepool Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment; 
 
2) Site Specific Flood Risk Assessments will be required in acc ordance 
with national policy; 
 
3) Ensuring that the developmen t will be safe over its lifetime , taking 
account of climate change, will not increase flood risk in vuln erable 
locations elsewhere and where po ssible, will reduce flood risk overall; 
 
4)  Assessing the impact of the development proposal on existin g  37sewerage infrastructure and flo od risk management infrastructur e, 
including whether there is a nee d to reinforce such infrastruct ure or 
provide new infrastructure; 
 
5) Ensuring that development pr oposals are resilient to flood r isk, in 
accordance with national policy and the findings and recommenda tions 
of the Hartlepool Strateg ic Flood Risk Assessment; 
 
6) Requiring that all developmen t proposals include provision f or the full 
separation of foul and s urface water flows; 
 
7) Ensuring that development propo sals separate, minimise and c ontrol 
surface water run-off, with Sust ainable Drainage Systems being the 
preferred approach. 
 
8) Surface water should be manag ed at source wherever possible,  
ensuring that there is no net  increase in surface water runoff for the 
lifetime of the development. Sur face water should be disposed o f in 
accordance with the following hier archy for surface water run-o ff:  
 
a) to a soak away system, unless it can be demonstrated that this is not 
feasible due to poor infiltration  with the underlying ground co nditions;  
b) to a watercourse, unless there is  no alternative or suitable re ceiving 
watercourse available; 
c) to a surface water sewer; 
d) disposal to combined sewers s hould be the last resort once all other 
methods have been explored. 
 
9) Where Greenfield sites are to  be developed, the surface wate r run-off 
rates should not exceed, and wher e possible, should reduce the existing 
run-off rates. Where previously  developed (brownfield) sites ar e to be 
developed, surface water run-o ff rates should seek to achieve g reenfield 
equivalent run off rates or be re duced by a minimum of 50% of t he 
existing site run-off rate.   
 
 
Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Generation 
7.27  Addressing climate change and suppor ting the transition to a lo w carbon future 
is one of the key priorities of delivering sustainable developm ent and is a 
central government core planning principle.11 The Climate Change Act 2008 
established a legal framework un derpinning the UK government’s commitment 
to tackling climate ch ange, including reducing CO 2 emissions and addressing 
climate risks. 
 7.28 Encouraging the development  of energy generation from rene wable and low 
carbon sources is a key part of addressing wider climate change  and energy 
                                                           
11 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 17; Department f or Communities & Local 
Government, March 2012.   38efficiency issues. The 2011 Energy White Paper12 aims to establish a diverse 
and secure range of low carbon sour ces of electricity. The gove rnment is 
seeking to transform the UK into a low carbon economy and meet a 15% 
renewable energy target by 2020 and an 80% carbon reduction tar get by 
2050. Following the United Nati ons Climate Change Conference in  Paris in 
December 2015 a deal was agreed t hat attempts to limit the glob al rise in 
temperatures to less than 2 degrees C. There is a long term goa l of net zero 
emissions by the end of the cent ury, with progress independentl y assessed in 
2018 and every five years thereafte r. Reflecting the reducing c ost of low 
carbon technologies, targets on reducing emissions will be able  to be stepped 
up. In 2020 all countries will be expected to update their plan s to cut emissions 
by 2030.    
 7.29 Future large scale renewable  energy generation in the UK i s likely to come 
principally from the following sources: 
 
 Onshore and offshore wind turbines  – both now well established  and one 
of the most economically viable sources of renewable electricit y; 
 Solar Photovoltaic (PV) developments – ground mounted solar PV  
panels convert sunlight into ener gy.  Rising energy costs and t he support 
of the Feed in Tariff increased the attractiveness of solar PV developments, although more recent changes to the tariff may af fect the 
number of solar PV proposals;  
 Biomass – which involves burning fuel such as wood which is re newable 
because, through planting and re-growth, biomass can be replace d over 
time and the cycle can be continuously repeated; 
 Energy from Waste (EfW) – the combustion of waste, or similar 
processes, reduces the amount of waste going to landfill and re covers 
energy from that waste as electricity or heat. Decentralised en ergy 
networks/district heating schem es/combined heat and power syste ms are 
common examples of energy from waste; 
 Wave and Tidal – although there ma y be considerable potential for this 
source of power in the UK and a number of prototypes are curren tly 
operating, many of the technolog ies are still developing. 
 7.30 There is also potential to supply energy from small scale micro-renewable 
schemes which can when taken toget her, make a significant contr ibution to 
renewable energy output  and tackling climate change. Micro-rene wable 
devices (which are usually accep ted to be the production of hea t of less than 
45kW capacity or electricity of l ess than 50kW capacity) includ e: 
 
 Micro-wind turbines and r oof mounted wind turbines; 
 Roof mounted solar technologies ( including photovoltaic arrays  and hot 
water panels); 
 Heat pumps (ground source, air s ource and water source), and 
 Individual biomass boilers.   
 
                                                           
12 Planning for our electric future: a White Paper for secure aff ordable and low carbon electricity; 
Department for Energy & C limate Change, July 2011.   397.31 Micro-renewable devices can be retrofitted to existing bui ldings or 
incorporated into developments.  Some proposals will, depending on scale and 
location, fall within permi tted development rights. 
 7.32 The Borough Counc il will seek to maximise opportunities th at support 
proposals for renewable and low  carbon energy generation, while  ensuring 
that any adverse impacts are sat isfactorily addressed, includin g cumulative 
impacts on landscape, visual am enity, and historic and natural assets.  Some 
proposed developments may need to be accompanied by an environm ental 
statement which will include an assessment of any likely signif icant effects. 
 7.33 The Borough Council will work flexibly with developers in order to promote 
energy from renewable sources and  to achieve acceptable schemes .    
 
7.34 Strategic wind turbine devel opments and large scale solar PV developments 
are considered under separate policies (CC4 and CC5). 
 
    
 
CC3: Renewable and Low Carbon En ergy Generation (excluding stra tegic wind 
turbines and large scale solar photovoltaic developments) 
 
Proposals for the generation of energy from renewable and low c arbon 
sources, including micro-renewa ble projects, will be supported to contribute 
toward the achievement of targets for renewable energy and redu ction of CO 2
emissions.   
 
In determining applications for e nergy generation from renewabl e and low 
carbon sources, significant weight will be given to the achieve ment of wider 
environmental and economic benefits. 
 
Applications will be approved s ubject to the proposal satisfact orily addressing 
the following criteria, including cumulative impacts within and  outside the 
Borough: 
 
1) Position of the installat ion on the land or building; 
2) Visual appearance, topography  and character of the area; 
3) Impact on the amenity of lo cal residents and nearby occupier s, 
including visual intrusion, air , dust, noise, odour, traffic ge neration 
and access; 
4) Impact on internationally, nationally or locally important s pecies 
and habitats; 
5) Any adverse impacts on air traffic operations, radar and air  
navigational systems, and 
6) Impact on the significance of  a heritage asset, including it s setting.  
 
Proposals should include details of any associated developments , including  40access roads, transmission lines, pyl ons and ancillary building s. 
 
Proposals should include details of measures to mitigate any ad verse effects 
on the amenities of occupiers of  nearby properties during the c onstruction, 
operational lifespan, and decommi ssioning of equipment and/or i nfrastructure. 
 
Where appropriate, developers will need to include a satisfacto ry scheme to 
restore the site to a quality of  at least its original conditio n when the 
development has reached the end of its operational life, includ ing addressing 
any resultant land contamination issues.  Any proposals for a lifetime 
extension or repowering of a renewable/low carbon energy genera tion project 
will be considered against the c riteria outlined in this policy . 
 
 
Strategic Onshore Wind Turbine Developments 
7.35 Wind energy remains one of t he biggest contributors to the  supply of electricity 
from renewable sources and will make  a significant contribution  towards the 
country’s 2020 renewable energy gener ation targets. Strategic w ind turbine 
developments are those with 0.5 MW and above of generating capa city up to 
50 MW capacity. Proposals of over 50 MW are currently considere d by the 
Secretary of State for Energy and the local pla nning authority is a statutory 
consultee. However the Governm ent has now announced its intenti on to 
amend legislation so that all app lications for onshore wind ene rgy 
developments are handled by loc al planning authorities. 
 
7.36 Hartlepool has already proved to be a viable location for strategic wind turbine 
developments, with a scheme in operation at High Volts in the n orth of the 
Borough and a further scheme appr oved but not yet constructed a t Red Gap 
Moor near Wynyard. Planning applications in 2014 for three turb ines in the 
Brenda Road area were approved by  the Borough Council but ‘call ed in’ by the 
Secretary of State. These applic ations were subsequently deemed  to be 
invalid by the Secretary of State due to inadequate/insufficien t public 
consultation.   
7.37 The Government’s onli ne Planning Practice Guidance
13 has now made it clear 
that when considering planning appl ications for wind energy dev elopment, 
permission should only be granted if the proposal is in an area  identified as 
suitable for wind energy in a Local or Neighbourhood Plan, and the proposal 
has the backing of the local community. It is the responsibilit y of prospective 
applicants for wind turbine proposals to undertake compulsory p re-application 
consultation with the local comm unity. The requirements are set  out in 
sections 61W and 61X of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 and Article 
4 of the Town and Country Pla nning (Development Management Proc edure) 
(England) Order 2015, and are summa rised in the government’s on line 
Planning Practice Guidance14. 
                                                           
13 Planning Practice Guidance, Renewable & Low Carbon Energy, upd ated June 2015 
(http://planningguidance.planning portal.gov.uk).  
14 http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uk pga/2011/20/part/6/chapter/4/en acted 
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ uksi/2015/595/article/4/made  41 
7.38 There are two studies in Ha rtlepool that have informed con sideration of rural 
areas within the Borough that may  have potential for wind turbi ne 
developments:    
 
 East Durham and Tees Plain Wind Farm Development and Landscape  
Capacity Study15, and 
 Hartlepool Landscape Assessment16 (although this study is now of more 
limited value) 
 7.39 Based on the evidence from both assessments it is consider ed that the 
following area has potential to accommodate further strategic w ind turbine 
development: 
 
 In the north west of the Borough,  in association with the exis ting wind 
turbine scheme at High Volts 
 
7.40 Further detail and analysis can be found in the Borough Co uncil’s Renewable 
Energy Evidence Paper
17.   
 7.41 Within the urban area, the Brenda Road area in south east Hartlepool is 
considered to have potential to a ccommodate a limited number of  wind 
turbines and the area has been the subject of recent developer interest.  The 
Brenda Road area is a predominantly  industrial landscape and th ere are 
several large structures in the vicinity including the nuclear power station, oil 
storage facilities, and chemical processing plant. While this i ndustrial area is 
capable of absorbing reasonably l arge structures and buildings it is necessary 
to have regard both to the potential cumulative visual impact o f a number of 
turbines within a specific area and to the impact of views of a ny turbines from 
outside of the area, as well as e cological and other constraint s .  T h e  W i n d  
Farm Landscape Capacity Study concluded that the area between B illingham 
and Hartlepool had potential to a ccommodate a ‘small-medium’ wi nd farm 
related to the industrial development of south east Hartlepool.  To reduce 
impact the maximum number of turbines should be restricted to f our and only 
small/medium scale turbines sh ould be permitted, with a maximum  tip height 
of 99 metres.   
 7.42 Voluntary community benefits schemes are now becoming an e stablished and 
integral part of onshore wind de velopments in the UK. The Borou gh Council 
will encourage and support developers and local communities to work together 
to secure community benefits from  projects. Such benefits could  include 
voluntary monetary payments from  a developer to the community u sually via 
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Planning Practice Guidance, Renewable & Low Carbon Energy, upda ted June 2015 
(http://planningguidance.planning.portal.gov.uk)  
15 Wind Farm Development and Lands cape Capacity Studies: East Dur ham and Tees Plain, North 
East Regional Assembly, August 2008, and Addendum, Association of North East Councils, October 
2009.  
16 Hartlepool Landscape As sessment; Landmark Pa rtnership on behal f of Hartlepool Borough 
Council, 2000.  
17 Hartlepool Local Plan: Evidence paper – Renewable Energy Gener ation, Hartlepool Borough 
Council, 2015.   42an annual cash sum, or other volunt ary benefits such as in-kind  work, direct 
funding of projects, or local energy discount schemes. 
 
 
CC4: Strategic Wind Turbine Developments 
 
Proposals for strategic scale wind turbine developments (develo pments with 
0.5 MW generating capacity and above), that can demonstrate tha t they have 
the backing of the local community following consultation,  wil l be supported 
in the following locations in t he Borough as defined on the Pol icies Map: 
 
1) High Volts – in association with the existing wind turbine 
development there is potential f or up to 3 additional turbines;  
2) Brenda Road area – a m aximum of 4 turbines.  
 
Proposals in the High Volts area should be of a similar scale ( or smaller) to the 
existing turbines.  In the Brenda Road area proposals should be  restricted to a 
maximum of 4 small/medium scale turbines with a maximum tip hei ght of 99 
metres.  
 
Proposals in the High Volts and Brenda Road areas will also be subject to 
consideration of the f ollowing criteria: 
 
3)     the impact, either indivi dually or cumulatively, on the amenity of 
local communities or residents in cluding visual intrusion, nois e 
and traffic; 
4)     appropriate measures and/or mitigation can be provided t o 
reduce or eliminate the potential of shadow flicker; 
5)     siting and scale of turbi nes takes into account the appe arance, 
topography, landscape and character of the area as identified i n 
existing and any future La ndscape and Visual Impact 
Assessments; 
6)     impact, either individuall y or cumulatively, on internat ionally, 
nationally or locally important species and habitats; 
7)     impact, either individuall y or cumulatively, on the sign ificance of 
a heritage asset including its setting; 
8)     any adverse impacts on air traffic operations, radar and  air 
navigational systems;  
9)     any adverse interference wi th electromagnetic transmissi ons 
including radio, television a nd communication signals, and 
safeguarded meteorological s ites and installations, and 
10)   safety measures are in place, including appropriate topple 
distances18, to protect buildings, roads and rights of way. 
 
Additionally proposals in the B renda Road area will also be con sidered in 
                                                           
18 An appropriate topple distance is the tip height + 10%. In the case of overhead lines it is whichever 
is the greater of the tip height +  10% or the electrical safety  distance applicable to the voltage of the 
overhead line (source : Energy recommendati on L44: Issue 1 2012:  Separation between wind  
turbines and overhead lines: Principles of good practice – Ener gy Networks Association). 
  43relation to: 
 
11)   the nature of the surroundi ng built environment, includin g the 
presence of large industrial or other structures that can 
reduce/mitigate the visual impact of wind turbines; 
12)   impact of the proposal on l onger distance views, particul arly from 
residential areas, herit age assets and the coast. 
 
All strategic wind turbine proposals should include details of associated 
developments and infrastructur e including access roads, transmi ssion lines, 
pylons and other anc illary buildings.   
 
All proposals should include details of measures to mitigate an y adverse 
effects on the amenities of occ upiers of nearby properties duri ng the 
construction, operational lifespan and decommissioning of 
equipment/infrastructure. 
 
All proposals should also include  details of how the site will be satisfactorily 
restored to at least its original condition once the wind turbi nes are no longer 
operational. Any proposals for a lifetime extension or repoweri ng of wind 
turbine projects will be consider ed against the criteria outlin ed in this policy. 
 
Developers will be required to undertake effective early pre-ap plication 
consultation with the public and interested parties, and will b e expected to 
work constructively with local communities and the local author ity to secure 
appropriate community benefits from wind turbine proposals. 
 
 Large scale Solar Photov oltaic (PV) developments 
7.43 There is a role for ground based solar PV developments to make a significant 
contribution to meeting national targets for increased renewabl e energy 
generation. There has been recent interest in developing solar PV 
developments in Hartlepool possibly reflecting capacity levels being reached in 
the south of the country, while i mproving technology allows sch emes to be 
viable in areas with lower irradiation (sunlight) levels. 
 7.44 Large scale (generating over 0 .5MW) solar PV developments will be 
considered on their merits and in relation to a number of speci fic criteria.  
Solar PV developments will be supported where possible. However  i t  i s  
important that support is not at t he expense of such developmen ts beginning 
to proliferate and dominate cert ain areas of the Borough. Consi deration of 
solar PV developments should ther efore also include their relat ionship with 
other renewable energy pro jects in the Borough. 
 7.45 A Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment should be provide d with 
proposals for large scale solar PV developments. The Assessment  should 
include: 
 Baseline landscape conditions, i ncluding consideration of any existing local 
landscape assessments, and details  of the sensitivity and impor tance of the 
landscape  44 Predictions of impact, includi ng scale/magnitude of change to the 
landscape, a Zone of Theoretical Vis ibility (ZTV), and evaluati on of direct, 
indirect and cumulative effects not only with other solar PV de velopments 
but also with other renewab le energy developments 
 Significance of impact, incl uding judgements made, sensitivity  of the 
landscape and receptors and significance of impacts following a ny 
mitigation 
 Mitigation, including measures  to avoid, reduce and remedy any  significant 
effects on the landscape and how mitigation measures will be im plemented.   
 
 
CC5: Large Scale Solar Photovoltaic Developments 
 
Proposals for large scale (over 0.5MW) ground based solar photo voltaic 
developments which contribute towa rds the achievement of nation al renewable 
energy targets and the reduction of CO 2 emissions will be supported subject to 
consideration of the following: 
 
1) developments should make use of previously developed or non-
agricultural land. If the propo sal involves the use of agricult ural 
land the best and most versatile land should be avoided and 
poorer quality land should be used; evidence should be provided  
to demonstrate the extent to which other sites for the 
development have been considered, particularly previously-
developed/non-agricultural land; 
2) affect on the amenity of occup iers of any nearby properties and/or 
land;  
3) impact of the development on landscape and character and the  
scope for mitigating any visual  impacts through, for example, t ree 
planting and screening with nat ive hedges; applications should 
be accompanied by a Landscape and Visual Assessment; 
4) effect of glint and glare on the landscape, neighbouring use s, 
highway and aircraft safety a nd on the passage/flight lines of 
migratory birds ; 
5) the need for, and impact of, security measures such as light ing 
and fencing; 
6) impact, either individually or  cumulatively, on the signific ance of 
a heritage asset including its setting; 
7) impact, either individually or cumulatively, on internationa lly, 
nationally or locally important species and habitats; 
8) an assessment of opportunities provided by the development t o 
enhance biodiversity interest, including for example wildflower  
planting, and 
9) an assessment of floodi ng and drainage issues. 
 
All proposals should include details of how the site will be re stored to at least 
its original condition when the development has reached the end  o f  i t s  
operational life.  In most cases applicants should provide an e nd date for the 
scheme to demonstrate the temporary nature of a solar photovolt aic 
development.  45 
Where appropriate developers should engage with the local commu nity and 
take their views into account pri or to submitti ng a planning ap plication. 
  468. INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
8.1 Infrastructure is a critical element in achieving sustainab le development.  
Efficient and reliable infrastructure is necessary to support g rowth and 
development over the Local Plan period.  The important role of infrastructure 
has been recognised by central government through the productio n of a 
National Infrastructure Plan19 and more recently a National Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan20, differing approaches to funding infrastructure development 
such as Local Growth Fund (LGF) and the Community Infrastructur e Levy 
(CIL), and policy/guidance in the National Planning Policy Fram ework 
(NPPF)21 and National Planning Pr actice Guidance (NPPG)22. 
 8.2 As part of the local plan pre paration process the Borough C ouncil has 
prepared a Local Infrastructure Plan (LIP)
23.  The LIP identifies the type of 
infrastructure required to facilitate and deliver allocations a nd proposals within 
the local plan and, where possible, the responsibilities for de livery and sources 
of funding. 
 8.3 This section of the Plan se ts out the policies and proposal s for the following 
key infrastructure elements: 
 
 Strategic transport and connectivity 
 Community facilities and services 
 Hospital provision 
 Telecommunications and utilities 
 
Transport and Connectivity 
8.4 The transport and connectivi ty policies in the Hartlepool L ocal Plan have been 
prepared within the context of t he transport challenges and amb itions of the 
wider Tees Valley sub-region.  T hese are identified in the Tees  V a l l e y  
Statement of Transport Ambition
24 and are summarised in the Table 4 below: 
 
 Table 4 – Transport Challenges a nd Ambitions of the Tees Valley 
  
Transport ambition Type of action required 
Resilient network connectivity  –
improving journey experiences on urban & local passenger networks; improving freight & passenger movements to and from national and inte rnational gateways Improvements to the local rail network 
including stations and interchange opportunities  Targeted strategic and local highway improvements such as capacity 
                                                           
19 National Infrastructure Plan 2013; HM Treasury, December 2013.  
20 National Infrastructure Deliver y Plan 2016-2021; Infrastructur e and projects Authority, reporting to 
HM Treasury and Cabinet Office, March 2016 
 
21 National Planning Policy Frame work, Department for Communities  and Local Government, March 
2012.  
22 http://www.planningguidance.planningportal.gov.uk.  
23 Hartlepool Local Infrastructure  Delivery Plan (Draft); Hartlep ool Borough Council, June 2016.  
24 Connecting the Tees Valley: Sta tement of Transport Ambition; T ees Valley Unlimited, April 2011.   47improvements at key junctions on the 
A19(T)  
Access to employment  –  i m p r o v i n g  
local bus services and opening up economic development opportunities Investment in new buses and journey 
time information  Bus priority measures, better passenger facilities and improved ticketing  
Enhanced cycling and walking networks 
for shorter commutes  Facilitating development at pinch points such as Wynyard (A19(T)/A689)  
Reducing carbon emissions  –
supporting transport systems, including through the spatial pl anning process, that 
do not exacerbate c limate change, and 
promoting active travel and targeted programmes of smarter choices Workplace and school travel planning 
 More electric vehicle charging points  Promoting a modal shift from the private car to rail and bus through marketing and awareness raising and service quality improvements  
 8.5 Network resilience and easin g congestion are recognised in the Tees Valley 
Strategic Economic Plan
25 as key elements in overcoming barriers to get 
businesses and people moving.  Capacity issues in and around th e 
A19(T)/A689 junction at Wynyar d impact on key housing and busin ess 
locations at Wynyard Park, southern Hartlepool and the north si de of the River 
Tees.  Some recent work at thi s junction, implemented through a  successful 
bid for Pinch Point Programme f unding, has improved traffic flo ws and further 
improvements planned along the A 689 will provide additional cap acity to ease 
constraints on further developm ent in the Wynyard and south Har tlepool 
areas. 
 8.6 The Tees Valley Combined Au thority’s transport vision for t he Tees Valley
26 is 
‘to provide a high qua lity, quick, affordable, reliable and saf e transport network 
for people and freight to move wit hin, to and from the Tees Val ley’. 
The Combined Authority is current ly developing a Strategic Tran sport Plan, 
due for publication in summer 201 7.  To facilitate the public c onsultation, 
‘Connecting the Tees Valley’ has been developed, which sets out  the sub-
region’s transport priorities up to 2026 and explain how the Te es Valley 
Combined Authority wants to impro ve the Tees Valley’s local tra nsport 
system. This document sets out the  framework for the Strategic Transport 
Plan and invites stakeholders, i nterest groups and the public t o help shape the 
                                                           
25 Tees Valley Strategic Economic  Plan, Tees Valley Unlimited, Ap ril 2014  
26 Connecting the Tees Valley, Tees  Valley Combined Authority, No vember 2016  
  48final Strategic Transport Plan. In  producing the Strategic Tran sport Plan, the 
Combined Authority aims to: 
 
 Improve local railways by havin g more, faster and better trains  and 
stations, so that journeys by r ail are quicker and more comfort able; 
 Maintain and improve roads so that they are safe and less conge sted; 
 Provide better bus services tha t are punctual and reliable, wit h improved 
passenger information and facilitie s, which provide access to w here 
people want to go, when they want to go; 
 Provide safe walking and cycling routes to make it easier to tr avel on 
foot and by bike; and 
 Make it easier and safer to trans port freight by road, rail, se a and air. 
 
 
8.7 The Tees Valley Strategic Infrastructure Plan27 identifies a number of specific 
projects designed to achieve the objectives of the Strategic Ec onomic Plan.  
Projects relevant to Hartlepool include: 
  
 Strategic route management – compl ements other capacity improv ements 
across the highway network, incl uding expanding use of the Urba n Traffic 
Management and Control System 
 A689 Wynyard improvements – f unding for capacity improvements secured 
through Local Growth Fund (LGF) 
 Sustainable Transport Package – increasing access to employmen t and 
other services, especially for those without access to a car 
 Hartlepool Dock Entrance – enhanc ing the locational advantages  
associated with the Po rt Enterprise Zone 
 A19 Active Traffic Management – increases capacity to facilita te future 
development through better man agement of vehicle speeds and rou teing  
 A19 widening between Wynyard (A 689) and Norton – part of a wid er 
package of measures to relieve fu ture congestion on the A19(T) 
 8.8 The Borough Council’s Local Transport Plan (LTP)
28 sets out improvements 
proposed to the local highway network over a 15 year period.  T he LTP is 
regularly updated so that it reflects regional and sub-regional  priorities as well 
as proposals identified in the Local Plan.   
 8.9 All transport schemes considered within this section are set ou t in more detail 
in the Local Infrastructure Plan.   
 
Road network 
8.10 There are two principal road links to/from Hartlepool town  centre and the main 
urban areas with the strategic s ub-regional network.  These are  the A179 
which links with the A19(T) to the north, and the A689 linking with the A19(T) 
to the south and then west towards the A1(M).  Additionally the  A1086 forms 
an important link north from Ha rtlepool towards Peterlee and co mmunities in 
                                                           
27 Tees Valley Strategic Infrastr ucture Plan, Tees Valley Unlimit ed, November 2014  
28 Local Transport Plan 3, 2011-2026; Hartlepool Borough Council,  April 2011.   49East Durham, while the A178 is a s imilarly important link south  towards key 
employment areas at Seal Sands , Port Clarence and Billingham. 
 8.11 Development and economic gro wth, together with a general t rend of 
increasing car ownership levels, have meant that traffic flows have increased 
over recent years, particularly on the principal road network a nd in the urban 
areas.  Congestion and journey reliability is an issue at a num ber of places in 
Hartlepool especially during peak periods.  Developments likely  to come 
forward over the plan period will inevitably increase traffic l evels and increase 
pressure at certain pinch points leading to further delays and unreliability, and 
increased costs particularly for businesses. 
 8.12 Highways England (HE) has undertaken a modelling exercise
29 to assess the 
implications of the development  proposals in the Local Plan on the strategic 
road network (SRN) and its juncti ons, namely the A19(T) and its  v a r i o u s  
access points.  With regard to the likely impact of the key hou sing allocation in 
the Local Plan on the strategic network - High Tunstall - the c onclusion of the 
HE modelling was that the developm ent would create “greater tha n 30 two-
way trips – further assessment of potential impacts required”.   The impact of 
the High Tunstall development will be mitigated by the provisio n of an 
improved link to the A19(T) at Elwick, including a bypass to th e north of Elwick 
village and a grade separated junc tion on the A19(T) itself at the northern 
Elwick access (see policy INF1 ‘Sustainable Transport Network’ and the Local 
Infrastructure Plan).  It has been agreed by Highways England t hat these 
works could take place prior to,  or concurrently with, the wide ning of the A19 
between Norton and Wynyard. In relation to housing development at 
Wynyard, the A689 committed scheme complements the Highways Eng land 
Pinch Point Programme scheme at  the A689/A19 junction, allowing  a number 
of residential schemes at Wyny ard to be implemented without fur ther highway 
capacity improvements.  However, further capacity improvements will be 
required to enable further developm ent at Wynyard to be accepta ble in 
highway terms and deliverable over the local plan period. 
 
8.13 The Local Infrastructure Plan addresses areas where pressu res on the 
principal and local r oad networks may occur as a result of deve lopment 
proposed in the Local Plan and ident ifies where improvements to  the road 
network will be required.   
          
                                                           
29 The trips resulting from developments were calculated with ref erence to generic TRICS© data.  To 
distribute and assign the trips Highways England’s GraHAM tool has been used.  Gra HAM is a GIS-
based program for estimating or igin and destination of trips as sociated with land use developments.    50 
 
Bus Network 
8.14 Hartlepool is part of the Tees Valley Bus Network Improvem ent scheme 
(TVBNI) which is designed to offer significant improvements to bus services, 
provide a real alternative to the private car on key corridors,  and increase the 
number of opportunities for bette r access to employment and tra ining.  The 
bus network remains the most im portant mode of public transport  in Hartlepool 
in terms of number of passengers carried and providing access t o jobs and 
essential services, especially fo r those without access to priv ate transport. 
 8.15 As new housing schemes are developed through policies and proposals in the 
Local Plan, the Borough Council will work closely with bus oper ators to ensure 
that new and/or extended bus servi ces are provided at the appro priate time.  
The Borough Council will also s upport bus priority measures and  o t h e r  
infrastructure to alter the traffic balance in favour of buses,  improving 
punctuality and reliability. 
 
Rail Network 
8.16 In terms of passenger numbers rail plays a relatively smal l role compared to 
bus.  However rail services thr ough Hartlepool play an importan t role in: 
 
 Providing local services south to Stockton-on-Tees and Middles brough and 
north to Sunderland and Newcastle 
 Providing opportunities, thr ough changing at Thornaby and/or D arlington, to 
access main line services to other parts of the UK 
 Providing a direct service to York and London 
 8.17 Options for opening new stations will continue to be explo red as part of the 
Tees Valley Rail Initiative.  T he Borough Council will also con sult and work 
closely with Network Rail on development proposals that will af fect rail 
infrastructure, incl uding level crossings.  
 
Footpath and Cycle Networks  
8.18  The provision of a high standard, attractive and safe net work of footpaths and 
cycleways is an important element  of a package of sustainable t ransport 
measures.  Such a network can o ffer access to employment opport unities as 
well as leisure and community facilities, and can have the adde d benefit of 
reducing congestion and carbon e missions through reducing car u sage. 
 8.19 A number of key footpath and  cycle schemes/routes will be implemented 
during the Local Plan per iod.  These include: 
 
 Wynyard area – working in conjunction with Stockton-on-Tees Bo rough 
Council, Sustrans, relevant lan downers and developers, Hartlepo ol 
Borough Council will seek to impl ement a network of footpaths a nd 
cycle routes both within the Wynyard development and 
o to provide links to the Castl e Eden Walkway/National Cycle 
Network Route 1 (a major sub- regional leisure route and 
country park linking urban area s of Stockton-on-Tees with  51the countryside west of Stockton and Hartlepool and on into 
County Durham);  
o north from Wynyard linking into the public right of way just 
across the Hartlepool boundar y into County Durham; 
o safe pedestrian and cycle crossi ng points on the A689 to link 
both sides of the Wynyard development, and similar safe crossings at appropriate points on the local/distributor road 
network within Wynyard; 
o routes south from Wynyard int o north Stockton, Wolviston 
and Billingham, and 
o a route from Wynyard/Wolviston into Hartlepool at Newton 
Bewley and along the A689 corridor to link up with routes in south west  and south Hartlepool .  This will provide a safe, 
attractive alternative to  using the A689 itself. 
 Greatham Link – improving sustai nable access from residential 
developments in south west Hartl epool to employment sites in th e south 
of the Borough, including Queen’ s Meadow Business Park and the 
nuclear power station; this route will also offer leisure oppor tunities and 
could provide links to nature conservation sites such as Greath am 
Creek and RSPB Saltholme. 
 Town Centre/Railway station – addressing severance issues caus ed by 
the A689, and improving pedestri an and cycle links from the tow n 
centre to the station, inc luding pedestrian signage. 
 Golden Flatts – in association with the community woodland pro ject, 
providing sustainable  transport through the site in conjunction  with 
Sustrans. 
 Tourism routes – better signage in and around the Marina, part icularly 
to Navigation Point and the Mari time Experience.  Also, working  closely 
with Stockton-on-Tees Borough C ouncil and other key stakeholder s, 
investigating better links and interpretation with the RSPB res erve at 
Saltholme and other visitor sites  between Seaton Carew and Salt holme. 
 8.20 The Borough Council will seek  to ensure that all parts of the urban area, 
including proposed development sites, are linked by safe and ea sily 
accessible green networks and rights of way to green space and the open 
countryside.  Such networks can also perform an important role as links 
between housing and employment a reas, and shopping and leisure facilities.  
The Borough Council’s Gr een Infrastructure Strategy
30 identifies a number of 
aspirational, upgradeable, and est ablished leisure routes to pr ovide links both 
to green space and the open coun tryside and to key employment a reas. 
       
                                                           
30 Hartlepool Green Infrastructure : Supplementary Planning Docume nt; Hartlepool B orough Council, 
February 2014.   52 
INF1: Sustainable Transport Network 
 
The Borough Council will work with key partners, stakeholders a nd other local 
authorities to deliver an effect ive, efficient and sustainable transport network, 
within the overall context of aiming to reduce the need to trav el. In Hartlepool 
the key priorities of a sustain able transport network are to: 
 
1) support sustainable economic growth and inward investment by  
improving reliability and minimising delays; 
2) improve opportunities for access to employment and training,  
particularly for those wi thout private transport; 
3) provide realistic alternat ives to travel by private car; 
4) support initiatives to reduce carbon emissions from transpor t, 
including for example the provisi on of more electric vehicle 
charging points and low emission buses; 
5) improve connectivity both within Hartlepool, and between 
Hartlepool and the other parts of the Tees Valley and the wider  
North East region by improving the quality and reliability of k ey 
road and rail links; 
6) support and implement the locational strategy identified in 
policy LS1; 
7) continue to develop and improve interchange facilities withi n 
the town centre to increase opportunities for travel by public 
transport; 
8) improve the quality and re liability of bus services; 
9) improve the frequency and qua lity of rail services, includin g 
facilities for passengers and freight, and 
10) provide a comprehensive, saf e and well-managed network of 
footpaths and cycle routes throughout the Borough linking 
residential areas with em ployment sites, shopping and 
community facilities, and leisure/recreation sites. 
 
Where appropriate development will be required to contribute to  the delivery of 
a sustainable transport network and promote sustainable travel.   Local Plan 
policy QP1 and the Planning Obligations Supplementary Planning Document 
provide further detail on the ty pe of contribution that may be required. 
 
 
INF2: Improving Connectivity in Hartlepool 
 
Delivering sustainable transpor t in Hartlepool will be achieved  through a 
balanced package of measures that seek to: 
 
1) maximise the level of sustainable access to areas of 
development, particularly through good quality public transport  
services and safe, attractive and, where appropriate, well lit 
pedestrian and cycle routes, and 
2) develop further opportunities for sustainable modes of 
transport to serve existing communities throughout the  53Borough. 
 
Where improvements to the principal and local road network are necessary to 
enable development or to minimi se the impact on the existing ne twork, they 
will be delivered through appropr iate legal agreements and/or c onditions. 
Road and other capacity improvements that are likely to be requ ired during the 
plan period are set out in the Local Infrastructure Plan. 
 
The Local Infrastructure Plan also provides details of improvem ents needed to 
the bus network and rail services, as well as improvements to p edestrian and 
cycle routes to provide sustainable transport opportunities to new and existing 
developments. 
 
All schemes identified in the Local Infrastructure Plan will be  delivered to 
conform to policy LS1 . 
 
Development proposals which would require the upgrading of the Church 
Street level crossing in order t o achieve pedestrian and/or veh icular access 
will be expected to c ontribute accordingly. 
 
No permanent development will be permitted within land corridor s shown on 
the Policies Map that are reserved  for the following road and r ail schemes: 
 
3) grade separated junction on A19(T) at Elwick; improvements 
and realignment of Elwick Road i ncluding bypass north of Elwick  
village, and realignment of Coal Lane; 
4) a link road between approved housing development at South 
West Extension and proposed d evelopment at High Tunstall; 
5) B1277 Brenda Road/A178 Tees Road; 
6) New link from A179 Easington Road into Middle Warren; 
7) A179 to A19(T) widening. 
 
Developments that are likely to  generate significant amounts of  movement and 
traffic will be required to produce a Transport Assessment or T ravel Plan to 
demonstrate that all opportuniti es for sustainable transport mo des have been 
fully explored.  Planning conditions or legally binding agreeme nts will be used
to secure any improvements necessary to the transport network a s a result of a 
development.  A financial contribut ion may be required from dev elopers. 
Policy QP1 and the Planning Obligations Supplementary Planning Document 
set out the type of contributions likely to be required.  New t ransport 
infrastructure should also where appropriate conform to high de sign standards 
set out in policies QP3 and QP4, and link into the Borough Coun cil’s green 
infrastructure network id entified in policy NE2. 
 
 
      54Community Facilities and Services  
8.21 Community facilities, including schools, community centres , libraries, health 
care facilities and indoor sports facilities, contribute to the  quality of life, 
prosperity and well-being of local  residents and are important factors which 
influence decisions to live or invest in Hartlepool.  The provi sion of major 
facilities serving the town as a whole is important and many of  t h e s e  a r e  
located in and around the town centre so that they are accessib le to as many 
people as possible.  Facilities of a more local nature should a lso be provided, 
retained and, where possible, enhanced within local communities  so that they 
are easily accessible.  New residential developments should be provided with 
facilities at a scale to refle ct the needs of new and expanding  communities.   
 
Education facilities 
8.22 Developments that are likel y to generate an increased dema nd for school 
places will be required to contribute towards expanding existin g education 
facilities where the development is not of a sufficient size to  justify a new 
school.   
 8.23 Based on current pupil proj ections the Local Education Aut hority is confident 
that the number of  existing secondary school sites can cater for the expected 
growth from new housing development over the plan period.  Howe ver some 
developments may be required to contribute towards school enhan cements or 
extra provision (such as additi onal classrooms) at these sites  on the basis of 
the cumulative impact that the development may have on schools in that 
locality. 
 
8.24 With regard to primary school  provision there are concerns  over the capacity 
of existing provision, particu larly in the north west of the to wn. A new primary 
school will therefor e be required as a  result of the proposed housing 
development at High Tunstall. Elsewhere, a new  primary school is also  to be 
provided as part of the approved  South West Extension developme nt on a site 
that has sufficient land for it  to be expanded in the future. A t Wynyard, a 
temporary primary schools is cu rrently sited within Hartlepool however a new 
two-form entry primary school is  to be constructed to the south  of the A689, 
within Stockton-on-Tees. As Wy nyard develops out, there will al so be a need 
for an additional new primary sch ool to the north of the A689, within 
Hartlepool. The scale of new prima ry school provision, whether these are to 
be one-form or two-form entry , will be determined based on need  and whether 
these are delivered by the Council or the Education Funding Age ncy (EFA). In 
other areas of the town, where housing developments are assesse d to have 
an impact on a local school, whether  primary or secondary, in l ine with the 
Planning Obligations Supple mentary Planning Document31, contributions may 
be required to increase the c apacity of existing schools.  
 
8.25 Further information on school provision in the Borough, in cluding current 
admission details, is contained in  the Local Infrastructure Pla n.   
   
                                                           
31 Planning Obligations Supplement ary Planning Document: Final fo r Endorsement; Hartlepool 
Borough Council, October 2015.   55Health Care provision and la nd at the University Hospital 
8.26 Under the local NHS Trust’s “Momentum: pathways to healthc are” programme 
published in 2008, the strategy i n Hartlepool is to provide hea lth facilities as 
close to homes as possible, with only services which need to be  provided in 
hospital taking place there.    
 8.27 The ‘Momentum’ programme i dentified facilities to be deliv ered within the 
Hartlepool area as follows: 
 
 Enhanced provision of s ervices within homes 
 Enhanced GP and health centre services with easy access for th e local 
population 
 The establishment of integrated Health Care Centres in central  locations, 
such as the facility on Park Road in the town centre.  Such cen tres will 
contain a variety of service s based on the needs of the local p opulation.  
 8.28 A new hospital was also proposed as part of the ‘Momentum’ prog ramme to 
serve Hartlepool, Stockton-on-Tees  and parts of Easington and S edgefield 
(County Durham).  The hospital was to have been located at Wyny ard but a 
deadline linking to elements of t he land sale agreement has now  passed 
raising serious concerns as to whether the hospital will be del ivered in this 
location. 
 8.29 As growth takes place over the Local Plan period it is lik ely that further health 
care provision will be required in areas of significant new hou sing 
development.  In particular developments in the south west exte nsion and in 
the north west of the town at High Tunstall, are likely to requ ire new health 
care facilities as part of local centres within the respective developments.  This 
will ensure that current service s do not become stretched as a result of 
pressure from new housing development.   
 8.30  The Borough Council regards the existing University Hospital o f Hartlepool on 
Holdforth Road/Easington Road as a valuable asset for the peopl e of 
Hartlepool and adjacent areas of County Durham. It is also a ma jor employer 
providing accessible jobs for a significant number of local res idents.  A 
proposal by North Tees and Hartlepool NHS Foundation Trust to m erge the 
services provided by both the Ha rtlepool Hospital and the Unive rsity Hospital 
of North Tees (within Stockton- on-Tees Borough) on a new, green  field site at 
Wynyard Park is now highly unl ikely go ahead.  The Borough Coun cil seeks to 
retain the existing Hartlepool hos pital and its facilities and where possible 
expand and improve t he range of health services it provides. 
 8.31  The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) identifies three main roles of 
planning to achieve sustainable development.  Alongside these e conomic and 
environmental roles, there is also a social role.  This involve s supporting 
strong, vibrant and healthy comm unities and providing accessibl e local 
services that reflect the community’s needs and support its hea lth, social and 
cultural well-being
32.  Furthermore the NPPF states that planning policies 
                                                           
32 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 7.   56should guard against the loss of v alued facilities and services , particularly 
where this would reduce the co mmunity’s ability to meet its day -to-day 
needs33. 
 8.32 As required in the NPPF
34 the Borough Council will work closely with all 
relevant stakeholders to understand the health status and needs  of the 
Borough’s residents, and ensure that they are provided with hig h quality, 
accessible services. 
 
Indoor Sports facilities 
8.33 The Borough Council commissioned an updated Indoor Leisure  Facility 
Strategy in 2013.35  The conclusions of this Strategy, along with a description 
of the application of Sport Engl and’s Facilities Planning Model  (FPM), can be 
found in the Local Infrastructure Plan.  The Strategy has taken  account of 
likely changes in population and population profile, as well as  the broad 
locations of proposed developmen t, in evaluating demand for fac ilities.    
 
 
8.34 Priorities for indoor sport and leisure provision over the  Local Plan period are: 
 
 Replacement of the existing but near life-expired swimming and  sports 
facilities at the Mill House Leis ure Centre with comparable fac ilities either 
on the Mill House site or another equally accessible and sustai nable town 
centre/fringe town centre location; 
                                                           
33 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 70.  
34 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 171.  
35 Indoor Leisure Facility Strategy ; EAG Consultancy Services on behalf of Hartlepool Borough 
Council, 2013.  
 57 An ongoing programme of refurbishment of facilities on educati on sites in 
conjunction with increased levels of community use; 
 Provision of a new swimming pool at Brierton Sports Centre.  T his will serve 
as a replacement for life-expir ed facilities at a number of sch ool sites and, 
through community use agreements, for access by existing and ne w 
residents in the south and west of the town; 
 Refurbishment of the existing, or construction of a new, swimm ing pool at 
High Tunstall school site, which will be able to serve resident s in the north 
west of the town. 
 
 
INF3: University Hospital of Hartlepool 
 
The Borough Council will safeguard the University Hospital of H artlepool site 
for the provision of health and related facilities.  As a prior ity the Borough 
Council, through working in partnership with the relevant hospi tal trust and 
Hartlepool and District Hospice, will seek to retain the servic es provided by the 
existing hospital and, where po ssible, expand the range of serv ices to meet 
current and future needs of the  Borough’s population.  This cou ld include 
supply chain businesses which support the health sector. 
 
Proposals for other uses on the si te will only be permitted pro vided that they: 
 
1) do not compromise the ability to meet current and anticipate d health 
and related uses on the site, and 
2) do not have a significant adve rse effect on the amenity of o ccupiers 
of adjacent or nearby properties . 
 
More vulnerable development will not be allowed within flood zo ne 2 or 
flood zone 3. 
 
  
 
INF4: Community Facilities 
 
To ensure that all sections of the local community have access to a range of 
community facilities that meet education, social, leisure/recre ation, and health 
needs, the Borough Council will: 
 
1) Protect, maintain and improve existing facilities where appr opriate 
and practicable; and 
2) Require and support the provision of new facilities to serve  
developments and to remedy any existing deficiencies . 
 
When considering the provision of new community facilities (inc luding health 
services, schools and indoor sports  facilities) as part of deve lopment, regard 
will be paid where appropriate to the following criteria: 
3)   the capacity and proximity o f other, similar community fac ilities  
nearby;  584)   the quantity, quality and accessibility of sports/recreati on facilities 
are in line with the standards set in the Open Space, Sport and  
Recreation Assessment; 
5)   the need or scope to incorpor ate other related educational  and 
community initiatives within t he proposed development, and 
 
As part of the High Tunstall, South West Extension and Wynyard housing 
allocations the developers will be required to safeguard land f o r  n e w p r i m a r y  
schools.  Regular monitoring will  determine when the new school s are required, 
and developers will be expected to contribute towards construct ion costs.  If 
constructed, it will also be necessary to ensure community use agreements are 
put in place to enable access to p laying fields for local teams  and residents. 
Other community facilities at these locations will be provided within the INF4 
designations as shown on the Policies Map. 
 
Where necessary planning conditions and legal agreements will b e used to 
ensure that these community use agreements are delivered as par t of 
developments across the Borough. 
 
Telecommunications and High Speed Broadband  
8.35 A high quality communications  infrastructure, including hi gh speed broadband, 
is essential for economic growth and for enhancing the provisio n of local 
community facilities and services.  The Local Plan supports the  expansion of 
electronic communications networ ks and the local authority has a wider role in 
supporting the roll out of supe rfast broadband to existing and proposed 
developments. 
 
8.36  In Hartlepool the main r esidential areas within and on th e edge of the town are 
either already served with a high speed broadband network or ca n be provided 
with a network in the short term .  The main gaps are industrial  estates and 
business parks, the town centre, and the villages and rural par ts of the 
Borough.   
 8.37 To address gaps in high s peed broadband the Borough Counci l, along with the 
other local authorities in Tees V alley, is a partner in the ‘Di gital Durham’ 
initiative
36.  Through participation in the Dig ital Durham programme, along  with 
other local Tees Valley initiatives37, Hartlepool will meet and exceed the UK 
Government’s target for 95% of all premises to have access to s uperfast 
broadband by December 2017.  In No vember 2016 additional fundin g (up to 
£1m) has been agreed between the Tees Valley Combined Authority  and 
Broadband Delivery UK (BDUK) to improve superfast broadband cov erage.  At 
a Tees Valley level this aims to exceed 98% coverage by the end  of 2018 and 
it should help Hartlepool to ach ieve coverage beyond its curren t 95% level. 
 
                                                           
36 ‘Led by Durham County Council ‘D igital Durham’ is a £25m initi ative to improve broadband speed 
for residents and businesses acro ss County Durham, Gateshead, S underland, and the Tees Valley.  
Funding has come through Broadband Delivery UK (BDUK) which was  set up by central government 
to deliver the broadband agenda.  
37 See the Local Infrastructure Plan.   598.38  As well as high speed br oadband other communications infr astructure will be 
required to support economic growt h and sustainable communities .   O n e  o f  
the main implications for planning concerns the number and loca tion of radio 
and telecommunication masts.  The National Plann ing Policy Fram ework38 
provides guidance on the expansion of electronic communications  networks 
and on the approach to radio and te lecommunications masts.   
 8.39 The Borough Council will generally support the improvement  and expansion of 
telecommunications networks subject to location, amenity and sa fety 
considerations.   
 
 Utilities 
8.40 The Local Infrastructure Pl an provides information on issu es associated with 
the provision of main utility se rvices to key development and g rowth areas 
within the Borough.  The utilities and services covered are ele ctricity provision, 
gas provision, water supply, and  foul and surface water managem ent.  The 
LIP covers areas such as: 
 
 ongoing investment programmes and priorities 
 current and potential capacity issues 
 existing assets affecting development sites 
 
8.41 Key issues/conclusions in relation to the main utilities in Har tlepool are 
summarised below: 
  
Table 5 – Key Utilities Issues 
 
Electricity provision Planned reinforcement/refur bishment projects will 
address capacity; however w orks cannot be undertaken 
in advance of proven need.  Estimates of costs for moving existing assets or providing new lines can be supplied by Northern Powergrid; this could assist with master planning exercises.  There are generally no capacit y issues when extending 
existing urban areas on to adjacent green field sites; main issues tend to be with previously developed land or more remote rural areas.  Few capacity issues affecti ng key industrial areas.  
 
Gas provision Northern Gas Networks is undertaking a long term 
pipeline replacement progra mme across Tees Valley; 
replacement infrastructure will be able to accommodate hydrogen.  
                                                           
38 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraphs 42 – 46.   60Generally no capacity issues in supplying development 
sites, particularly in or adjacent to urban areas.  Cost of supplying sites can vary – largely determined by distance from network and whether supply needs to 
cross critical infrastructure such as major roads or rail lines.  
Water supply For the majority of proposed development sites there is 
capacity available; however som e sites (identified in the 
LIP) will require mains r einforcement and/or some 
offsite works.  Hartlepool Water will continue to invest in new pipes, onsite generators, and flood pr otection works for all key 
sites.  
Foul and Surface Water Management Generally no significant foul  water or surface water 
issues associated with key development sites. Northumbrian Water Limited has provided a site by site analysis which is included in the LIP.  All new housing, employment and  industrial sites will be 
required to incorporate su stainable drainage systems 
(SuDS).  
 8.42 The Borough Council will work  closely with the utility pro viders and 
developers to ensure that requir ed services are provided at the  appropriate 
time, and that required works do not impact significantly on ot her services 
and users. 
 
 
INF5: Telecommunications 
 
Proposals for the improvement and expansion of telecommunicatio ns 
networks, including high speed broadband, will be supported and  applications 
for infrastructure will be supported subject to the proposal ad dressing the 
following criteria: 
 
Telecommunications and radio masts 
1) evidence that there will be no adverse impacts on air traffi c 
operations, radio and air navigational systems; 
2) evidence that there will be no adverse interference with 
electromagnetic transmissions, in cluding radio, television and 
communication signals; 
3) evidence that the operator ha s explored all options for usin g and 
sharing existing masts,  buildings and other structures so that the 
number of new masts and installations can be kept to a minimum;  
4) have regard to design and si ting techniques, including scree ning and  61landscaping, to minimise th e impact of equipment; 
5) the potential impact of new buildings or other structures in terfering 
with telecommunications services; 
6) evidence that consultation ha s been undertaken with organisa tions 
with an interest in the proposal  particularly where a mast is p roposed 
near a school or other educational establishment or within a 
statutory safeguarding zone; 
7) a statement that self-certifi es that the cumulative exposure , when the 
infrastructure is operational, will not exceed International 
Commission on non-ionisi ng radiation protect ion guidelines; 
8) the relationship of equipm ent to existing buildings, 
townscape/landscape, topography, views and vistas. 
 
Broadband 
Where broadband infrastructure is proposed within conservation areas, or 
where it   may have an impact on listed buildings or other heri tage assets, 
broadband providers are encouraged to liaise closely with the B orough 
Council to minimise any adverse impacts. 
 
Where appropriate, and having regard to any technical and opera tional 
constraints and the significance of the proposal as part of the  national 
network, the Borough Council will seek to protect areas of envi ronmental 
importance , including conservati on areas, areas of Special Lan dscape Value, 
and nature conservation sites, particularly sites designated of  international or 
national importance.  Where the operator can demonstrate that t here are no
suitable alternative locations p roposals within areas of enviro nmental 
importance should be designed and located to minimise visual an d other 
impacts.  Where there is likely to be an adverse impact on an i nternationally 
designated nature conservation si te, either directly or indirec tly, suitable 
mitigation measures will be required in advance of the developm ent that meet 
current habitat regulations. 
  629. QUALITY OF PLACE  
 
9.1 Development has the potential to create a multitude of bene fits in an area, 
providing the homes we need, cr eating jobs and enhancing spaces  and places 
we all want to be part of. However, if we do not plan and manag e development 
correctly, consequent pressures can have detrimental impacts up on the 
existing amenity and infrastructure of the Borough. Careful con sideration 
should be given to the impact that  development can have. Where there is the 
potential to create an impact wit hin the Borough appropriate mi tigation 
measures will be required to ens ure that the infrastructure sys tem and related 
facilities are able to cope wit h, adapt to and accommodate deve lopment.   
 
9.2 The Local Plan incorporates policies which seek to address potential impacts 
by facilitating the delivery of new and improved infrastructure  such as better 
quality roads, sewage treatment and the related network of infr astructure, 
green spaces, play areas and community facilities including sch ools, leisure 
facilities and community centres in order to help create a bett er quality of place 
capable of meeting the needs of exi sting and future generations . 
 
Planning Obligations 
9.3 The Borough Council will cont inue to use appropriate planni ng conditions as 
part of the planning application pr ocess to ensure that develop ment in the 
Borough is well designed and has an acceptable impact on the to wnscape and 
landscape of Hartlepool.  
 9.4 Development often puts pressure on the environment, infrast ructure and 
services. It is expected that d evelopers will mitigate or compe nsate for the 
impact of their proposals.  In many cases this mitigation/compe nsation will be 
delivered by way of ‘Planning Obligations’.  
  9.5 Planning obligations are u sually secured under section 106 of the Town & 
Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended).  These are agreements b etween 
local planning authorities and developers (and the landowner wh ere the 
developer does not own the land) that secure contributions, in cash or in kind, 
to address environmental impacts and community and infrastructu ral needs 
associated with development.  R egulations introduced in April 2 010 place 
three tests on the use of planni ng obligations.  These tests ar e also set out in 
the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF).  In determining an 
application it is unlawful to take into account a planning obli gation that does 
not meet all three tests.  These are that the obligation is: 
1) Necessary to make the proposed development acceptable in pla nning 
terms; 
2) Directly related to t he proposed development and 
3) Fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the propo sed 
development. 
 
9.6 In 2010 the government intr oduced the Community Infrastruct
ure Levy (CIL), 
which aims to provide a more  understandable charging system for  contributing 
towards wider infrastructure prov ision. Whilst planning obligat ions will still 
remain their use will be restri cted to the criteria set out in the Planning  63Obligations Supplementary Planning Document.  The ability to ‘p ool’ 
contributions from a number of de velopments towards specific in frastructure is 
currently limited. Pooling is use d where individual development s will have an 
impact but alone would not be ab le to deliver a specific piece of infrastructure. 
Pooling allows contributions to be combined from a number of de velopments 
to deliver the required infrastr ucture. In preparation of this Local Plan, further 
work on development viability was undertaken through the develo pment of the 
Deliverability Risk Assessment ( DRA) document.  This document a ssessed 
the economic viability of the dev elopment types which have been  identified 
within this Local Plan.  The DRA  considered the constraints and  c o s t s  o f  
delivering in the current economic climate and then considered the cost 
implications of planning obligat ions on development viability.  The evidence 
assumed a ‘worst case scenario’ to cost assumptions, based on l ocal 
development indicators, standard development cost assumptions a nd through 
taking professional advice from  local Agents and Borough Counci l officers. 
 9.7 CIL is intended to form the main mechanism for delivering w ider infrastructure 
needs.  A development’s contributi on towards the CIL will be es tablished 
through local charging schedules. Whilst the CIL rate will rela te to the overall 
cost of identified infrastructure required in the area CIL reve nue may be spent 
on any infrastructure needed within the Borough, not necessaril y in the vicinity 
of any particular development.   In Hartlepool viability testing to date has 
indicated that implementation of a CIL charging schedule would impact upon 
the deliverability of development across the Borough.  The bene fit of securing 
planning obligations through s106 agreements is that they can b e individually 
negotiated allowing the Borough Council to deliver a flexible a pproach based 
on viability assessment therefore planning obligations will con tinue to be 
secured through s106 legal agree ments.  If this position change s in the future 
development of a CIL charging schedule will be reconsidered.     
 9.8 The Borough Council recogni ses the need to support developm ent as a 
means of supporting economic g rowth, addressing housing need an d 
improving the range and quality of  amenities for its residents and visitors. The 
Borough Council adopted a Planning  Obligations SPD in November 2015; this 
sets out the planning obligati ons that may be required to addre ss the impacts 
arising from a development.  Thes e obligations will be secured by legal 
agreement or unilateral undertakings.  
 9.9 The Borough Council offers a One Stop Shop service for deve lopment 
proposals which potential app licants are encouraged to use and,  as well as 
advice on planning requirements,  details are provided of any de
veloper 
contributions which may be requi red.  Identifying requirements at an early 
stage of development limits delay s related to s106 negotiations .  
 9.10 The Habitat Regulations A ssessment (HRA) stage 1 screening  identified a 
likely significant adverse effect  on the Teesmouth and Clevelan d Coast 
Special Protection Area and Rams ar European Protected Site.  Th is adverse 
impact would be caused through recr eational disturbance of bird s which are 
the interest features of the si te, including a breeding colony of little terns in the 
summer and shorebirds in the aut umn, winter and spring.  The HR A  64established that at least some new residents of housing develop ments would 
visit the SPA/ Ramsar and that thes e additional visits would ca use harm.  
Each housing development is res ponsible for mitigating potentia l harm and 
developers can ensure this throu gh Planning Obligations by prov iding an 
adequate provision of Suitable Al ternative Green Space (SANGS) to absorb 
new recreation, such as daily dog walking, on site and/or by pr oviding a 
financial contribution to be s pent on managing recreational pre ssures on the 
European Protected Site.   
 
 
QP1: Planning Obligations 
 
The Borough Council will seek planning obligations where viable  and deemed 
to be required to address the impacts arising from a developmen t. Planning 
obligations may be required for the following: 
 Affordable Housing; 
 Children’s Play / Play Facilities; 
 Playing pitches & Outdoor Sports / Exercise Provision; 
 Built Sport Facilities; 
 Highway and Rail Infrastructure a nd Sustainable Transport Measu res; 
 Education Provision; 
 Community Facilities; 
 Green Infrastructure; 
 Training and Employment; 
 Heritage (protection / preser vation / interpretation); 
 Maintenance; 
 Housing Market Renewal; 
 Flood Protection;  
 Renewable Energy & Energy Efficiency Measures; 
 Ecological Mitigat ion & Networks; 
 Suitable Alternative Natural Green  Space and/or Mitigation for 
recreational disturbance on the Teesmouth and Cleveland Coast S PA – 
Mitigation guided by the Council’s  Endorsed Mitigation Strategy  and 
Delivery Plan which sets out the  funding formula for mitigation  
 
The detail on the planning obligation requirements is set out i n the Planning 
Obligations Supplementary Planning Document. 
 
This list is not exhaustive and other mitigation / contribution s may be required 
to make the development acceptable in planning terms.  In addit ion priorities 
set out in any Neighbourhood Plan  will be taken into account. 
 
In certain circumstances, if it is illustrated that the develop ment is providing a 
significant regeneration benefit,  such as the clearance of a pr oblem building or 
renovation of a heritage asset, there may be an opportunity to reduce the 
developer contributions associat ed with that development, e.g. through the 
Vacant Building Credit.  
 
The sub-division of sites to avo id planning obligations is not acceptable.  65Where it is considered sub-division has taken place to avoid re aching 
thresholds within the Planning Ob l i g a t i o n s  S P D  t h e  w i d e r  c o n t i g uous
development will be viewed as a whole. 
 
Any contributions will  be secured by relevant parties entering i n t o  a  l e g a l  
agreement with the Borough Co uncil or through unilateral undert akings. 
 
 Compulsory Purchase Orders  
9.11 Within the Borough it is an im portant priority for the Bor ough Council that all 
communities thrive ensuring t hat Hartlepool is, and continues t o be, a great 
place to live and visit.  The physical environment is crucial t o the perception of 
place hence derelict and unsight ly buildings and land can have a significant 
negative impact on neighbourhoods, their communities and public  perception 
of these areas. They can often also pose a safety risk to the p ublic and this is 
something that can be costly to manage to ensure residents are not put in 
danger.    
 9.12 Where appropriate the Borough  Council will aim to work wit h owners to 
progress the development of such s ites. Over recent years this approach has 
been successful at a number of prominent sites through various solutions with 
the Borough Council acting as the conduit to enable future deve lopment of 
these sites. 
 9.13 In certain circumstances t he release of such development s ites may have 
been held back by a landowner’s inability to bring forward deve lopment 
proposals.   This may be detrimental to the economic growth of the town and 
may cause large unsightly vacan t or derelict land and buildings  to become an 
eyesore creating associated envi ronmental and social problems.   Where, in 
the opinion of the Borough Council, it is necessary to achieve the proper 
planning of the area the use of C ompulsory Purchase Powers will  be pursued.    
 
 
QP2: Compulsory Purchase Orders 
 
In order to facilitate the proper planning of the area, and add ress amenity 
issues arising from vacant and derelict land and buildings, whe re appropriate 
Hartlepool Borough Council will proactively work with landowner s to facilitate 
the sale of land / buildings by agreement.   
 
Where this has not been possible, and where appropriate, the Bo rough Council 
will use Compulsory Purchase Powers where the overall delivery of a specific 
aim is dependent on the acquisi tion of property or land in a sp ecific location. 
 
 
Improving the quality of place 
9.14 Since the early 1990s many parts of Hartlepool have underg one major 
physical transformation as a result of regeneration work and ho using and 
economic growth. Whilst much of this development has been of hi gh quality 
and has helped to transform the image of Hartlepool, some devel opments  66have not been to such a high standar d. This inconsistency has i n part reflected 
the prevailing economic conditions , where development values at  times have 
been marginal, and has in part reflected the fragmented ownersh ips and 
developer interests. This has m ade it difficult to secure high quality design 
solutions on a comprehensive scale.  
 9.15 Good building design and high quality townscape and landscaping , together 
with the integration of the loca l heritage helps create a vibra ncy and quality of 
place, which can instill a sense of pride in the local communit y and encourage 
new investment. There have been some very obvious high profile developments which have produced well designed exemplar develop ment 
including the One Life Centre on Park Road, the remodelling of Hartlepool 
Sixth Form College, the new Hartl epool College of Further Educa tion, the 
refurbishment of the Leadbitter Buildings by Cleveland College of Art and 
Design, the restoration of the former Co-op Central Stores and a range of new 
housing developments including t he innovative volumetric homes at Easington 
Road.  
 9.16 Conversely the existence of  derelict and untidy buildings and sites can have a 
negative impact on the surrounding area, deterring investment a nd affecting 
peoples` living environment. The Borough Council has an ongoing  
commitment to tackling this problem. To date the Council has he lped secure 
the refurbishment and re-use of a number of prominent buildings , including 
Titan House, the former Co-op C entral Stores, Christ Church, th e Carnegie 
Building, St Andrews Church and Victoria Buildings, The Headlan d. The 
Borough Council is committed to tackling unsightly buildings in  the borough by 
working with the public and privat e sector to bring forward sol utions. 
 9.17 The Borough Council will cont inue actively pursuing, and w here possible 
supporting, owners of problem buildings and sites in order to s ecure 
improvements and new uses. This  support has included financial assistance in 
the form of grants. The Borough Council will continue to do thi s where 
resources allow, whilst utilising available planning and compul sory purchase 
powers where possible and actively  pursue potential sources of funding from 
external organisations and funding bodies.  
 9.18 The Borough Council will s eek to ensure that all developme nt is carried out to 
a high standard of design and adds to the quality and enjoyment  of the 
borough for the lifetime of the dev elopment. The Borough Counci l will work 
with partner organisations includi ng the Homes and Communities Agency 
(HCA), Historic England and the Commission for Architecture and  the Built 
Environment (CABE) to help achieve this.  
 9.19 The Borough Council is pro ducing a Residential Design SPD to encourage 
good design standards for new housin g development and will prep are design 
briefs for important developmen t sites. Developers are encourag ed to engage 
in pre-application discussions at an early stage, to gain a bet ter understanding 
of the community’s needs shape their plans in light of communit y input.  
  679.20 Development proposals will need to satisfy a set of genera l design and 
sustainability requirements, the  components of which contribute  to achieving 
high quality inclusive design.  
 
Location, accessibility, highway safety and parking 
9.21 The location and accessibility of development can make importan t 
contributions to achieving sustainable communities. Whilst loca tion is largely 
determined by land availability and Local Plan allocations, dev elopment should 
be designed to accommodate and enc ourage access and movement by  a  
variety of modes of transport, incl uding public transport, walk ing and cycling 
throughout the site and to key services and/or key links. Where  appropriate, 
green infrastructure should be an integral part of development to provide a 
range of benefits including pedestr ian and cycle links, support ing and 
enhancing biodiversity, providing play and incidental open spac e and, where 
appropriate, contributing to fl ood risk mitigation through sust ainable drainage 
solutions. All Public Rights of Way are, where relevant, mainta ined at public 
expense and improved through creat ions, diversions and extingui shments.  In 
some circumstances, where appropriate, they are also diverted a nd/or 
improved to allow for development. In some instances the develo pment also 
allows for the creation of new public rights of way, in additio n to any 
diversionary changes. However a net loss of a route will not be  acceptable, in 
any circumstances. 
 9.22 To ensure that all people ha ve the opportunity to move fre ely in the borough 
and feel safe in doing so, dev elopment should be designed to ac commodate 
and encourage access for all users including those with reduced  mobility, 
which may include those with visual impairments.  
 9.23 Highway safety is a key pri ority for the Borough Council a nd although the 
necessary highways specifications, applicable at the time, must  be adhered 
too for the lifetime of the devel opment, the highway networks m ust also be 
designed to minimise conflict bet ween the various users and mod es of 
transport. Any increase in new main access points along the pri mary road 
network is likely to impact on traffic flows and lead to safety  problems and 
should therefore be resisted.  
 9.24 The servicing arrangements of  businesses are vital in ensu ring that goods are 
delivered and distributed and wa ste is removed. Developers will  be expected 
to ensure that adequate service space is provided and that the servicing 
arrangements are safe and secure for users along with being as conveniently 
and discreetly placed as possible.  Where there are instances wh ere servicing 
vehicles may come into contact with other highway users measure s to protect 
the safety of all users will be required. Measures could includ e allocated 
service areas with restricted public access, clear road marking s and/or 
bollards and/or ensuring that l andscaping does not impact upon visibility. A 
balance should be struck between the need to protect users and the need to 
create user friendly and multi- purpose environments. The provis ion of 
measures such railing, bollard s and speed humps will be discour aged and 
other more sympathetic measures suc h as tree planting or landsc aping will be 
encouraged.  68 
9.25 To encourage greater use of sustainable transport modes, d evelopment 
should provide adequate and secure cycle parking. Provision mus t be 
commensurate to the scale of development, conveniently and safe ly located; if 
not then the lack of parking facilities could be a hindrance to  increasing the 
number of cyclists. In commercial/employment development such a s office 
units, industrial locations and educational establishments’, co nsideration 
should be given to providing shower and/or changing facilities and storage 
lockers for cyclists.  
 9.26 Car parking facilities must  be commensurate to the scale a nd location of 
development, for example within the town centre less car parkin g is required 
as there are greater opportunities  to use public transport or w alk or cycle to 
shops and services. In other are as where there may be fewer opp ortunities for 
sustainable travel and depending on the size of the development  more parking 
may be required. The Tees Valley design guide and specification s provides a 
guide to what level of car parki ng provision may be appropriate  in relation to 
different types of development. T he location of car parking can  be vital to the 
appearance and function of development and, as often as possibl e, parking 
should be out of view from the street scene. Where this is not possible 
however appropriate landscaping and tree planting should be use d to ensure 
that car parking does not domin ate a development. Furthermore p arking areas 
should be conveniently located so that residents and visitors d o not have to 
face unnecessary obstacles or take convoluted routes. Every att empt should 
be made to ensure that high standards of design remain for the lifetime of 
development. Inconsiderate parki ng can have a negative impact u pon the 
overall visual amenity of an area, the absorption rate of areas  especially if 
grassed areas are turned to mud and the flow of pedestrians. We ll designed 
and placed obstacles, such as rocks or vegetation, should be in corporated into 
development to ensure that areas  such as open spaces and paveme nts are 
kept vehicle free. 
 
 
QP3: Location, Accessibility, Highway Safety and Parking 
 
The Borough Council will seek to ensure that development is saf e and 
accessible along with being in a sustainable location or has th e potential to be 
well connected with opportuniti es for sustainable travel.  
 
When considering the design of development developers will be e xpected to 
have regard to the following matters: 
 
1) The proximity of the development to nearby shops and service s 
and how shops and services can be accessed along with how 
access can be improved particularly via the green infrastructur e 
network. 
2) Ensuring all residents and visitors can move with ease and s afety 
and that features such as doors, entrance ways and parking are 
conveniently located. 
3) Servicing arrangements and hi ghway safety provisions are in line  69with the relevant local guidance and the requirements to mainta in 
such provisions over the lif etime of the development. 
4) Creating multi-purpose environments, managing the conflict 
between highways users specifically by distinguishing between 
paths and roads, whilst recognising the need to limit and/or cr eate 
sympathetic highways safety measures.  
5) The provision of adequate, safe, secure and conveniently loc ated 
car and cycle parking, having rega rd to the possible movement o f 
residents and visitors. 
6) Ensure new car parking areas and proposals that include car 
parking should, where viable,  use permeable paving solutions 
and/or introduce a SuDS scheme to mitigate for any increase in 
surface water run-off.  
7) Recognise the wider benefits that safety improvements at lev el 
crossings can bring about. 
 
To maintain traffic flows and safety on the primary road networ k no additional 
access points or intensification of use of existing access poin ts, other than 
new accesses associated with developm ent allocated within this Local Plan, 
will be permitted on the follo wing roads – A19(T), A689, A179. And A178 (south 
of Seaton Carew to Brenda Road/Tees Road roundabout) unless the se have 
the approval of Highways England and/or the highways authority.  This should 
be in conjunction with the propor tionate provision of sustainab le travel 
modes.  All roads to wh ich this policy relates are shown on the  Policies Map. 
 
Where the site is not adequately served by public transport or there is no 
provision within the vicinity of the site then a developer may be required to 
provide a subsidised bus service or contribute to the expansion  of an existing 
service. Further information relating to improving connectivity  can be viewed 
in the Green Infrastructure and Planning Obligations policies a nd the Green 
Infrastructure and Planning Obligations SPD. 
 
Proposals relating to residential development should be in acco rdance with the 
Residential Design SPD. 
 
Layout and design of development  
9.27 There are many factors that  can impact upon the success of  a development. 
Well designed buildings and spaces can impact upon how users in teract with 
the development, how they move around within the development an d how it 
makes them feel.  Well designed buildings and spaces can assist  in facilitating 
social interaction and achieving social cohesion. If buildings and spaces are 
designed correctly they should, in  most instances, blend seamle ssly with 
surrounding land uses, reflect local character and create a sen se of place. 
Well designed buildings and spaces  should be aesthetically plea sing and 
assist in uplifting mood or heightening senses in a bid to impr ove the overall 
wellbeing of residents and visitors. 
 9.28 The layout of development s hould, as often as possible, re spect and reflect 
the surrounding land uses.  In most instances the density of de velopment 
should be reflective of its loc ation with higher densities more  likely to be  70appropriate around transport hubs,  areas with good walking and cycling links 
and areas served by a range of local facilities such as shops, play parks or 
green open spaces. The Borough Council expects development to b e 
connected to and compliment its surroundings by respecting the historic grain 
of the area, typically by reflec ting existing street/road patte rns, field boundaries 
and building lines. The layout of development should be easy to  navigate and 
there should be clear and legible routes with focal buildings a nd/or features 
placed in key locations to assist  in way finding which can be p articularly 
beneficial to some members of  the elderly population. 
 9.29 When considering the form of development and the impact th at it can have 
upon overall quality and upon the surrounding area it should be  noted that 
different shapes of buildings, such as tall towers, town houses , low rise office 
blocks or commercial units will be appropriate in different loc ations. The right 
form should be designed for the ri ght place, for example bigger  blocks may be 
more appropriate in the Town Centre or Marina and low rise buil dings in 
residential areas. 
 
9.30 When considering the scale of buildings and spaces a balance sh ould be 
struck between the amount and size of built development and the  level of 
open space. Open spaces must be of a size that is useable and e asy to 
maintain, many pockets or small areas of open space can be unus able and 
difficult to maintain and in some instances one large area may be more 
appropriate. 
 9.31 When considering the specif ic design elements of developme nt, such as the 
doors, windows, porches, gutters, ironmongery and decorative fe atures, these 
details should not be viewed in isolation. The specific design elements are an 
 71important component of the overa ll quality of the development. An 
understanding of local circumsta nces must be applied to the cho ice and size 
of specific design elements in a  bid to ensure that development  in Hartlepool is 
reflective of its location and context and does not appear to b e a standard 
design that could be applied anywhere.  
 9.32 Choosing the correct materials and colour pallet can assist in ensuring that 
development blends into an existi ng environment and does not ap pear as an 
intrusive addition. In addition  the use of appropriate colour c an assist those in 
the community who may have dementia or visual impairment. The l inks to use 
of colour and dementia friendly des ign are further explained wi thin the 
residential design SPD. Although contained within a residential  design SPD, 
the same colour principles can be applied to commercial buildin g and public 
spaces. Typically the materials should be practical, durable, a ffordable, 
attractive and relate we ll to their surroundings.  
 9.33 With many minor planning applications, the types of materials t o be used often 
form part of a conditional approval . However given the importan ce of the use 
of materials, in many instances it is not appropriate to discus s such matters 
once an approval is given. With regard to major development in prominent 
locations and/or within the rural area the Borough Council expe cts the 
developer to provide information relating to the pallet of mate rials at validation 
stage. 
 9.34 Throughout Hartlepool there are many  examples of areas that are  cluttered 
with street furniture and/or s igns. The Borough Council is keen  to ensure that 
development is designed appropri ately so there is a reduced nee d for signage 
and/or bollards and reduce any fur ther potential for visual clu tter. The Borough 
Council expects the location of street furniture to be consider ed carefully. All 
proposals must consider the cumula tive impact of any additional  
furniture/signage upon the street scene. Furniture must be sens itively yet 
conveniently placed, for example if located properly benches ca n be utilised 
for resting and taking in a view , but if incorrectly placed the y can be underused 
or lead to anti-social behaviour. 
 9.35 Of great importance when considering design is the need to  cater for the 
changing demands of the population and in particular the needs of an ageing 
population and those with disabili ties or those who may have a disability in the 
future. Councils’ duties to meet housing demands for elderly pe ople are 
outlined in the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) which  states that 
housing mix should be determined by demographic trends and the needs of 
different groups, including older  people. The Government’s Nati onal Planning 
Practice Guidance (NPPG) adds that plan-makers should consider the size, 
location and quality of dwellings  older people need. The Boroug h Council 
echoes this view and provides a policy framework to ensure all members of 
the community have the homes they  need, given that the Borough Council are 
seeking to achieve dementia friendly status then particular att ention should be 
paid to the need to create dementia friendly environments, furt her detail 
regarding dementia design will be  provided in the Residential D esign SPD. 
  729.36 The layout, form and scale of development, along with specific architectural 
detail, can assist in ensuring that elderly  members of the comm unity and those 
with disabilities can enjoy the buildings and spaces within the  Borough as 
much as all other residents. Fur thermore, if homes are designed  c o r r e c t l y  i t  
can ensure that, with some adaptation, residents can remain wit hin their 
homes and remain as part of a c ommunity as they age and/or beco me less 
mobile. Designing homes to take account of changing needs of re sidents can 
also reduce the burden of needing to provide disabled facilitie s grants and the 
level of inconvenience for residents as homes will be cheaper a nd easier to 
adapt.  
 
9.37 Development must not have a detri mental impact on the occupiers  of adjacent 
or nearby properties by virtue of  privacy, noise, overshadowing , poor outlook 
and disturbance. To protect priv acy the Borough Council conside rs that 
minimum separation distances s hould be applied to ensure that t here is an 
acceptable distance between prin cipal residential windows and a ny other 
residential or commercial windows and elevations. 
 
9.38 Tandem development, where one hous e is located behind the other  sharing 
the same access or having an access very close to the frontage of another 
dwelling, is unlikely to achieve  appropriate standards relating  to design, 
privacy, noise and disturbance and access and is therefore unli kely to be 
supported by the Borough Council. 
 
9.39 In some instances design may be of such an innovative and susta inable 
nature that it does not strictly align with the cr iteria above.  However innovative 
design does have a place within Hartlepool and the Borough Coun cil will seek 
to support such schemes and work with developers to ensure that  the above 
criteria can be achieved. 
 
 
 
QP4: Layout and Design of Development 
 
The Borough Council will seek to ensure all developments are de signed to a 
high quality and positively enha nce their location and setting.  
 
Development should: 
 
1) Be of an appropriate layout, scale and form that positively 
contributes to the Borough and reflects and enhances the 
distinctive features,  character and history of the local area.   
2) Respect the surrounding buildi ngs, structures and environmen t. 
3) Have adequate, well located and planned public space/s.  
4) Be aesthetically pleasing, usi ng a variety of design element s 
relevant to the location and type of development. 
5) Use an appropriate mix of materials and colour. 
6) Sustain and/or enhance the historic environment and heritage  
assets including archaeological r emains, and their settings. 
7) Have appropriately designed and well located street furnitur e.  738) Be flexible to changing needs of users and consider the need s of 
an ageing population.  
9) Should not negatively impact u pon the relationship with exis ting 
and proposed neighbouring land uses and the amenity of 
occupiers of adjoining or nearb y properties by way of general 
disturbance, overlooking and loss of privacy, overshadowing and  
visual intrusion particularly relating to poor outlook.  
10) Ensure that the provision of  private amenity space should b e 
commensurate to the size of the development. 
11) Use well designed and placed obstacles, such as rocks or 
vegetation, to prevent vehicles parking on areas not designated  
for vehicles such as green spaces and pavements. 
 
To ensure the privacy of residents and visitors is not signific antly negatively 
impacted in new housing development the Borough Council seeks t o ensure 
adequate space is provided between houses. The following  minimum 
separation distances mu st be adhered to:  
12) Principal elevation to pri ncipal elevation 20 metres. 
13) Gable to principal elevation 10 metres. 
 
Extensions to buildings that would significantly reduce the sep aration 
distances between properti es will not be permitted. 
 
Most development should blend seamlessly with its surroundings.  However 
often there is opportunity for appropriate inclusive, innovativ e and sustainable 
design that can be bolder in design terms and often aims to cre ate a landmark 
development. Such innovative pr oposals will be supported, provi ding they 
satisfy the relevant criteria above.  
 
Where development is likely to have an impact upon existing inf rastructure, or 
require new infrastructure, the applicant will be required to p rovide such 
infrastructure in accordance with policy QP1, the Planning Obli gations SPD 
and the Local Infrastructure Plan. 
 
Further justification is provided in the Green Infrastructure a nd Planning 
Obligations policies and the Green Infrastructure and Planning Obligations 
SPD. 
 
Proposals relating to residential development should be in acco rdance with the 
Residential Design SPD. 
 Safety and Security  
9.40 Creating safe environments and reducing crime and the fear  of crime will 
ensure that all residents and visitors feel safe and secure wit hin the Borough. 
The Borough Council will seek to tackle safety, crime and fear of crime 
through a number of measures. The Community Safety and Engageme nt team 
will keep residents up to date with lo cal news, activities and advic e to help 
reduce the risk of becomi ng a victim of crime. The  Environmental Protection 
team will seek to ensure resident s and visitors are protected f rom undue 
health impacts, noise and dist urbance. The Borough Council also  seeks to  74ensure Hartlepool is safe and secure via the Planning and Build ing Control 
system. The Building Control system seeks to ensure that buildi ngs and 
spaces in and around buildings are structurally safe and secure  and in the 
instances of new dwellings, they  have powers to ensure that cer tain external 
door and window locks are provided.  
 9.41 The Borough Council expects  development to be designed wit h safety and 
security in mind and where possible incorporate Secured by Desi gn principles, 
including adequate street lightin g, appropriately located car a nd cycle parking, 
bus stops and well designed land scaping. The Police Liaison Off icer routinely 
assesses planning applications  and advises the Borough Council on matters 
relating to layout and design along with boundary treatments, s torage and 
servicing locations and opening hours. The Police Liaison Offic er can be 
contacted independently from the Borough Council to provide dir ect advice.  
 9.42 The Borough Council has a responsibility and a desire to improv e the health of 
residents along with having a moral obligation to consider the health and 
wellbeing of visitors. The Bor ough Council has noted that occur rences of skin 
cancer have arisen over the year s and have also noted the probl ems that 
increasing summer temperatures c an have particularly on those w ho are more 
vulnerable in society such as the elderly. The Borough Council would seek to 
ensure that residents and visitors  have the option to benefit f rom the outdoors 
without being subjected to exce ssive exposure to the sun and/or  excessive 
heat. Residents and visitors should have the option of taking s hade from the 
sun and/or high temperatures if they so choose. In light of thi s, the Borough 
Council expects developers to consider options for sun shading and urban 
cooling within development. Wi thout adequate shading and coolin g there 
could be an increase of skin c ancer and overheating and associa ted illnesses. 
The Borough Council believe that s imple measures such as provid ing 
canopies on buildings, shaded seating in public areas, strategi c tree planting 
and adequate landscaping would not  be an undue cost upon a deve loper and 
will assist in improving the ov erall quality an d amenity value of a proposal. 
 9.43 The Council’s Residential Design SPD can provide further a dvice with regard 
to incorporating safety, sun shading and urban cooling measures  into the 
design of residential development.  
  
 
QP5: Safety and Security 
 
The Borough Council will seek to ensure that all developments a re designed to 
be safe and secure. 
 
Developers will be expected to have regard to the following mat ters, where 
appropriate: 
 
1) Adhering to national safety and security standards as set ou t by 
central government. 
2) Be developed in a way that minimises crime and the fear of c rime,  75amongst other things, incorporating Secured by Design principle s 
as appropriate. 
3) Ensure areas of sun shading and urban cooling are provided 
through tree planting, strategic landscaping and other design 
considerations. 
 
Proposals relating to residential development should be in acco rdance with the 
Residential Design SPD. 
 
Site constraints and opportunities 
9.44 When considering developmen t it must be borne in mind that  constraints of the 
land and surrounding area can hav e a bearing upon where develop ment is 
located and how it is designed.  Development must have regard to  any existing 
constraints on a site, includin g, but not limited to, ground co nditions, 
landscape features, overhead cables  and high pressure pipelines  o r  a n y  
restrictions in association with air traffic radar systems alon g with constraints 
such as surrounding land uses and  the extent of the utilities n etwork.  
 9.45 The presence of any contami nation on the land must be inve stigated and any 
necessary remediation m easures put in place. 
 9.46 The presence of any landscape features, particularly those  of significant 
quality in terms of species or visual amenity,  should be preserved as often as 
possible. Any trees and hedgerows on site, or adjacent to a sit e, should be 
identified accordingly and refere nce should be made to their st atus. Examples 
include trees protected by a T ree Preservation Order and hedger ows 
protected by the Hedger ow Regulations 1997. 
 9.47 In the first instance the Bo rough Council would expect tre es and hedgerows to 
be retained. However if this is not the intention then the Boro ugh Council will 
expect to see clear justification for any pruning or removal of  t r e e s  a n d  
hedgerows. If the Borough Council is not satisfied then plannin g permission 
may be refused if the loss or  damage of the trees and hedgerow would have a 
significant impact on the loca l environment and its enjoyment b y residents and 
visitors. 
 9.48 The location of any overhead cables and high pressure pipe lines along with 
restrictions relating to the operation of air traffic must be i nvestigated and 
clearly identified. To prevent f uture problems associated with electromagnetic 
fields and health problems, inf rastructure damage and possible gas leaks 
along with conflict between development and air traffic radar s ystems the 
relevant bodies must be consul ted to gain an understanding of a ppropriate 
development exclusion zones. 
 9.49 Residents and visitors should not suffer from pollution (n oise, dust, fumes or 
odour) or poor air and water  quality. The location and design of development 
should have due regard to minimising the impacts of pollution b oth on existing 
land uses and the future proposed land use. 
  769.50 The location and provision of inf rastructure, particularly util ities and drainage 
can impact upon the quality of a development and can assist in ensuring that 
some impacts of climate change such as flooding are considered.  A l l  
development must be well served by adequate infrastructure that  takes into 
account the future demands of users. Although it is, in most in stances,39 the 
Local Planning Authority, that det ermines a planning applicatio n, other 
external agencies such as the Health and Safety Executive, can influence the 
Borough Council’s decision. Withi n Hartlepool there are numerou s statutory 
consultation zones relating to hazardous industries and the nuc lear power 
station that can place constr aints on development. The Borough Council 
expects developers to undertake early discussions with relevant  statutory 
consultees to avoid problem s in the design process. 
  
 
QP6: Technical Matters 
 
The Borough Council expects development to be incorporated into  t h e  
Borough with minimal impact. On site constraints and external i nfluences can 
often halt development. The Borough Council will work with deve lopers to 
overcome such issues. 
 
Where appropriate all proposals mu st ensure that the following matters are 
investigated and satisfactorily addressed: 
 
1) The status of any agricultural land and its importance to th e 
Borough; 
2) Development should take account  of previously contaminated l and 
including from historic landfill sites; 
3) Any matters regarding flood risk, both on and off site, thro ughout 
the design life of the site; 
4) The presence of any landscape features and in particular pro tected 
trees; 
5) The presence of any heritag e assets, including any impact up on 
their significance and setting; 
6) The location of any high volt age overhead cables and gas, oi l, water 
and other high pressure pipelines;  
7) The operation of air tra ffic and radar systems; 
8) The effects on, or impact of, general disturbance including noise, 
vibration and dust, fumes, smell, air and water  quality. 
9) The water supply system is adequate, surface and foul main 
drainage is dealt with in a  sustainable manner; 
10) The effects on wildlife and habitat; and 
11) The requirement to satisfy the relevant planning requiremen ts of 
statutory consultees. 
 
  
                                                           
39 In some instances the Planning In spector or the Secretary of S tate may determine a planning 
application for example via t he appeals process or the Call in procedure.   77Energy Efficiency 
9.51 Within the UK approximately 40% of the energy consumption and carbon 
emissions derive from the way buildings are lit, heated and use d. If this level of 
energy consumption continues then carbon emissions will continu e to increase 
global climatic temper ature and lead to further problems associ ated with 
climate change.  
 9.52 The use of energy does not  just impact upon carbon emissio ns, it impacts 
upon the amount of money our res idents and businesses spend on fuel bills. 
Of particular concern to the Borough Council are those resident s in fuel 
poverty. Fuel poverty is often a particular problem for our mos t vulnerable 
residents, for example, those liv ing on a lower income who cann ot afford to 
keep warm at a reasonable cost, t he elderly population or those  with 
disabilities who can often stay  in their homes for longer perio ds of time and 
need more energy to fuel the home  for longer. Residents may not  just struggle 
to pay fuel bills there are ot her associated problems linked to  fuel poverty such 
as an excess in winter deaths, cardio vascular disease, sleep d eprivation, 
depression and lower levels of a ttainment in the younger popula tion. 
 9.53 Strict targets have been set by the European Commission
40 regarding the 
energy performance for buildings. By 31 December 2020, all new buildings 
should be nearly zero-energy build ings and after 31 December 20 18 new 
buildings occupied and owned by public authorities should be ne arly zero-
energy buildings. The intention of the EU’s Directive is essent ially to increase 
the energy efficiency level of b uildings and the use of renewab le energy can 
assist in achieving this requirement.  
 
9.54 Moving to a more energy efficient, low-carbon economy will  n o t  o n l y  h e l p  
Hartlepool  contribute to meeti ng carbon emissions targets it w ill also help the 
UK become less reliant on imported fossil fuels and less expose d to the risk of 
higher energy prices in the future. The Government cannot contr ol fluctuations 
in a global market and therefor e residents may be susceptible t o energy price 
rises. The Borough Council will seek to ensure homes are effici ent so that 
residents can take control and reduce their own energy bills an d do not suffer 
the consequences associat ed with fuel poverty. 
 9.55 As part of the Deregulation Act (2015) the Government intr oduced powers for 
the Secretary of State to amend se ction 1(1) (c) of the Plannin g and Energy 
Act (2008) with regard to resident ial development via a commenc ement order. 
This commencement order has not  yet been produced and the Borou gh 
Council is still permitted to set local requirements for energy  efficiency 
standards. Notwithstanding the pro visions within legislation, t he Borough 
Council does not consider the elements in policy QP7 to be a re quirement. 
They provide a flexible option should a developer not be able t o design a 
scheme that ensures the layout, building orientation, scale and  form minimises 
energy consumption.  
 
                                                           
40 Article 9 `nearly zero-energy buildings`, Directive 2010/31/EU .  789.56 The Borough Council understand s that significant achieveme nts can be made 
to reduce the UK’s greenhouse gas emissions if businesses, the public sector 
and households reduce thei r demand for energy.  
 9.57 Furthermore whilst the Buil ding Regulations set minimum st andards and meet 
the requirements of EU legislat ion, the Borough Council conside rs they do not 
go far enough to ensure that buildings within Hartlepool are co nstructed as 
efficiently as possible. Within Hartlepool this is particularly  important given the 
Borough’s position on the i ndex of multiple deprivation
41 and the high levels of 
fuel poverty.42 Although the fuel poverty rate is close to the national rate 
(20.9% in 2010) it is considered that the higher than average n ational 
unemployment rate means that r esidents have a reduced opportuni ty to get 
out of fuel poverty. Furthermore, some buildings, such as some agricultural 
buildings and single storey det ached buildings with a floor are a less than 30m2 
which contain no sleeping accomm odation are exempt from Buildin g 
Regulations. Therefor e with the effective use of this policy, i t is necessary to 
ensure the efficiency of all development, not just those that f all within the 
requirements of the Building Regulations. 
 9.58 To assist in reducing the CO
2 output of future buildings and additions to 
existing buildings the Borough C ouncil expects all developers t o ensure that 
development is as energy efficient as possible. There are a var iety of tools in 
place at design stage to improv e the energy efficiency of build ings. The layout, 
orientation, scale and form of buildings can impact upon energy  consumption 
and therefore an attempt should be made to locate and design bu ildings so 
that they take advantage of solar  energy, passive heating and c ooling, natural 
light and natural ventilation. I n addition tree planting and la ndscaping should 
be used appropriately to assist in ensuring energy efficiency i .e. through 
providing shade in the summer and reducing the need for air con ditioning.  
 9.59 Incorporating sustainable construction methods and finishe s such as use of 
non-toxic or lead-free paints and wood preservatives and improv ing the fabric 
of buildings, for example by usi ng pulped recycled paper for ro of insulation or 
by using cellulose insulation, can assist in reducing carbon em issions and fuel 
bills. 
 9.60 Water efficiency measures such as grey water recycling can  reduce the use of 
potable water and reduce carbon emissions. This is because the treatment of 
water for human consumption r equires an energy input and uses c arbon and 
many water uses such as toilet flushing can be done with grey w ater.  The 
residential design SPD provides  guidance on how the requirement s in the 
policy can be achieved, the guidelines will be used by the coun cil to assess 
each application and applicants c an used the guidelines as the basis for a 
checklist when putting together th eir planning and/or sustainab ility statement. 
 9.61 If by virtue of the nature of  the development it is not po ssible to satisfy the 
above criteria then the Borough Council would seek to apply opt ional 
                                                           
41 26 out of 58 lower super outpu t area (LSOA) in 20% or less mos t deprived nationally with 10 of 
those being in the t op 3% (2010 figures).  
42 20.3% of the population in 2010.   79standards above building regulati ons. The Borough Council would  seek to 
apply an optional standard that encourages developers to improv e the fabric of 
the building 10% above what is r equired in the most up to date Building 
Regulations (not the regulation applicable at time of submittin g the initial 
building notice). The duty to inform a building control body th at an optional 
requirement has been imposed falls on the person carrying out t he work. The 
optional requirements will be im posed as a condition of the pla nning 
permission. The Borough Council is prepared to work flexibly wi th developers 
and will encourage a range of desi gn ideas and technologies app ropriate to 
the type, scale and nature and deliverability of the developmen t.  
 9.62 This policy can assist in m eeting the requirements of poli cy CC1 particularly 
bullet point eight. Energy efficiency measures assist in making  i t  e a s i e r  t o  
meet the EU renewable energy pr oduction targets. If buildings a re constructed 
efficiently then the energy out put is reduced and the 10% on si te energy 
requirement would be lowered which would in turn have a positiv e impact 
upon the overall cost of developmen t. Both initiatives along wi th other 
measures are intended to reduce carbon dioxide emissions and bo th must be 
applied to developments. 
 9.63 A sustainability statement  must be submitted with all majo r planning 
applications.  The statement mus t outline how the proposed deve lopment will 
be designed and built to achieve high energy efficiency and how  on site 
renewable energy provision will be incorporated. The sustainabi lity statement 
can be incorporated into the Design and Access statement or any  other 
supporting document as appropriate.  The sustainability statemen t will form 
part of the stipulation within t he local validation checklist, without such 
information it could be difficu lt to understand how development  will contribute 
to reducing its impact on clim ate change and how a development would 
mitigate against any impacts. 
 
 
QP7: Energy Efficiency  
 
The Borough Council will seek to ensure high levels of energy e fficiency in all 
development. Notwithstanding the requirements of the Building R egulations all 
developments, where feasible and viable, will be required to:  
 
1) Ensure that the layout, build ing orientation, scale and form  
minimises energy consumption a nd makes the best use of solar 
gain, passive heating and cooli ng, natural light and natural 
ventilation. 
2) Ensure that green infrastructure is used appropriately to as sist in 
ensuring energy efficiency. 
3) Incorporate sustainable cons truction and drainage methods. 
 
If by virtue of the nature of the development it is not possibl e to satisfy the 
above criteria then the Borough Council would encourage an atte mpt to be 
made to improve the fabric of the building 10% above what is re quired by the 
most up to date Building Regulations (Not the Building Regulati ons applicable  80at the time of submitting the initial building notice). 
 
If due to viability neither of the above can be met then a full  viability 
assessment must be submitted. 
 
Any amendments to the plans w ill be considered in the context o f the impact 
upon the anticipated energy output and it may be necessary to r e-assess the 
energy output information submitted. The Borough Council reserv es the right 
to inspect the site and meet wit h any approved inspector at any  point in time. 
 
Developers will be required to submit a sustainability statemen t with all major 
planning applications.  
 
Proposals relating to residential development should be in acco rdance with the 
Residential Design SPD. 
 
Advertisements 
9.64 Advertisements can be seen wi dely across the Borough. They  can play a role 
in promoting the Borough and businesses within it, provide dire ctions and can 
temporarily assist in screening untidy buildings or areas. 
 9.65 In some instances advertise ments can have a negative impac t upon the 
Borough and the local planning authority has a responsibility t o consider the 
appropriateness of any advertise ments and how they impact upon amenity 
and public safety. 
 
9.66 When focusing on amenity (including residential and visual  amenity and the 
cumulative impact of each advert isement on these amenities in r elation to 
other adverts and street furniture  such as bins, light columns and traffic signs), 
consideration should be given to  local characteristics and feat ures such as 
street scene and heritage assets w hich contribute to the distin ctive nature of 
the locality. 
 9.67 In relation to public safety it is necessary to consider t he effect of an 
advertisement upon the safe use of vehicles and operation of tr affic flow, 
which includes pedestrian and cycle traffic. This effect should  be considered in 
relation to safety at all levels including air traffic. The lik ely behaviour of 
pedestrians, drivers and cyclists should be considered taking i nto account the 
effect of the proposed advert along with possible confusion wit h any road 
traffic sign, traffic signal or possible interference with a na vigational light or an 
aerial beacon. 
 9.68 In those areas which the Bor ough Council considers merit p rotection on 
amenity grounds orders may be made defining them as Areas of Sp ecial 
Control wherein certain rights to  display advertisements are wi thdrawn. 
      81 
QP8: Advertisements  
 
The Borough Council will seek to ensure that advertisements are  appropriately 
located within the Borough and are of an appropriate scale and size. 
Applications for advertisements  should have regard to the follo wing criteria: 
 
1) The impact of the advertisement either individually or by a 
resultant cumulative effect upon the building/land on which it is to 
be displayed or upon the surrounding area; and 
2) The impact upon public safety in particular whether the 
advertisement itself, or the location proposed, is likely to be  s o  
distracting or impacts upon site  lines that it creates a hazard . 
 
Advertisements which introduce vi sually obtrusive features will  not be 
permitted . 
 
 10. HOUSING 
 
10.1 In order to grow and pros per as a Borough and to meet the existing needs and 
aspirations of residents, Hartlepool needs to provide a range o f house types in a 
variety of locations where people want to live. The Government’ s overall ambition 
is to increase housing supply in sustainable locations.  
 10.2 In order to help understand and inform the housing require ments for the Borough 
a Strategic Housing Market Asse ssment (SHMA) was produced and e ndorsed in 
March 2015. Given the representa tions made at Preferred Options  Stage and as 
a result of the release of the 2014 Sub National Household Proj ections (SNHP) 
an addendum to the SHMA has been prepared to inform the develop ment of the 
Publication Local Plan. The SH MA, and subsequent Addendum, enab les the 
Borough Council to plan for a mi x of housing based on current a nd future 
demographic trends, market trends and the needs of different gr oups in the 
community. It identifies the size, type and tenure of market ho using required in 
sub-areas by considering current  market demand relative to supp ly. It also 
addresses affordable housing requi rements across the Borough. T he SHMA 
Addendum reaffirms in section 2 that Hartlepool can be consider ed to have its 
own housing area. It is proposed that the Objectively Assessed Housing Need for 
Hartlepool over the plan peri od 2016-2031 is established from a  baseline of 200 
(using the latest 2014-based SNPP), with an upward adjustment t o take account 
of past migration trends to 210 dwellings. A further uplift is recommended to 
support jobs-growth in the Borou gh to 240 dwellings each year ( The Addendum 
settles on a scenario based on the Tess Valley Strategic Econom ic Plan (SEP) 
which assumes 290 jobs growth per annum over the plan period. ( The SEP is 
based on 10 years however for t he purposes of the plan, this ha s been 
extrapolated forward to be based on a 15 year period.) One of t he main 
objectives of the SEP is to raise  the employment levels within the Tees Valley 
and as such the scenario assumes 70% from existing residents, 1 5% in migration 
and 15% in commuting.) A further uplift to the baseline demogra phic requirement 
to take account of market signals is not recommended.  However,  in order to take 
into account historical under delivery against housing targets it is recommended 
that an additional 700 dwellings  over the plan period be added a s  a  b a c k l o g ,  
equating to a cumulative total of 290 dwellings (rounded from 2 87) each year.  In 
conclusion, the Objectively Assessed Need figure of 290 takes a ccount of the 
need to deliver more housing for an increasing number of househ olds and 
supports economic growth. The full objectively assessed dwellin g need over the 
Plan Period 2016-2031 ( 15 years) is therefor e a minimum of 4,30 0 dwellings . 
 10.3 The housing need in Hartlepool  is primarily driven by:  
 
 An increasing population, with Office of National Statistics ( ONS) 2012 based 
population projections indicating an increase of 5.5% from 92,6 00 in 2014 to 
97,400 by 2037;  
 An increase in new household  formation amongst the existing po pulation;  
 An ageing population;  
 The need to retain the y oung and working age people;  
 Economic growth and improvement and diversification of the loc al economy 
and;  
 The ongoing replacement of obsolete housing stock.  
  8310.4 The SHMA has been used to help establish the need for new housing to be 
provided in the Borough over the ne xt 15 years which is confirm ed in the 
document “Planning Policy Framewor k Justification November 2015 .” This 
document has been produced by Har tlepool Borough Council to hel p illustrate the 
position in relation to a five year supply of housing in line w ith paragraph 47 of the 
NPPF and prior to the adoption of  the new Local Plan. The SHMA Addendum 
states that an appropriate housi ng target would be approximatel y 290 net 
additional dwellings per annum goi ng forward over the next 15 y ears. Taking the 
SHMA housing target as a starti ng point, it is also important t o consider: 
 
 Demolitions  likely to take place over the plan period (this has been asses sed 
by HBC Housing Services Team) and reflects the ongoing aspirati on to 
continue successful housing marke t renewal initiatives within t he central area.  
 Affordable Housing Delivery:  There will be an imbalance between the 
number of affordable homes deliver ed in the Borough and the nee d for 
affordable homes identified in the SHMA. To reduce this imbalan c e  a  2 0 %  
buffer has been included in the housing requirement.  The buffe r will deliver 
both affordable and market housing but its primary purpose is t o increase 
affordable housing delivery.  
 
These issues are used to determine the housing delivery require d over the Local 
Plan period to meet the objecti vely assessed need and is set ou t in table 6 below. 
 
Table 6: Housing Target Breakdown 
 
Housing Target Breakdown Annual DwellingsTotal Dwellings 
Over 15 Years 
SHMA Housing Requirement  240 3600 
Historical Backlog fr om 2006 Local Plan 47 705 
OAN Total Requirement 287 4305 
Replacement of Demolitions (assuming 
50% on site windfall replacement) 65 975 
20% Affordable Housing Delivery Buffer  57 860 
Annual Housing Target 410 6150 
 
 
10.5 The most recent housing permissions and planning applicati ons that benefit from 
a resolution to approve subject to the signing of a s.106 agree ment considered 
deliverable within the plan period total 2,225 (includes North Pentagon allocation 
which now has planning permission). Therefore this Local Plan a llocates sites for 
an additional 3,585 new homes ove r the plan period to ensure th e need is met. It 
must be noted that this need is not considered a ceiling, purel y a figure to meet 
need.  
  8410.6 As the Council has not achiev ed the advocated housing targ et (at the time) 
consistently over the last 10 ye ars, in accordance with NPPF pa ragraph 47 the 
Borough Council accepts that there has been a record of persist ent under 
delivery of housing. As a result  there is a requirement to incr ease housing 
provision over the first five years by an additional 20% (moved  forward from later 
in the plan period). This essent ially means that the Borough Co uncil needs to 
demonstrate a six year supply instead of a five year supply ove r the same period. 
Table 2 illustrates the housing delivery scenario over the next  15 years bearing in 
mind the 20% frontloaded buffer allowance. Table Seven provides  a  t r a j e c t o r y  
which demonstrates that there is  more certainty over housing de livery in the first 
five years of the plan period gi ven knowledge of ongoing develo pments. The table 
shows that the average annual hous ing requirement of 410 dwelli ngs has been 
staggered over the plan period. This is because several of the housing allocations 
are strategic sites for which there will be a significant lead- in period before they 
start to deliver completed dwel lings. The table shows that the Borough Council 
can demonstrate a five year suppl y of deliverable housing sites  f o r  t h e  1st f i v e  
years of the plan period. It also shows that there is a shortfa ll of circa 150 
dwellings at the end of the plan period. However, the Borough C ouncil is 
confident that this is a nomin al shortfall and that over the co urse of the plan 
period it will be addressed. A ppendix 14 provides additional te xt clarifying how the 
housing land supply has been calculated.  
 10.7 The baseline housing provision over the next 15 years take s into consideration 
the overall ambition of the Gove rnment to increase the delivery  of new housing 
and the additional hous ing need arising from newly forming hous eholds over the 
next 15 years. The Borough Council ’s ambition to plan for econo mic growth to 
meet the aspirations of both the Hartlepool Vision and the Tees  Valley Strategic 
Economic Plan are reflected withi n the housing requirement. Thi s aspiration has 
been considered against a range of o ther issues within the SHMA  to ensure that 
the housing provision advocated, will be achievable and ultimat ely deliverable 
over the next 15 years.  
 10.8 The provision requires a minimum total of 6,150 new dwelli ngs to be built over the 
plan period, equating to an aver age of 410 dwellings per year a nd factors in 
demolitions and prev ious undersupply.  
 
Housing Implementation Strategy 
10.9 Having established the future  housing provision required i n the Borough over the 
next 15 years, appropriate housi ng sites have to be identified to accommodate 
the new housing growth.  
 10.10 The authority contacted l andowners across the Borough and  asked them to 
submit any sites they wished to be considered for housing. The SHLAA 
represents an evaluation of sites  (submitted by private landown ers and the 
Borough Council’s Estates Divis ion) throughout the Borough whic h could 
potentially be allocated for housi ng. These include a variety o f sites of varying 
sizes within the urban area and also large rural sites that hav e the ability to 
provide new housing ov er the next 15 years.  
 10.11 The SHLAA considered potential housing sites and assessed  their suitability, 
availability and achievability t o determine when an identified site could realistically 
be expected to be developed. The SHLAA was endorsed in March 20 15.   85 
10.12 The findings of the SHLAA were used to identify additiona l new housing sites, 
including two large strategic housing sites at High Tunstall an d Wynyard, which 
can provide a phased housing s upply over the next fifteen years  with the capacity 
to make up any potential shortfall and to provide a range and c hoice of housing 
densities, types and tenures whilst also supporting the deliver y of significant new 
infrastructure within the Bor ough. A smaller site at Quarry Far m 2 to the north of 
High Tunstall has also been identified as a sustainable locatio n for 220 dwellings 
which will help to fund the infrastructure such as a new primar y school and at 
High Tunstall and bypass and grade separated junction at Elwick . 
 10.13 Based on this technical information within the SHLAA  and  housing need from the 
SHMA, preferred housing sites of  varying sizes within the urban  and rural area 
have been identified, including:  
 
 An existing `stock` of planning permissions; 
 Other suitable urban brownfield sites;   
 A strategic South West Extensio n (this now benefits from minde d to a minded 
to grant decision from Planni ng Committee and will benefit from  outline 
planning permission once the S 106 Legal Agreement has been sign ed. As 
such this has been counted withi n the `existing stock`); 
 A strategic extension in  the High Tunstall area; 
 Quarry Farm 2;  
 Extensions to the exis ting Wynyard area and;  
 Small sites at Elwick and Hart villages.  
 10.14 The above mix of sites and existing permissions is reflec ted in the trajectory in 
table 7 below.  The methodology for Table 7 is set out in Appen dix 14. Table 7: Summary Demonstrating Supply of Deli verable Housing Sites over Local Plan Period 
Housing Deliver
y Source 
2016/17 
2017/18 
2018/19 
2019/20 2020/21 2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 
2024/25 
2025/26 2026/27 2027/28 2028/29 2029/30 
2030/31 
Total 
Planning permissions 185 299 348 241 188 182 148 109 109 72 22 15 25 25 35 2003 
Sites subject to s.106 10 66 60 34 12 20 20 222 
Windfalls  (see Appendix 14)  6 6 40 50 42 25 10 179 
Urban Local Plan Sites 35 48 13 7 20 10 20 20  15 188 Rural Local   
Plan SitesSouth West Extension 30 80 100 100 125 125 125 125 125 125 125 75 1260 
Wynyard Park North 20 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 20 400 
Wynyard Park South 15 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 7 232 
High Tunstall 12 30 90 135 135 135 135 121 105 105 105 92 1200 
Quarry Farm 30 36 36 36 36 36 10 220 
Village Sites 33 34 18 85 
Total Housing Delivery Trajectory 185 340 489 603 635 617 571 505 495 408 319 305 290 192 35 5989 
(A) Baseline Housing Target 
(includes 20% affordable housing 
delivery buffer)  350 350 350 350 350 400 400 400 400 400 480 480 480 480 480 6150 
(B) Add  underdelivery 2016-2017 
(Liverpool method) 350 367 367 367 367 417 417 417 417 417 497 497 497 497 497 
(C) 20% NPPF Para 47 Buffer 
Target 420 440 440 440 440 500 417 417 417 417 408 408 408 408 408 
Housing Target Accordance -
235-
100 49 163 195 117 154 88 78 -9 -89-
103-
118-
216-
373 -161 
5 Year Supply Accordance 
(dwellings) 72 428 -899 
5 Year Supply Accordance (years) 5.16 5.89 2.79 
5.93 (2017 to 2022) 10.15 Table 8 sets out how the fu ture housing supply will be di stributed across the 
Borough and illustrates a spread of sites to help meet the need  in a deliverable 
manner. The even spread helps to minimise the reliance on one p articular site to 
meet the need. 
 10.16 The approximate 2,240 tota l dwelling capacity for the new ly identified greenfield 
sites is estimated through consid eration of typical housing den sities in adjacent or 
nearby residential areas. These dens ities also reflect the Boro ugh Council’s 
desire to raise the standard and quality of the residential env ironment as set out 
in other policies within the Local Plan. Bearing this in mind e ach individual site 
has tailored approximate dwellings per hectare threshold which equates to the 
total numbers of dwellings per s ite. Although individual sites differ, reflecting their 
location and the type of housing expected to be provided on the  site, the overall 
average density is appr oximately 25 dwellings per hectare.  
 
Table 8: Future Housing S upply over the Next 15 Years 
 
Housing Site Source Approximate 
Additional 
Dwelling 
Capacity Land 
Type % Provision
of dwelling 
requirement 
of 6,150 
dwellings 
Existing Urban Area     
Extant Planning Permissions and 
site subject to s.106 1670 Mixed 27% 
Windfalls 179 Mixed 3% 
Urban Local Plan Sites 188 Mixed 3% 
Existing Urban Area Sub Total 2037  33% 
Urban Edge Extensions    
Extant Planning Permissions and 
site subject to s.106 282 Greenfield 4.5% 
South West Extension 1260 Greenfield  20.5% 
High Tunstall Extension 1200 Greenfield 19.5% 
Quarry Farm 2 220 Greenfield 3.5% 
Urban Edge Extensions Sub Total 2962 Greenfield 48% 
Wynyard     
Extant Permissions  215 Greenfield 3.5% 
Wynyard Park North 400 Greenfield 6.5%  
Wynyard Park South 232 Greenfield 3.5%  
Wynyard Extension Sub Total 847  13.5% 
Villages    
Extant Permissions 58 Mixed 1% 
Elwick Sites 35 Greenfield 0.5% 
Hart Sites 50 Greenfield 1% 
Villages Sub Total 143  2.5 % 
Total Dwelling Delivery 5,989  97%43 
 
                                                           
43 There is a shortfall of circa 1 50 dwellings over the plan perio d. However, the Council has  been very cautious in its 
approach to windfalls and only in cluded an allowance based on i ntelligence about specific sites. Given past trends in 
respect of windfall development s, this shortfall is a nominal o ne.  8810.17 Bearing in mind the deliver y scenario presented above, it  is anticipated that a 
large proportion of the new hous ing in the first five years wil l be delivered through 
existing planning permissions, and sites allocated through the Local Plan will 
begin to deliver towards the end of the first five year period.  Where appropriate, 
and in accordance with Government advice, Local Development Ord ers will be 
put in place on brownfield sites  within public ownership to ens ure these sites can 
be brought forward as quickly as possible. Graph 1 below illust rates the delivery 
trajectory over the plan period.  
 10.18 For the second and third 5 year periods the bulk of deliv ery is expected to switch 
to strategic sites on the edge o f the urban area and at Wynyard . These are 
predominantly on greenfield sites , although it is anticipated t hat some urban 
permissions and allocations will c ontinue to contribute to the delivery. The 
Borough Council will continually m onitor the delivery of housin g over the plan 
period. If insufficient additional housing delivery is being ac hieved this may trigger 
a review of the housing policie s contained in the Local Plan  including a review of 
the housing sites iden tified in the plan.  
 10.19  The Borough Council will not seek t o control housing delivery t hrough policies in 
the Local Plan according to the expected delivery trajectories illustrated in table 7 
and graph 1; each housing site i dentified will deliver accordin g  t o  t h e  h o u s i n g  
market at the time, table 7 and graph 1 are included for illust rational purposes 
only. 
  
The five year supply of deliverable housing sites 
 
10.20 Table 7 shows how the Council has projected housing deliv ery over the plan 
period. The following different s ources of housing supply are l isted within Table 7: 
 Planning permissions 
 Sites which the Council has resolved to grant planning permiss ion for 
subject to the signing of a  Section 106 Agreement. 
 Urban Local Plan Sites 
 Rural Local Plan Sites 
 Windfalls 
 
10.21 Table 7 also shows the calculation of the five year suppl y of deliverable housing 
sites for each of the five year periods covered by the plan and  the current five 
year plan period (2017 to 2022 ). When the objectively assessmen t of housing 
need (OAN) was undertaken a ‘strategic’ backlog of housing unde r-delivery of 
705 dwellings (net figure) was i dentified. Since the plan perio d began further 
under-delivery of 307 dwellings ( net figure) has occurred. The strategic housing 
backlog was included in the OA N and spread across the plan peri od (the 
‘Liverpool’ method) and therefor e forms part of the baseline ho using requirement 
for the plan period. The addi tional backlog has been added to t he baseline 
housing requirement and also s pread across the plan period.  
 
 10.22  Paragraph 47 of the NPPF sta tes that local planning auth orities should add a 
buffer of 5% or 20% to the five year housing supply requirement  depending on 
whether or not there has been per sistent under-delivery. The Co uncil accepts 
that there has been a record of persistent under-delivery (this  will be kept under 
review through the annual monitori ng process) and has therefore  added a buffer  89of 20% to the requirement for t he five year period 2017 to 2022 . Also in 
accordance with NPPF paragraph 47 this has been moved forward f rom later in 
the plan period, rather than incr easing the requirement over th e whole of the plan 
period. 
 
10.23   In the interest of clarity, the NPPF paragr aph 47 buffer is completely separate 
from the 20% ‘affordable housing delivery buffer’ identified in  Table 6. The 
affordable housing delivery buffer forms part of the baseline h ousing 
requirement.  The NPPF parag raph 47 buffer has been frontloaded  t o  t h e  
housing requirement at the front o f the plan period by the redu cing the housing 
requirement at the back of the pl an period. So it has not alter ed the baseline 
housing requirement. 
 
10.24 Table 7 shows that the NPP F paragraph 47 buffer has been added to the whole 
of the housing requirement for t he period 2017 to 2022 (includi ng that part of the 
requirement comprising backlog fo r previous under-delivery. The refore the NPPF 
paragraph 47 buffer has demonstrably been added to the backlog as well as the 
baseline housing requirement. The Council will continue to oper ate this approach 
for the annual updates of the five year supply of deliverable h ousing sites.  For 
the avoidance of doubt, the housing land supply assessment incl udes an 
allowance for non-implementation of 10% on the supply from smal ler sites (sites 
of 4 units or less). No such allowance has been made on larger sites given the 
annual detailed profiling of site supply takes a precautionary approach on site 
deliverability, informed by test ed evidence from site owners an d developers.  
 
Executive Houses at Wynyard Development 90Graph 1: Delivery Trajectory of  Housing Sites over the Next 15 Years  
 
 91HSG1: New Housing Provision 
The Borough Council will seek to ensure that new housing provis ion in the 
borough is delivered through housing sites that have already be en permitted, 
newly identified sites both within  the urban areas and on the e dge of the urban 
area, villages in the rural area and sites elsewhere in the bor ough to, as a 
minimum, the net housing requi rement identified below. All sites are suitable, 
available and deliverable and are illustrated below:   
 
Existing Urban Area  Approximate 
Dwelling 
Provision 
Extant Residential Planning 
Permissions and sites subject to 
s.106 1,670 
Windfalls  179 
Urban Local Plan Sites 188 
Total Urban Area Provision 2,037 
 
Urban Edge and Village Sites  Approximate  
Dwelling 
Provision 
Extant Planning Permissions and 
sites subject to s.106 555 
South West Extension 1,260 
High Tunstall 1,200 
Wynyard Park North 400 
Wynyard Park South 232 
Quarry Farm 220 
Elwick Village 35 
Hart Village 50 
Total Rural Provision 3,952 
Shortfall identified in Table 7 161 
Overall Net 
Housing 
Requirement 
Total       6,150    
 
 
 
HSG1a: Ensuring a Sufficien t Supply of Housing Land 
A sufficient supply of housing la nd will be maintained over the  plan period in 
order to ensure the delivery of  the overall housing requirement  as outlined in 
Policy HSG1.  The rate of housi ng delivery and supply will be a ssessed through 
the annual monitoring process, wit h performance being measured against the 
housing trajectory (Table 7).   I f monitoring demonstrates that  the number of 
completed dwellings falls below t he cumulative target over the appropriate 12-
month monitoring period (1 Apr il to 31 March), the Council will  prioritise the 
delivery of housing in the sub sequent monitoring periods.   Thi s will be ensured 
through appropriate mechanisms whi ch, depending on the scale an d nature of  92potential under-delivery, will include: 
 
1) Preparation of an interim pos ition statement and drawing on evidence 
from the  Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment (HE LAA), 
which will be undertaken and updated as required, to identify a dditional 
housing land;  
2) Preparation of development briefs and use of the Council’s p owers to 
support delivery, such as Compulsory Purchase Orders and, where  
appropriate, working in partnersh ip with landowners and develop ers to 
support delivery. and/or 
3) A partial review of the Loca l Plan, including options for sa feguarded land 
including allocated employmen t land will be undertaken if excep tional 
circumstances prevail. 
 
 The Plan contains a range of proposals relating to housing, in cluding the South 
West Extension, Quarry Farm a nd High Tunstall sites that are cr ucial to the 
delivery of the overall locational s trategy and the Wynyard Par k sites that are 
crucial to the shared ambition of Hartlepool and Stockton on Te es Borough 
Councils to see the Wynyard settl ement developed as a sustainab le community. 
 
The Council will work with develope rs and other stakeholders to  ensure the 
timely development of these stra tegic proposals, including the associated key 
infrastructure requirements. Any material delay in the implemen tation of 
infrastructure necessary to susta in housing delivery, which wou ld lead to under-
delivery of supply, will inform w hether the range of measures s et out above are 
triggered. This process will ens ure that plan-led corrective me asures are put in 
place at the appropriate time. 
 
 
  
10.25 The Government has consulted on a proposed housing delive ry test and the 
Council will ensure that the operat ion of Policy HSG1a is consi stent with 
whatever final form this takes.   
 
Housing Mix 
10.26 Balancing the supply and dem and of housing to meet local aspirations is a key 
element of the Sustainab le Community Strategy
44 and the Hartlepool Housing 
Strategy.45 There are several sources of information that form the evidenc e base 
for current and future housing ne ed. Analysing this evidence en ables the Borough 
Council to establish a future requirement framework of housing mix on all 
development within policy HSG1 above.  
 
Hartlepool Strategic Housing Mar ket Assessment 2015 (SHMA) and 2016 
Addendum 
10.27 Previous Strategic Housi ng Market Assessments (SHMAs) hav e been completed 
at a local level in 2007 and at the Tees Valley level in 2009 a nd 2012, previous to 
the most recent Hartlepool assessm ent being completed in 2015. All previous 
                                                           
44 Hartlepool Sustainable Community Strategy 2014  
45 Hartlepool Housing Strategy 2015-2020   93SHMAs identified an imbalance of house types in the borough. Th e 2015 SHMA, 
made the following obse rvations of the current housing market i n the Borough:  
 The need to continue development to satisfy household aspirati ons, in 
particular the development of detached and semi-detached houses  a n d  a  
range of property sizes to offse t identified market imbalances.  
 Developing a range of housing and support products for older p eople. 
 Delivering additional affordabl e homes to meet the shortfalls,  and diversifying 
the range of affordable products b y developing intermediate ten ure products. 
 Strong unmet demand for detached houses. 
 Strong unmet demand for bungalows. 
 
Monitoring 
10.28 The Borough Council continua lly monitors housing planning  permissions, starts 
and completions which provide an accurate overview of the futur e housing supply 
at any given time. The SHMA will be used in the determination o f planning 
applications to ensure that devel opment help to contribute towa rds the particular 
needs within the localit y of the development.  
 10.29 Table 9 below illustrates  the current housing stock mix i n the Borough.  
 
Table 9: Existing Housing Stock Mix in the Borough (Source: 2015 SHMA) 
 
House Type Housing
Stock %
(2015) 
Detached House 14.5% 
Semi Detached 
House 29.2% 
Terraced House 29.7% 
Bungalow 12.1% 
Apartments 12.5% 
Other 2% 
 
10.30 Table 9 indicates that ther e is a comparative oversupply of terraced houses and 
semi-detached properties and a relative undersupply of detached  houses, 
apartments and bungalows in the Bo rough. The current extant pla nning 
permissions are heavily weighted i n the provision of apartments , however many 
of these permissions are not considered deliverable within the plan period and 
therefore have been ex cluded from the totals of planning permis sions in table 7.   
 
 Future Housing Need  
10.31 As demonstrated by the evidence of need in the SHMA and c ontinuing monitoring 
the current commitments in planning permissions would not, on t heir own, provide 
an appropriate housing mix to meet  the needs of the Borough. An y future 
strategic housing provision must seek to balance these needs wi th an appropriate 
mix of house types and tenures in a choice of locations. The fu ture housing need 
is for a full range of house types, with a specific emphasis on  family homes and 
elderly person’s accommodation,  including bungalows. The main p roposed future 
housing types required to meet the  future housing need are defi ned in table 10.   
  9410.32 Whilst table 10 (below) prov ides the overall criteria for  housing mix it may be 
acceptable for some minor variations within an overall developm ent, particularly 
on larger schemes.  
Table 10: Housing Mix Definitions 
 
House Mix Type Description 
Executive Housing  Should generally: 
1) Be of high quality design;  2) Be predominantly detached dwellings; 
3) Have 4 or more bedrooms; 4) Be set in generous grounds; 5) Be in an attractive setting, and;  6) Overall development shoul d be low density of no 
greater than 15 dwelli ngs per hectare.  
 
Full Range of House 
Types A genuine mix of housing tha t caters for the overall 
housing need.   This will include affordable dwellings, starter homes, 
family dwellings, bungalows , elderly persons housing, 
self-build and executive dw ellings and will change from 
site to site depending on the particular need identified 
within the SHMA or equival ent document at the time. 
 
 
10.33 The Borough Council will seek to create sustainable resid ential communities, 
throughout the Borough by providing a mix and balance of good q uality housing 
of all types in line with the evid ence from the SHMAs and ongoi ng monitoring. To 
do this the Borough Council will s eek to control the future sup ply of apartments 
given the large amount of ex tant permissions and the ageing pop ulation which 
mean this type of accommodation has a low demand and increase t he provision 
of family homes, bungalows, elder ly person’s accommodation and executive 
houses in the Borough, along with making sufficient provision w ithin housing sites 
to meet the demand for custom  and self-build housing.  
                   95HSG2: Overall Housing Mix 
 
The Borough Council will ensure that all new housing, and/or th e redevelopment 
of existing housing areas, contr ibutes to achieving an overall balanced housing 
stock that meets local needs and aspirations, both now and in t he future. The 
Borough Council will give significan t weight to housing need, a s identified within 
the most up-to-date SHMA, when c onsidering planning application s.  
 
New housing provision identified in policy HSG1 and on the Poli cies Map will be 
required to deliver a suitable range and mix of house types whi ch are appropriate 
to their locations and lo cal needs as follows:  
 
New Housing Site House Type Required 
South West Extension Full Range of House Types 
High Tunstall Full Range of House Types 
Quarry Farm Full Range of House Types 
Wynyard Park - North 
Pentagon Executive 
Wynyard Park North Full Range of House Types 
Elwick Village Full Range of House Types 
Hart Village Full Range of House Types 
 
 
Urban Local Plan Sites / Allocations 
10.34 To complement the existing planning permissions which exi st within the urban 
area, the SHLAA examined other pot ential sites for development whilst also 
seeking to protect key green spac es within the urban area. A sm all number of 
other sites which may have had some potential for additional ho using on 
brownfield sites within the SH LAA have had to be discounted for  various reasons; 
for example the hospital was proposed to move to Wynyard at the  time of the 
SHLAA however it is now known whether or not this will occur so  the hospital site 
within the town has been protect ed for health related services and is not available 
as a housing site.  
 10.35 The development of Briarfie lds has the potential, along w ith the High Tunstall and 
Quarry Farm housing developments, to add to the high number of cars passing 
through Elwick Village. In order to mitigate this traffic impac t improvements are 
proposed to the highway network.  
 10.36 Policy HSG3 below lists those sites allocated within the urban area as housing 
sites, the approximate numbers of  dwellings they can accommodat e along with 
some general development princ iples they should adhere to.  
         96 
The South West Extension  
10.37 The South West Extension is the strategic housing site wi thin the south of the 
Borough, delivering the majority  of the new planned housing ove r the next 15 
years. It received a “minded to grant” decision from Planning C ommittee for full 
permission for 144 dwellings and outline permission for 1116 in  October 2015. 
Once the S106 Legal Agreement is  signed this will form a planni ng permission 
which will develop out over the plan period. Significant infras tructure works, 
including a new access onto the A689, new interconnecting roads , cycleways and 
footpaths, utilities and services are required for the developm ent to start in the 
short term and delivery is expect ed to start within the first f ive years and will 
continue throughout the Plan peri od. The development of the sit e is supported by 
a masterplan which will guide development and set out in detail  the main 
components of the scheme. The Ma sterplan was agreed as a condit ion on the 
planning permission.  
 10.38 The South West Extension will offer a broad mix of housin g types and tenure that 
will cater for a general Borough -wide housing need. The 1,260 t otal dwelling 
capacity for the site takes acc ount of densities of adjoining a nd nearby residential 
areas of The Fens and Owton Manor and the Borough Council’s des ire to create 
a high quality residential environment. Although individual sit es differ, the overall 
average density is appr oximately 25 dwellings per hectare.  
 10.39 The South West Extension will incorporate appropriate fac ilities that will meet the 
needs of local and Borough wide res idents. A local centre likel y to provide retail 
provision and health facilities , primary education provision an d leisure facilities 
that meet the local needs, are r equired as part of the South We st Extension. As 
well as the incidental open space provided as part of the exemp lar residential 
environment, a multifunctional strategic green wedge will be cr eated and 
managed. The green wedge will incor porate recreation, leisure, biodiversity and HSG3: Urban Local Plan Sites 
 
The following sites within the urban area are allocated for hou sing 
development as illustrate d on the Policies Map: 
 
1) US1 – South of John Howe Gard ens – approximately 20 dwelling s. 
2) US2 – Carr and Hopps - approximately 70 dwellings. 
3) US3 – Briarfields - app roximately 14 dwellings. 
4) US4 – Coronation Drive - a pproximately 65 dwellings. 
 
The development of these sites will be determined in accordance  with other 
policies within the Plan. Specifi c site requirements, including  design, access 
arrangements and development phasing will be secured through pl anning 
conditions and/or planning obligations secured through legal ag reements 
where appropriate. 
 
The development of Briarfields will be expected to contribute, on a pro-rata 
basis with High Tunstall (HSG5), Quarry Farm 2 (HSG5a) and (HSG 7) Elwick 
Village, to the provision of the grade separated junction and b ypass to the 
north of Elwick Village. 
  97flood mitigation features which benefit the existing local resi dential area and also 
the newly created residential ar eas. Diagram one identifies how  the site could 
develop, and reflects the elements which were secured in full b y the planning 
permission including 144 dwellings , the red line boundary of th e site, the main 
roads and the green wedge and sugg ests how the other elements o f the 
development could be orientated, again this diagram is indicati ve.  98Diagram 2 – The South West Extension  
 
 
 99HSG4: The South West Extensi on Strategic Housing Site 
The South West Extension benefi ts from full permission for 144 dwellings and 
outline permission for 1116 dwellings (subject to completion of  S106 Legal 
Agreement) and covers approximat ely 97.25 hectares. The develop ment will 
be phased over the plan period, w ith applications being determi n e d   i n  
accordance with the following criteria: 
 
1) No more than 46.33ha of land  will be developed for new housi ng and 
associated infrastructure incl uding Community Facilities and 
Transport Access;  
  
2) Approximately 1,260 dwellings  will be developed on the site.   
 
3) Land will be set aside and allocated for the following neigh bourhood 
facilities:  
 
a) Safeguarded land (2.7 hectares) for Primary Education 
provision (Use Class D1) in acco rdance with policy INF4, and;  
b) Local Centre(s) including retail provision (Use Class A1, up  
to 1,999sqm) to meet the local needs, public house (Use 
Class A3/4 up to 500sqm), health facilities (Use Class D1, up 
to 300sqm), leisure facilities and any other community needs 
in accordance with policies INF4 and RC16.  
 
4) An access road through the site connecting the A689 and Brie rton 
Lane with appropriate vehicular, pedestrian and cycle linkages to the 
adjoining urban area. 
 
5) Approximately 48.22 ha of mult ifunctional green infrastructu re will be 
provided including formal and informal leisure, education relat ed 
sports provision and recreational facilities will be allocated,  developed 
and managed as a strategic green wedge, as defined on the Polic ies 
Map and in accordance with policies NE1-5. Planning Permission will 
only be given for developments whi ch relate to the use of land within 
the green wedge as parkland or other amenity, recreational or 
landscaped open space, or for allo tments or wildlife purposes. 
 
6) Appropriate vehicular, pedestrian and cycle linkages to the adjoining 
urban and rural area must be provided with each phase of the 
development. 
 
7) A landscape buffer, as defined by the site boundaries and il lustrated 
on the  Policies Map will be created between the site and the A689, 
Dalton Back Lane and the rural fr inge. No built incursion into the 
landscape buffer will be permitted other than for uses intrinsi cally 
linked to its use as a landscape buffer. 
 
8) No development will be permi tted which restricts the ability  of the 
Borough Council to implement a link road between this site and the 
High Tunstall development in the future as marked on the  Policies 
Map.  
   100 Specific site requirements, i ncluding design, access arrangemen ts and 
development phasing will be secured through planning conditions  a n d  
planning obligations secured through legal agreements where app ropriate.   101High Tunstall and Quarry Farm Ex tension to the Urban Area 
10.40 Also on the western edge of  the existing urban area, ther e are proposals for 
urban extensions at High Tunstall  for approximately 1,200 new h omes and at 
Quarry Farm Two for 220 homes.  
 10.41 The High Tunstall development is a sustainable scheme inc orporating a new 
primary school and playing fiel ds, a green wedge, sustainable d rainage provision, 
local centre and play facilities. The development will link int o adjacent 
developments through the provision of public footpaths and Righ ts of Way and 
will connect into the public tr ansport network. The development  is currently 
subject to a planning applicati on with associated Masterplan.  
 10.42 The NPPF states that planning should be genuinely plan le d and set out a 
positive vision for the future and the Borough Council supports  a masterplanning 
approach to major development. The vision for this site is illu strated on the 
concept plan (see Diagram 3) and it is essential that a masterp lan is agreed with 
the Council and that development i s carried out in accordance w ith it. 
   10.43 The Quarry Farm Two site t o the north of Elwick Road is a  proposal for a mix of 
house types with associated gree n space, play area and footpath  / cycle links into 
adjacent areas. It is also currently subject to a planning appl ication. The Quarry 
Farm development will be expect ed to contribute in financial te rms towards the 
delivery of the primary school on the High Tunstall development  a s ,  g i v e n  t h e  
existing lack of capacity within existing schools, both sites r equire additional 
education spaces to be made available. 
 
10.44 In order to make the developments acceptable in highway t erms there is a need 
for major improvements to the road network in the area to minim ise the risk of 
accidents on the A19 trunk road. As such it is proposed to deve lop a new bypass 
to the north of Elwick Village and create a new grade separated  junction of the 
A19(T) at the northern Elwick access point. The Borough Council  recognises the 
significant benefits that such ma jor infrastructure works would  result in; in effect 
this would create a third access into Hartlepool from the A19(T ), helping to relieve 
pressure and congestion from t he A689 and A179 through allowing  residents 
within the area to use this access point. The estimated costs o f these works are 
between £14 and £18 million. Opti ons for funding these works in clude Local 
Growth Fund, the Homes and Communities Agencies (HCA) Home Buil ding Fund 
or prudential borrowing by the Local Authority. To date work ha s commenced on 
a discussions with landowners to  agree an appropriate route, ta king account of 
the operational needs of the farm s. Work is ongoing to commissi on land surveys 
to assist in preparing a more det ailed route plan which will be  consulted on with 
landowners and other interested parties and a bid has been made  to the Local 
Enterprise Partnership for £18 m illion of Local Growth Fund (LG F) money – if 
successful this money would be available to enable the works to  s t a r t  t o  b e  
implemented in 2018-9. Whichever of the above finance methods a
re used in 
order to ensure the road is in place up front, all are loans an d would then be 
repaid by the developments as they  build out over the plan peri od. Other sites 
that would benefit from the road im provements will be expected to contribute 
towards the cost of repaying the LGF funding. 
    102Diagram 3 – High Tunstall Concept Plan  
 
 
 103 
HSG5: High Tunstall Strategic Housing Site 
 
The High Tunstall development is allocated for approximately 12 00 
dwellings. The site covers an ar ea of approximately 83.50 hecta res as 
illustrated on the Policies Map. No development will be permitt e d  p r i o r  t o  
the implementation of the grade separated junction and bypass t o the north 
of Elwick Village unless otherwise agreed with Highways England  and the 
Borough Council.  
 
The development will be phased over the plan period, with appli cations 
being determined in accordance  with the following criteria: 
 
1) No more than 69.1ha of land will be developed for new housin g 
and associated transport infrastructure;  
 
2) Approximately 1,200 dwellings  will be developed on the site.   
 
3) 2.4ha of land will be set aside and allocated for the follow ing 
neighbourhood facilities:  
 
a) Land for Primary Education provision in accordance with 
policy INF4, and;  
b) Local Centre(s) including re tail provision (Use Class A1, 
up to 250sqm) to meet the local needs, public house (Use 
Class A3/4 up to 500sqm), health facilities (Use Class D1), 
leisure facilities and any other community needs in 
accordance with policies INF4 and RC16.  
 
4) Approximately 12.00ha of multi functional green infrastructur e 
including the required level of SANGS, formal and informal 
leisure, education related sports provision and recreational 
facilities will be allocated, de veloped and managed as a strate gic 
green wedge, as defined on the Policies Map and in accordance 
with policies NE1-5. Planning Permission will only be given for  
developments which relate to the use of land within the green 
wedge as parkland or other amenity, recreational or landscaped 
open space, or for allotments or wildlife purposes. 
 
5) A landscape buffer, as defined by the site boundaries and 
illustrated on the Policies Map will be created between the sit e 
and Elwick Road and the rural fringe. No built incursion into t he 
landscape buffer will be permitted other than for uses intrinsi cally 
linked to its use as a landscape buffer.  
 
6) Appropriate vehicular, pedestrian and cycle linkages to the 
adjoining urban and rural area must be provided within each 
phase of the development.  
 
7) No development will be permitted which restricts the ability  of the 
Borough Council to implement a link road between this site and 
the South West Extension in the future as marked on the Policie s  104Map.  
 
8) Development to accord with the key principles set out in con cept 
diagram contained in the Plan; development to accord with an 
approved masterplan. 
 
9) Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment (LVIA) to be provided  
given edge of settlement location. 
 
In order to ensure that necessary utilities infrastructure is d elivered in a 
timely manner a phasing plan shoul d be submitted as part of the  initial 
planning application. 
  
Specific site requirements, i ncluding design, access arrangemen ts and 
development phasing will be secured through planning conditions  and 
planning obligations secured through Section 106 legal agreemen ts where 
appropriate.  
 
The Local Infrastructure Plan gi ves further detail on the infra structure 
requirements linked to the site a nd legal agreements will ensur e the LGF 
(or alternative) funding for th e road improvements linking to t he A19(T) and 
associated Elwick grade separated  junction is paid back by each  of the 
phases of the High Tunstall devel opment, along with contributio ns from 
Quarry Farm 2 (HSG5a), Elwick V illage (HSG7) and Briarfields (H SG3(3), on 
a pro rata basis. 
 
 
 
 
HSG5a: Quarry Farm Housing Site 
 
The Quarry Farm housing development is allocated for approximat ely 220
dwellings. The site covers an ar ea of approximately 11.30 hecta res as 
illustrated on the Policies Map. No development will be permitt e d  p r i o r  t o  
the implementation of the grade separated junction and bypass t o the north 
of Elwick Village unless otherwise agreed with Highways England  and the 
Borough Council.  
 
The development will be phased over the plan period, with appli cations 
being determined in accordance  with the following criteria: 
 
1) No more than 8.3ha of land will be developed for new housing  and 
associated infrastructure and Tr ansport Access, with the site 
being accessed from Reedston Road; 
 
2) Approximately 220 dwellings will be developed on the site. 
 
3) The development will be expect ed to contribute, on a pro-rat a 
basis, to strategic infrastructur e provision including the grad e 
separated junction and bypass to the north of Elwick Village an d 
the single form primary school on the High Tunstall development .  
  1054) Approximately 3ha of multif unctional green infrastructure wi ll be 
provided, which will accommodate the provision of the required 
level of SANGS. This will include formal and informal leisure a nd 
recreational facilities which w ill be allocated, developed and 
managed as amenity open space and green corridors in 
accordance with policy NE2. Pla nning Permission will only be 
given for developments which relat e to the use of the land as 
parkland or other amenity, recr eational or play space, landscap ed 
open space, or for allotments or wildlife purposes. 
 
5) A landscape buffer, as defined by the site boundaries and 
illustrated on the Policies Map will be created between the sit e 
and the rural fringe. No built incursion into the landscape buf fer 
will be permitted other than for uses intrinsically linked to i ts use 
as a landscape buffer.  
 
6) Appropriate vehicular, pedestrian and cycle linkages to the 
adjoining urban and rural area must be provided as part of the 
development.  
 
Specific site requirements, i ncluding design, access arrangemen ts and 
development phasing will be secured through planning conditions  and 
planning obligations secured through Section 106 legal agreemen ts where 
appropriate.  
 
The Local Infrastructure Plan gi ves further detail on the infra structure 
requirements linked to the site a nd legal agreements will ensur e the LGF 
(or alternative) funding for th e road improvements linking to t he A19(T) and 
associated Elwick grade separated  junction is paid back by each  of the 
phases on a pro rata basis.  
 
  106Wynyard Park Housing Developments 
10.45 Over recent years Wynyard has seen significant employment  and housing 
development. Historically the housing development was to the so uth of the A689 
with the prestige employment provision to the north of the A689 . However, 
recently there has been housing development permitted to the no rth of the A689 
both in Hartlepool and in Stockton, sitting alongside the prest ige employment 
land. These recent housing developments have come forward in a piecemeal 
way, driven by neither authorit y being able to demonstrate a fi ve year housing 
land supply. This has led to problems in terms of delivering in frastructure in an 
integrated and effective way.  
 10.46 This Local Plan gives t he Borough Council an opportunity to ensure that the 
Wynyard development creates a sus tainable community. This aspir ation is crucial 
given it is isolated from the main urban areas of Hartlepool an d Stockton. Whilst 
one of the main strengths of Wynyard is its location adjacent t o the A19(T) and 
with easy access to the A1(M), historically it has never been w ell served by public 
transport and therefore it is nec essary to secure investment in to the public 
transport network in order to impr ove the sustainability of the  area. Recent 
developments which have been approved have secured a service fo r a limited 
period, however, it will be crucial to continue this in the fut ure. It will be vital that 
this continues in the future.  
 
10.47 Both Hartlepool and Stockt on-on-Tees Borough Councils are  committed to 
ensuring that Wynyard is develope d as a sustainable settlement including 
affordable housing, green infrastructure, cycling links and bui lt sports provision. 
Both Councils are committed to future masterplanning which will  take place 
following the completion of Local Plans. The masterplan will pr ovide a strong 
framework to guide development and the Wynyard Concept Plan (se e Diagram 4) 
provides a high level visual illustration of the vision.  
 
10.48 The capacity of the road network has been an issue and Hi ghways England (HE) 
has been involved in assessing the impact developments in the a rea will have on 
the strategic road network. Di scussions have been ongoing with HE to assess 
the impact of the proposed allo cations, and necessary improveme nts to the road 
network are highlighted within  the Local Infrastructure Plan an d will need to be 
secured as part of the developm ents. To ensure delivery of hous ing in Hartlepool 
Borough, and to provide a degree o f flexibility, it has been ag reed between 
Hartlepool BC, Stockton BC and Hig hways England that the trigge r for the 
mitigation measures at the A19 / A689 interchange should be the  cumulative total 
of dwellings at Wynyard (both north and south of the A689) and the SW 
Extension, as modelled up to t he total of 2,263 dwellings. 
 
10.49  Presently the development at the North Pentagon (HSG6a) within the policy is 
able to proceed, however, the ot her two sites (HSG6b and HSG6c)  necessitate 
the need for improvements at the A19 junction including an addi tional lane for 
eastbound traffic to allow two la nes of traffic heading south o nto the A19 and also 
the need for a pedestrian bridge adjacent to the main road junc tion. The trigger 
for commencing these improvement s at Wynyard will be reached up on the 
delivery of 2,263 dwellings acr oss the identified committed dev elopment sites.  
 
10.50 Recently a temporary prim ary school has been constructed whilst a permanent 
primary school is constructed on land at Wynyard village to the  south of the A689.  107Meetings with the Diocese have taken place and in addition to t he proposed new 
two form entry primary school to the south of the A689 there is  also an identified 
need for a 1 form entry primary school to the north of the A689  on the Wynyard 
Park site. Ensuring that Wynyard residents are able to access t he playing fields at 
the school outside of school hours  will also be important and s hould be secured 
through a community use agreement. This will help to ensure res idents, 
especially children, have access  to sports provision without th e need to travel 
outside of Wynyard. Whilst this will cater for junior use there  is also an identified 
need for adult pitch provision at Wynyard and this will be cate red for within the 
area shown as INF4 (Community Fac ilities) on the Policies Map. 
 10.51 To the north of the A689 co mmunity facilities and other e lements which are vital 
to create a sustainable community, including a local centre, ha ve not yet been put 
in place. As such, it will be necessary for the schemes allocat ed by policy HSG6 
to ensure that a range of servi ces and facilities are provided in line with the policy. 
These will be secured by legal  agreement and conditions.  108 
Diagram 4 – Wynyard Concept Plan  
 
 109HSG6: Wynyard Housing Developments 
The following sites at Wynyard are allocated for a total of app roximately 732
dwellings as illustrated on the Policies Map: 
 
a) North Pentagon – 8.82ha - approximately 100 dwellings. 
b) Wynyard Park North – 25.8ha - approximately 400 dwellings. 
c) Wynyard Park South – 11.1ha – approximately 232 dwellings. 
 
Development will be phased over th e plan period, with site A av ailable prior 
to any of the off-site road infr astructure improvements. Sites B and C are 
linked to the provision of off-sit e road infrastructure improve ments, as 
identified in the Local Infrastru cture Plan and as agreed with Highways 
England. Any development at Sit es B and C which exceeds the agr eed 
cumulative trigger of 2,263 dwe llings across Wynyard Park, Wyny ard Village 
and the South West Extension w ill not be permitted to commence prior to the 
installation of the highway improvements. 
 
Planning  applications will be determined in accordance with the followin g 
criteria: 
 
1) No more than 6.7ha of land will be developed for new executi ve 
housing and associated infrastructure at the North Pentagon. De nsities 
within this area will be restrict ed to a maximum of 15 dwelling s per 
hectare. The development will inco rporate a minimum of approxim ately 
2.12ha of green infrastructure , informal open space and recreat ional 
and leisure land including the pr ovision of a skate park or sui table 
alternative play provision  on land adjacent to the play area associated 
with the southern pentagon area;  
 
2) At Wynyard Park North no mo re than 20.2ha of land will be de veloped 
for a full range of house types , developed to a high standard o f design 
to reflect its rural location. The development will incorporate  a 
minimum of 5.6ha of green infrast ructure, informal open space a nd 
recreational and leisure land; 
 
3) At Wynyard Park South no more than 11.1ha of land will be 
developed for a full range of house types, developed to a high 
standard of design to reflect its  rural location. The developme nt will 
be expected to incorporate green i nfrastructure and informal op en 
space within applications; 
 
4) A total of 8.9ha of land will  be set aside adjacent to the h ousing 
land, and allocated under Policy INF4 (Community Facilities), f or 
vital infrastructure facilities  to ensure the development is 
sustainable for the followi ng neighbourhood facilities:  
 
a) Local Centre including retail provision to meet the local 
needs, health facilities, lei sure facilities and any other 
community needs in accordance with policies INF4 and 
RC16; 
b) A one form entry Primary School and associated playing  110pitch and accessible changing facility provision with 
associated community use agreement;  
c) Playing pitch provision capable of catering for adult 
football matches with associat ed changing facilities; and 
d) Play area and other play facilities included the provision 
of a multi-use games area and f acilities which cater for older 
children. 
 
Alternative uses, including housi ng, will only be considered on  land 
covered by Policy INF4 once all of the community facilities 
considered necessary to form a sustainable community have been 
delivered. 
 
5) A multifunctional strategic green wedge is allocated, as def ined on 
the Policies Map. Planning Permission will only be given for 
developments which relate to the use of land within the green 
wedge as parkland or other amenity, recreational or landscaped 
open space, or for allotments or wildlife purposes. 
 
6) A landscape buffer, including a corridor along the A689, as defined 
by the site boundaries and illustrated on the Policies Map will  b e  
created. No built incursion into the landscape buffer will be 
permitted other than for uses intrinsically linked to its use a s a 
landscape buffer.  
 
7) To protect the woodland there will be a minimum gap of 10m 
between the plantation woodland edge and garden fences. Where 
the woodland is ancient woodland this gap will increase to 15m.  
This corridor will be planted with native species as the housin g 
develops.  
 
8) Appropriate pedestrian and c ycle linkages to the adjoining a reas at 
Wynyard and linking to Hartlepool along the A689 must be provid ed 
by the development in accordan ce with policies INF1 and 2.  
 
9) Development to accord with the key principles set out in con cept 
diagram contained in the Plan; development to accord with an 
approved masterplan. 
 
In order to ensure that necessary  utilities infrastructure is d elivered in a 
timely manner a phasing plan s hould be submitted as part of  any initial 
planning applications. 
 
Specific site requirements, in cluding design, access arrangemen ts and 
development phasing will be secure d through planning conditions . Planning 
obligations will be secured through legal agreements to ensure the provision 
of the infrastructure, both on a nd off site, required to ensure  the development 
is sustainable. 
     111Elwick Village Housing Site 
10.52 Elwick Village is a small village to the west of Hartlepo ol with direct access onto 
the A19(T). The village is c entred around a linear village gree n and benefits from 
a post office, two public houses , primary school, grade II list ed church and 
Women’s Institute hall. A conser vation area covers a significan t part of Elwick 
Village and contains the grade II* Church and a number of grade  II listed 
properties. The northern boundary of the Conservation Area is d irectly adjacent to 
the proposed housing site and development will need to take acc ount of, and 
respect, these heritage assets.  
 10.53 Elwick currently suffers from high levels of cars travell ing through the village to 
and from the A19(T) and has had ongoing issues with speeding an d road safety. 
Road safety has also been an ongoing issue at the two junctions  with the A19 
where there have been a number of  fatalities and other serious accidents. As 
such it is proposed to develop a bypass to the north of the vil lage and create and 
new grade separated junction at the northern A19(T) access. The se 
improvements will have signific ant benefits not only to the vil lage in terms of 
reducing traffic and improving sa fety both in the village and a t the junctions, but it 
will also effectively create a third entrance into Hartlepool f rom the A19(T), 
helping to reduce congestion on t he A689 and A179 and ensuring that traffic from 
developments on the western fr inge of Hartlepool do not exacerb ate existing 
safety issues within Elwick.   
 10.54 Elwick Village has only s een small infill developments ov er the past decade or so. 
There is an existing permission for 14 dwellings at North Farm but it is considered 
there is potential for an additional small housing site for app roximately 35 
dwellings in this location. This site is proposed as a housing site within the Rural 
Neighbourhood Plan and as such it i s considered allocating the site within the 
Local Plan will ensure the two documents are in general conform ity. This 
development should help to ensur e the continued viability of th e various services 
within the village, helping to ensure the ongoing sustainabilit y of the village. 
   112 
 HSG7: Elwick Village Housing Development 
 
The following site at Elwick Village is allocated for a total o f approximately 35 
dwellings as illustrated on the Policies Map: 
 
a) Potters Farm / North Farm – 2.07ha - approximately 35 dwelli ngs. 
 
The development will be phased over the plan period, with appli cations being 
determined in accordance with  the following criteria: 
 
1) No more than 1.67ha of land will be developed for new housin g.  
The development will incorporate a minimum of 0.40ha of green 
infrastructure, informal open space and recreational and leisur e 
land.  
 
2) The site will be accessed via Elwick Road at the North Farm access. 
No access will be permitted from the new bypass or via the vill age 
green.  
 
3) A landscape buffer, as illustrated on the  Policies Map, will be 
created between the site and the bypass to the north. No built 
incursion into the landscape buffer will be permitted other tha n for 
uses intrinsically linked to it s use as a landscape buffer.  
 
4) Development proposals for the site will be expected to take account 
of, respect and conserve the significance and setting of  the 
adjacent heritage assets.  
 
5) Appropriate pedestrian and cycle linkages to the adjoining a reas of 
countryside and linking to Hartlepool along Elwick Road will be  
required as part of the residential development, along with a 
contribution towards a subsidised  bus service to help maximise the 
sustainability of the site. 
 
6) The development will be expected to contribute, on a pro-rat a basis 
with High Tunstall (HSG5), Quarry Farm 2 (HSG5a) and Briarfield s 
(HSG3(3), to the provision of the grade separated junction and 
bypass to the north of Elwick Village. 
 
Specific site requirements, i ncluding design, access arrangemen ts and 
development phasing will be secured through planning conditions  a n d  
planning obligations secured through legal agreements where app ropriate.  
  113Hart Village Housing Sites 
10.55 Hart Village is a small village to the north west of Hart lepool with a strong sense 
of community spirit which is gen erated by events within the vil lage hall. The two 
public houses, grade I listed c hurch and primary school also pl ay an important 
part in community life. The vi llage shop/post office closed 200 8, meaning the 
nearest shop is now at the local centre at Middle Warren. As su ch all new 
developments will be expected to  contribute towards improvement s to the 
footpath between Hart Village and Mi ddle Warren to ensure it is  s a f e ,  u s e a b l e  
and attractive to help encourage its use.  
 10.56 Similar to Elwick Village, the site at Nine Acres propose d by the Local Plan in 
Hart Village, is also proposed by the Rural Neighbourhood Plan,  helping to 
ensure general conformity  between the documents.  
 10.57 The two housing sites are at the western end of the villa ge to the north and south 
of the road and will ensure the village grows in linear pattern . The additional 
growth will help to protect the viability of the local services , in particular the 
school, which will benefit from developer contributions from th e developments to 
improve the school through increas ing capacity to cater for add itional children 
from the developments.  
 10.58 Whilst the playing pitch at the school is used informally  by children within the 
village, there is no play area. A s such one of the requirements  of the 
developments will be to provide a new formal play area for the village. It is 
envisaged that the play area will be provided near to the schoo l.  
 
10.59 As previously mentioned it  is proposed to create a formal  green space adjacent to 
the housing development on the north side of the road. Given th e lack of formal 
green spaces in the village it is felt that this is necessary t o provide residents with 
a quality green space which will be multifunctional, catering f or a range of users. 
The design of the housing development at Nine Acres will be imp ortant to ensure 
that housing is provided in a w ay which overlooks the green spa ce to help with 
natural surveillance.  
   114 HSG8: Hart Village Housing Developments 
 
The following sites at Hart Village are allocated for a total o f approximately 50 
dwellings as illustrated on the Policies Map: 
 
a) Nine Acres – 3.06ha - a pproximately 30 dwellings. 
b) Glebe Farm – 1.47ha - a pproximately 20 dwellings. 
 
The two developments will be phased over the plan period, with applications 
being determined in accordance  with the following criteria: 
 
1) No more than 2.2ha of land will be developed for residential  at Nine 
Acres and no more than 1.1ha will be developed for residential at 
Glebe Farm with the remaining land on both sites developed as 
green infrastructure,  informal open space and recreational and  
leisure land. 
 
2) A landscape buffer, as defined by the development limits and  
illustrated on the Policies Map will be created between the Gle be 
Farm site and the A179 to the south. No built incursion into th e 
landscape buffer will be permitted other than for uses intrinsi cally 
linked to its use as a landscape buffer.  A further landscape b uffer 
will be provided to the north of the Nine Acres site to ensure a 
buffer between development and the open countryside.   
 
3) An area of land within the eastern area  of the Nine Acres site will be 
developed as a formal area of green infrastructure and designat ed 
under Policy NE2 to protect it from development in the future. 
Housing proposals for the overall site will be expected to be 
designed so that they overlook the green space to increase 
security. Planning permission wi ll only be given for developmen ts 
which relate to the use of land as protected green space or oth er 
amenity, recreational or landscaped open space. 
 
4) Appropriate pedestrian and cycle linkages to the adjoining a reas of 
countryside and linking to Hartlepool along the footpath adjace nt to 
the A179 will be required as part of the residential developmen t to 
help maximise the sustainability of the site. 
 
Specific site requirements, i ncluding design, access arrangemen ts and 
development phasing will be secured through planning conditions  a n d  
planning obligations secured through legal agreements where app ropriate.  
  115Affordable Housing Provision  
10.60 Affordable housing is housin g designed for those whose in come generally 
denies them the opportunity to pur chase houses on the open mark et. 
Affordable housing should meet t he needs of eligible households  including 
availability at a cost low enough for them to afford, determine d with regard 
to local incomes and local house prices. Affordable housing mus t include 
provision for the dwelling to rem ain at an affordable price for  future eligible 
households. Affordable housing in Hartlepool can be delivered i n three 
ways, as detailed in table 11. The Government is also currently  ex p l o r i n g 
the idea of “Starter Homes” which would form a fourth type of a ffordable 
housing if brought forward. 
 
Table 11: Affordable Housing Definitions 
 
Affordable House 
Type Description 
Social Rent Rented housing owned and managed by Registered 
Providers, for which gui deline target rents are 
determined through the national rent regime.  
Affordable Rent The same characteristics as social rented housing 
except that it is outside t he national rent regime, but is 
subject to other rent controls that require it to be offered to eligible households at a rent of up to 80% of local market rents.  
Intermediate Housing which is part owned and rented by Registered 
Providers to the tenant. This can take the form of Shared Ownership or Equity Share schemes.  
 
10.61 Affordable housing can be delivered either as a 100% affo rdable 
development or as part of a private market housing development where a 
smaller percentage of the overa ll dwellings are affordable in t enure and the 
majority are private.   
 10.62  In the future it may be difficu lt to secure grant funding for s ubsidised 100% 
affordable housing and as a result other mechanisms need to be utilised to 
secure ongoing affordable housi ng provision. Securing affordabl e housing 
as part of private residential developments provides perhaps th e most 
realistic way of securing new a ffordable housing developments i n the future.  
 
Hartlepool Strategic Housing Ma rket Assessment 2015 (SHMA)  
10.63 The previous 2012 Tees Valle y SHMA identified an affordab le housing 
need in the Borough of 27.5%. The 2015 SHMA continues to identi fy areas 
of affordable housing need in the Borough and advocates an annu al 
affordable housing delivery target of approximately 144 dwellin gs. 
Compared to the net additional dwe lling provision target of 410  (adjusted 
from the 325 proposed in the SHMA to take account of demolition s and 
previous under-delivery), the ne t affordable housing delivery t arget is 
approximately 35%.
 
  116Hartlepool Affordable Housing Viability  
10.64 Although the evidence identif ies a significant level of a ffordable housing 
need, the Borough Council appreciate s that providing an element  o f  
affordable housing as part of pri vate development affects the e conomic 
viability of schemes. Bearing this in mind it is necessary to e nsure that 
affordable housing is provided at  a level that is economically viable and 
does not prevent development from taking place.   
 10.65 To provide guidance in assessing site viability the Borou gh Council 
produced an Affordable Housing Ec onomic Viability Assessment to  inform 
the Planning Obligations Supplem entary Planning Document 2015 ( SPD) 
which assessed the viability of a range of sites across the Bor ough (This 
document is attached as Appendix 1 of the SPD on page 46).  The  results of 
the economic viability assessment  show that in current market c onditions 
the development of residential property on sites with a thresho ld of 15 or 
more dwellings is generally ec onomically viable when contributi ng 18% 
affordable housing along with the other developer contributions  required. 
The results suggest that a minimum target of 18% affordable hou sing 
should be sought on housing devel opments but that any policy ne eds to be 
flexible and perhaps have built i n trigger points or similar me chanisms which 
enable more affordable housing to  be delivered as market condit ions 
improve – this may be more rel evant to brownfield developments where the 
viability was shown to  be more marginal. 
 10.66 In preparation of this Local  Plan, further work on develo pment viability was 
undertaken through the development of the Deliverability Risk A ssessment 
(DRA) document.  This document a ssessed the economic viability of the 
development types which have been identified within this Local Plan.  The 
DRA considered the constraints and costs of delivering in the c urrent 
economic climate and then consider ed the cost implications of p lanning 
obligations (including affordable housing) on development viabi lity.  The 
evidence assumed a ‘worst case scenario’ to cost assumptions, b ased on 
local development indicators, s tandard development cost assumpt ions and 
through taking professional advice from local Agents and Boroug h Council 
officers. 
 10.67 The findings of this most recent evidence base, which det ails that affordable 
housing requirements can be me t; are generally supported by rec ent 
planning applications where th e Borough Council has been succes sful in 
securing affordable contributions  in the region of 15-18% on gr eenfield sites 
over the past three years. In or der to ensure that  any future d evelopments 
are viable the affordable housi ng policy is flexible enough to 
have regard to 
prevailing market conditions. Thi s method will allow both for t he 
maximisation of affordable housing on site and the viability of  schemes 
aiding delivery in  the long term.  
 
10.68 The Borough Council wishes to maximise the number of affo rdable homes 
delivered across the Borough in support of its aim to create su stainable 
residential communities and to wo rk towards meeting the need id entified in 
the SHMA. Securing affordable housing as part of economically v iable  117private residential developments provides the most realistic wa y of securing 
new affordable housing development s in the future therefore a p olicy which 
builds in both some certainty  for landowners and developers and  flexibility to 
account for differing market conditions and allows for the esta blishment of 
viability on a scheme by scheme basis would be the best way of meeting 
this role.  
 10.69 The Borough Council will s eek, on all residential develop ments of 15 
dwellings or more, an affordable housing requirement to be deli vered as 
part of the development. It is expected that all new affordable  housing 
provision will be delivered on-site and where appropriate be pe pperpotted. 
However, in the case of the Nort h Pentagon Site at Wynyard and in certain 
other circumstances where a low density product is delivered, i t may be 
acceptable for provision to be made off-site. Where off-site pr ovision is 
deemed acceptable a commuted sum mechanism will be used. Off-si te 
contributions will be used toward s the provision of affordable housing within 
the central area of Hartlepool and may include contributions to  s i t e  
assembly of larger schemes or re-use and modification of empty homes to 
provide modern affordable homes. The established process as to how an 
appropriate commuted sum is calcu lated is detailed in the Plann ing 
Obligations SPD .  
 
HSG9: Affordable Housing  
The Borough Council will seek to deliver affordable housing in respect of all 
applications or proposals for C3 residential developments that consist of a 
gross addition of 15 dwellings or more. These include residenti al new build, 
renewal of lapsed unimplemented planning permissions and change s of use 
and conversions.  
 
An affordable housing target of 18% will be sought on all sites  above the 15 
dwelling threshold. The affordable provision and tenure and mix  will be 
negotiated on a site-by-site basis, having regard to the econom ic viability of 
the development and the most up-to-date evidence of housing nee d, 
aspiration and the local housing market.  
 
It is expected that affordable housing will be delivered throug h on-site 
provision and where appropriate, be pepperpotted. Affordable un its should 
be indistinguishable from the market units on the development a nd be 
delivered in line with other relevant policies within this plan  and guidance 
within the Planning Obligations  SPD. However in certain circums tances it 
may be acceptable for provisi on to be made off-site, where:  
 
1) Applicants can provide sound, robust evidence why the 
affordable housing cannot be incorporated on-site.  
 
Unless in exceptional circumstances all affordable units will b e delivered in 
partnership with a Registered Provider or the Borough Council b y means of a 
legal agreement, which will include appropriate provision to se cure its long 
term availability.  118Housing Market Renewal  
10.70  In some parts of the borough ther e are concentrations of housin g where 
there is an imbalance between s upply and demand. This housing m arket 
failure, or weakness, manifests itself in a number of ways incl uding: 
significantly lower than average  house prices; concentrations o f vacant/void 
properties; housing demand dominated by investors and private l andlords; 
absence of owner-occupiers (incl uding first-time buyers) and an ti-social 
behaviour. 
 10.71 The Borough Council recogni ses that a holistic approach i s required to 
tackle the problems of low dem and and abandonment and redress t his 
imbalance. Over recent years the Borough Council and its partne rs have 
embarked on a housing market renew al programme which has sought  t o  
clear and redevelop the worst a ffected areas and refurbish othe r adjacent 
areas through a combination of ph ysical improvements to buildin gs and the 
surrounding environment, improv ed management such as landlord 
accreditation and community support measures. The housing clear ance 
programme is underpinned by studi es and consultation which help ed 
identify the worst affected areas and with a mix of public and private sector 
funding supported by the use of Com pulsory Purchase procedures where 
required. Significant progress has been made. Included as part of the 
housing market renewal programme i s the empty homes strategy; t his will 
endeavour to bring empty homes back into use through collaborat ive 
working with key partners and focussed coordinated action. It i s intended to 
continue these programmes in futu re years utilising available r esources. 
 
10.72  The Borough Council acknowledges  that housing clearance is not the only 
tool for addressing housing market failure and with restricted budgets there 
will be less opportunity particula rly in the short term to fund  such 
interventions. The Borough Council’s Housing Strategy establish es a broad 
plan of action to tackle the various housing issues in the town  involving 
working with key partners and serv ice providers active in the B orough. The 
Housing Strategy identifies the specific areas in the borough w here existing 
and future housing regeneration wil l be required; specific loca tions are not 
identified in the Local Plan.  
 10.73 The Borough Council will seek to improve the existing hou sing stock in the 
Borough through tackling the est ablished problems of low demand , housing 
market failure and weakness and increasing vacancy in the Borou gh in 
areas identified in the Borough Council’s Housing Strategy.  
 
HSG10: Housing Market Renewal 
The Borough Council will seek to tackle the problem of the imba lance of 
supply and demand in the existi ng housing stock through co-ordi nated 
programmes including Housing Market Renewal. Priority will be g iven to the 
housing regeneration areas in central Hartlepool identified in the Hartlepool 
Housing Strategy.  
 
  119Extensions and alterations to Existing Dwellings  
10.74 Many householders in seeking to acquire more living space  and additional 
facilities choose to extend their existing homes rather than mo ve to a new 
house. If, however, extensions are of an inappropriate design o r scale they 
can cause problems for immediate neighbours in terms of loss of  privacy, 
light and outlook. They can also affect the amenities of the wi der area, 
particularly where there may be  a proliferation of extensions c oncentrated in 
small areas, or where a terracing effect is being created by th e erection of 
side extensions to semi-detac hed or detached dwellings.  
 10.75 The Borough Council will s eek to control inappropriate pr oposals for 
residential extensions in order  to ensure that the residential amenity of 
neighbours and the visual amenity o f the wider area is not comp romised.  
 
HSG11: Extensions and altera tions to Existing Dwellings 
 
The Borough Council supports oppor tunities for homeowners to im prove 
their homes. The Borough Council will ensure that proposals for  extensions 
to existing dwellings and alterations are permitted where it ca n be 
demonstrated that development:  
 
1) Is of a size, design and uses materials that are sympathetic  to the 
existing dwelling, and;  
2) Does not adversely affect the character of the surrounding 
residential area, and;  
3) Does not significantly affect  the amenities of the occupiers  o f  
adjacent or nearby properties th rough overlooking, overshadowin g 
or by creating a poor outlook, and; 
4) Does not leave less than adequate parking space within the 
curtilage, and; 
5) Does not deny the existing and future occupiers adequate pri vate 
amenity space for normal domestic n eeds within the curtilage; a nd  
6) Does not prejudi ce road safety.  
 
Proposals should be in accordance with other policies in the pl an and the 
Residential Design SPD. 
    
  120Residential Annexes  
10.76 The accommodation needs of families can change over time and there is 
often a desire for accommodation for relatives to be provided a djoining the 
main family home i.e. a resi dential annex. By definition, a  residential annex 
is accommodation ancillary to the main dwelling within the resi dential 
curtilage and must be used for this purpose.  Usually this is in the form of an 
extension to the property, but s ometimes a separate structure w ithin the 
curtilage of the property can be c onverted, or very rarely, a n ew building 
erected in the curtilage of the property.  
 
10.77  The Borough Council will seek t o control inappropriate proposal s for 
residential annexes in order to ensure that the residential ame nity of 
neighbours and the wider area is not compromised. It is importa nt to ensure 
that all residential annexes, es pecially those where separate 
accommodation is provided are c apable of being incorporated bac k into the 
accommodation serving the main d welling. The Council will seek to control 
residential annexes that have the potential to be used as a sep arate 
dwelling in the future.   
 
HSG12: Residential Annexes  
 
The Borough Council supports oppor tunities for homeowners to im prove 
their homes. The Borough Council will permit proposals for resi dential 
annexes providing that they are in accordance with HSG11, desig ned so that 
it will serve an ancillary functi on to the existing dwelling, a nd it can be 
demonstrated that development can be incorporated into the acco mmodation 
serving the main dwelling when no longer required. 
 
Where it is demonstrated that a residential extension cannot be  effectively 
achieved for design reasons, conversion of an outbuilding, or i n exceptional 
circumstances a new building wi ll be permitted where developmen t:  
 
1) Is of a satisfactory scale, l ocation and design in relation to the 
existing dwelling, its curtila ge and surrounding properties, an d; 
2) Is designed so that it will serve an ancillary function to t he existing 
dwelling and is not of a form that would encourage its occupati on as 
a separate dwelling when no longer required; and  
3) Does not deny the existing and future occupiers adequate pri vate 
amenity space for normal domestic n eeds within the curtilage.  
 
For all residential annexes planning conditions will be applied  that bind the 
occupation of the accommodation provided to the occupation of t he host 
dwelling.  
 
Proposals should be in accordance with the Residential Design S PD. 
 
 
 
  121Gypsy and Traveller Provision  
10.78 In August 2015 the Governm ent updated the guidance in Pla nning Policy for 
Traveller Sites (PPTS) effectiv ely amending the definition of w ho should be 
regarded as a Gypsy or Traveller for planning purposes. In orde r to take 
account of this revised definitio n, Hartlepool Borough Council appointed 
Renaissance Research to carry out a revision of the 2014 Gypsy and 
Traveller Needs Assessment (GTAA) . The study was finalised in S eptember 
2017. 
 
10.79 It is apparent that none of the respondents to the survey  undertaken for the 
2014 GTAA met the updated PPTS definition as none were travelli ng for 
work-related purposes and some had ceased travelling permanentl y due to 
old age. Taking this into account and the very small overall po pulation of 
Gypsies and Travellers the GTAA stated that it is unlikely ther e will be any 
new household formation that would meet the new PPTS definition . The 
GTAA evidence suggests therefore that in the first instance, th e provision of 
a dedicated Gypsy and Traveller site in Hartlepool, whether per manent or 
stop-over, may not offer the best solution to meeting the small  theoretical 
housing need established through this accommodation assessment.  T h i s  
stance is supported by the fact t he local authority has never r eceived an 
application for pitches and only experience very low instances of 
unauthorised encampments.   
 10.80 The study recommends that the Borough Council commits to proactively 
support and positively intervene with any member of the Gypsy a nd 
Traveller community needing re- housing, to explore their housin g options, 
and recommends that a dedicated site for Gypsy and Travellers i s not 
allocated in the Local Plan. 
  10.81 Support from the Borough Counc il will include access to c urrently available 
bricks and mortar housing, with referral to support agencies if  necessary, as 
well as awareness-raising about t he full range of accommodation  options 
and how to pursue them. 
 
10.82  However, should the small theoretical need for a site then be m anifested as 
actual demand through a Gypsy and Traveller member request or t hrough a 
formal planning application, the  Council will positively plan f or such and 
would assess applications on t he basis of policy HSG13 below. 
 10.83 The Housing and Pl anning Act 2016 requi res periodical rev iews of housing 
needs in the context of the provis ion sites on which caravans c an be 
stationed and also places on inla nd waterways where houseboats can be 
moored.  This requirement will be  one of the considerations inf orming the 
next review of the plan.  
    
  122HSG13: Gypsy and Traveller Provision  
Proposals for the provision of Gypsy and Travellers and Travell ing 
Showpeople sites will be approved  where the following criteria are met:  
 
1)   There is adequate access to the site and provision for par king, 
turning and servicing within the site. 
2)   The site is accessible to edu cation, health, welfare and e mployment 
infrastructure. 
3)   The site is neither subject  to unacceptable pollution by r eason of 
noise, dust, fumes or smell, nor to potential nuisance or hazar d 
created by existing or approved c ommercial or industrial activi ties. 
4)   The site is adequately screened and landscaped to ensure t he 
development does not have a detrimental impact on the visual 
amenity of the area, including  any natural and historic assets or 
features, and provides sufficient privacy and security while no t 
isolating the community from the rest of the settled community.   
5)   If required, the size of the site is large enough to accom modate 
mixed or separate residential and business uses and additional 
parking space for extra car avans, cars and lorries.  
6)   Adequate space is available within the site to accommodate  grazing 
animals to minimize any impa ct on neighbouring sites. 
7)  There is no negative impact upon the relationship with exis ting and 
proposed neigbouring land uses and the amenity of occupiers of 
adjoining or nearby properties.  12311. STRENGTHENING THE LOCAL ECONOMY 
 
11.1 The Borough Council is committed to developing a more ente rprising, vigorous 
and diverse local economy that will attract new investment, ena ble local 
enterprises and entrepreneurs to be globally competitive and cr eate more 
employment opportunities for loc al people.  The Borough Council  will adopt 
positive approaches and policies to economic growth and investm ent including 
a range and choice of employment sites, sites for housing that will encourage 
people to live and work in the Borough, and providing a high qu ality 
environment and good qua lity of life. 
 11.2 The Local Plan seeks to provide a broad range and choice o f employment 
land in locations that support the wider aims and objectives of  growing the 
economy and encouraging investment set out in local and sub-reg ional plans, 
strategies and programme s.  These include: 
 
 Tees Valley Strategic Economic Plan
46 and supporting funding documents 
including Local Growth Fund47 and European Structural & Investment 
Funds Strategy48 
 Hartlepool Economic Regener ation Strategy 2011-202149 
 Hartlepool Vision and R egeneration Masterplan50 
 Hartlepool Employment Land Review51 
 Tees Valley Strategic Infrastructure Plan52 
 Tees Valley Enterprise Zone Scheme53 
 North and South Tees Industr ial Development Framework54 
 Hartlepool Southern Business Zone Study55 
 
Economic Strategy and the role of the Local Plan 
11.3 The Tees Valley Strategic Economic Plan (SEP) sets an ambi tious target to 
create 25,000 net additional jobs o ver the next 10 years, and h as identified a 
number of key sectors where ther e is potential and opportunity to create these 
jobs.  Growth sectors where Ha rtlepool has strong potential to play a key role 
include so-called ‘super sectors’ – process engineering, offsho re/sub-sea 
engineering and energy including nuclear – and the low carbon s ector which 
includes waste processing and r enewable energy.  These sectors are also 
                                                           
46 Tees Valley Strategic Economic  Plan; Tees Valley Unlimited, Ap ril 2014  
47 Tees Valley Local Growth Fund Bid; Tees Valley Unlimited, Apri l 2014  
48 Tees Valley European Structural  & Investment Funds Strategy 20 14-2020; Tees Valley Unlimited, 
January 2014  
49 Economic Regeneration Strategy  (2011-2021); Hartlepool Borough  Council, April 2014 (Refresh)  
50 The Hartlepool Vision was the  first step in developing proposa ls to regenerate the centre and key 
locations around Hartlepool. The Regeneration Masterplan based on the Vision is now complete and 
can be downloaded at www.investinhartlepool.com  
51 Employment Land Review Final  Report: BE Group on behalf of Har tlepool Borough Council, 
December 2014 (Endorsed January 2015)  
52 Tees Valley Strategic Infrastr ucture Plan; Tees Valley Unlimit ed, November 2014  
53 For full details of the Tees Valley Enterprise Zone scheme see  www.teesvalley-ca.gov.uk/tees-
valley/enterprise-zone.asp  
54 North and South Tees Industrial  Development Framework; Parsons  Brinckerhoff Ltd & Genecon on 
behalf of Tees Valley Unlimited, November 2009  
55 Southern Business Zone Study; Har tlepool Borough Council, 2009   124identified in Hartlepool’s econo mic assessment which is summari sed in the 
Economic Regeneration Strategy, along with high value-added eng ineering 
and knowledge intensive business se rvices. Hartlepool can also expect to play 
a key part in supporting growth and expansion of the existing s mall and 
medium sized enterprise (SME) bas e from engineering and advance d 
manufacturing, energy, process i ndustry to digital/creative.  
 
11.4 The Hartlepool Employment Land Review has considered emplo yment change 
through to the end of the plan period.  A ‘policy on’ scenario accounts for 
manufacturing related growth in the Enterprise Zones, along wit h further 
growth in sectors such as health, professional/scientific and e ducation and 
projects the generation of some 1,700 additional jobs by 2031.  The jobs target 
in the Tees Valley SEP suggests that a somewhat higher number o f additional 
jobs (up to 4,350) could be creat ed in Hartlepool over the plan  period.  This is 
based on growth in, for example, the low carbon, advanced manuf acturing, 
professional/scientific, and logi stics sectors.  Employment gro wth is of course 
difficult to forecast due to many external factors, however the  Council has 
taken a positive approach in line with the Tees Valley Combined  A u t h o r i t y ’ s 
(TVCA) SEP target to ensure t hat Hartlepool will contribute tow ards achieving 
the growth aspirations o f the wider Tees Valley. 
 11.5 The SEP notes the need to  enhance and expand business acco mmodation in 
Hartlepool, especially on Enterprise Zone sites, business parks  and strategic 
sites such as Wynyard Business Park.  Hartlepool also has the p otential to 
provide creative industries acco mmodation as part of an innovat ion and skills 
quarter around the Hartlepool Coll ege of Further Education and the Cleveland 
College of Art and Design with t he development of a new HQ and Campus. 
 11.6 While Hartlepool Borough Coun cil, along with the other Tee s Valley local 
authorities, actively pursue opp ortunities to enhance employmen t land and 
accommodation for businesses on Enterprise Zone sites, business  parks and 
industrial estates, the SEP provides evidence of the need for i ntervention 
because of market failure in this sector in the Tees Valley.  I n most cases 
rents achievable are not able to  provide a commercial return on  the investment 
costs of development, particularly for incubator space and smal l business 
units.  Tees Valley as a whole also has a number of out of date  industrial 
premises and over-supply of low er grade office accommodation.   
 11.7 A number of schemes have be en included in the Tees Valley Local Growth 
Fund bid that will provide direct  and indirect benefits for Har tlepool by opening 
up opportunities for economic d evelopment.  These include strat egic highway 
capacity improvements, developm ent land within the Marina and t
he new HQ 
and Campus for Cleveland Coll ege of Art and Design. 
 11.8 Effective strategic infrastr ucture is essential to help ac hieve sustainable 
economic growth and investment.   The Tees Valley Strategic Infr astructure 
Plan complements the Strategic Economic Plan by identifying inf rastructure 
strengths, barriers to growth and strategic priorities.  Infras tructure priorities 
that will impact on Hartlepool’s e conomic performance include: 
  125 Increasing investment and impl ementing capacity improvements o n the 
A19(T) and A689, alleviating pot ential restrictions on future e mployment 
(and housing) development in  the south of Hartlepool; 
 Widening and deepening the entranc e to Hartlepool Docks, along  with Tees 
Dock, to cater for increasing ship sizes and ensuring that Tees  Valley can 
compete with other U K and European ports; 
 Capacity work to improve journe y times and reliability for peo ple and goods 
to and from strategic employment s ites including Enterprise Zon e sites and 
the Southern Business Zone; 
 Providing more sustainable tr ansport opportunities including f ootpaths and 
cycle routes between empl oyment and housing areas; 
 Greater co-operation with utility providers to allow efficient  planning of new 
supplies to cater for new development and growth; 
 Continuing investment in flood risk management schemes that un lock or 
protect strategic sites and infra structure including flood defe nces at 
Hartlepool Headland a nd Seaton Carew, and 
 Delivering high speed broadband in the Enterprise Zones, rural  and urban 
areas. 
 11.9 In March 2011 the Government approved 12 sites in the Tees  Valley as 
Enterprise Zones to provide further stimulus to business and jo b growth in the 
private sector.  The Enterprise Zone forms a key element in the  Tees Valley 
Strategic Economic Plan and the Hartlepool Economic Regeneratio n Strategy, 
and three sites in the Borough have been identified that will t arget specific 
markets: 
 
 Hartlepool Port – an enhanced capi tal allowance scheme targete d at the 
renewable energy and advanc ed engineering sectors; 
 Queen’s Meadow Business Park – business rates discount for pro cess, 
renewable energy and  advanced engineerin g businesses, and 
 Oakesway Industrial Estate – locally funded business rates dis count 
particularly targeted at the renewable energy and advanced engi neering 
sectors. 
 11.10 The Enterprise Zone has been extended by three years to M arch 2018.  All 
three Enterprise Zone sites are covered by separate Local Devel opment 
Orders (LDO) that specify certain types of use that are permitt ed without the 
need for a formal plan ning application. 
 11.11 Following consultation on the Hartlepool ‘Vision’ a Regen eration Masterplan 
has now been completed by the B orough Council.  A number of key  sites are 
identified within the Masterplan,  including employment areas at  the Port, 
Queen’s Meadow and Wynyard.   
 
11.12 A key element in the Hart lepool Economic R egeneration Str ategy is to improve 
business infrastructure and pr ovide the right accommodation and  environment 
for a variety of business uses . Projects and successes have inc luded: 
  126 Queen’s Meadow, with the UK Steel  Enterprise Innovation Centre , 
comprising 4,366 sq. m (47,000 sq. ft.) of high quality busines s 
accommodation and high quality spec ulative units.  The Homes & 
Communities Agency (HCA) has rec ently completed a development o f 21 
high quality workshops totallin g 2,323 sq. m. (25,000 sq. ft.) and the site is 
the location for the new Clevela nd Fire Brigade HQ which includ es state of 
the art training facilities tha t will be of national importance :   
 Longhill and Sandgate, where a major regeneration programme ha s uplifted 
an older, long establis hed industrial area; 
 Southern Business Zone, which has seen infrastructure improvem ents in 
the Borough’s main employment area, and 
 Strategic sites, identified for the offshore wind sector, prin cipally Hartlepool 
Port. 
 
11.13 There is also a continuing need to improve the environmen t of industrial 
estates and business parks to ensure that they are suitable for  current and 
future demands. 
 11.14 The 2014 Employment Land Review has provided up to date e vidence on the 
supply and demand for employment land and premises in Hartlepoo l .   K e y  
findings include: 
 
 Employment in 9 of 10 industry sectors is predicted to grow, p roducing 
some 1,600 new jobs, although this will be offset by job losses  in other 
sectors, particularly manufacturi ng.  However Enterprise Zone i nvestment is 
predicted to create some 500 further jobs in manufacturing whic h, coupled 
with growth in the health and education sectors, could generate  n e t  
employment growth of 1 ,700 extra jobs to 2031; 
 127 Hartlepool is a relatively self -contained local authority area  with 69% of its 
working residents living and working in the Borough; 
 Hartlepool has a number of assets which are of national signif icance and 
will draw investment into the Borough.  These include facilitie s for recycling 
vessels and oil and gas platforms at Able Seaton Port which off ers one of 
the largest dry docks in the world, Hartlepool Nuclear Power St ation, 
Hartlepool port facilities, (particularly for the offshore sect or), Queen’s 
Meadow, and proximity to the Seal Sands/North Tees chemicals an d 
processing area, and 
 There is healthy demand for modern moderate/good quality units  of up to 
1,000 sq. m., and incubation units of around 100 sq. m.  
 
11.15 In terms of land supply, t he key conclusions of the Emplo yment Land Review 
are: 
 There is a substantial surplus of employment land and therefor e no need to 
identify further land allocati ons in the period to 2031; 
 The level of surplus provides opportunity to rationalise the c urrent land 
supply.  Land supply reductions to talling 152 hectares are reco mmended; 
 Several large landowners/busine sses highlighted that much of t he land 
need is driven by winning or los ing major contracts.  Demand is  therefore 
difficult, if not impossible, t o predict over the long term and  it is important to 
retain a strategic reserve o f land that can be brought forward at short notice; 
 At Queen’s Meadow and Oakesway E nterprise Zones the full level  o f  
demand will take time to emerge, and 
 There is a need to protect smaller employment sites along Bren da Road in 
the Southern Business Zone to provide opportunities for the dev elopment of 
modern small business space. 
 11.16 Site specific recommendati ons from the Employment Land Re view are 
summarised below. 
  
 Table 12 – Recommendations from the Employment Land Review 
Site/area Recommendation 
Former Centura Works, 
Greatham Heavily constrained, backl and site with extremely 
limited access – land should be de-allocated  
Golden Flatts A backland site now mostly developed/proposed for 
housing.  Remaining land would be better suited to creation of a green wedge – land should be re-
allocated  
Longhill/Sandgate A key location for local industrial businesse s and a 
study should be undertaken into regeneration opportunities.  This study has been completed and led 
to a £1.8m investment which has resulted in 
significant environmental and other improvements to 
the estate with associated pr ivate sector job creation 
and enhanced opportunities for investment.  
North Burn Electronic 
Park Employment uses are unlikely given severe access 
constraints.  Site should be de-allocated  unless there 
is evidence of funding availability to address  128infrastructure issues  
Oakesway Limited interest but development is likely to be a lon g 
term prospect exceeding life of the current Enterprise 
Zone designation 
Queen’s Meadow Business Park Policy should continue to highlight the site as a key 
employment area 
Tees Bay Retail Park An established retail location and future development 
will principally be for retail uses.  This should be reflected in the Local Plan. 
Hartlepool Port The port operator  (PD Ports) highlighted the 
importance of protecting undeveloped land at the Port and North of Seaton Channel  to meet unpredictable 
requirements.  A 3.1 ha (7.7 acres) employment site west of Marina Way should be de-allocated/re-
allocated   
Wynyard Park The employment allocation should be amended to 
reflect current consents and agreements 
 11.17 The Employment Land Review  refers to the opportunities fo r Hartlepool arising 
from its proximity to the Seal Sands/North Tees chemical, refin ing and 
processing cluster in Stockton- on-Tees.  In Hartlepool sites su ch as Phillips 
Tank Farm and West of Seaton Channel (Huntsman Tioxide) are eff ectively 
extensions of the Seal Sands/North Tees complex and are linked by pipeline 
and service corridors.  The North and South Tees Industrial Dev elopment 
Framework (prepared for Tees Val ley Unlimited and its partners in 2009) 
assessed the industrial assets and capabilities in the study ar ea and 
demonstrated a strategic direction for Tees Valley Unlimited, t he local 
authorities and their partners to  develop the area into a world  class industrial 
base.  The Framework provided evidence for the continued retent ion of 
several sites in south east Hartlepool for the process sector, hazardous 
industry, energy generation and resource recovery. 
 11.18 The existing nuclear power station is due to be decommiss ioned in 2024.  A 
new nuclear power station would have considerable economic bene fits for 
Hartlepool and the Tees Valley.  The power station currently su pports up to 
700 high quality jobs (and up to 3 ,000 jobs would be supported during the 
construction phase of a new power station and the decommissioni ng of the 
existing power station) and £19m of local supply chain spend.  One of the 
Tees Valley Investment Fund ‘asks’ outlined in the Strategic Ec onomic Plan is 
for investment to be made in  the medium term (2017-2020) to wor k up detailed 
proposals to construct a new nuclear power station, together wi th 
accompanying infrastructure. 
 
11.19 The policies in the Local P lan are designed to reflect th e land use and spatial 
implications of the strengths and opportunities of Hartlepool’s  Economic 
Strategy. The policies therefore: 
 
 Highlight the key roles that both Wynyard and Queen’s Meadow B usiness 
Parks will continue to play in attracting high quality employme nt and 
investment to Hartlepool;  129 Safeguard and improve general emplo yment sites in the Southern  Business 
Zone – this is the main emplo yment area of the Borough; 
 Safeguard land at Hartlepool Port  for port-related development  a n d  
renewable energy manufacturing , taking full advantage of propos als to 
widen and deepen the entrance to the dock; 
 Continue to safeguard appropriate  sites in the south east of t he Borough for 
a range of specialist development s including process and/or haz ardous 
industry (such as chemicals, st eel, oil and gas, biofuels), ene rgy generation, 
resource recovery, off-shore wind related manufacturing; 
 Reserve land for a new nuclear power station;  
 Support Enterprise Zone designat ions and their associated bene fits, and 
 Continue to seek environmental improvements on all employment sites to 
provide attractive locati ons that encourage investment. 
 11.20 As recommended in the Employ ment Land Review a number of sites are 
proposed for de-allocation or re-allocation (see table 12 above ).  In addition it 
is proposed to de-allocate North Seaton Channel as the site is subject to 
severe environmental constraints.   Furthermore there has been n o recent 
developer interest in the site  and the National Planning Policy  Framework
56 
requires planning policies to avoid long term protection of sit es where there is 
no reasonable prospect of the si te being used for that purpose.   
   
Employment Development at  Wynyard Business Park 
11.21 Wynyard Business Park will play an important role in attr acting new 
investment not only to Hartlepool  and the Tees Valley but also the wider North 
East region.  It forms part of t he prestigious Wynyard developm ent (which is 
partly also within St ockton-on-Tees Borough)  that also includes  high quality 
housing and recreation/leisure us es.  A prestige employment sit e is defined as 
one that has a very high standard of design, generally low dens ity 
development and a high quality env ironment that is capable of a ttracting major 
national and internatio nal inward investment. 
 11.22 Wynyard Business Park (part of which is within Stockton-o n-Tees Borough) 
has already proved successful in attracting significant new inv estment and 
high performing companies.  Much of its success is down to its location close 
to the A19 trunk road and the A689 linking directly to the A1(M ), and its high 
quality woodland/parkland environ ment.  Although Wynyard is det ached from 
the main urban areas of both Hartlepool and Stockton-on-Tees, t he economic 
benefits it provides to the Tees  Valley and the wider North Eas t through job 
creation, investment opportunities  and attracting new residents  justify its 
continued commitment and development  as a prestige employment s ite.  The 
whole of the site has planning permission for employment uses. 
 11.23 The Local Plan seeks to achieve the Borough Council’s ove rarching aspiration 
for Wynyard Business Park by ensuring that its prestige status is maintained 
and enhanced, and the Park a ttracts new investment. 
 
                                                           
56 National Planning Policy Framework – paragraph 22; Department for Communities and Local 
Government, March 2012.   13011.24 The frontage of the Business Park alongside the A689 is o f critical design 
importance for this site and will be limited to B1 uses only (a s defined in the 
Town & Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987, as amended).  I n  
addition, to ensure that its pre stige status and design quality  are maintained, 
there will be controls  on densities and uses  in other parts of the site. 
 
EMP1: Prestige Employment S ite Wynyard Business Park  
A total of 32.7 hectares of land is available for prestige empl oyment use at 
Wynyard Business Park.   
 
Proposals for business development (falling within class B1 of the Town and 
Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 as amended) will be p ermitted at 
Wynyard Business Park provided that: 
 
1) The buildings are of an exceptionally high quality standard of 
design and finishing; 
2) High quality landscaping, incl uding restoration, creation or  
enhancement of wildlife habitats and/or woodland planting are 
provided as appropriate to the surrounding natural environment;  a 
15m buffer is required between development and areas of ancient  
woodland; 
3) There is no more than a 25 per cent coverage of each develop able 
site by buildings; 
4) Car parking areas are landscaped and outside storage is 
adequately sited and screened, and 
5) Appropriate surface water management and sustainable drainag e 
is incorporated. 
 
Proposals for general industrial developments and warehousing ( falling 
within classes B2 and B8 of the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) 
Order 1987 as amended) will be permitted where they meet the ab ove criteria 
and provided that the development: 
 
6)   Is not adjacent to the A689 frontage; 
7)   Does not have a significant detrimental effect on the amen ities of 
the occupiers of adjoini ng or nearby properties; 
8)   Does not prejudice the d evelopment of adjacent sites; 
9)   Provides a landscaped buffer (which will need to include v isual 
and noise abatement screeni ng where necessary) between 
development and adjacent residential areas. 
 
In this respect, planning conditi ons and/or legally binding agr eements may be 
imposed to restrict general industrial developments.  
 
Proposals for office developments (falling within class B1a of the Town and 
Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 as amended) will be c onsidered 
in accordance with policy RC1.  
 
  131Employment Development at Qu een’s Meadow Business Park 
11.25 Land at Queen’s Meadow Business Park is committed for hig h quality 
employment development.  A high quality business park is define d as one 
characterised by development dens ities slightly higher than tho se on a 
prestige employment site, fewer  restrictions on the range and t ype of uses and 
more likely to have a local/sub-regional attraction base.  High  environmental 
and design standards will still be required, particularly along  the A689 
frontage. 
 11.26 Part of Queen’s Meadow is iden tified as an Enterprise Zon e (EZ).  
Developments at Queen’s Meadow w ill therefore need to be mindfu l of the EZ 
status of parts of the site and the relevant Local Development Order (LDO) 
which grants permission for certain types of development.  The Enterprise 
Zone LDO focuses on the following industrial sectors: 
 
 Advanced engineering and advanced manufacturing 
 Chemical, pharmaceutical and biotechnology 
 Renewable energy manufacturing 
 
EMP2: Queen’s Meadow Business Park  
A total of 65.0 hectares of land is committed for high quality employment use 
at Queen’s Meadow Business Park.   Currently 44.7 hectares (110. 4 acres) of 
land is available for development.  A total of 33.0 hectares (8 1.5 acres) is 
included in the Enterprise Zone Local Development Order. 
 
Proposals for business development (falling within class B1 of the Town and 
Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 as amended) will be p ermitted at 
Queen’s Meadow Business Park provided that: 
 
1) The buildings are of a high standard of design; 
2) There is no more than 35 per cent coverage of each developab le 
site by buildings; 
3) High quality landscaping, incl uding restoration, creation or  
enhancement of wildlife habitats and/or woodland planting are 
provided as appropriate to the surrounding natural environment,  
particularly on the main road frontages and along the boundary 
closest to Greatham village; 
4) Car parking areas are landscape d and outside storage is adeq uately 
sited and screened, and 
5) Appropriate surface water manag ement and sustainable drainag e is 
incorporated. 
 
Proposals for general industrial development and warehousing (f alling within 
classes B2 and B8 of the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes ) Order 
1987 (as amended) will only be allowed on sites to the rear of the Business 
Park, away from the A689 and Greatham village frontages, where they meet 
the above criteria and: 
6)  Do not have a detrimental effect on the amenities of adjoin ing or 
nearby properties;  1327)   Do not prejudice the devel opment of adjoining sites; 
8)   Will not have a negative imp act on the promotion of Queen’ s 
Meadow as a high qualit y employment site. 
 
In this respect planning conditi ons will be imposed to restrict  general 
industrial developments to appropriate operations within the B2  and B8 use 
classes. 
 
Proposals for office developments (falling within class B1a of the Town and 
Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 as amended) will be c onsidered 
in accordance with policy RC1. 
 
Land for General Employment Uses 
11.27 Land committed for general emp loyment uses will allow for  greater flexibility in 
terms of permitted uses and greater development densities compa red to the 
prestige and high quality empl oyment sites.  Good design standa rds and 
environmental credentials will still be required for general em ployment land 
developments in accordance with policies set out in the Local P lan.   
 11.28 With the exception of Oakesway Industrial Estate – an Ent erprise Zone site in 
the north of Hartlepool – the Borough’s general employment land  comprises 
an area known as the Southern Bu siness Zone (SBZ) running from the town 
centre southwards to the Boroug h boundary.  The SBZ comprises 1 5 industrial 
estates and business parks, and is home to about 170 companies employing 
around 5,000 people.   
 
11.29 Local Plan policies seek to maintain the integrity of the  various elements of the 
SBZ, which includes general employment land and land for specia list 
industries.  There are opportunities  within individual industri al areas for 
expansion and for infrastructure  improvements.  The Borough Cou ncil is 
continually seeking to improve the environment of the SBZ and w ill encourage 
investment in appropriate uses and measures to secure such impr ovements 
and achieve high design and la ndscaping standards to improve th e Zone’s 
attraction for future investmen t.  The Sandgate area and Grayth orp industrial 
estate are considered appropriate for ‘bad neighbour’ uses, sub ject to amenity 
and safety considerations.  The Borough Council will make a jud gement on 
bad neighbour uses but they will in clude uses such as scrap yar ds, car 
breaking operations, and waste ma terial sorting, but this is no t an exhaustive 
list. 
 11.30 The southern parts of the SBZ border on designated areas of international 
national and local importance for nature conservation, includin g the 
Teesmouth and Cleveland Coast Spec ial Protection Area/Ramsar si te, 
Teesmouth National Nature Reserve and several Sites of Special Scientific 
Interest.  European and UK legislation require these sites to b e protected from 
development that may have a significant impact on their nature conservation 
interest.  Industrial development near these areas may be restr icted or 
required to provide appropriate  mitigation and/or compensation measures in  133order to meet the requirement s of the Habitat Regulations57.  It should also be 
noted that the Zinc Works Road site  falls within the Nuclear Po wer Station 
safeguarded land (see policy EMP5 ) which may impact on industri al 
development at the site if the new power station goes ahead. 
 11.31 In line with national gui dance where there is no reasonab le prospect of a site 
being used for the allocated empl oyment use, it may be appropri ate to 
consider alternative uses, with such applications being treated  on their merits 
having regard to market signals and the relative need for diffe rent land uses to 
support sustainable local communities. 
 
EMP3: General Employment Land  
 
Land is committed in the following industrial areas for general  empl oy ment 
uses: 
 
      North Hartlepool 
a) Oakesway: total site area 38. 8 hectares; available land 18.6  
hectares.  All 38.8 hectares of t he Oakesway site is included a s part 
of the Enterprise Zone Local Development Order. 
 
Southern Business Zone 
b) Longhill/Sandgate: total site area 73.8 hectares; available land 1.0 
hectare.  
c) Usworth Road/Park View West: total site area 33.3 hectares; 
available land 2.2 hectares.  
d) Sovereign Park: total site area 20.9 hectares; available lan d 11.4 
hectares. 
e) Brenda Road: total site area 3.6 hectares; no available land .   
f) Tofts Farm East/Hunter House:  total site area 44.2 hectares;  
available land 0.6 hectare. 
g) Tofts Farm West: total site area 34.1 hectares; available la nd 8.2 
hectares. 
h) Graythorp Industrial Estate: total site area 13.1 hectares; no 
available land. 
i) Zinc Works Road: total site area 3.0 hectares; no available land. 
 
Proposals for business development (falling within class B1 and  B 8  o f  t h e  
Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 as amended) will be 
permitted. 
 
Proposals for general industrial development (included within c lass B2 of the 
Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 as amended) and for 
other uses which are complementary to the dominant use of a dev elopment 
will be approved where the Borough Council is satisfied that th ey will not 
have detrimental effect on the amenities of the occupiers of ad joining or 
nearby properties or prejudice the development of adjacent site s. 
                                                           
57 The Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2010, S.I . 2010/490.   134 
In this respect planning conditions  may be imposed to restrict general 
industrial developments to appropriate operations within the B2  use class,  a
high quality of design and landscaping will be required for dev elopment 
fronting the main approach roads and estate roads and, where ne cessary, 
adjacent to the main railway line subject to operational consid erations.
Appropriate surface water management and sustainable drainage s hould also 
be incorporated. 
 
Proposals for office developments (falling within class B1a of the Town and 
Country Planning (Use Classes) Ord er 1987 as amended) will be s ubject to a 
sequential test requiring town centre uses to be located in tow n centres, then 
edge of centre locations, and then out of centre locations if n o suitable sites 
are available. 
 
Proposals for the development or extension of sites for ‘bad ne ighbour’ uses 
(such as the sorting, composting and/or storage of waste materi als, 
scrapyards, car breakers yards or coal yards) will be permitted  only in the 
Sandgate area and/or Graythorp Industrial Estate provided that:  
1) There will be no significan t nuisance to adjacent premises o r 
highway uses through dust, sme ll, vibration, smoke, noise, mud or 
slurry; 
2) the site is not visually prominent from a main access road o r from 
the railway; 
3)  adequate screening of the site is provided 
4) the site is of a sufficient s ize for the proposed operation,  and 
5) there are adequate car parki ng and servicing arrangements. 
 
Proposals for office developments (falling within class B1a of the Town and 
Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 as amended) will be c onsidered 
in accordance with policy RC1. 
 
All proposals must be considered against all relevant policies in the plan.  In 
particular policy NE1, given the close proximity of the some of  t h e  
employment sites listed within th is policy to designated sites for nature 
conservation. 
 Land for Specialist Industrial Development  
11.32 There are a number of indus trial developments and uses wh ich by nature of 
the processes and materials they use, associated emissions and/ or their 
infrastructure needs, have parti cular locational requirements.  These industries 
include the chemical, pharmaceut ical, biotechnology and process  sectors, 
certain types of manufacturing such as steel making, types of r enewable 
energy manufacturing, resource r ecovery and port-related develo pment.  
Some of these are also potentia lly polluting and/or hazardous i ndustries. 
 11.33 Hartlepool is able to offer a number of locational advant ages for these types of 
specialist industrial ‘clusters’, including access to port faci lities and proximity to 
the Seal Sands/North Tees chemicals and processing industries j ust across 
the Borough boundary in Stockton-on-Tees.    135 
11.34 Part of the Hartlepool Port  site is identified as an Ente rprise Zone (EZ) as part 
of the wider Tees Valley EZ sc heme.  Developments at Hartlepool  Port will 
therefore need to be mindful of the EZ status of part of the si te and the 
relevant Local Development Order (LDO) which grants permission for certain 
types of development.  The Enterprise Zone LDO focuses on the f ollowing 
industrial sectors: 
 
 Advanced engineering and adv anced manufacturing  
 Renewable energy manufacturing 
 11.35 Land at Graythorp has been identified in the Tees Valley Minerals and Waste 
Development Plan Document
58 for the development of facilities to manage and 
recycle 65,000 tonnes of commercia l and industrial wastes per y ear by 2021.   
 11.36 Land at Able Seaton Port falls partly within the Nuclear Power Station 
safeguarded land (see policy EMP5) and this may affect the area  of land 
available for industrial purpos es if the new power station goes  ahead. 
 11.37 In the south east of the Borough some of the specialist i ndustrial land is 
located adjacent to or close to sites of international, nationa l or local 
importance for nature conservati on, including the Teesmouth and  Cleveland 
Coast Special Protection Area/Ra msar site, Teesmouth National N ature 
Reserve and several Sites of Spec ial Scientific Interest.  Euro pean and UK 
legislation require these sites to be protected from developmen t that may have 
a significant impact on their nat ure conservation interest.  In dustrial 
development near these areas may be restricted or be required t o provide 
appropriate mitigation and/or com pensation measures in order to  m e e t  t h e  
requirements of the Habitat Regul ations.  In order to demonstra te strategic 
commitment to conserving European Sites, industrial companies w ill be 
encouraged to join INCA and participate in the Tees Estuary Par tnership. If 
EMP4 sites are developed, this is likely to adversely impact up on neighbouring 
pSPA and SPA land. Construction and operation will need to miti gate adverse 
impact on European Sites, for example through timing of works a nd 
companies should consider this  in their long-term planning. 
 
 EMP4: Specialist Industries 
Land is committed in the followi ng locations for specialist ind ustrial uses: 
 
a) Hartlepool Port: total site a rea 106.1 hectares; available l and 60.1 
hectares; port related industrial development; renewable energy  
manufacturing.  A total of 79.0 h ectares is included as part of  the 
Enterprise Zone Local Development Order. 
b) West of Seaton Channel; total  site area 76.7 hectares: area of 
undeveloped land 44.0 hectares – all reserved for potential 
expansion of existing occupier; potentially polluting and hazar dous 
                                                           
58 Tees Valley Joint Minerals and Waste Policies and Sites Develo pment Plans Docum ent; Darlington, 
Hartlepool, Middlesbrough, Redcar & Cleveland and Stockton-on-T ees Borough Councils and Tees 
Valley Unlimited, adopted September 2011.   136industrial development. 
c) Phillips Tank Farm: total site area 150.4 hectares; 103.4 he ctares of 
undeveloped land all reserved for use of existing occupier; 
potentially polluting and hazardous industrial development. 
d) South Works: total site area  131.2 hectares; 20.5 hectares o f 
undeveloped land all reserved for use of existing occupier; 
potentially polluting and hazardous industrial development/stee l 
manufacturing. 
e) North Graythorp: total site area 27 hectares; available land  13.6 
hectares; potentially polluting and hazardous industrial 
development. 
f) Graythorp Waste Management: total site area 4.1 hectares; av ailable 
for development as a waste manage ment and recycling facility. 
g) Able Seaton Port: total site  area 47.8 hectares; reserved fo r use of 
existing occupier; recycli ng and resource recovery. 
 
Proposals will be permitted wher e they meet the following crite ria: 
  
1) proposals will not have a significant adverse visual impact,  
noise impacts, air quality, water quality and supply, health or  
safety risk to people in the surrounding area and also to 
existing and proposed land uses;  
2) the presence of hazardous substances which cannot be 
mitigated against or appropriately dealt with, or the further 
extension of safeguarding zones around installations, will not 
inhibit the full opportunity for development of other sites in the 
vicinity. 
3) Development of essential infr astructure must avoid areas of 
high hazard unless supported by a Flood Risk Assessment that 
demonstrates that flood risk can be effectively managed 
throughout the lifetime of the development. 
 
Where relevant proposals will need to demonstrate that there wi ll be no 
adverse impact on the integrity of the Teesmouth and Cleveland Coast 
Special Protection Area and Ram sar site (including any proposed  extension 
to the Special Protection Area) , or other European designated n ature 
conservation sites, either alone or in combination with other p lans and 
programmes.  Any necessary mitigati on/compensation measures mus t be 
secured in advance of the development in order to meet the requ irements of 
the Habitat Regulations. 
 
Appropriate surface water management and sustainable drainage s hould also 
be incorporated as part o f development proposals. 
 
Proposals for office developments (falling within class B1a of the Town and 
Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 as amended) will be c onsidered 
in accordance with policy RC1. 
                                                                                                                                                             
 
  137Safeguarded Land for New Nuclear Power Station  
11.38 The National Policy Statem ent for Nuclear Power Generatio n59 identified 
Hartlepool as one of 10 sites in England and Wales as potential ly suitable for 
the deployment of a new nuclear power station by the end of 202 5 .   T h e  
existing Hartlepool nuclear power station is a twin-reactor Adv anced Gas-
Cooled (AGR) power station which commenced operation in 1983 an d is 
expected to be decommissioned in 2024. 
 11.39 The Borough Council supports the potential development of  a new nuclear 
power station.  It will provide substantial economic benefits n ot only to 
Hartlepool but to the wider Tees V alley and North East region a s a whole.  
Government policy acknowledges t he contribution that nuclear po wer can 
make to increased security of energy supplies and to reducing c arbon 
emissions.  The nominated site ar ea (taken from National Policy  Statement 
EN-6) is shown on the Policies Map  and is approximately 140.0 hectares. 
 11.40 Developments within the vi cinity of nuclear power station s are subject to 
certain constraints depending on t he nature of the development and its 
proximity to the nuclear installa tion.  These constraints are i ntended to ensure 
that residential, industrial and  commercial developments are co ntrolled in an 
attempt to maintain the general  characteristics of the site sim ilar to those that 
existed at the time of licensing throughout the entire life cyc le of the nuclear 
installation.  For proposals wit hin identified safeguarding zon es the Office of 
Nuclear Regulation (ONR) wil l need to be consulted. 
 11.41 The nominated site is partly within and adjacent to the T eesmouth and 
Cleveland Coast Special Protection Area (SPA)/Ramsar site, the Teesmouth 
National Nature Reserve, and a number of Sites of Special Scien tific Interest.  
European and national legislation require these sites to be pro tected from 
developments likely to have a significant adverse impact on the ir nature 
conservation interest, unless t here are reasons of overriding p ublic interest.  In 
such circumstances appropriate m itigation and/or compensatory p rovision may 
need to be provided.  Annex C3 to the National Policy Statement  for Nuclear 
Power Generation (EN-6) refers to a Habitats Regulation Assessm ent (HRA) 
that has been undertaken as par t of the site report for Hartlep ool.  The annex 
notes that more detailed studies, including a further HRA, must  be undertaken 
should an application for develop ment consent come forward. 
          
                                                           
59 National Policy Statement for Nu clear Power Generation (EN-6);  Department of Energy & Climate 
Change, July 2011.   138EMP5: Safeguarded Land for New Nuclear Power Station 
Land is safeguarded in the Zinc Works Road/North Gare/Seaton Sn ook/Able 
Seaton Port areas for a new nuclear power station, as shown on the Policies 
Map. 
 
The Appraisal of Sustainability, undertaken by Government in su pport of 
preparing the relevant national policy, has concluded that the potential for 
adverse impacts on sites (Teesm outh and Cleveland Coast Special  Protection 
Area (SPA)/Ramsar site, Teesmouth National Nature Reserve, and a number 
of Sites of Special Scientific In terest) and species considered  to be of 
European importance, cannot be r uled out.  Studies will be requ ired to 
identify ways to avoid, minimise, mitigate or, if necessary, co mpensate for 
any significant impacts.   
 
Development of essential  infrastructure must avoid areas of hig h hazard 
unless supported by a Flood Risk A ssessment that demonstrates t hat flood 
risk can be effectively managed throughout the lifetime of the development.  
 
 
Underground Storage 
11.42 South west of the West o f Seaton Channel specialist indus try site, and east of 
the A178 Tees Road, is an area which has been used in the past for the 
extraction of brine, along with a  larger area of land lying sou th of Greatham 
Creek in Stockton-on-Tees.  Follo wing brine extraction a number  o f  
underground cavities remain which have the potential to be used  for storage of 
various substances without the need for large above ground stru ctures.  In 
view of the presence of internat ionally important nature conser vation sites in 
the area only non-toxic substances  should be considered for sto rage.  
Particular care will also be nee ded to ensure that the aquifer and watercourses 
in the area are not affected and t here is no significant increa se in risk to 
workers in nearby industrial premises. 
  
EMP6: Underground Storage 
Proposals for the use of former brine cavities in the south of the Borough for 
underground storage will only be  considered for approval where:  
1) there will be no significant increase in the potential risk to people 
in the area; 
2) it can be demonstrated that there will be no resultant harm to the 
aquifer or to watercourses in the surrounding area, and in 
particular to sites important for nature conservation (see also  
policy NE1), and 
3) any above surface structures are limited in scale, not visua lly 
prominent and will be designed with flat roofs to replicate any  
habitat lost. No built developmen t will be permitted on SPA lan d.  139 
Proposals for the storage of tox ic substances will not be allow ed. 
 
Development of essential  infrastructure must avoid areas of hig h hazard 
unless supported by a Flood Risk A ssessment that demonstrates t hat flood 
risk can be effectively managed throughout the lifetime of the development.   
 
In order to make any undergrou nd storage deliverable, access wi ll need to be 
from the portion of Greenabella  Marsh that has no Natural Envir onment 
allocation, which will avoid the  need for a structure to be bui lt on the SPA. 
There is such a piece of land whic h adjoins the A178 and the EM P6 sites.  
 
In considering any proposals the Borough Council will have rega rd to advice 
from relevant agencies including the Health and Safety Executiv e, 
Environment Agency, Natural England, Northumbrian Water, and Ha rtlepool 
Water. 
 
Access to the sites is indicat ed on the Policies Map.   
 
  14012. PROTECTING, MANAGING AND ENHANCING THE RURAL AREA 
 
12.1 The rural area is considered as the countryside which is d efined as land 
beyond the limits to development. The countryside has many uses  and is an 
important resource that should be protected, managed and enhanc ed. 
 12.2 The rural area of Hartlepool covers approximately 65% of t he Borough’s land 
area, equating to 6110 hectares.  The population of the rural ar ea is only 2.2% 
of the Borough’s overall populati on. The rural area is populate d by many farms 
and smallholdings and there are fi ve established historic villa ges in the 
Borough; Dalton Piercy, Elwick, G reatham, Hart, and Newton Bewl ey. Whilst 
Elwick, Greatham and Hart have some services such as a school a nd 
community facilities, only Elwick and Greatham have managed to sustain 
shops. Dalton Piercy and Newton Bewley lack basic facilities.  Access to 
public transport across the rura l area is limited and availabil ity varies between 
villages, with Greatham and Hart being best served. The physica l character of 
the rural villages is unique; ther e are conservation areas with in Elwick and 
Greatham villages and heritage assets including scheduled ancie nt 
monuments and listed buildings acr oss the wider rural area. 
 12.3 The villages have strong communities as a result of separa tion from the wider 
town due to geographic location. In the case of Greatham, close  proximity to 
industry has influenced the grow th of the village; similar cons traints have 
impacted upon the way the villag es have developed.  Facilities in the villages 
are important for community cohes ion and social inclusion, over  recent years 
essential services in these locations have reduced due to econo mic viability.  
Elwick, Greatham and Hart have a number of facilities, such as village halls 
and schools that provide vital facilities and services to local  communities. 
 12.4 Wynyard is on the wester n edge of Hartlepool within the ru ral area, much of 
the village is within the nei ghbouring borough of Stockton.  Re cent 
development and planning permissions at Wynyard have extended t he village 
to the north of the A689 which wil l increase the population of the Borough 
living in this location.  There is a small centre which service s the village and a 
new school and community facilities are proposed as part of the  village 
expansion to the south of the A 689.  The provision of public tr ansport is 
anticipated to improve over the years as the developments progr ess.   
 
12.5 The rural area provides popular locations to live in the B orough.  It is an 
important asset for the Borough in terms of its role in support ing the local 
economy, the environment, agriculture, ecosystems, food product ion and 
tourism. The rural area provides local employment, which in tur n helps to 
sustain other elements of the lo cal economy, including local se rvices.   
However, changes in the economy and increased mobility have res ulted in 
economic dependency between rural and urban areas.  As such the  proximity 
of the villages to the main settlement of Hartlepool means that  many residents 
who live in the villages will work, do their shopping and use t he range of 
amenities available within Har tlepool as well as the wider sub- region; this has 
an impact on the sustainability of local villages.  In addition , proximity of 
villages to the A19(T) provides  good connectivity from these ru ral locations to 
the wider region.  Effective plan ning policy will assist in ‘ru ral proofing’ of the  141rural area to ensure that people living within a rural environm ent have the 
same opportunities as those living within the urban area.  
 12.6 Socially there are a higher number of people over the age of 65 living within 
the rural area. Owner occupancy, c ar ownership and larger housi ng are all 
more prevalent.  Although there ar e differences between the vil lages, 
particularly within Greatham where  31% of the housing stock is owned by the 
Hospital of God estate.  Access to public transport is limited;  however 
generally resident satisfaction wit h the rural area as a place to live is higher 
than its urban counterpart. 
 12.7 The rural area of Hartlepool is characterised as agricultu ral, with 55 farms and 
small holdings.  Between 2007 a nd 2010 there was an 11% decline  in the total 
farmed area and 12% decline in farm labour. These changes to ag riculture are 
having an impact on the way in w hich the rural economy is chang ing and 
diversifying.  There are 150 VAT  registered rural businesses; t his is 6.4% of 
the businesses within the boro ugh, and represents a higher rate  of businesses 
per 10,000 head of population for the rural area than for the u rban area.  The 
development of new businesses can be challenging in rural locat ions due to 
isolation and limitations of te chnology.  The Tees Valley has a  lower proportion 
of rural businesses than the na tional average; however Hartlepo ol has seen 
an increase in agriculture, fore stry and fishing related busine sses in recent 
years.  New businesses within t he rural area will be supported providing they 
are appropriate within the rural area and not better suited to the town centre or 
employment land locations. The Bo rough Council will work with b usiness 
owners to look for the best sol utions to sustain and boost the rural economy. 
 12.8 The Borough Council will se ek to promote development that supports 
sustainable growth of the rural area, balancing support for the  rural 
community, economy and the environment. The Borough Council wil l, 
however, try to maintain an appropriate balance between develop ment 
opportunities and the need to protect and enhance the rural env ironment in 
order to maintain the char acter of the rural area. 
 12.9 Some development may be acceptable within the rural area, such as 
agricultural buildings to support food production, farm diversi fication, 
equestrian development, employment provision and tourism accomm odation, 
which can help to support the rural economy and encourage susta inable 
communities. It is important, however, to ensure that such deve lopments are 
of a suitable scale, nature and are appropriate to their surrou ndings.  
 12.10 Connectivity across the rural area is important to suppor t rural enterprise, 
leisure and tourism related infr astructure. Hartlepool’s Local Access network 
comprises of the Public Rights of Way (96kms or 59.7 miles – a total of 103 
paths) and the Permissive Access network.  Whilst extensive the se routes 
require protection and there are opportunities for improvements
, as identified 
in the Infrastructure and Natural Environment sections of this plan.  The 
potential impact of public and permissive access can be a conce rn to 
landowners and farmers in relation to the functional use of lan d, therefore 
early consultation on potential new accesses will be encouraged . 
  14212.11 Renewable energy projects hav e a growing role to play in the changing rural 
economy. The rural area contains built and permitted wind turbi nes and as 
explained within the Infrastruc ture Chapter there is the opport unity for up to a 
further three similar sized turbines in the High Volts area.  I n addition there 
have been recent solar farms developments in the rural area. Wh ilst such 
development opportunities are enc ouraged to support the rural e conomy 
through farm diversification and to help contribute to addressi ng climate 
change, careful consideration must  be given to the cumulative i mpact of such 
development on the landscape ch aracter of the rural area.   
 12.12 Supporting a strong and pros perous rural economy is a pri ority for the 
Borough Council; as such, improve ments to infrastructure in the  rural area to 
support the rural economy will be encouraged. This includes sup porting the 
improvement of telecommunications to enhance appropriate busine ss 
opportunities.  Along with opport unities for diverse rural busi nesses, rural 
areas present higher than average levels of home working.  Broa dband 
infrastructure presents a chal lenge for the rural area, whilst 95% of the 
population of the borough has access to Superfast Broadband the re are 
pockets within the rural area that  have limited availability.  The Borough 
Council has been working with the other Tees Valley Local Autho rities and the 
Tees Valley Rural Community Council to ensure that the Tees Val ley 
broadband plan mirrors the government aims for access to superf ast speeds. 
Within this plan there is a commitment to support the continued  improvement 
of broadband access across the rural area.  
 12.13 Business development in the rural area is high on the nat ional and local 
agenda; the rural area is incorpo rated within the European Agri cultural Fund 
for Rural Development and LEADER programmes in the Tees Valley (with 
Hambleton District Council).  Pri orities of the programmes are;  to improve the 
competitiveness of rural busines s by providing dedicated busine ss support, 
increasing access to employment and removing barriers to growth , such as 
poor broadband and transport connecti vity.  Planning policies w ill aim to 
support these priorities.  
 12.14 The Borough Council encourages the re-use of existing rur al buildings to 
support the rural economy and agri cultural uses.  New buildings  should be well 
designed, of a scale appropriate  to the rural location and shou ld be in close 
proximity to existing settlement s.  Development should enhance the quality, 
character and distinctiveness of the rural area.  New businesse s within the 
rural area will be supported prov iding they are most appropriat e and not better 
suited to town centre or em ployment land locations.   
 
Development in the Rural Area 
12.15 Objective 11 of the Local Plan sets out ‘ To protect, promote and enhance the 
quality and distinctiveness of the Boroughs natural, rural and built 
environment’.  
 The different demands on the ru ral area remain challenging for  
development. Whilst it is impor tant to protect the open country side to ensure 
that the natural habitat and landscape character is not lost th ere is a need to 
ensure there is a balance betw een protecting and enhancing the rural area 
and providing a socially, econom ically and sustainable environm ent for 
residents. 
  14312.16 Whilst many of the activities which take place in the rur al area are outside the 
scope of planning control some forms of development can be acco mmodated 
without detrimental effect on t he countryside offering sustaina ble 
environmental enhancements. This may include opportunities to m anage and 
improve environmental assets or improvements for recreation or tourism 
purposes. 
 12.17 There is increasing pressure  for new dwellings in the rur al area and it is 
acknowledged that some limited e xpansion can help to sustain th e rural 
economy. However, as a general p rinciple, new development will be directed 
to sites within development lim its in line with housing policie s within this plan. 
The countryside will be protect ed from inappropriate developmen t and 
coalescence between the villages and urban edge by the use of d evelopment 
limits and the strategic gap, as illustrated on the Policies Ma p. This will help to 
ensure the characteristics of t he rural area are protected.     
 12.18 Any new developments should help retain, or enhance, loca l services, 
community facilities and infrastructure in the rural villages. Development that 
ensures the future of a building of architectural or historic i nterest, or that re-
uses redundant or disused buildi ngs is encouraged, particularly  if development 
leads to the physical improvem ent of the immediate setting and enhances the 
quality, character and distinct iveness of the local area.  
 12.19 Where development is consi dered acceptable it will be req uired to respect the 
form, scale and character of the landscape through careful siti ng, design and 
use of materials. New buildings  and structures should, wherever  possible, be 
sited adjacent to existing build ings or building groups rather than isolated in 
the landscape. 
 12.20 In the rural area outside the development limits, beyond the agricultural 
permitted development rights, dev elopment may be permitted wher e it is 
essential for the purposes of ag riculture, forestry, public inf rastructure or to 
meet the social needs of the local community. This and other de velopment 
that is appropriate to a rural area and supports the rural econ omy, agricultural 
diversification, rural tourism and leisure developments may be permitted 
where it respects the tranquility and character of the local co untryside and 
does not have a significant impact on visual amenity in the set ting of the 
landscape or on the local road network.
 
 
12.21 Some limited development within the current village envel opes will assist in 
maintaining the viability of the village amenities such as scho ols, shops and 
public transport. Strategic housi ng sites have been identified for Elwick, Hart 
and Wynyard to accommodate future  growth of these villages. Any  s u c h  
developments must be appropriate in scale, design and character  t o  t h e  
locality.  
       144RUR1: Development in the Rural Area 
The Borough Council will seek to ensure the rural area is prote cted and 
enhanced to ensure that its natural habitat, cultural and built  heritage and 
rural landscape character are not lost. Development outside the  development 
limits will be strictly controlled. 
 
The Borough Council will seek to support the rural economy. Pro posals must 
be considered necessary for the efficient or the continued viab le operation of 
agriculture, horticulture, for estry, equine uses, and/or other appropriate land 
based businesses. This includes th e diversification of activiti es on existing 
farm units which do not prejudice continued agricultural use an d are of a 
scale and nature that is sui table to a rural location.  
 
Development in the rural ar ea should, where relevant: 
1) Be in accordance with the  Hartlepool Rural Neighbourhood Pla n 
and any other neighbourhood plan; 
2) Where possible be located in or near to the villages; 
3) Where possible re-use exist ing buildings and/or materials; 
4) Not have a significant detrimental impact on neighbouring us ers 
or surrounding area by way of amenity, noise, access, light 
pollution or visual intrusion; 
5) Through good design, enhance the quality, character and 
distinctiveness of the immediate area, villages and landscapes,  
taking into account relevant d esign guides and statements; 
6) Be in keeping with other buildings in terms of siting, size,  
materials and colour; 
7) Ensure access is appropriate and there is not a detrimental 
impact on the highway safety; 
8) Where possible create and impr ove sustainable connectivity;  
9) Not have a detrimental impact on the landscape  character or 
heritage assets; and 
10) Avoid areas of best and most versatile agricultural land, t hose 
areas classed as grades 1, 2 and 3a in the Agricultural Land 
Classification. 
 
For new dwellings in the rural area, the development must meet the criteria 
set out in the New Dwellings Out side of Development Limits Supp lementary 
Planning Document and be in acco rdance with policy RUR2.   
 
Where developments are likely to have an impact upon existing i nfrastructure 
or require new infrastructure, the applicant will be required t o provide such 
infrastructure in accordance with policy QP1, the Planning obli gations 
Supplementary Planning Document  and the Local Infrastructure Pl an. 
 
 
New Dwellings Outside of Development Limits 
12.22 Development limits are a commonly used tool in Local Plan s that provide clear 
and defensible boundaries around settlements within which devel opment will 
be confined. Most of the land in the borough which falls outsid e of 
development limits can be chara cterised as being “countryside”.  Therefore  145most dwellings proposed outside of the developm ent limits will be, by 
definition, “developmen t in the countryside’’.  
 12.23 The Borough Council has car efully managed housing develop ment in the 
countryside through the Local Plan which defines limits to deve lopment around 
each village and sets out strategic gaps between villages and t he main urban 
area. A review of the Authoritie s Monitoring Reports (AMRs) rev eals the 
Borough Council’s commitment and success protecting the country side from 
unjustified and unsustainable isola ted residential development.  I t  i s  e v i d e n t  
from the AMRs that the few residential developments permitted o utside 
development limits were for new  dwellings associated with exist ing agricultural 
developments or other rural-bas ed business developments such as  tourism, 
forestry and wildlife. There hav e been a limited number of resi dential 
conversions of farm buildings and replacement dwellings have be en permitted 
since 2006. The Borough Council wil l continue to protect the co untryside from 
unjustified unsustainable res idential dev elopments.   
 12.24 The Local Plan allocates sufficient land within developme nt limits to 
accommodate the Borough’s antici pated housing need over the nex t 15 years. 
Therefore it is envisaged that t here will be very limited need for additional 
dwellings to be provided outside  of the development limits. Dwe llings in the 
countryside may be needed essentia lly to support rural-based bu sinesses 
such as agriculture, forestry, wildlife, sustainable rural tour ism, leisure 
developments etc. In such cases and prior to planning permissio n being 
granted, the Borough Council will s eek to control the developme nt of new 
dwellings in the countryside in a ccordance with current nationa l planning 
policies, other relevant polices  and relevant material consider ations at the time 
planning permission is sought.    
 12.25 The National Planning Polic y Framework (NPPF) paragraph 5 5 states the 
special circumstances under which  development in the countrysid e may be 
permitted. These include: 
 the essential need for a rural worker  to live permanently at, or near, 
their place of work in the countryside; or  
 where such development would repr esent the optimal viable use of a 
heritage asset or would be appropriate enabling development to secure the future of heritage assets; or 
 where the development would re-use redundant or disused buildings 
and lead to an enhancement to t he immediate setting; or 
 the exceptional quality or innovat ive nature of the design of the 
dwelling. 
 
12.26 The NPPF specifically direc ts local planning authorities 
to avoid new isolated 
homes in the countryside unless justification can be sought und er special 
circumstances as stated in paragraph 55. As a result, new house s outside of 
the development limits will require special justification for p lanning permission 
to be granted in line with the Ne w Dwellings outside of Develop ment Limits 
SPD (2015).  
    146RUR2: New Dwellings Outsid e of Development Limits 
The Borough Council will seek to protect the countryside by onl y permitting 
new dwellings outside of development limits if there is clear j ustification and 
it can be demonstrated that: 
1) There is a clearly establis hed functional need and it is con sidered 
essential for a full time rural worker(s) to live permanently a t or 
near to their place of agricultural, forestry or other rural ba sed 
enterprise considered acceptable by the Borough Council; 
2) The agricultural, forestry or other rural based enterprises 
considered acceptable by the Borough Council has been 
established for at least three years, has been profitable for a t 
least one of them, is currently financially sound and has a cle ar 
prospect of remaining so; 
3) The need could not be met by a nother existing dwelling nearb y; 
4) The dwelling(s) proposed is of  a size commensurate with the 
size/value of the business it is supporting; 
5) Proposals are in accordance with policies CC1, QP1, QP3, QP4 , 
QP5, QP7 and NE1 along with any other relevant policies on a 
case by case basis; and 
6) Where relevant, the development would represent the best via ble 
use or secure the futur e of a heritage asset. 
 
Notwithstanding the above criter ia, in exceptional circumstance s, new 
dwellings outside of development  limits may be permitted where the design: 
7)   Is truly outstanding, gr oundbreaking and innovative, for e xample 
in its use of materials, met hods of construction or its 
contribution to protecting a nd enhancing the environment; 
8)   Reflects the highest standards in architecture; 
9)   Significantly enhances the immediate setting; and 
10) Is sensitive to the defining characteristics of the local a rea. 
 
Proposals for replacement dwelli ngs outside of development limi ts will only 
be approved in the following circ umstances: where an existing d welling no 
longer meets modern standards and is incapable of economic repa ir or 
adaptation; the scale of the proposed development is similar to  the original;
and the form, scale, massing and general design is such to mini mise visual 
intrusion but significantly enha nce the immediate setting.  Reu se of existing 
buildings and materials is enc ouraged.                                                                   
 
Proposals for new housing development and the re-use of existin g buildings 
should pay particular attention to design and landscape charact er so to 
preserve and enhance the charact er and distinctiveness of the c ountryside. 
 
Occupancy conditions will be impo sed where justified on permiss ions for 
agricultural dwellings, such c onditions will not be removed wit hout realistic 
assessment of needs. 
 
For new dwellings in the rural area, further to the criteria se t out in this 
policy, the development must have regard to the provisions of t he New 
Dwellings Outside of Development Limits Supplementary Planning 
Document.  147 
Farm Diversification 
12.27 The character of the rural area in Hartlepool is largely dependent on farming 
and farm related activities.  The farming and rural communities  are custodians 
of the countryside, ther efore a continued presence of agricultu re is 
fundamental to the future of the rural area and preserving the character, 
culture and nature of the rural area. Farm diversification is i mportant for 
farmers and agricultural businesses that need an extra source o f income in 
addition to agricultural production to sustain and enhance thei r agricultural 
presence in the rural area. Changes in agriculture policy and p ractice in recent 
years as well as waning farm incomes and increased environmenta l pressures 
have resulted in a decline in the level of farmed land in Hartl epool and farm-
related jobs.  As a consequence there has been an increase in t he stock of 
land and buildings no longer r equired for agriculture.  
 12.28 Well conceived farm diversification schemes may be encour aged where the 
nature and scale of the business is appropriate to a rural loca tion.   Types of 
farm diversification are varied in nature.  Examples of such sc hemes across 
the borough include converting agr icultural buildings to worksh ops, storage 
facilities, offices, training/ educational facilities, food proc essi ng uni ts or retai l  
outlets, this could be related to local products; commercial de velopment 
related to animals such as catteries and kennels;  farm-based tourism such as 
bed and breakfast or self-cateri ng accommodation and visitor fa rms; 
renewable energy sources such as b iomass; leisure pursuits incl uding fishing, 
shooting and motor sports such as quad biking and equine relate d commercial 
activities such as stabling or horse riding-centres. The Boroug h Council 
recognises the development through diversification will be spec ific to the 
needs and aims of the farm business. 
 12.29 To ensure that the vernaculars of farmsteads within the r ural area are 
retained, farm diversification should seek to reuse existing bu ildings to create 
new business space rather than create additional structures in the rural area 
where possible.  Where new build ings are required there should be no 
significant harm caused by the loss of visual quality of the co untryside or 
erosion of the characte r of the rural area. 
 
RUR3: Farm Diversification 
The Borough Council will seek to support and diversify the rura l economy 
through farm diversification.  
 
Development which forms part of a farm diversification scheme w ill only be 
permitted where it can be demonstrate that: 
 
1) The development would benefit the economy of the rural area;   
2) Existing farm buildings are reused as a priority, where new 
buildings are proposed; 
a) The buildings are appropriate in scale, form, impact, 
character and siting to their rural location; 
b) Wherever possible new or replacement buildings should 
be located within or adjoi ning an existing group of 
buildings;  1483) It does not have significant detrimental effect on the ameni ties of 
occupiers of adjoining and nei ghbouring property by reason of 
smell, noise or general disturbance;  
4) The proposed activity is compatible with agricultural operat ions on 
the farm and neighbouring agricultural holdings; 
5) It should not generate traffi c of a type or amount inappropr iate for 
the rural roads affected by the proposal or require improvement s to 
these roads which could be detrimental to the character of the rural 
area; 
6) Access to the development is safe and secure and the proposa l 
presents no detrimental imp acts on highway safety; 
7) Any associated signage/advertising does not constitute an in trusive 
feature in the landscape; 
8) There is no overall detrimental impact on the wider landscap e 
setting or the historic environment; and 
9) The proposal does not involve a significant, irreversible lo ss of the 
best and most versatile agricultural land, those areas classed as 
grades 1, 2 and 3a in the Agric ultural Land Classification. 
 
Development must demonstrate how it will support the existing f arm 
business and contribute towards the future viability of the far m, contribute to 
the local economy and environmental management as well as benef it the 
rural community.  Each will be considered on its own merits and  w h e r e  
appropriate the provision of a business case to demonstrate nee d may be 
required. 
 
Any development proposal should be in accordance with the Plann ing 
Obligations Supplementary Planning Document, ensuring that wher e a 
diversification scheme attracts a number of users appropriate p lanning 
obligations may be required to e nsure sustainable development.   
 
 
Equestrian Development 
12.30 The equestrian industry comb ining horse racing, leisure a nd competitive riding 
makes a multi-billion pound co ntribution to the UK economy.     Primarily based 
in the rural area, this diverse industry includes commercial ac tivities such as 
breeding as well as leisure eques trian activities.  Equestrian activities in the 
rural area are a popular pursuit. In recent years there have be en a number of 
proposals for equestrian development  in Hartlepool responding t o the 
changing characteristics of the rural area leading to increasin g demand for 
liveries and associated equestrian development.  Due to the clo se proximity to 
the urban area the rural area is a readily accessible location for equestrian 
facilities.  
 12.31 The result of which has been growth in the sector as a gr eater number of 
equestrian related activities have established in the rural are a; the extent of 
which varies from small scale rec reational development such as stables 
attached to individual rural dwe llings to larger commercial rur al enterprises 
e.g. livery, riding schools and horse training and breeding bus inesses.  Such 
developments require access to gra zing land and bridleways to e nsure they 
are located in suitable and sustainable locations. The Borough Council is 
supportive of such uses within the rural area to enhance the ru ral economy  149and support farm diversification;  however the maintenance of th e rural area 
and protection of the landscape is critical.  
 12.32 There are a number of public and permissive bridleways ac ross the rural area; 
the Borough Council is constantly  looking to develop this netwo rk further.  
Consideration of how proposed  new equestrian development links into the 
existing network is fundamental f or the development of a safe e questrian 
environment for both horses and t heir riders.  Further developm ent of new 
public and permissive bridlewa ys is encouraged as part of eques trian 
development. 
 
RUR4: Equestrian Development 
The Borough Council will seek to support the rural economy thro ugh 
equestrian development. Equestrian development will be supporte d as an 
appropriate use in the rural area where: 
1) Development is adjacent to or in the vicinity of villages, e xisting 
farmsteads or small holdings to minimise the visual impact of 
new build development on open countryside;  
2) The proposals are of a scale and character appropriate to th eir 
setting and are sensitively site d within the landscape and the 
Historic Environment. To minimi se impact, consideration should 
be given to the adaptation, or conversion of existing buildings  
before new build.  Any proposals for extensions to existing 
buildings should harmonise with the scale, height, form, and 
design of the original building; 
3) It does not have significant detrimental effect on the ameni ties of 
occupiers of adjoining and nei ghbouring property by reason of 
smell, noise or general disturbance;  
4) The number of stables proposed and the number of horses to b e 
accommodated can be supported by the amount of grazing land 
available; 
5) In the case of new commercial establishments - these are loc ated 
sufficiently close to existing residential accommodation to all ow 
for appropriate levels of supervision; 
6) In the case of commercial establishments, they are located c lose 
to existing bridleways or othe r routes suitable for trekking or  
hacking out where this forms part of the business; where this i s 
not the case, provision of safe equine routes should be provide d; 
and 
7) Developments should be in accordance with QP1 along with any  
other relevant policies on a case by case basis.  
8) The proposal does not invol ve a significant, irreversible lo ss of 
the best and most versatile agr icultural land, those areas clas sed 
as grades 1, 2 and 3a in the Agr icultural Land Classification.  
 
Applications for commercial scal e equestrian establishments mus t be 
supported by a business plan setting out the financial and loca tional 
requirements for the proposal and demonstrating how the develop ment 
contributes positively to the rural economy. 
 
  150Rural Tourism 
12.33 As well as being a great place to live, work and play, th e high quality 
environment and experience the rural area offers attracts visit o r s .   W h i l s t  
traditionally Hartlepool and the wi der Tees Valley has been ove rshadowed by 
its close proximity to the diverse rural landscapes available i n North Yorkshire, 
the Dales and Northumberland, t he rural area of Hartlepool is b ecoming 
increasingly popular as a locatio n for tourist attractions and a place to stay.  It 
offers access to the amenities of the rural area, Hartlepool co astline and good 
connectivity to the wider sub-region.  As such the rural area c ontinues to 
present opportunities for touris m which helps to sustain and en courage the 
vitality and viability o f the rural economy.   
 12.34 The changing nature of agr iculture requirements on land a nd buildings across 
the rural area presents opportunities for development, and farm  diversification.  
A key challenge to development of tourism accommodation in the rural area is 
ensuring the development is sust ainable without creating a detr imental impact 
on the landscape and rural communities.   
 12.35 There is a variety of tour ist accommodation available acr oss the rural area 
including a hotel, caravan and camping site and self-catering l odges; future 
development of similar accommodation can be an opportunity to b oost the 
rural economy.   There is limited supply of self-catering accom modation across 
Hartlepool and in particular t he rural area.  Unused agricultur al buildings may 
provide opportunity to address this; visitor accommodation may offer a way to 
safeguard a future for such buildings.  
 12.36 Tourism in general makes a s ignificant contribution to th e Hartlepool economy 
and is a key growth priority for the borough; the rural area ha s a role to play in 
delivering this priority.  Caref ul development within the rural  area can positively 
enhance and protect the quality of the rural area ensuring this  environment will 
continue to be enjoyed by future generations.   
 
RUR5: Sustainable Rural Tourism 
The Borough Council will seek to enhance the tourism offer of t he Borough; 
the Council recognises the role and opportunities that exist wi thin the rural 
area. 
 
The Borough Council will support proposals for rural tourism an d leisure 
attractions and visito r accommodation where: 
1) it can be demonstrated that proposals for new attractions or  
accommodation are not suitable for location within or adjacent to 
the urban area of Hartlepool or the villages; 
2) appropriately located existing buildings are re-used where p ossible; 
3) they result in an improvemen t to the range and quality of at tractions 
and/or visitor accommodation in the area; 
4) the scale, layout and design of development is appropriate t o its 
location and maintains or enhances the high quality of the buil t, 
natural and, where appropriate, historic environment;  
5) they do not have a detrimental  impact on landscape setting, 
adjacent land uses or users, making development unacceptable in  
planning terms;  1516) they will benefit the local economy and help to protect loca l 
services; and 
7) they will not generate levels of traffic that would have an adverse 
impact upon the operation of the highway network or on highway 
safety. 
 
In particular, support will be given to proposals that meet the  above criteria 
and form part of a comprehensive farm diversification scheme, o r are directly 
linked to the long-term conservation and enjoyment of publicly accessible 
heritage assets. 
 
Proposals for caravan, holiday lodges and camping development ( either new 
or extensions to existing sit es) should be in accordance with c riteria points 1-
7 of this policy and po licies LT4 and LT5.   
 
Rural Services 
12.37 Shops, public houses and other key facilities in villages  offer key services to 
the rural area and present a vit al component to sustainable rur al areas.  The 
prevalence of services within th e villages reduces car travel t o access basic 
needs.  Rural services have reduc ed significantly as it is diff icult to ensure that 
such facilities are maintained when operators or owners wish to  c e a s e  
operations for economic or family reasons.    
 12.38  The Localism Act (2011) introduced a Community Right to Bid (Assets of 
Community Value) which aims to ensure that buildings and amenit ies can be 
kept in public use and remain an integral part of community lif e.  A ‘list of 
assets of community value’ is held by the Borough Council.  The  Borough 
Council will encourage and suppor t the continued provision of s uch uses 
within the villages.   
 
RUR6: Rural Services 
Changes of use or redevelopment of a shop, public house or othe r key 
facilities within a village in th e rural area will only be supp orted where it can 
be demonstrated that: 
1) the facility is no longer economically viable; 
2) there is no demand for the facility in the locality;  
3) equivalent alternative facili ties are available nearby; and  
4) there is no evidence of realistic intent from the community for the 
retention of the business or community facility. 
 
Supporting evidence will be require d to demonstrate that the pr operty has 
been appropriately advertised locally on the open market for a reasonable 
period and that no reasonable offer that would allow retention of the service 
has been refused.   
 
 
  15213.  RETAIL AND COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT  
 
13.1  The Government recognises t hat town centres are at the he art of 
communities, they have both social and economic benefits. Town centres 
have been at the heart of towns and cities across the country f or centuries, 
acting as the focal point for commercial and community activity . However, over 
recent years there has been a fa ll in retail spending in town c entres and this 
trend is expected to continue. O ut-of-town retail parks have pl ayed a part in 
draining the traffic and retail ex penditure from town centres. Also online 
shopping along with delivery servic es has increased and thus ta ken trade 
away from the town centre and major supermarkets have diversifi ed their 
stock range so shoppers can buy clothes and gifts along with th eir food 
shopping. Town centres have begun to adapt and must continue to  do so by 
offering greater value and diversity in the offer. This include s ensuring that the 
provision of leisure and enterta inment services adds to the ove rall town centre 
experience. 
 13.2 The Government seeks to ensure that town centres remain at  the heart of 
communities and this is apparent t hrough the NPPF and NPPG whic h sets out 
a town centre first approach to m ain town centre use developmen t. 
 13.3 The Borough Council echoes t he Government’s concerns and v iews. The 
retail and commercial activities are major components of the Bo rough’s 
economy and the Borough Council seeks to ensure this remains an d grows. 
The Town Centre is one of the Borough’s key assets generating c onsiderable 
turnover and wealth, employing thousands of people and providin g a range of 
social, leisure and other service s. Hartlepool is a relatively self-contained 
Borough; the Town Centre is comm ensurate with its sub-regional status 
drawing most of its custom from within the Borough itself with some limited 
custom from areas such as Pet erlee and Billingham and spending associated 
with tourists. 
 
13.4 The Town Centre is focus ed around Middleton Grange Shoppin g Centre and 
York Road along with the Church Street area to the east of the A689. 
Immediately surrounding and radiat ing out from the Town Centre are defined 
edge of town centre areas. Adjacent to the Town Centre are the edge of 
centre areas and the retail and le isure parks. There is a furth er retail and 
leisure park at Tees Bay with existing residential areas served  by numerous 
local centres, of varying sizes, which provide for the day-to-d ay needs of the 
community.  
 
13.5 The 2015 Hartl epool Retail Study
60 provides a comprehensive assessment of 
retail activities and includes an assessment of the need for fu rther retail 
development within the Borough. I t identifies deficiencies in c urrent provision 
and the capacity of existing c entres to accommodate new develop ment. The 
Retail Study raised a number of concerns regarding the health o f the Town 
Centre, notably the relatively h igh vacancy rates and the large  size of the 
Town Centre along with competiti on from edge of centre retail l ocations.  
 13.6 With regard to convenience retail the Retail Study states that the Borough has 
an appropriate network of food stores with no overriding defici ency in 
                                                           
60 From here on referenced as the retail study.   153provision, therefore there is no quantitative or qualitative re quirement for the 
Borough Council to allocate any new development sites over the plan period. 
In light of this, coupled with the need to protect comparison g ood floorspace, 
the Borough Council seeks to restrict the sale of foods in some  of the retail 
and leisure parks. In other desi gnated centres that are predomi nately 
surrounded by residential propertie s, and/or where existing per missions for 
unrestricted A1 retail exists , then the sale of A1 food retail may be permitted. 
 13.7 With regard to comparison retail the Retail Study states t hat, although over the 
plan period there is likely to be growth in the comparison mark et, there is no 
requirement to allocate any new  development sites over the emer ging plan 
period.  Given the high number of vacancy rates it is considere d that the Town 
Centre has capacity to accommodate future growth and should be the 
preferred location for main town centre uses.  
 13.8 The Retail Study recommends  that there is no need or justi fication for out-of-
centre provision, any new retail floorspace granted permission outside of the 
defined centres would be likely to draw expenditure away from t he centres and 
put them at risk. The Borough Council endorses this view and ha s used the 
2006 Local Plan boundary allocations as a starting point and ha s not allocated 
any additional floorspace above wha t exists at present within t he Town Centre, 
edge of centres and retail and leisure parks through existing a llocations, 
operations, permitted developmen t or unimplemented permissions.   
 13.9 Some new local centres have been created, these are areas that currently 
serve the local community but  were not identified in the 2006 L ocal Plan. 
Within some of the local centres some residential units are loc ated next to 
commercial units and in most ins tances are located between comm ercial units. 
These residential units have been drawn within the local centre  boundaries 
and therefore do constitute an increase in overall floor space allocation within 
the local centres. This additional provision has been captured as a pragmatic 
approach to setting boundaries and defining areas. It would be impractical to 
draw boundaries that only bounded commercial units as the resid ential 
properties in between commercial units or adjacent to commercia l units can be 
seen as part of the local centre as a whole and if an applicati on came forward 
to convert the residential units to commercial units then permi ssion is likely to 
be granted. 
 
The Hartlepool Vision and Hartlepool Regeneration Masterplan 
13.10 To accompany the Hartlepool Vision
61 the Borough Council has endorsed the 
Hartlepool Regener ation Masterplan62 for the central area of Hartlepool. The 
masterplan area comprises two sub-areas; a focused masterplan a rea and the 
wider masterplan area. The focused masterplan area is concentra ted on the 
Waterfront including key sites such as former Jacksons Landing,  the National 
Museum of The Royal Navy, Trincomalee Wharf, The Marina and Chu rch 
Street. The wider Masterplan Ar ea includes key retail and leisu re locations 
including Middleton Grange Shopping Centre and Mill House Leisu re Centre. 
An important element of the Ha rtlepool Regeneration Masterplan is the Retail 
Study and a Retail Revival Strategy, which set out a comprehens ive strategy 
and action plan for improving retail opportunities in the Town Centre. The 
                                                           
61 Hartlepool Vision January 2014.  
62 The Masterplan December 2014.   154masterplan along with the polici es contained within this Local Plan are 
essential to ensuring the success of the Town Centre by enablin g sustainable 
economic growth and providing a wide range of social and enviro nmental 
benefits. 
 
Retail and Commercial Centre Hierarchy  
13.11 Within Hartlepool there are four types of key Retail and Commercial Centres, 
the Town Centre, edge of centres,  retail and leisure parks and local centres. 
The Local Plan identifies and defines, in table 13 and through this policy, a 
hierarchy of centres where main town centre uses should be loca ted. The 
hierarchy has been established in a bid to protect the Town Cen tre and to 
protect other retail and commercial centres throughout the Boro ugh and to 
ensure that retail and commercia l uses do not proliferate withi n unsuitable 
areas such as industrial areas and residential areas. There are  other areas 
where retail and commercial activ ity takes place, such as units  within the 
villages and units individua lly located throughout the Borough,  often on the 
corner of terraced properties. These units generally benefit fr om long standing 
permissions and although they do provide a service to residents  they are not 
considered as part of the reta il and commercial hierarchy. 
 
Table 13: Retail and Commercial Centre ma in function, characteristics and unit 
size range. 
 
Retail and 
Commercial 
Centre  Retail and Commercial Centre  Unit size range   
(m2) 
Town Centre 
 1. Centre serves the borough and 
other locations as a retail and leisure destination. 
2. Centre is the principal retail 
area in the Borough.  
3. Centre contains a primary 
shopping area (PSA) with predominantly A1 uses. 
4. Centre has a host of leisure 
facilities and includes many night time economy uses.  
5. Centre has a variety of 
commercial businesses including offices. 
6. Centre has good public 
transport links incl uding a public 
transport interchange 
7. Centre has residential uses, 
predominantly on upper floors but not within the PSA. The smallest unit is 
14.79m
2. 
The largest is Hartlepool College of Further Education 7554.96 m
2. 
     
Edge of Town 
Centre Locations
 
 1. Provide transition zones 
between Town Centre and residential area. 
2. Provides a complimentary 
retail/leisure area to the Town Centre.  Smallest unit is 31m
2 on 
York Road South. The largest is an office development of 4328.5m
2 on Lynn Street. 
  1553. Contains commercial business 
including offices. 
4. Residential properties 
intermittently located throughout each centre.  
5. Most centres are well 
connected to and within walking distance of the Town Centre.  
Retail and 
Leisure Parks 1. Complimentary retail and 
leisure area to the Town Centre.
2. Contains areas locally known as 
The Vision Retail Park, Highpoint Retail Park, Anchor Retail Park and Tees Bay Retail Park. 
3. Three Parks ar e within walking 
distance from the Town Centre, but dissected by the railway, the 
A689 and Marina Way. 
4. Free car parking to the West of 
Marina Way, large pay to park facility at the Marina. 
5. Residential properties and office 
development located within the Marina area. 
6. Attractive area of water and 
waterfront at the Marina. 
7. Tees Bay is an out of town retail 
and leisure park with a large 
free car parking area, good public transport links, walking distance from Seaton train station and there a is bus service operating close by. The smallest unit is 
32.15m
2 at the Marina and 
the largest is Asda 11444.34m
2 on West of 
Marina Way.  
 
 
Local Centres 
 1. Discrete collection of small 
shops such as convenience shops, along with key services such as a doctors, nursery and/or dentist. Such uses serve the day-to-day needs of the local community. 
2. Well connected to surrounding 
areas by foot. 
3. Some have dedicated car 
parking. 
4. Some have public transport 
provision nearby.  The smallest is a vacant 
unit on Davison Drive, 
28.5m
2. The largest is  
Hartlepool and Wynyard Primary Care Trust  1077.93m
2 on Wynyard 
Road.  
 13.12 The Borough Council recogni ses the importance of the Town  Centre and its 
contribution to supporting and dr iving forward the Borough’s ec onomy. One of 
the priorities of the Borough Council is to improve the vitalit y and viability of  156the Town Centre and the Borough C ouncil will pro-actively encou rage 
proposals for main town centre use s to be located within the To wn Centre.  
 13.13 The Borough Council also re cognises that other retail and  commercial centres 
are important for the Borough’s economy and to residents; there fore the 
Council will seek to ensure that other retail and commercial ce ntres continue 
to thrive. Although the Town Cen tre’s vitality and viability is  a priority for the 
Council, the Borough Council consi ders it important to ensure t hat new retail 
development is directed to existi ng centres in order to protect  and retain their 
vitality and viability too.  
 13.14 Methods to ensure the Town Centre and other designated ce ntres are 
protected and have the opportuni ty to improve include undertaki ng a 
sequential test and a  impact assessment where appropriate. 
 
Sequential test (Main town centr e uses not in a designated cent re) 
13.15 The designated centres within the Borough are the preferr ed locations for 
main town centre uses. Any propos als for main town centre uses that are not 
in a designated centre will be required to submit a sequential test. 
 13.16 A sequential test helps gui de main town centre use develo pment; they are 
used to assess what sites are available within the Town Centre,  edge of 
centre, retail and leisure parks and local centres and if no si tes are available 
then an assessment of the next p referable location must be unde rtaken until a 
suitable site is found. This requ irement applies to all develop ment, no size 
threshold has been applied; this is because any unit, no matter  the size, 
proposed outside of a designated centre must illustrate that th ey cannot be 
located elsewhere. Given the vacancy rates in Town Centre, edge  of centre, 
retail and leisure parks and local centres the Borough Council seek to reduce 
the vacancy rates in those locations first.  
 13.17 The Borough Council seeks to  ensure that there is not a p roliferation of units 
outside of designated centres due to the impact they could have  upon 
infrastructure, parking, refuse collections, crime and anti-soc ial behaviour. If 
activity is located within desig nated areas then the aforementi oned can be 
better controlled. 
 
Sequential Test (Main town centre uses not in the Town Centre b ut 
located within a designated centre)  
13.18 Although the Borough Counc il will encourage main town cen tre use in the 
Town Centre as a priority, it is not essential in all instances  to require this 
through Planning Policy. 
 
Sequential test for Local Centre proposals 
13.19 The Borough Council consider s that many of the units with in the local centres 
are not in direct competition wit h the Town Centre. The units w ithin local 
centres primarily serve local r esidents and therefore the Counc il seeks to 
ensure local centres thrive and are able to serve the day to da y needs of the 
surrounding residents. 
 13.20 The Borough Council recognise s that in many local centres  there are a 
number of independent local retailers and that it would place a n undue burden  157upon such operators if a sequentia l test were requested. The an chor stores 
within the local centres are o ften the stores that attract the highest footfall; the 
average size of the anchor stores within the local centres is a pproximately 
300m2. It is considered that units bel ow this size are typically sma ll scale local 
businesses and to request a sequential test from such business would be 
unreasonable, especially when the Borough Council considers tha t small scale 
units are acceptable within local centres. Units above the aver age size are 
typically national chains, such chains are likely to be better practiced in 
engaging with the planning system  and the associated documents that 
sometimes have to be produced and therefore to request a sequen tial test 
from applicant looking to operate larger units would not be unr easonable or an 
undue burden. Proposals for new bu ild and/or change of use, wit hin a local 
centre, that are 300m2 floor space or above will be required to submit a 
sequential test.  
 
Sequential test for Edge of centre and retail and leisure park proposals 
13.21 The size of the largest vacant unit with the Town Centre is 894.0m2 and the 
smallest vacant unit is 15.67m2. Given that there are numerous units available 
with an average size of 250m2 then proposals below that size could easily be 
accommodated within the Town Cent re and should therefore be loc ated within 
the Town Centre in the first instance. All proposals in Edge of  centre and retail 
and leisure parks and below 250m2 must submit a sequential test. 
 
Table 14: Retail and commercial hierar chy for main town centre uses in 
numerical order. 
 
Rank Centre Hierarchy  
1 Town Centre  
(Sequentially preferable location for all town centre uses). 
2 Edge of Town Centre Areas and 
Retail and Leisure Parks. (Second most sequentially preferable location). 
3 Local centres 
(Third sequentially preferable location). 
 (NB: the sequential hierarchy will only be engaged where there is a need to 
apply the sequential test). 
 
Impact Assessments 
13.22 Although the Borough Council  recognises the importance of  a l l  o f  t h e  
borough’s retail and commercial centres, given the Town Centre’ s vacancy 
rates (15% of the total floors pace) and its sustainable locatio n, as a priority the 
Borough Council must protect and enhance the vitality and viabi lity of the 
Town Centre. Key uses that assist in driving the Town Centre by  ensuring 
there is a high footfall are re tail, leisure and office uses. 
 13.23 One mechanism for ensuring the vitality and viability of the Town Centre is 
protected is to apply an impact assessment for all applications  f o r  r e t a i l ,   158leisure and office development outside of the Town Centre above  a speci fic 
floorspace threshold.  
 13.24 An impact assessment consider s the impact of a proposal o n the vitality and 
viability of existing, committed and planned public and private  investment in 
the Town Centre and determines w hether there would be likely si gnificant 
adverse impacts of locating certain main town centre uses outsi de of the Town 
Centre. Impacts must not solely focus upon the Town Centre, the  vitality of 
other retail and commercial centres is vital in delivering key services across 
the Borough. If an application is  located within a local centre  and requires a 
impact assessment, then the scope of the assessment must includ e the 
impact of the proposal on the ed ge of centres, retail and leisu re parks and the 
relevant local centres. Applicants are advised to speak to Plan ning Services in 
the first instance to agree the scope, key impact and level of detail for the 
report. 
 13.25 It is not necessary to apply the impact assessment to all  applications for retail, 
leisure and business outside of the Town Centre as units below a certain 
threshold and in different locat ions are unlikely to have a neg ative impact upon 
the Town Centre. The Retail Study  recommends that within Hartle pool a 
minimum local floorspace threshold of 200m
2 additional floorspace is an 
appropriate floorspace threshold.  
 13.26 The Borough Council endorses the recommended threshold fo r all locations 
except local centres. The Boroug h Council notes that throughout  the Borough 
in designated retail and commercial  centres and non-desi gnated locations 
there are retail and le isure units that have drawn footfall awa y from the Town 
Centre. Across the Borough the average size of the above mentio ned units is 
in excess of 200m² (not includi ng the retail warehousing). Unit s of such a size 
are likely to attract higher foo tfall than smaller units and if  they are located 
outside of the Town Centre, in le ss sustainable locations, they  could take 
trade away from the Town Centre and thus potentially harm the v itality and 
viability of the Town Centre. In general the  smaller units within local centres 
are not in direct competition wit h the Town Centre, as such the  Borough 
Council consider it would be unr easonable to request a sequenti al test and 
place an undue burden upon these often small scale, local busin esses. The 
anchor units within the local c entres are often national chain stores that assist 
in creating a high level of footfall.  
 13.27 It is assumed that such stores draw trade away from the t own centre. The 
average size of such stores is 300m2, therefore to ensure that retail, leisure 
and office applications within local centres above 300m2 do not  negatively 
impact upon the town centre an impact test will be required. 
 
RC1: Retail and Commercial Centre Hierarchy 
The Borough Council has identified  and defined a hierarchy of r etail and 
commercial centres that will offer  a variety of sites that are economically 
attractive, diverse and in appropriate sustainable locations an d/or locations 
where connectivity can easily be enhanced throughout the Boroug h.  
 
The defined hierarchy and sequen tial preference of the centres,  for main town  159centre uses in the Borough are id entified in table 14 and on th e Policies Map 
and are detailed below:  
 
1) The Town Centre, then;  
2) Edge of Town Centre Areas and Retail and Leisure Parks then;  
3) Local Centres.  
 
Proposals for main town centre u ses, not located w ithin a desig nated centre 
will be required to provide a robust sequential test. The test must consider all 
of the Borough’s designated centr es and follow the sequential h ierarchy. 
Where it is established that no suitable sites are available wi thin the 
designated centres, an alternat ive acceptable location may be a  location 
accessible by a choice of means of t ransport and/or which offer s significant 
regeneration benefits.  
 
Proposals for main town centre u ses, within a local centre, wit h a floor area of 
300m2 or above, will be required to  provide a robust sequential test . The test 
must consider all of the Boroug h’s designated centres and follo w the 
sequential hierarchy. Where it i s established that no suitable designated 
centres are available to accommoda te the proposals, an alternat ive centre, 
accessible by a choice of transport and/or which offers signifi cant 
regeneration benefits, may be acceptable. 
 
Proposals for main town centre u ses, within an edge of centre o r retail and 
leisure parks, with a fl oor area of below 250m2 will be required to provide a 
robust sequential test.  The test m ust consider all of the Boro ugh’s 
designated centres and follow the  sequential hierarchy. Where i t is 
established that no suitable des ignated centres are available t o accommodate 
the proposals, an alternative centre, accessible by a choice of  transport 
and/or which offers significant regeneration benefits, may be a cceptable. 
 
Proposals for retail, leisure a nd office development located in  local centres, 
with a floor area of 300m² or a bove, will be required to provid e a robust 
impact assessment. In some inst ances it may be necessary to ass ess the 
impact of the proposa l on the Town Centre, other designated cen tres and 
village businesses and community f acilities. Proposals which wo uld 
undermine Town Centre vitality a nd viability will not be permit ted. 
 
Proposals for retail, leisure a nd office development with a flo or area of 200m² 
or above, not located in the Town Centre or a local centre, wil l be required to 
provide a robust impact assessment. In some instances it may be  necessary 
to assess the impact of the proposa l on the Town Centre and oth er 
designated centres. Proposals wh ich would undermine Town Centre  vitality 
and viability will not be permitted. 
 
 
Planning for a Sustai nable Town Centre   
13.28  The Borough Council recognises that the heart of the Borough is  the Town 
Centre.  The Town Centre is the main shopping, commercial, educ ational and 
social centre of Hartlepool, the Town Centre is in a sustainabl e location, well 
served by public transport and withi n close proximity to a numb er of residential 
properties thus allowing a high  number of residents to access i t by foot or  160bicycle. Hartlepool has a relativel y self-contained Town Centre  serving the 
immediate local area and the adjoining areas of south east Durh am and 
Billingham.  
 13.29  At the heart of the Town Centre i s the Primary Shopping Area lo cated around 
York Road and the Middleton Grange Shopping Centre as illustrat ed on the 
Policies Map. A1 retail uses dom inate the Primary Shopping Area , other uses 
such as banks, building societie s, estate agents, solicitors, c afes and 
restaurants falling within use cla sses A2 and A3 are also prese nt within the 
Primary Shopping Area.   
 13.30  The uses discussed above are typical of a Primary Shopping Area  and, 
although retail dominates, other u ses, especially those within A2 and A3 are 
considered complementary to the retail function of the area. Th ere are a 
limited number of other uses su ch as amusement arcades, hotels and public 
houses, dental practices and other health care facilities provi ding services and 
activities for users of the town centre. These uses are not see n as essential 
within the Primary Shopping Are a and can have a detrimental imp act upon the 
shopping environment. Such uses would be and could be better lo cated 
elsewhere within the Town Centre , therefore the Borough Council  will 
encourage non-A1, A2 and A3 uses to be directed beyond the limi ts of the 
Primary Shopping Area.  
 13.31 To the north of the Primar y Shopping Area are further ret ail units, the Civic 
Centre, police station, community  buildings, offices, a social club and 
supermarket along with a petrol filling station. To the east of  the primary 
shopping area across the A689 is t he Church Street area that pr ovides the 
Public Transport Interchange, educ ational establishments, retai l, commercial 
and leisure uses. The leisure us es within this area are particu larly associated 
with the night time economy. To the south of the Primary Shoppi ng Area are a 
number of retail units along with  the One Life Medical Centre, a limited number 
of residential properties and two edge of centre commercial loc ations; to the 
south west is York Road South Edge of Centre Area and to the ea st is 
Stranton Edge of Centr e Area. To the west of the Primary Shoppi ng Area are 
 161a number of residential properties along with two edge of centr e areas; to the 
north is West of Victoria Road Edge of Centre area and to the s outh is Park 
Road West Edge of Centre area.  
 13.32 All of the aforem entioned uses assist in creating a Town Centre that has a mix 
of uses that assist in generat ing footfall. The Borough Council  approach is one 
of flexibility and therefore the Town Centre is recognised a lo cation for a 
variety of town centre uses and the Borough Council will work p roactively to 
ensure a diverse range is offered and thrives. 
 13.33  There is a higher than national a verage number of vacant units within the in 
the Town Centre. The observed increase in the number of vacanci es arising in 
the Primary Shopping Area (mos t notably Middleton Grange) is of  particular 
concern and The Retail Study su ggests that the high vacancy rat es are linked 
to the over provision of retail floorspace within the Town Cent re. As a result 
the Retail Study advocates that extreme caution should be exerc ised in 
permitting new floorspace out side the Town Centre.  
 13.34 The way in which people shop is changing; many people now  choose to shop 
online and therefore not visit the Town Centre; conversely some  may browse 
online and buy/collect in store from the Town Centre or in some  instances 
from accessible out of Town Centr e locations. To ensure the Tow n Centre 
thrives it must provide an attractive shopping and leisure expe rience which the 
internet is unable to match. The Borough Council’s flexible app roach to uses 
within the Town Centre will assist in competing with the intern et yet more must 
be done to make the Town Centre as accessible as possible via s ustainable 
transport modes and by improving and providing cheaper car park ing. 
 13.35 The Borough Council accept s that drinking establishments and hot food 
takeaways contribute to the Bor ough`s economy however these use s can 
often be associated with daytime  closure and evening opening ho urs. Crime 
and anti-social behavior can oft en lead to disturbance emanatin g through the 
surrounding residential areas. T he proliferation of such uses c an, over time, 
alter the character and function o f the Town Centre. In order t o protect the 
character and function of the Town Centre and to ensure the Inn ovation and 
Skills Quarter thrives, along with protecting the amenity of th e occupiers of the 
surrounding residential areas applic ations for drinking establi shments and hot 
food takeaways will be strictly controlled.  
 13.36 The Town Centre should not j ust provide shops and service s, it should provide 
an attractive environment to assi st in enticing people to inter act with the area 
and be more likely to increase the duration of their stay. An a ttractive 
environment can assist in alteri ng the image and perceptions of  the Town 
Centre and can assist in improv ing safety. A poorly designed en vironment can 
have the opposite effect, it may  discourage people from visitin
g the area or if 
they do visit, their stay may be shorter. To ensure Hartlepool attracts more 
visitors the Borough Council will  encourage the creation of arr ival points to the 
Town Centre, along with encouraging bold and innovative design of 
development within key locations.  
 13.37  The Retail Study highlighted that  physical integration between the Middleton 
Grange Shopping Centre and the rest  of the Town Centre appears to be a  162major obstacle to increased vitality and ongoing viability. Arc hitecturally 
Middleton Grange Shopping Centre turns its back on the surround ing 
shopping streets, presenting uns ightly views of the rear of the  centre (including 
service yards and access areas) and providing links via large a reas of surface 
car parking neither of which provides a particularly attractive  shopping 
environment. The owners of the s hopping centre acknowledge this  a s  a  
problem and have proposals in mind to invest in environmental i mprovements 
to enhance the external ele vations of the centre.  
 
RC2: The Town Centre 
The Town Centre, as defined on the Policies Map will continue t o be the 
primary retail and commercial centre in the borough. In accorda nce with 
policy RC1 the Borough Council will seek to diversify, support and protect 
the Town Centre as the sequentially preferable location for mai n town centre 
uses, including:  
 Shops (A1)  
 Financial and Professional Services (A2)  
 Food and Drink (A3)  
 Drinking Establishments (A4)  
 Hot Food Takeaways (A5)  
 Business (B1)  
 Hotels (C1)  
 Non-residential institutions (D1)  
 Assembly and Leisure (D2)  
 Theatres and Nightclubs (Sui Generis)  
 Residential (C2, C2a, C3 and C4) 
 
The above uses, and other uses, will only be permitted providin g that they do 
not adversely affect the charact er, appearance, function and am enity of the, 
property and the surrounding area and are in conformity with th e Green 
Infrastructure and the Pl anning Obligations SPD.  
 
Within the Innovation and Skills Quarter, as identified on the Policies Map, no 
A4, nightclubs and A5 uses will b e permitted in the area locate d outside of 
the late night uses area.  
 
The Borough Council will have regard to the length of time that  a vacant unit 
has been empty along with considering the attempt to market and  bring a 
vacant unit back into use when considering other uses. 
 
Businesses will not be permitted to operate between the hours o f 11.30pm 
and 7am unless they are located within the late night uses area , as identified 
on the  Policies Map. 
 
In accordance with the Planning  Obligation and Green Infrastruc ture SPDs, all 
development should facilitate, whe re appropriate, improvements to:  
a)Creating a sense of arri val in the Town Centre 
b)Connectivity within the Town Centre and between the different  
elements of the Town Centre, this includes providing visually 
attractive focal points th at encourage movement.   
c)Connectivity from the Town Centre to Edge of Town Centre area s  163and the Retail and Leisure Parks including improved pedestrian and 
cycle provision 
d)Public transport provision 
e)Cycling facilities 
f)Car parking facilities 
g)The overall environment and appearance of the area 
h)Areas of public realm 
 
Where medium/large scale developments are proposed the Borough Council 
will encourage bold and innovative design. Smaller scale propos als that 
involve alterations to commercial fronts should be designed in accordance 
with the Shop Fronts SPD.  
 
‘More Vulnerable’ (See National Planning Practice Guidance floo d risk 
vulnerability classification) devel opment will not be allowed w ithin Flood 
Zone 2 and 3a unless supported by a Flood Risk Assessment that 
demonstrates that flood risk can be effectively managed through out the 
lifetime of the development. 
 
Planning for a Sustainable I nnovation and Skills Quarter 
13.38  The Innovation and Skills Quarter (ISQ) is identified on the pr oposal map. The 
Innovation and Skills Quarter is located with the eastern part of the Town 
Centre and the Lynn Street/North of Mainsforth Terrace Edge of Centre. 
Guided by recommendations incl uded in the Regeneration Masterpl an the ISQ 
is designed to address the key economic and property market cha llenges that 
are a barrier to development in the area. The ISQ will build on  r e c e n t  
investment in the Hartlepool Co llege of Further Education and f urther 
development of the Cleveland College of Art & Design. Cleveland  College of 
Art & Design have recently been awarded money from the Local Gr owth Fund 
to expand and create a landmark modern educational building wil l anchor the 
eastern end of Church Street and add significance to the Church  Street 
Conservation Area.  
 13.39 Cleveland College of Art & D esign and Hartl epool College of Further 
Education provide a supply of  job ready, adaptable skilled work ers however 
the graduate retention levels within the area are low despite t he high 
percentages of graduates going on to create their own businesse s. There is 
currently a lack of suitable spac e for start-up companies and s mall firms that 
require space, centrally located in Hartlepool, to set up grow,  and expand. The 
ISQ seeks to create a focus for new small business development particularly 
relating to the creative and di gital industries sector. 
 13.40  Attracting students from outside t he area is important to ensur e the area 
develops and thrives, the provis ion of student accommodation wi ll be 
encouraged at the Lynn Street D epot site and within other areas  throughout 
the area. Having students who ar e resident and learning in the area will also 
increase footfall on Church Street  and in the surrounding retai l and 
commercial centres. In support of  this investment the Borough C ouncil will 
pursue opportunities for high qual ity investment in the public realm and 
explore opportunities to creat e a pedestrian friendly environme nt which will 
help improve connectivi ty across the area.  
  16413.41 The creation of the ISQ with an enhanced physical environ ment and 
commercial floorspace, coupled with a supportive culture, would  help to 
improve perceptions of Hartlepool as a place to live and work f or pre-start, 
micro and Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) in the fiel ds such as 
design, advanced manufacturing and digital media. They can then  grow in the 
town and contribute towards the local economy and the community .  
 
 
 RC3: Innovation and Skills Quarter  
In the area identified on the  Policies Map, the Borough Council will continue 
to encourage and promote the development of an Innovation and S kills 
Quarter (ISQ). 
 
The provision of small scale starter units will be encouraged w ithin the ISQ 
and the Borough Council will acti vely encourage such uses withi n the area. 
 
In order to achieve a positive ch ange within the area and to en sure that the 
ISQ area evolves accordingly, no A4, nightclubs and A5 uses wil l be 
permitted in the area located outside of the late night uses ar ea, as identified 
on the Policies Map.  
 
Proposals that involve alterations to commercial fronts should be designed in 
accordance with the Shop Fronts SPD. 
 
Improvements to the public realm will be supported providing th ey are
appropriate and respect the Chur ch Street Conservation Area des ignation.  
 
The pedestrianisation of part of Church Street will be supporte d providing 
that it will not have a significant impact upon the flow of veh icular traffic 
within the area. 
 165Diagram 5 – Edge of Town Centre Areas 
 166Planning for Sustainable E dge of Town Centre Areas  
13.42 Immediately surrounding the Town Centre are a number of a reas suitable for a 
range of uses which could enhance the variety of facilities and  support the 
vitality and viability of the Town Centre. The edge of centre l ocations, as 
identified on Diagram 5, are we ll integrated and relate well to  the Town Centre 
providing complementing retail, business and other services. Th e edge of 
centre areas commonly incorpor ate a higher proportion of reside ntial uses 
compared to the Town Centre.   
 13.43 Within this Local Plan and identified on the Policies Map  are eight designated 
edge of centre locations, each e dge of centre provides a differ ent type and 
amount of retail, leisure and other services and each edge of c entre has an 
important role to play in adding to the overall offer of the To wn Centre and 
wider central area. 
 13.44 The Borough Council consider s these shops and services vi tal for maintaining 
employment and for providing s hops and services close to where people live. 
The Council seeks to ensure these shops and services remain.  
 13.45 The Borough Council rec ognises that each edge of centre l ocation has a 
different character, offer and generally serves a different pur pose. Different 
types of businesses are located within different areas. The Bor ough Council 
seeks to capture the unique char acter and purpose of each area and over time 
the Borough Council would like to see certain uses within certa in areas 
phased out. Although the Borough Council cannot force businesse s to 
relocate, the Borough Council can restrict what new uses can go  into an area 
and encourage other uses to re-lo cate. Similarly as the Borough  Council seeks 
to ensure the retail and commerc ial space within the area is sa feguarded for 
future growth then residential development will not be supporte d in some 
locations and in other locations it may only be supported on up per floors. Each 
policy sets out the preferred us es for the area. Other uses may  be acceptable 
but in the first instance the Borough Council will work pro-act ively to 
encourage the specified us es within each area. 
 13.46 There is a need to improve the physical links between the  Town Centre and 
the edge of centre locations. Residents and visitors should hav e the option to 
move between the Town Centre to  the edge of centre locations an d vice versa 
by a means of pleasant walking/ cycling routes. At present many of the 
walking/cycling routes are uninv iting and the car dominates par ticularly along 
Raby Road, Victoria Road, York Road and the A689 (Stockton Road ). The 
Council will seek to ensure that development contributes to the  improving 
connectivity both within the edge of centre locations and the T own Centre.  
 
Avenue Road/Raby Road Ed ge of Town Centre Area 
13.47 The Avenue Road/Raby Road area is located to the north ea st of the Town 
Centre within walking distance t o key Town Centre uses such as 
supermarkets, the Civic Centre and the services and units along
 York Road. 
 13.48 The area has a mix of uses , from retail to restaurants, a long with being a key 
location for non-residential institutions, such as The Masonic Hall and a variety 
of welfare centres. To the north  of the area is the vacant Odeo n cinema, a  167grade II listed building that has  been vacant for some time. Th e area is 
significantly bounded by resident ial properties to the north an d west.  
 13.49 The Borough Council seeks to ensure this edge of centre l ocation provides a 
complimentary offer to the Town Centre, with particular uses re lating to health 
and wellbeing being encouraged here.  
 13.50 The former Odeon site on Raby Road is a prominent landmar k at a gateway 
location heading towards the Town  Centre. The grade II Listed f our storey 
building closed as a cinema in 1981 and, despite a number of su bsequent 
uses including a snooker hall and a night club use in the 1990s , since 1999 
the building has stood vacant and its physical fabric has deter iorated 
dramatically. Whilst the Borough Council can continue to take a ppropriate 
action to ensure the maintenance  and protection of the Listed B uilding in the 
short-term it is important that  a long-term solution is found f or the site. The 
conversion of the building should be investigated via a full fe asibility exercise 
that considers all realistic us es for the building, in close co nsultation with 
Historic England and the Borough Council’s Conservation Team. I f it is not 
feasible or viable to do so th en demolition may be considered. The building 
and/or land could accommodate a num ber of uses all set out with in the policy 
below. 
13.51 In order to protect the am enity of the occupiers of the r esidential areas to the 
north and west, applications for drinking establishments (A4 us e class) and hot 
food takeaways (A5 use cl ass) will not be permitted.  
 
13.52 The general connectivity of the area is good, with street s linking the area to 
the Town Centre and Mill House area. The environmental quality and overall 
appearance of the buildings could be improved. The area is domi nated by 
buildings and car parking. Additional landscaping and improveme nts to the 
fabric and signage of buildings w ould assist in uplifting the a rea. 
 
RC4: Avenue Road/Raby Road Edge of Town Centre Area 
The Borough Council will seek to diversify, support and protect  Avenue 
Road/Raby Road Edge of Town Centre. 
 
In accordance with policy RC1, after the Town Centre, the Edge of Town 
Centre areas and Retail and Leisur e Parks are the next sequenti ally preferable 
locations for main town centre uses. The following uses are app ropriate 
within Avenue Road/Raby Roa d Edge of Town Centre: 
 Shops (A1)  
 Financial and Professional Services (A2)  
 Food and Drink (A3)  
 Business (B1)  
 Hotels (C1)  
 Non-residential institutions (D1)  
 Assembly and Leisure (D2)  
 Residential (C2, C2a, C3 and C4) 
 
Applications for drinking estab lishments (A4 use class) and hot  food  168takeaways (A5 use class) w ill not be permitted. 
 
The above uses, and other uses, will only be permitted providin g that they do 
not adversely affect the character, appearance, function and am enity of the 
property and the surrounding area and the Green Infrastructure and Planning 
Obligations SPD.  
 
The Borough Council will have regard to the length of time that  a vacant unit 
has been empty, along with considering the attempt to market an d bring a 
vacant unit back into use when considering other uses. 
 
Businesses will not be permitted to operate between the hours o f 11.30pm 
and 7am. 
 
In accordance with the Green Infrastructure and Planning Obliga tions SPDs, 
all development should facilitate, where appropriate, improveme nts to:  
a) The overall environment and its visual amenity. 
b) Improvements to the appearance of the buildings, including 
improving signage. 
c) Areas of public realm particularly in association with any 
development of the Former Odeon site.  
 
The design of all units is key to improving the appearance and safety of the 
area. Proposals that involve alterations to commercial fronts s hould be 
designed in accordance with the Shop Fronts SPD.  
 
The Brewery and Stranton Edge of Town Centre Area 
13.53 The Brewery and St ranton Edge of Town Centre area is loca ted to the south of 
the Town Centre. The area is b ounded to the east by the A689, t o the south 
by Burn Road and to the west by residential properties. The are a is 
predominately designated as Str anton Conservation Area and incl udes uses 
such as the Cameron’s Brewery and associated offices, retail wa rehousing 
and a selection of small to medium size shops and services in V icarage 
Gardens. The area is located on a key route into the Town Centr e. The area is 
not predominately surrounded by  residential properties. 
 
13.54 The Borough Council seeks to ensure this edge of centre r emains healthy and 
provides a location which is c omplimentary to the Town Centre. The area does 
host a variety of uses and the Borough Council would seek to en sure that this 
variety remains. The area around Vicarage Gardens is particular ly attractive 
and could host a number of cafes that could have on street seat ing and assist 
in creating a cafe culture in th is attractive area to the south  of the Town 
Centre.  
 13.55 The continued use of drinki ng establishments (A4 use clas s) will be supported 
in this area, as the area has an established social hub and som e limited 
additional A4 uses could add to the offer in the area. Further applications for 
drinking establishments will be supported providing they do not  a l t e r  t h e  
character of the area as a whol e and/or have a detrimental impa ct upon the 
amenity of surrounding land uses. There are currently no A5 use s within the 
area and in order to protect the amenity of the occupiers of th e residential 
areas to the north and east and to  prevent the exacerbation of the health  169inequalities applications for hot  food takeaways (A5 use class)  will not be 
permitted.  
 13.56 Connectivity to the Town Centre is good with key routes b eing the A689 and 
Waldon Street. However, the attr activeness of the routes could be improved 
as they are dominated by vehicular traffic and hard standing. T he site is also 
within close proximity to Burn Valley green wedge and attempts to improve the 
connectivity between this edge of centre location and the Burn Valley will be 
encouraged. Due to the location of the centre on a key transpor t route, along 
with the conservation area designat ion and the presence of the grade II* listed 
church, the design of buildings or alterations to buildings sho uld be of a high 
quality design and assist in formi ng an attractive entrance to the Town Centre. 
Any signage within the area s hould be sympathetic to the key ro ute and the 
conservation area designation an d signage that would detract fr om the area’s 
visual quality may be refused.  
 
RC5: The Brewery and Stranton Edge of Town Centre Area 
The Borough Council will seek to diversify, support and protect  Brewery and 
Stranton Edge of Town Centre. 
 
After the Town Centre, the Edge of Town Centre Areas and Retail  and Leisure 
Parks are the next sequentially preferable locations for main t own centre 
uses. The following uses are appr opriate within the Brewery and  Stranton 
Edge of Town Centre: 
 Shops (A1)  
 Financial and Professional Services (A2)  
 Food and drink (A3)  
 Drinking Establishments (A4) 
 Business (B1)  
 Hotels (C1)  
 Non-residential institutions (D1)  
 Assembly and Leisure (D2)  
 Residential (C3) 
 
The above uses, and other uses, will only be permitted providin g that they do 
not adversely affect the character, appearance, function and am enity of the 
property and the surrounding area and the Green Infrastructure and Planning 
Obligations SPD.  
 
Applications for hot food takeaw ays (A5 use class) will not be permitted. 
 
The Borough Council will have regard to the length of time that  a vacant unit 
has been empty along with considering the attempt to market and  bring a 
vacant unit back into use when considering other uses. 
 
Businesses will not be permitted to operate between the hours o f 11.30pm 
and 7am. 
 
In accordance with the Green Infrastructure and Planning Obliga tions SPDs, 
all development should facilitate, where appropriate, improveme nts to:  
a) Connectivity to the Town Centre through environmental  170improvement works and improved p edestrian and cycle provision; 
b) Connectivity to the Burn Valley Green Wedge through 
environmental improvement works and improved pedestrian and 
cycle provision; 
c) Cycling facilities; 
d) The overall environment and appearance of the area including  
areas of public realm, respecting the conservation area designa tion. 
e) The design of focal buildings along with the signage, partic ularly 
along the A689.  
 
The design of all units is key to improving the appearance and safety of the 
area. Proposals that involve alterations to commercial fronts s hould be 
designed in accordance with the Shop Fronts SPD. 
 
‘More Vulnerable’ (See National Planning Practice Guidance floo d risk 
vulnerability classification) devel opment will not be allowed w ithin Flood 
Zone 2 and 3a unless supported by a Flood Risk Assessment that 
demonstrates that flood risk can be effectively managed through out the 
lifetime of the development. 
 
East of Stranton Edge of Town Centre Area 
13.57 East of Stranton Edge of Town Centre is located to the so uth of the Town 
Centre bounded by Clark Street and residential properties to th e east, Burbank 
Street and industrial businesses to the south, the A689 to the west, public 
open space and Hucklehoven Way to the north. The edge of centre  area i s 
adjacent to the Stranton Conser vation Area, albeit separated by  the A689. The 
area has the potential to provide a transition zone from the In novation and 
Skills Quarter towards the employment location to the south. Th e area is not 
predominately surrounded by resi dential properties although a s ignificant 
number are located to the east of the area. 
  13.58 The predominant uses in this area are the fire station an d Royal Mail sorting 
office along with a parcel of vacant land to the south. 
 13.59 The Borough Council seeks to ensure that the fire station  and Royal Mail 
sorting office remain active. Should these uses cease then the most 
appropriate uses for this area w ould be those that have the pot ential to 
generate high employment. Office  development could possibly ser ve the 
industrial uses to the south, educational establishments could compliment the 
education and skills hub to the north of the area. To ensure tr affic flows and 
safety along the A689 is not negatively impacted upon then acce ss to these 
locations must be from Clark Street and Burbank Street and not from the 
A689. 
 13.60 The Borough Council expec t the parcel of vacant land is b rought into use, 
either by virtue of the unimple mented permission or by the impl ementation of a 
new permission, possibly relating to the above mentioned uses. Other uses as 
detailed in the policy below may be acceptable, however the asp iration for the 
area is to provide a key employment location and B1 office uses  along with 
educational establishments would assist in achieving this shoul d the existing 
uses ever cease. 
  17113.61 Due to the location of industrial units to the south and the heavily trafficked 
A689 to the west the Borough Council does not deem this area ap propriate for 
tourist related businesses such as hotels, museums and art gall eries. Such 
uses that attract high numbers of  visitors should be located wi thin areas where 
the surrounding land uses are un likely to have a detrimental im pact upon the 
experience of the visit. The Borough Council seeks to ensure vi sitors benefit 
from the array of attractions that Hartlepool has to offer and do not take away 
negative impression relating to noise from traffic and/or indus try. 
 13.62 The East of Stranton  Edge of Town Centre is not significantly bounded by 
residential properties; however t here is a large residential ar ea to the east 
which could be significantly imp acted upon if drinking establis hments and hot 
food takeaways were located withi n this edge of centre location . Applications 
for drinking establishments (A4 use class) and hot food takeawa ys (A5 use 
class) will not be permitted. 
 
13.63 There is no public open space within the Edge of Centre; the route to and from 
the Town Centre along the A689  is dominated by cars and hardsta nding. The 
Borough Council would seek to ens ure that all development along  this key 
route is of high design and that the route is improved over tim e either through 
environmental improvement works or  by improving the appearance of the fire 
station and Royal Mail sorting office. Development will be expe cted to be of 
high quality design and provide environmental enhancements to a ssist in 
improving the green infrastructu re network across the Borough a s a whole. 
 
RC6: East of Stranton Edge of Town Centre Area 
The Borough Council will seek to diversify, support and protect  East of 
Stranton Edge of Town Centre.  
 
In accordance with policy RC1, after the Town Centre, the Edge of Town 
Centre areas and the Retail and Leisure Parks are the next sequ entially 
preferable locations for main town centre uses. The following u ses are 
appropriate within East of St ranton Edge of Town Centre: 
 Business (B1)  
 Non-residential institutions (D1)  
 
The above uses, and other uses, will only be permitted providin g that they do 
not adversely affect the charact er, appearance, function and am enity of the, 
property and the surrounding area and that they are in accordan ce with the 
Green Infrastructure and Planning Obligations SPD.  
 
Applications for drinking estab lishments (A4 use class) and hot  food 
takeaways (A5 use class) w ill not be permitted. 
 
The Borough Council will have regard to the length of time that  a vacant unit 
has been empty along with considering the attempt to market and  bring a 
vacant unit back into use when considering other uses. 
 
Businesses will not be permitted to operate between the hours o f 11.30pm 
and 7am. 
  172Vehicular egress from the area will not be permitted onto the A 689. 
 
In accordance with the Green Infrastructure and Planning Obliga tions SPDs, 
all development should facilitate, where appropriate, improveme nts to:  
a) Connectivity to the Town Centre by improving crossing points  and 
the overall environment and app earance particularly along the A 689.  
b) Cycling facilities. 
 
The design of all units is key to improving the appearance and safety of the 
area, Proposals that involve alterations to commercial fronts s hould be 
designed in accordance with the Shop Fronts SPD. 
 
Lynn Street Edge of Town Centre Area 
13.64 The Lynn Street Edge of Tow n Centre is located to the sou th east of the Town 
Centre. The area is bounded by the railway to the east; residen tial properties 
to the south and the Town Cent re to the west and north.   
 13.65 The predominant uses within the area are office uses, car  repair, car wash, 
workshops and warehouses. The area typically serves as an emplo yment and 
service location not a retail location. 
 13.66 Church Street Conservation Ar ea is located to the immedia te north east of the 
area and to ensure that the conser vation area is preserved and where 
possible enhanced, development must take into account the chara cter of the 
adjoining conservation area and nearby listed buildings.  
 13.67 The Borough Council seeks to ensure this Edge of Centre l ocation thrives and 
continues to provide a range of uses such as vehicle repair and  warehousing 
towards the south and eastern boundary, typically an area that hosts uses that 
are not compatible with the Town  Centre yet should be located i n sustainable 
locations. The Borough Council seeks to ensure that the new col lege and 
student accommodation is deliver ed to the north of the area 
 13.68 Due to the mix of uses, inc luding uses that are not typic ally visually attractive, 
the Borough Council would not seek  to allow this area to develo p as a tourist 
destination and therefore would not seek to encourage tourist t ype activity 
such as hotels, museums art galleries etc. within this area. Th e Borough 
Council recognises that visitor  accommodation may be necessary as the 
educational offer in the area improves however the Borough Coun cil seeks to 
encourage the provision of hot els within the Town Centre. 
 13.69 The Lynn Street Edge of Town Centre is located within the  Innovation and 
Skills Quarter and it is consider ed that drinking establishment s and hot food 
takeaways are not aligned with the ISQ strategy and should be r estricted 
within this area.  
 13.70 The connectivity of the ar ea to the Town Centre is good g iven the key routes 
along Lynn Street and Surtees Stree t. However the visual amenit y of these 
key routes could be enhanced. Giv en the areas proximity to the late night uses 
area and the desire to enhance the student accommodation and ed ucational 
offer in and around the area, improvements to the overall safet y and security  173should be ensured. Development will be expected to consider saf ety and 
security along with environmental  enhancements as a priority. 
 
 
RC7: Lynn Street Edge of Town Centre Area 
The Borough Council will seek to diversify, support and protect  Lynn Street 
Edge of Town Centre.  
 
In accordance with policy RC1, after the Town Centre, the Edge of Town 
Centre areas and the Retail and Leisure Parks are the next sequ entially 
preferable locations for main town centre uses. The following u ses are 
appropriate within Lynn Street Edge of Town Centre: 
 Food and drink (A3)  
 Businesses (B1)  
 Non-residential institutions (D1)  
 Assembly and Leisure (D2)  
 Residential (C2 and C3) 
 
The above uses, and other uses, will only be permitted providin g that they do 
not adversely affect the charact er, appearance, function and am enity of the, 
property and the surrounding area and the Green Infrastructure and Planning 
Obligations SPD.  
  
Applications for hot food takeaw ays (A5 use class) will not be permitted. 
 
Businesses will not be permitted to operate between the hours o f 11.30pm 
and 7am. 
 
The Borough Council will have regard to the length of time that  a vacant unit 
has been empty along with considering the attempt to market and  bring a 
vacant unit back into use when considering other uses. 
 
In accordance with the Green Infrastructure and Planning Obliga tions SPDs, 
all development should facilitate, where appropriate, improveme nts to:  
a) Connectivity to the Town Centre and Retail and Leisure Parks  to 
the north of the railway through improved pedestrian and cycle 
provision; 
b) Cycling facilities; 
c) The overall environment, appearance and security of the area . 
 
The design of all units is key to improving the appearance and safety of the 
area. Proposals that involve alterations to commercial fronts s hould be 
designed in accordance with the Shop Fronts SPD. 
 
‘More Vulnerable’ (See National Planning Practice Guidance floo d risk 
vulnerability classification) devel opment will not be allowed w ithin Flood 
Zone 2 and 3a unless supported by a Flood Risk Assessment that 
demonstrates that flood risk can be effectively managed through out the 
lifetime of the development. 
 
  174Mill House  Edge of Town Centre Area 
13.71 The Mill House Edge of Town Centre is located to the Nort h of the Town 
Centre, within walking distance of key services such as a super market, the 
Civic Centre and Middleton Grange Shopping Centre. The area is bounded by 
residential properties to the nor th and west, the Town Centre t o the south and 
the railway line to the east. 
 
13.72 The predominant uses within the area relate to leisure ac tivities such as the 
Mill House Leisure Centre and Hartlepool Indoor Bowls Club. The  leisure 
centre and bowls club are reachi ng the end of their physical li ves and the 
Borough Council is considering op tions for future provision of these or similar 
facilities either on the existing site or within the Town Centr e. The Borough 
Council seeks to ensure that this area remains a focus for leis ure activities 
however should the leisure facili ties re-locate then the Counci l would work with 
the house building industry and enc ourage the land to be used f or housing 
development. 
 13.73 Due to the proximity of a s ignificant number of residenti al properties 
surrounding the area and in order t o protect the amenity of the  occupiers of 
the residential prope rties applications for drinking establishm e n t s  ( A 4  u s e  
class) and hot food takeaways (A 5 use class) will not be permit ted. 
 13.74 Connectivity to the Town Centre is good along Raby Road a nd Clarence 
Road. There are some areas of landscaping along Raby Road which  create a 
more pleasant environment yet C larence Road is dominated by a w ide road, 
wide paths and bleak railway barriers with no landscaping. The key routes 
could be enhanced to assist in im proving the enjoyment of navig ating between 
the Town Centre and t he Mill House area.  
 
RC8: Mill House  Edge of Town Centre Area 
The Council will seek to diversify, support and protect Mill Ho use Edge of 
Town Centre. 
 
In accordance with policy RC1, after the Town Centre, the Edge of Town 
Centre Areas and the Retail and Leisure Parks are the next sequ entially 
preferable locations for main town centre uses. The following u ses are 
appropriate within Mill Hou se Edge of Town Centre: 
 Non-residential institutions (D1)  
 Assembly and Leisure (D2)  
 Residential (C2 and C3) 
 
The above uses, and other uses, will only be permitted providin g that they do 
not adversely affect the character, appearance, function and am enity of the 
property and the surrounding area and that they are in accordan ce with the 
Green Infrastructure and Planning Obligations SPD.  
 
Applications for drinking estab lishments (A4 use class) and hot  food 
takeaways (A5 use class) w ill not be permitted. 
 
The Borough Council will have regard to the length of time that  a vacant unit 
has been empty, along with considering the attempt to market an d bring a  175vacant unit back into use when considering other uses. 
 
Businesses will not be permitted to operate between the hours o f 11.30pm 
and 7am. 
 
In accordance with the Green Infrastructure and Planning Obliga tions SPDs, 
all development should facilitate, where appropriate, improveme nts to:  
a) Connectivity to the Town Centre through environmental 
enhancement works and improved p edestrian and cycle provision; 
b) Cycling facilities; 
c) The overall environment and appearance of the area and the 
addition of public art linked to sporting activity. 
 
The design of all units is key to improving the appearance and safety of the 
area. Proposals that involve alterations to commercial fronts s hould be 
designed in accordance with the Shop Fronts SPD. 
 
Park Road West Edge of Town Centre Area 
13.75 Park Road West Edge of Town Centre area is located to the  south west of the 
Town Centre, bounded by residential properties to the north, so uth and west. 
The predominant uses within the area are retail and non-residen tial institutions 
such as support groups and dance studios. Other common uses inc lude 
vehicle repair and servicing facilities, typically located to t he north of the area. 
The retail and non-residential inst itutions units within this a rea are welcomed 
and the Borough Council seeks to ensure such provision remains and 
increases. The Borough Council does not deem vehicle repair and  servicing 
uses to be appropriate within an area surrounded by a high numb er of 
residential properties. The Borou gh Council would like to see a  shift away from 
these types of uses within the area.  
 13.76 Due to the proximity of a s ignificant number of residenti al properties 
surrounding the area and in order t o protect the amenity of the  occupiers of 
the residential properties, applic ations for drinking establish ments (A4 use 
class) and hot food takeaways (A 5 use class) will not be permit ted.  
 
13.77 Park Road has direct access onto York Road and the Primar y Shopping Area. 
Although access to the Town Cen tre is good, the general appeara nce of the 
area could be improved. There is no green infrastructure in thi s part of Park 
Road and car parking areas to t he north of Park Road visually d ominate the 
area. On street parking is provi ded to the south of Park Road w ith double 
yellow lines restricting parki ng along the north of the road, a t times the parking 
restrictions are ignored and t hus traffic congestion can occur.   
 
RC9: Park Road West Edge of Town Centre Area 
The Borough Council will seek to diversify, support and protect  Park Road 
West Edge of Town Centre. 
 
In accordance with policy RC1, after the Town Centre, the Edge of Town 
Centre Areas and the Retail and Leisure Parks are the next sequ entially 
preferable locations for main town centre uses. The following u ses are 
appropriate within Park Road West Edge of Town Centre:  176 Shops (A1)  
 Financial and Professional Services (A2)  
 Food and Drink (A3)  
 Offices (B1)  
 Hotels (C1)  
 Assembly and Leisure (D2)  
 Residential (C2, C2a, C3 and C4) 
 
The above uses, and other uses, will only be permitted providin g that they do 
not adversely affect the character, appearance, function and am enity of the
property and the surrounding area and that they are in accordan ce with the 
Green Infrastructure and Planning Obligations SPD.  
 
Vehicle repair and servicing bus inesses (Sui Generis) will not be supported 
within this area. 
 
Applications for drinking estab lishments (A4 use class) and hot  food 
takeaways (A5 use class) w ill not be permitted. 
 
Businesses will not be permitted to operate between the hours o f 11.30pm 
and 7am. 
 
The Borough Council will have regard to the length of time that  a vacant unit 
has been empty, along with considering the attempt to market an d bring a 
vacant unit back into use when considering other uses. 
 
In accordance with the Green Infrastructure and Planning Obliga tions SPDs, 
all development should facilitate, where appropriate, improveme nts to:  
a) The overall environment a nd appearance of the area; 
b) Car parking provision and/or p arking management solutions. 
 
The design of all units is key to improving the appearance and safety of the 
area. Proposals that involve alterations to commercial fronts s hould be 
designed in accordance with the Shop Fronts SPD. 
 West Victoria Road Edge of Town Centre Area 
13.78 West Victoria Road Edge of T own Centre is located to the west of the Town 
Centre bounded by residential pr operties to the north, south an d west. The 
properties to the North of Victoria Road are located within Gra nge 
Conservation Area. 
 13.79 The predominant u ses within the area are financial and pr ofessional services 
along with a medical centre, the majority of which are served b y in-curtilage 
car parking. 
 13.80 The Borough Council will encourage professional services and medical 
facilities to thrive and expand within this area. The operation  of such services 
is complimented by the in-curtilage parking. 
 13.81 Due to the proximity of a s ignificant number of residenti al properties 
surrounding the area and in order t o protect the amenity of the  occupiers of  177the residential properties, applic ations for drinking establish ments (A4 use 
class) and hot food takeaways (A 5 use class) will not be permit ted.  
 13.82 The connectivity to the T own Centre is good with a direct  link along Victoria 
Road, giving direct access to t he Primary Shopping Area. Victor ia Road is a 
heavily trafficked road with wide pavements and parking bays wi thin the 
curtilages to the north of Victor ia Road. The area is dominated  by hard 
standing (paths and parking) and t herefore improvements could b e made to 
the general visual amenity of the area. 
  
RC10: West Victoria Road E dge of Town Centre Area 
The Borough Council will seek to diversify, support and protect  West Victoria 
Road Edge of Town Centre. 
 
After the Town Centre, the Edge of Town Centre Areas and the Retail and 
Leisure Parks are the next sequentially preferable locations fo r main town 
centre uses. The following uses are appropriate within West Vic toria Road 
Edge of Town Centre: 
 Financial and Professional Services (A2)  
 Offices (B1)  
 Non-residential institutions (D1) 
 Residential (C2 C2a, C3 and C4) 
 
The above uses, and other uses, will only be permitted providin g that they do 
not adversely affect the charact er, appearance, function and am enity of the, 
property and the surrounding area and that they are in accordan ce with the 
Green Infrastructure and Planning Obligations SPD.  
 
Applications for drinking estab lishments (A4 use class) and hot  food 
takeaways (A5 use class) w ill not be permitted. 
 
The Borough Council will have regard to the length of time that  a vacant unit 
has been empty, along with considering the attempt to market an d bring a 
vacant unit back into use when considering other uses. 
 
Businesses will not be permitted to operate between the hours o f 11.30pm 
and 7am. 
 
In accordance with the Green Infrastructure and Planning Obliga tions SPDs, 
all development should facilitate, where appropriate, improveme nts to:  
a) The overall environment and appearance of the area. 
 
The design of all units is key to improving the appearance and safety of the 
area, Proposals that involve alterations to commercial fronts s hould be 
designed in accordance with the Shop Fronts SPD. 
 
     178York Road South Edge of Town Centre Area 
13.83 York Road South Edge of Town Centre is located to the sou th of the Town 
Centre bounded by residential pr operties to the west, south and  east and 
within close proximity  to Burn Valley Gardens. 
 13.84 The predominant uses within the area are shops, financial  services and hot 
food takeaways with a limited number of non-residential institu tions and 
vehicular repair and servicing facilities. The Borough Council seeks to ensure 
that the provision of shops and f inancial services along with t h e  o t h e r  u s e s  
such as non-residential institut ions remain high in this area. However the use 
of vehicular repair and servicin g is not deemed to be an approp riate use within 
an area so close to the Town Centre and in an area predominatel y surrounded 
by residential properties. Theref ore the Borough Council will s eek to restrict 
these types of Sui Generis uses.   
 
13.85 The former Health Authority outpatients’ clinic was locat ed on the corner of 
Elwick Road and Caroline Street. The clinic was demolished in 2 011 and the 
land has remained vacant since. T he Borough Council will seek t o ensure that 
this land is redeveloped and adds to the overall offer and comp liments the 
Town Centre as a whole. 
 13.86 Due to the proximity of a s ignificant number of residenti al properties 
surrounding the area and in order t o protect the amenity of the  occupiers of 
the residential properties, applic ations for drinking establish ments (A4 use 
class) and hot food takeaways (A 5 use class) will not be permit ted.  
 13.87 This edge of centre locati on spans either side of York Ro ad and has good 
access to the Town Centre and t he primary shopping area. There is some 
limited vegetation close to Burn Valley roundabout along with s ome street 
trees. Improvements in the provision of green infrastructure le ading up York 
Road to the town centre will be encouraged. There is some limit ed uncovered, 
yet naturally overlooked, cycle parking to the south of the are a. This provision 
is welcomed.  
 
RC11: York Road South Edge of Town Centre Area 
The Borough Council will seek to diversify, support and protect  York Road 
South Edge of Town Centre  
 
After the Town Centre, the Edge of Town Centre areas and the Re tail and 
Leisure Parks are the next sequentially preferable locations fo r main town 
centre uses. The following uses are appropriate within York Roa d South Edge 
of Town Centre. 
 Shops (A1)  
 Financial and Professional Services (A2)  
 Food and Drink (A3)  
 Offices (B1)  
 Hotels (C1)  
 Assembly and Leisure (D2)  
 Residential (C2 C2a, C3 and C4) 
 
The above uses, and other uses, will only be permitted providin g that they do  179not adversely affect the character, appearance, function and am enity of the 
property and the surrounding area and that they are in accordan ce with the 
Green Infrastructure and Planning Obligations SPD.  
 
Applications for drinking estab lishments (A4 use class) and hot  food 
takeaways (A5 use class) w ill not be permitted. 
 
The Borough Council will have regard to the length of time that  a vacant unit 
has been empty, along with considering the attempt to market an d bring a 
vacant unit back into use when considering other uses. 
 
Businesses will not be permitted to operate between the hours o f 11.30pm 
and 7am. 
 
In accordance with the Green Infrastructure and Planning Obliga tions SPDs, 
all development should facilitate, where appropriate, improveme nts to:  
a) The overall environment and appearance of the area. 
 
The design of all units is key to improving the appearance and safety of the 
area. Proposals that involve alterations to commercial fronts s hould be 
designed in accordance with the Shop Fronts SPD. 
 
‘More Vulnerable’ (See National Planning Practice Guidance floo d risk 
vulnerability classification) devel opment will not be allowed w ithin Flood 
Zone 2 and 3a unless supported by a Flood Risk Assessment that 
demonstrates that flood risk can be effectively managed through out the 
lifetime of the development. 
 Planning for Sustainable Re tail and Leisure Parks  
13.88 Within Hartlepool there are four retail a nd leisure parks , three of the parks are 
located to the north of the Town Centre (The Marina, West of Ma rina Way and 
Trincomalee Wharf) and the fourth , Tees Bay Retail and Leisure Park, is 
located approximatel y two miles to the s outh of the Town Centre . 
 13.89 The Borough Council recogni ses the important role that th e Parks play in 
providing retail and leisure oppor tunities. The Borough Council  seeks to 
ensure that the Parks thrive and improve the retail and leisure  offer in 
Hartlepool for residents and assist in making Hartlepool a popu lar visitor 
destination. 
 
The Marina Retail and Leisure Park 
13.90 Hartlepool Marina is located to the north east of the Tow n Centre and 
incorporates, Navigation Point which is the focus for leisure a ctivity and the 
Vision Retail Park which is the focus of retail activity. The M arina hosts a wide 
range of uses primarily includi ng housing, offices, retail alon g with leisure and 
tourism which includes the National Museum of The Royal Navy an d HMS 
Trincomalee (the oldest Navy warship in the UK which is still a float) and the 
Museum of Hartlepool. 
 13.91 The Marina boundary has bee n amended since the 2006 Local  P l a n ,  t o  
remove Anchor Retail Park. Anchor Retail Park is dissected by M arina Way 
and is deemed to have a different purpose to that of the area s urrounding the  180water (The Marina area) and the An chor Retail Park area would b e better 
identified as its own retail ar ea rather than as part of the Ma rina.  
 13.92 The Marina allocation in t his Local Plan includes the wat er within the Marina. 
The water and waterfront are important features which the Borou gh Council 
seeks to ensure remain attractive features. The Borough Council  wish to see 
the water enhanced with the provis ion of water based activities , connectivity 
infrastructure such as water taxis and the waterfront visually improved. 
Allowing built development on and/ or over the water could hampe r the 
opportunities to develop water based activities and the Borough  Council will 
seek to strictly control any dev elopment on/over the water. All owing poor 
design and poor connectivity along the waterfront could hamper the 
experience of visitors therefore any development should form a strong 
relationship between building/s and water’s edge. The Estuary E dges: 
Ecological Design Guidance whic h has been developed by the Envi ronment 
Agency will be relevant fo r some types of development. 
 13.93 The Marina will continue to be developed for a mixture of  uses which will 
enhance its value as a major attra ction for both residents and visitors. Given 
that there is unlikely to be any  need for additional convenienc e floorspace over 
the plan period then the Borou gh Council seeks to focus A1 food  retailing 
within the Town Centre and on sites which currently benefit fro m unrestricted 
A1 use and could operate as food retail.  The Borough Council w ill not support 
the addition of food retailing within Tees Bay and will conditi on future A1 
application to non-food retail only.  
 13.94 The redevelopment of the longstanding vacant Jackson’s La nding is a priority 
because of its prominent location and its potential to stimulat e further 
investment within The Marina area.  
 13.95 The Marina area forms part of the evening economy, visito rs frequent the 
numerous eating and drinking establishments. Often accompanying  drinking 
establishments are hot food tak eaways. The Borough Council reco gnises the 
need to provide a comprehensive evening economy offer whilst pr otecting the 
overall vitality and viability of the Marina, the health of res idents and residential 
amenity. All applications for dri nking establishments will be c onsidered on a 
case by case basis and applications for hot food takeaways will  be assessed 
in accordance with policy RC18. 
 13.96 There is a need to improve  the links between the Marina a nd the Town Centre. 
At present the walking/cycling routes are uninviting and the ca r dominates and 
there are no cycle parking faci lities within the area. The Boro ugh Council will 
seek to ensure that developmen t contributes to the improving co nnectivity both 
within the Marina and  to adjacent areas. 
 13.97 Much of the Marina area is dominated by car parking, part icularly to the front 
of Navigation point. Although ca r parking provision is essentia l, the Borough 
Council considers that the overa ll visual appearance of the lar ge car parking 
areas could be improved through t he provision of landscaping. I
t may be 
appropriate to reduce the number o f bays to ensure that maintai nable areas of 
landscape can be inserted into the area where it is considered that this will not 
impact on the viability o f local businesses.  181 
13.98 Refuse bins are located throughout the area, these bins c an, at times be 
unsightly. Therefore the Borough  Council seeks to ensure that d evelopment 
seeks to improve the overall appearance of the area. This may i nclude 
facilitating the provision of screened bin storage areas.  
 13.99 The Middleton Road entrance to Navigation Point is not in viting or appealing. 
The Borough Council will seek to ensure that development contri butes to a 
scheme to improve the overall appearance of the entrance possib ly through 
improvements through public  art or landscaping. 
 13.100 Advertising within the Marina plays a vital role in info rming visitors what is on 
offer within the area and assist s in capturing visitors for lon ger stays and 
increasing the spend whilst in t he area. Currently the advertin g within the 
Marina is limited and outdated. T he Borough Council will encour age and 
support applications that seek to improve the overall signage q uality across 
the area, particularly signs that  are reflective of the area’s history and/or 
function and that promote the ar ea’s internationally important birds. Poor 
quality signage will be resisted due to the detrimental impact it has on the 
visual amenity of the area.
 
  182Diagram 6 – Retail and Leisure Parks 
 
  
 183 
RC12: The Marina Retail and Leisure Park  
The Borough Council will seek to diversify, support and protect  t h e  M a r i n a  
Retail and Leisure Park.  
 
In accordance with policy RC1, after the Town Centre the Edge o f Centre 
Areas and Retail and Leisure Parks are the next sequentially pr eferable 
locations for main town centre uses. The following uses are app ropriate 
within the Marina Retail and Leisure Park.  
 Non-food Shops (A1)  
 Food and Drink (A3)  
 Drinking Establishments (A4) 
 Offices (B1)  
 Hotels (C1)  
 Non-residential Institutions (D1)  
 Assembly and Leisure (D2)  
 Residential (C2 and C3) 
 
The above uses, and other uses, will only be permitted providin g that they do 
not adversely affect the charact er, appearance, function and am enity of the, 
property and the surrounding area and that they are in accordan ce with the 
Green Infrastructure and Planning Obligations SPD.  
 
The use of the water will be safeguarded for water based activi ty including 
sporting activities and transport infrastructure linked to wate r taxi provision. 
Built development in and/or over the  water will be strictly con trolled. 
 
Any development along the waterfront must be of particularly hi gh design 
and should actively open up the relationship between the water and the 
waters edge. 
 
Businesses will not be permitted to operate between the hours o f 11.30pm 
and 7am. 
 
In accordance with the Planning Obligations and Green Infrastru cture SPDs ,
all development should facilitate, where appropriate, improveme nts to:  
a) Connectivity to the Town Centre and the Retail and Leisure P arks 
through improved pedestrian and cycle links. 
b) Public transport provision, f acilities and cycling facilitie s. 
c) The overall environment a nd appearance of the area. 
d) The Middleton Road a nd Marina entrance. 
e) Areas of public realm.  
 
Where appropriate the Council will seek the provision of interp retation to
increase public understanding of the Teesmouth and Cleveland Co ast SPA 
and Ramsar. 
 
The design of all units and the display of advertising is key t o improving the 
appearance, safety and promotion of the area. Proposals that in volve 
alterations to commercial front s should be designed in accordan ce with the 
Shop Fronts SPD and proposals relating to advertisements must b e in  184accordance with policy QP8. 
 
Car parking areas should be adequately landscaped and screened from the 
Waterfront. Refuse storage areas should in the first instance b e to the rear 
and adequately screened.  
 
Developments that are likely to  have an impact upon existing in frastructure or 
require new infrastructure will be required to provide such inf rastructure in 
accordance with policy QP2 and the Planning Obligations SPD. 
 
‘More Vulnerable’ (See National Planning Practice Guidance floo d risk 
vulnerability classification) devel opment will not be allowed w ithin Flood 
Zone 2 and 3a unless supported by a F lood Risk Assessment that 
demonstrates that flood risk can be effectively managed through out the 
lifetime of the development.  
 West of Marina Way Retail and Leisure Park 
13.101  The West of Marina Way Retail and Leisure Park is locat ed to the north of the 
Town Centre and to the west of The Marina. The area comprises o f three 
distinct areas, High Point Retail  Park to the north, Anchor Ret ail Park in the 
centre and a supermarket and pet rol filling station to the sout h. The 
predominant uses within the area  are retail uses and the Boroug h Council will 
seek to ensure that this remains. The area is dissected from re sidential 
properties by Marina Way and the railway line and therefore in some instances 
businesses may operate here beyond 11.30pm and before 7am. 
 
13.102 Given that there is unlikely to be any need for addition al convenience 
floorspace over the plan period,  then the Borough Council seeks  to focus A1 
food retailing within the Town Centre and on sites which curren tly benefit from 
unrestricted A1 use and could operate as food retail.  The Boro ugh Council will 
not support the addition of food retailing within Tees Bay and will condition 
future A1 application to non-food retail only. 
 
13.103 There are some opportuniti es for dining in the retail an d leisure park within the 
existing Retail and Leisure Par k. The Borough Council will supp ort future 
applications for eating establishments where they are deemed to  be 
complimentary to the retail offer and do not significantly dimi nish the primary 
function of the area as a retail and leisure park. The use of d rinking 
establishments and hot foot tak eaway will not be supported. 
 
13.104 There is a need to improve the links between the West of  Marina Way Retail 
and Leisure Park and the surrounding areas, particularly the To wn Centre. 
Given that the Park is served by three large car parks and that  the walking and 
cycling links from the Town Centre are poor and uninviting it i s often the case 
than many visitors access the ar ea by car. The Borough Council will seek to 
reduce the reliance upon the car and therefore seek to ensure t hat 
development contributes to impr oving the pedestrian and cycling  linkages to 
and from the Park to the surrounding areas. 
 
13.105 Highpoint Retail Park is served by a large free to use c ar park. The area has 
an attractive frontage with Marina Way. However the vehicular e ntrance from 
Marina Way is poor as it is not  clearly identifiable and lacks an entrance  185feature. The Borough Council c onsiders that the area would bene fit from 
signage before the entrance and an attractive entrance feature to allow drivers 
time to slow before entering and ensuring that the entrance to the site is 
welcoming and attractive.  
 
13.106 Anchor Retail Park and the supermarket site are served b y large free to use 
car parks. The car parks have limited landscaping throughout. T he area has a 
landscape buffer along Marina Way. Although the landscaping doe s add to the 
visual amenity of the area the Borough Council will seek to ens ure that 
development improves the level of landscape provision to assist  f u r t h e r  i n  
improving the visual amenity o f the area in a bid to attract mo re visitors. 
 
13.107 The advertisements for High point Retail Park and Anchor Retail Park are key 
to informing passersby and visitors what is on offer within the  area. The signs 
are out dated and the Borough Co uncil will encourage and suppor t 
applications that seek to improv e the overall signage quality a cross the area, 
particularly signs that are refle ctive of the ar eas history and /or function. 
 
RC13: West of Marina Way R etail and Leisure Park 
The Borough Council will seek to  diversify, support and protect  West of 
Marina Way Retail and Leisure Park.  
 
In accordance with policy RC1, after the Town Centre, the Edge of Town 
Centre Areas and the Retail and Leisure Parks are the next sequ entially 
preferable locations for main town centre uses. The following u ses are 
appropriate within West of Mari na Way Retail and Leisure Park.  
 Non-food Shops (A1)  
 Food and Drink (A3) 
 
The above uses, and other uses, will only be permitted providin g that they do 
not adversely affect the character, appearance, function and am enity of the
property and the surrounding area and that they are in accordan ce with the 
Green Infrastructure and Planning Obligations SPD.  
 
Businesses will not be permitted to operate between the hours o f 11.30pm 
and 7am. 
 
In accordance with the Planning Obligations and Green Infrastru cture SPDs 
all development should facilitate, where appropriate, improveme nts to:  
a) Connectivity to the Town Centre and the adjacent Retail and 
Leisure Parks through improved pedestrian and cycle links and 
cycling facilities. 
b) Public transport facilities. 
c) The overall environment a nd appearance of the area. 
d) The entrance way to Highpoint R etail Park from Marina Way. 
 
The design of all units and the display of advertising is key t o improving the 
appearance, safety and promotion of the area. Proposals that in volve 
alterations to commercial front s should be designed in accordan ce with the 
Shop Fronts SPD and proposals relating to advertisements must b e in 
accordance with policy QP8.  186 
Car parking areas should be adequately landscaped and screened from 
public view. Refuse storage areas should in the first instance be to the rear 
and adequately screened.  
 
Where developments are likely to have an impact upon existing i nfrastructure 
or require new infrastructure, the applicant will be required t o provide such 
infrastructure in accordance with policy QP1, the Planning obli gations SPD 
and the Local Infrastructure Plan. 
 
Trincomalee Wharf Retail and Leisure Park  
13.108 The Trincomalee Wharf Reta il and Leisure Park is located  to the north of the 
Town Centre, just beyond the rail way line and to the south of T he Marina 
Retail and Leisure Park. The area hosts a variety of leisure us es, all served by 
free to use car parks, including Vue cinema, Mecca bingo, Pizza  Hut, KFC and 
McDonalds along with a hotel. The eastern half of the area comp rises of a 
large area of waste land with so me residential units located to  the north east 
corner in the grade II listed fo rmer Old Dock Offices and Old C ustoms House. 
 
13.109 The current uses are welcom ed within this area as they i mprove the leisure 
offer within Hartlepool. Notwit hstanding the existing permissio n that has been 
granted and implement ed, in part, across The Marina and Trincom alee Wharf 
area, the Borough Council will s eek to ensure that the vacant l and within the 
area is developed as a mixed use  area that could accommodate us es 
including, residential, offices, leisure uses as well as a reta il including one 
convenience store (A1 food retail). 
 
13.110 Given the proximity to her itage assets on the Marina and  the presence of two 
heritage assets on the site, al ong with the proximity to the Ch urch Street 
Conservation Area to the south, t he Borough Council will seek t o ensure that 
any proposals ensure that the setting and significance of the h eritage assets 
are preserved and wh ere possible enhanced. 
 
13.111 Given that there is unlikely to be any need for addition al convenience 
floorspace over the plan period the Borough Council seeks to fo cus A1 food 
retail within the Town Centre and the existing food retail oper ators that exist or 
retail units that have unrestric ted A1 use and could operate as  food retail. One 
A1 unit would be supported within Trincomalee Wharf providing t hat its 
purpose was to serve the immediat e residential units and staff within the area. 
To ensure the retail unit does not impact upon the town centre a size threshold 
has been set at 199m2. 
 
13.112 Other A1 uses will be s upported in the area providing th ey primarily serve and 
complement the offer in the ar ea and providing that they do not  negatively 
impact upon the Town Centre. The Borough Council will seek to c ondition any 
additional A1 applications  to non-food retail only. 
 
13.113 Given the nature of the ar ea, the Borough Council consid ers that hot food 
takeaways are not appropriate within this location; therefore a pplications for 
hot food takeaways wi ll not be supported.  
  18713.114 The connectivity of the site to the Town Centre is poor for pedestrians and 
cyclists as the key link route ov er the A689/Stockton Road Town  Centre 
railway bridge has no visual quality, is open to the elements a nd is dominated 
by vehicular traffic. The link fr om the south of Church Street is more appealing 
as pedestrians can walk down the wide paths along Church Street  and then 
across the pedestrian element of the level crossing. From the l evel crossing 
the pathway links are less appealing mainly due to the large ex panse of un-
kept vacant land. The properties f ronting Victoria Terrace have  landscaping 
within their curtilage which does  assist in improving the visua l appearance of 
the area. The landscape features along Mari time Avenue and the Lanyard are 
visually appealing and assist i n improving the entrance ways to  this site.  
 
13.115 The Borough Council will seek to ensure that safe and se cure cycle parking is 
provided and that development pro vides an active frontage along  V i c t o r i a  
Terrace and Maritime Avenue and that there is significant lands caping to 
assist in uplifting the environmental quality of the area and c reating more 
enticing links to the neighboring areas. Where properties abut the pathway 
then on street plant ers will be encouraged. 
 
13.116 Large areas of hard standi ng can dominate an area and de tract from the 
buildings and visual amenity of the area therefore the Borough Council will 
seek to ensure that car parking  areas are adequately landscaped  a n d  a r e  
screened from the Waterfront through the careful positioning of  buildings 
and/or landscaping.  
 
13.117 To improve connectivity from the south of the borough to  the Maritime 
Experience and the southern side of the Marina, the Borough Cou ncil will seek 
to ensure that any proposals for the site either provide a new link road from 
the Lanyard to Maritime Avenue al ong with providing a link from  the Lanyard 
to Victoria Terrace and/or do not preclude an access route comi ng forward in 
the future. 
 
13.118 The advertisements for Trin comalee Wharf are linked to t he uses that currently 
exist within the area. The signs a re important as they advertis e what is on offer 
in the area. However the Borough Council will seek to ensure th at any 
additional advertising is well placed and designed and does not  a l o n e  o r  
cumulatively detract from the vi sual amenity or safety of the a rea. 
 
RC14: Trincomalee Wharf Retail and Leisure Park 
The Borough Council will seek to diversify, support and protect  Trincomalee 
Wharf Retail and Leisure Park.  
 
In accordance with policy RC1, after the Town Centre the Edge o f Town Centre 
Areas and the Retail and Leisure Parks are the next sequentiall y preferable 
locations for main town centre uses. The following uses are app ropriate within 
Trincomalee Wharf Retail and Leisure Park.  
 Shops (A1)  
 Food and Drink (A3)  
 Drinking Establishments (A4) 
 Offices (B1)  
 Hotels (C1)   188 Non-residential Institutions (D1)  
 Assembly and leisure (D2)  
 Residential (C2 and C3) 
 
The above uses, and other uses, will only be permitted providin g that they do 
not adversely affect the charact er, appearance, function and am enity of the, 
property and the surrounding area and that they are in accordan ce with the 
Green Infrastructure and Planning Obligations SPD.  
 
Where appropriate the Council will seek the provision of interp retation to 
increase public understanding of t he Teesmouth and Cleveland Co ast SPA and 
Ramsar. 
 
Businesses will not be permitted to operate between the hours o f 11.30pm and 
7am.  
 
In accordance with the Planning Obligations and Green Infrastru cture SPDs, all 
development should facilitate, whe re appropriate, improvements to:  
a)  The link from the south of the borough to the Museum of Mar itime 
experience and the south of The  Marina via an improved link. 
b)  Connectivity to the Town Centre and the Retail and Leisure Parks 
through improved pedestrian and cycle links. 
c)   Cycling facilities. 
d) The overall environment and a ppearance of the area, includin g 
creating an area of usable a nd attractive public realm. 
 
The design of all units and the display of advertising is key t o improving the 
appearance, safety and promotion of the area; proposals that in volve 
alterations to commercial fronts should be designed in accordan ce with the 
Shop Fronts SPD and proposals relating to advertisements must b e in 
accordance with  policy QP8. 
 
Car parking areas should be adequately landscaped and screened from the 
Waterfront. Refuse storage areas should in the first instance b e to the rear and 
adequately screened.  
 
Where development is likely to  have an impact upon existing inf rastructure or 
require new infrastructure, the applicant will be required to p rovide such 
infrastructure in accordance with policy QP1, the Planning Obli gations SPD 
and the Local Infrastructure Plan. 
 
‘More Vulnerable’ (See National Planning Practice Guidance floo d risk 
vulnerability classification) development will not be allowed w ithin Flood Zone 
2 and 3a unless supported by a Flood Risk Assessment that demon strates that 
flood risk can be effectively managed throughout the lifetime o f the 
development. 
 
Tees Bay Retail and Leisure Park 
13.119 The Tees Bay Retail and Lei sure Park is located approxim ately two miles to 
the south of the Town Centre and  approximately one mile from Se aton Carew 
train station. Tees Bay is surrounded by residential properties  to the north and 
north west with industrial sites being located to the west and south and  189recreational land to the east. The key access routes are along the A689 and 
Brenda Road.  
 
13.120 Tees Bay was initially cons tructed in the mid to late 19 80s under the terms of 
the Urban Development Corporat ion and the enterprise zone schem e. The 
uses in Tees Bay are all retai l uses, ranging from food retail to homeware 
along with vehicular maintenanc e and outdoor pursuits retail. 
 
13.121 The offer at Tees Bay is similar to the offer at Portrac k Lane in Stockton on 
Tees. The retail report considers that as the housing market re covers certain 
sectors such as home furnishing and DIY may benefit from increa sing 
demand. The Borough Council seeks to capture this potential inc rease in 
demand and improve the Tees Bay o ffer in a bid to prevent resid ents shopping 
outside the borough.  
 
13.122 Given that there is unlikely to be any need for addition al convenience 
floorspace over the plan period then the Borough Council seeks to focus A1 
food retailing within the Town Centre and on sites which curren tly benefit from 
unrestricted A1 use and could operate as food retail.  The Boro ugh Council will 
not support the addition of food retailing within Tees Bay and will condition 
future A1 application to non-food retail only.  
 
13.123 The function of Tees Bay is to provide retail and leisur e facilities to residents 
and visitors. The Borough Council will seek to retain the floor  space for retail 
and leisure purposes and seek to ens ure that any future uses co mpliment the 
character and function of the area. Office development (B1) alo ng with  D1 
uses including Museums, Art Galle ries, Education and Training C entres are 
not considered complementary uses  to the function of the area a nd therefore 
such use will be directed else where within the Borough such as the Town 
Centre and/or the employment loc ations.  Drinking establishment s (A4) and 
hot food takeaways (A5) are not deemed to be complementary uses  within 
Tees Bay and therefore applicat ions for A4 and A5 uses will not  be supported. 
 
13.124 Vehicular links to Tees Bay are good, including the prov ision of public 
transport operating along Brenda Road. The walking and cycling links from the 
surrounding residential area, Tow n Centre and Seaton Carew trai n station are 
also relatively good with a cycle lane provided and landscaping  along Brenda 
Road towards Seaton Carew train station. The links could howeve r be 
improved to make them more attractive and to provide better cro ssing points 
for pedestrians particularly across the A689 so that residents can access 
Brenda Road and the Tees Bay. Safe and secure cycle parking cou ld also be 
provided to assist in enticing cyclists to the area and reduce the dependence 
on the car. 
 13.125 In 2014 environmental impro vement works were undertaken and the works 
have assisted in improving the vi sual amenity of the area makin g  i t  a  m o r e  
attractive area to visit. However more could still be done, for
 e x a m p l e ,  b y  
providing additional landscaping particularly within the car pa rking area to 
assist in breaking up the dominant tarmac landscape. The entran c e  w a y  t o  
Tees Bay including the advertising could be improved to make it  more inviting 
and a place where people want to visit, especially through the addition of tree 
planting and flower beds.  190 
RC15: Tees Bay Retail and Leisure Park  
The Borough Council will seek to diversify, support and protect  Tees Bay 
Retail and Leisure Park.  
 
After the Town Centre, the Edge of Town Centre areas and the Re tail and 
Leisure Parks, as defined on the Policies Map, will be the next  sequentially 
preferable locations for main town centre uses. The following u ses are 
appropriate within Tees Bay:  
 Non-food shops (A1)  
 Food and Drink (A3)  
 Assembly and Leisure (D2)  
 
The above uses, and other uses, will only be permitted providin g that they do 
not adversely affect the charact er, appearance, function and am enity of the, 
property and the surrounding area and that they are in accordan ce with the 
Green Infrastructure and Planning Obligations SPD.  
 
Businesses will not be permitted to operate between the hours o f 11.30pm 
and 7am. 
 
In accordance with the Planning Obligations and Green Infrastru cture SPDs, 
all development should facilitate, where appropriate, improveme nts to:  
a) Connectivity to the surrounding area, especially to the Town  Centre 
and Seaton Carew train station through improved public transpor t 
provision and facilities and pedestrian and cycleway provision and 
facilities. 
b) The overall environment a nd appearance of the area. 
c) Areas of public realm particularly related to the entrance t o Tees 
Bay. 
d) Modernised advertisements and signage.  
 
Car parking areas should be adequately landscaped and screened from 
public view. Refuse storage areas should in the first instance be to the rear 
and adequately screened.  
 
The design of all units and the display of advertising is key t o improving the 
appearance, safety and promotion of the area. Proposals that in volve 
alterations to commercial front s should be designed in accordan ce with the 
Shop Fronts SPD and proposals relating to advertisements must b e in 
accordance with policy QP8. 
 
 
Planning for Sustainable Local Centres 
13.126 Away from the Town Centre a nd edge of town centre areas and commonly 
located in existing residential areas are the local centres ide ntified on the  
Policies Map  and listed in appendix 9. Nati onal Planning Policy does not 
define what a local centre is.  The Borough Council however deem s a local 
centre to be either in the form of small purpose built shopping  parade or in the 
form of small shops located in tr aditional streets providing lo cal shops and 
services. The scale, function and character of local centres ar e typified by  191centres that provide the day to day shopping and other local ne eds of the 
community, particularly for thos e who are less mobile. These lo cal centres 
provide a life line to residents across the Borough ensuring th at there is 
access to shops and key services within close proximity to wher e people live. 
The Borough Council seeks to ens ure that the local centres are able to flourish 
over the plan period whist respec ting the amenity of surroundin g residents. 
 
13.127 The Retail Study states t hat local centres across the Bo rough are all relatively 
small scale, the majority of which serve the basic shopping and  service 
requirements of the local residen tial areas with which they are  associated. The 
local centres appear to be functioning effectively at their lev el in the local retail 
hierarchy although some to a le sser extent than others. The Bor ough Council 
has extended some local centre  boundaries and included some res idential 
properties to assist in allowing for expansion. Other centres h ave not been 
amended as it is considered that there is current capacity with in vacant units 
and that such units should be uti lised prior to any local centr e expansions. 
 
13.128 The Borough Council conti nually monitors the health, vit ality, viability and 
character of the local centres. A  concern resulting from this m onitoring is the 
increasing numbers of hot food ta keaways that are being granted  permission 
in local centres. Where such uses come to dominate local centre s it can have 
a serious impact on range of other services available locally. This in turn can 
affect the vitality of the centre and hamper the growth of indi vidual shops 
which often rely on there being a range of different types of s hops to attract 
customers. Further detail regar ding the control of hot food tak eaways can be 
obtained in policy RC18. 
 
13.129 The Borough Council seeks to safeguard the local centres  floor space for retail 
and commercial activity and therefore will seek to resist the c onversion of 
ground floor commercial floor s pace to residential uses. 
 
13.130 HBC do not want a domi nance of large units in Local Cent res (the largest unit 
is 1077.93m2 and the largest retail unit is the Sainsburys at Middle Warren  
(530m2)) as units of a larger size could take trade away from t he town centre. 
The combining of Local Centre units will not be supported as th e newly 
combined unit would increase the floor space for an individual unit and would 
potentially have an impact upon the Town Centre and the charact er and 
function of the Local Centre. One method of assessing the impac t is by 
undertaking a impact assessment. 
 
13.131 The following loca l centres, as defined on the Policies Map (where possible), 
have now been officially designated through this plan. The loca l centres are 
deemed to be of local importanc e and serve the day to day needs  of nearby 
residents: Claxton, Chat ham Road, Davison Road, Duke Street Nor th, Duke 
Street South, High Tunstall, Mie rs Avenue, Powlett Road East, S eaton Front, 
Springwell Road/Stockton Road, St ockton Road, the former Powlet t Public 
House, Warren Road and Wynyard Park . 
 
13.132 The quality of the environm ent and the connectivity of l ocal centres is 
important for making people who w ant to use the local centre as  well as being 
physically able to access the centres. The quality of the envir onment and the 
connectivity of the local centres vary. Some local centres are more attractive  192than others with the use of appropr iately located street furnit ure and 
landscaping and some are less attractive often due to the lack of landscaping. 
Some local centres have dedicated car parking and/or are well l inked to bus 
and walking provisions. None of the local centres have cycle pa rking. The 
Borough Council will seek to en sure that the environmental qual ity of the local 
centres along with the connectivity  of the centres is improved.  
 
RC16: The Local Centres  
The Borough Council will seek to diversify, support and protect  local centres in 
recognition of the important service they provide to their loca l communities. In 
accordance with policy RC1 local centres as identified on the P olicies Map will 
be the sequentially preferable location for the following uses below 300m2:  
 Shops (A1)  
 Financial and Professional Services (A2)  
 Food and Drink (A3)  
 Drinking Establishments (A4)  
 Hot Food Takeaways (A5)  
 Non–residential institutions (D1)   
 Residential (C3 and C4) only on upper floors 
 
The above uses, and other uses, will only be permitted providin g that they do 
not adversely affect the character, appearance, function and am enity of the 
property and the surrounding area and that they are in accordan ce with the 
Green Infrastructure and Planning Obligations SPD.  
 
Applications for hot food takeaways will be determined in accor dance with 
policy RC18. 
 
The combining of units will not be supported where the newly co mbined unit 
would have a negative impact upon the character, vitality and v iability of the 
Town Centre or the Local Centre.  
 
The Borough Council will have reg ard to the length of time that  a vacant unit 
has been empty, along with considering the attempt to market an d bring a 
vacant unit back into use when considering other uses. 
 
Businesses will not be permitted to operate between the hours o f 11.30pm and 
7am. 
 
The Borough Council will seek to enhance the vitality and viabi lity of the local 
centres through a range of improvement and enhancement schemes.  I n  
accordance with the Green Infrast ructure and Planning Obligatio ns SPD all 
development in the local centres should facilitate, where appro priate, 
improvements to: 
a) Connectivity to the surrounding area through improved pedest rian 
and cycle provision; 
b) The overall environment and appearance of the area; 
c) Public transport provision and  
d) Areas of public realm.  
 
The design of all units is key to improving the appearance and safety of the  193area. Proposals that involve alterations to commercial fronts s hould be 
designed in accordance with the Shop Fronts SPD. 
 
Development that is likely to have an impact upon existing infr astructure or 
require new infrastructure will be required to upgrade and/or p rovide such 
infrastructure in accordance th e Planning Obligations SPD. 
 
‘More Vulnerable’ (See National Planni ng Practice Guidance flood risk 
vulnerability classification) development will not be allowed w ithin Flood Zone 
2 and 3a unless supported by a Flood Risk Assessment that demon strates that 
flood risk can be effectively managed throughout the lifetime o f the 
development.  
 
Planning for a Sustaina ble Late Night Uses Area  
13.133 Some leisure activities c an have a detrimental effect on  the amenities of the 
surrounding area. Amusement arc ades and bingo halls, for exampl e, generate 
a certain amount of noise and thei r proliferation in an area ca n have an 
inhibiting effect on other bus inesses and residential amenity. Similarly hot food 
takeaways, food establishments,  wine bars and other licensed pr emises can 
give rise to different types of ‘nuisance’ and should generally  be located away 
from residential areas.  
 
13.134 Licensing laws enable such uses, as well as night clubs and premises selling 
alcohol, to open up to twenty f our hours a day, every day which  c o u l d  
exacerbate the potential for dist urbance during the time when m ost residents 
would normally expect peace and quiet. Most disturbances in thi s respect are 
caused by users once they are outside the premises and relates to the noise 
and disturbance from people waiti ng for taxis or walking home t hrough nearby 
residential areas. The Borough C ouncil has sought to draw back the licensing 
times to 2am in all non-residential areas, furthermore the Boro ugh Council will 
continue to work in partnership  with Cleveland Police in seekin g to remedy the 
associated problems. Within predominately residential areas the  local 
licensing policy generally allow s businesses to open until 11.3 0pm. 
 
13.135 The Borough Council may attach planning conditions to pe rmissions restricting 
hours of opening in order to prot ect the amenities of nearby re sidents. In a bid 
to coincide with licensing laws the Borough Council has sought to ensure that 
this Local Plan sets out that no new business can operate befor e 7am and 
beyond 11.30pm under the planning r egime unless it is within a designated 
late night uses area. Previously  businesses could operate until  midnight via 
the planning regime. However it  is considered that if businesse s close to the 
public at 11.30 then those visitors will be home before midnigh t and therefore 
minimise disruption in nearby res idential areas. This is minima l time reduction 
but over time it is envisaged that it will still allow business es to thrive whilst 
respecting residential amenity. 
 
13.136 The Retail Study continues t o identify Church Street and  the south western 
part of the South of Maritime Avenue edge of centre as key nigh t time 
destinations that has a positive effect on the economy; specifi cally the night 
time economy of the borough. The retail study is noted however given the 
desires to create a thriving Inno vation and Skills Quarter (ISQ ), the late night  194uses area has been limited to the eastern part of Victoria Road  a n d  t h e  
western part of Church Street, as identified on the Policies Ma p. 
 13.137 Other areas such as the we stern part of Victoria Road an d parts of York Road 
do have businesses operating beyond 11.30pm. This is typically due to 
historical planning permissions a nd more relaxed planning rules  in the past. 
Such locations are close to resi dential areas and the prolifera tion of late night 
uses in such areas are likely to have a significant impact upon  residential 
amenity and further applicati ons will not be supported.  
 
13.138 The Borough Council will aim to ensure that developments  operating after 
11.30pm are only located in the l ate night uses area, as identi fied on the 
Policies Map.  The Borough Council will seek to ensure development in this 
area does not have a detrimental effect on the amenity of neigh bours or the 
overall appearance, function and c haracter of the area includin g the ISQ.  
 
13.139 The Hartlepool Masterplan recommends that environmental improvement 
works are undertaken with the Chur ch Street area to assist in a ttracting inward 
investment and increase visitor  numbers. Some environmental imp rovement 
works can have a negative impac t upon surveillance, for example  trees can 
often block CCTV cameras, planter s look attractive during the d ay but can be 
damaged on an evening and narrow paving can increase the chance  o f  
altercations occurring. All propo sals for environmental improve ments must 
seek advice from Cleveland Police liaison to ensure that a bala nce is struck 
between visual amenity, connectivi ty and crime/fear of crime. 
 
13.140 Within the late night use s area it is acknowledged that visitors may be likely to 
frequent hot food takeaway as part of their evening activity an d therefore the 
Borough Council recognises the role that such businesses can pl ay in 
boosting the local economy and ni ght time area offer. Any propo sals for hot 
food takeaway uses will be determined in accordance with policy  RC18, the 
policy acknowledges the role of hot food takeaways (A5 use clas s) within the 
late night uses area. 
 
RC17: Late Night Uses Area    
The Borough Council will support development in appropriate loc ations that 
contribute positively to the nig ht time economy in the Borough.  
 
For businesses operating after 11.30pm and before 2am   the late night uses 
area identified on the Policies Map will be the only appropriat e location in the 
borough for:  
 Shops (A1) 
 Restaurants and Cafes (A3) 
 Drinking  Establishments (A4)  
 Hot Food Takeaways (A5)  
 Nightclubs and Theatr es (Sui Generis) 
 Assembly & Leisure (D2) 
 Business (B1) 
 
No businesses will be allowed to operate from 2am to 7am.  
  195In order to adequately develop the Church Street area and prote ct and 
enhance the Church Street Conservation Area the above uses, and  o t h e r  
uses, will only be permitted providing that they do not adverse l y  a f f e c t  t h e  
character, appearance, function and amenity of the , property and the 
surrounding area and that they are in accordance with the Green  
Infrastructure and Planning Obligations SPDs. 
 
The Borough Council will have regard to the length of time that  a vacant unit 
has been empty, along with considering the attempt to market an d bring a 
vacant unit back into use when considering other uses. 
 
The use of hot food takeaways will be strictly controlled in ac cordance with 
policy RC18.  
 
Proposals for improvement works within the night time economy a rea must
bear in mind the crime and fear o f crime implications associate d with some 
night time activity businesses. P roposals that have the potenti al to 
significantly exacerbate crime and fear of crime will not be su pported. 
 
The design of all units is key to improving the appearance and safety of the 
area, Proposals that involve alterations to commercial fronts s hould be 
designed in accordance with the Shop Fronts SPD. 
 
Applicants are advised to liaise with the public health team fo r advice relating 
to minimising and mitigating agai nst the impact of uses within the late night 
uses area. 
 
‘More Vulnerable’ (See National Planning Practice Guidance floo d risk 
vulnerability classification) devel opment will not be allowed w ithin Flood 
Zone 2 and 3a unless supported by a F lood Risk Assessment that 
demonstrates that flood risk can be effectively managed through out the 
lifetime of the development. 
 
13.141 The Borough Council seeks to support and protect all ret ail and commercial 
areas within the borough. The Bo rough Council recognises that h ot food 
takeaways can play an important role in providing jobs and assi st in boosting 
the local economy. However such uses can often give rise to pro blems 
associated with anti-so cial behaviour, crim e, fear of crime and  obesity. A 
concentration of such uses can also negatively impact upon the vitality and 
viability of retail and commercial centres. In most instances h ot food 
takeaways operate from the early evening and are closed during the daytime. 
This reduces linked trips to other units that can often be clos ed from early 
evening when a hot food takeaway may open. It also impacts nega tively upon 
the day time economy.  
 
13.142 The need to protect the vitality and viability of retail  and commercial centres is 
a long established pl anning principle. H owever the need to cons ider the health 
impact of development is becomi ng more apparent and the Governm ent have 
recognised this through national planning policy.63 The issue of health, and in 
particular obesity, is a signifi cant issue for the UK Governmen t and in regards 
to the levels of obesity within Hartlepool, the Borough Council  seeks to ensure 
                                                           
63 NPPF paragraph 17(12) and NPPF paragraph 171.   196the obesity rate in adults and ch ildren is not increased over t ime and where 
possible is reduced. 
  13.143 Obesity can lead to illnesses such as coronary heart dis ease, type 2 Diabetes 
and some types of cancer. Howeve r it is difficult to determine all the factors 
which cause such illnesses. Being overweight or obese is one ke y factor. The 
Borough Council is aware that ther e are other factors that can lead to such 
illnesses, for example a lack of  exercise and/or other underlyi ng medical 
conditions, and some illnesses may be hereditary.
 
 
13.144 The Borough Council is awa re that it cannot control all the factors that can 
lead to obesity and the possible conditions related to being ob ese. However, 
given that an unhealthy diet is a proven causal link for many i llnesses, the 
Borough Council believes that limiting the number of fast food take-away 
outlets is one way to tackle t he problem. Other measures to tac kle ill health 
are related to the location of homes, employment opportunities and retail etc. 
along with the provision of open spaces and play/sports facilit ies. The 
Borough Council has a number of measures to tackle obesity, suc h as 
working with catering outlets to improve the nutritional value of foods, and 
providing awareness materials along with direct help and suppor t to residents 
who may have obesity and/or other  health related problems. The Borough 
Council is committed to improvi ng the health of residents and t his policy 
therefore adds to a package o f measures that already exist. 
 13.145 To ensure that there is not  a proliferation of hot food takeaways across the 
Borough the amount of permitted A5 floorspace in each centre wi ll be strictly 
controlled by virtue of the poli cy stipulations below relating to a total ban in 
some areas or a maximum floor s pace threshold. If an applicatio n is likely to 
exceed the threshold then it wi ll not be supported. The thresho lds have been 
set by looking at current A5 o ccupation levels, current vacancy  rates, ward 
level obesity data for adults and childhood obesity data for sc hools within the 
Borough and the proximity of eac h area to residential propertie s. Given the 
number of allocations within the town centre, Diagram 7 is incl uded below to 
clearly illustrate the sub areas of the town centre. 
 
13.146 If there is an extension to a retail and commercial area  then the level of A5 
floorspace will be re-assessed as in some instances additional A5 may be 
permissible but in other instances where the A5 floorspace is a lready 
comparatively high, further A5  floor space may not be appropria te. 
 
13.147 The Borough Council also recognises that some hot food t akeaways are on 
routes that students may walk alo ng when coming home from schoo l. In a bid 
to discourage students from purc hasing hot food items on their walk home 
from school, the Borough Council  may seek to control the operat ional hours of 
businesses that are located on key transit routes from students . 
 
13.148  To assist in formulating  the hot food takeaways policy,  the Council undertook a 
substantial amount of research, that research is publically ava ilable within two 
key documents.  Appendix 5 contai ned within the paper entitled `Additional 
evidence relating to 2018 draft Local Plan policy RC18 – Hot Fo od Takeaways 
November 2017’ Appendix 5 sets out  where there may be an option  f o r  
average and/or small sc ale A5 floor space.  197Diagram 7  – Town Centre Sub Areas  
 
 198RC18: Hot food takeaways   
The Borough Council seeks to protect the vitality and viability  of the network 
of retail and commercial centr es within the Borough along with seeking to 
protect the residential amenity of nearby residents. Furthermor e, the Borough 
Council are committed to ensuring that Hartlepool residents hav e the best 
possible opportunities to live a healthy lifestyle and to ensur e this, proposals 
relating to hot food takeaway uses will be strictly controlled in accordance 
with the criteria below. 
 
Town centre sub area A5 thresholds 
The Town centre has been divided into eight sub areas as detail ed on the 
Policies Map, the level of A5 use for each sub area is detailed  below. 
 
1) Middleton Grange Shopping centr e - no A5 uses will be permit ted 
2) Hucklehoven North sub area - no A5 uses will be permitted 
3) Museum Road/ South Lauder Street sub area  - no A5 uses will  be 
permitted 
4) Church Street east sub area -  the amount of A5 floorspace s hould 
not exceed 13% 
5) Church Street West  - the am ount of A5 floorspace should not  
exceed 5%  
6) Park Road sub area - the amount of A5 floorspace should not 
exceed 8% 
7) Victoria Road sub area - the amount of A5 floorspace should not 
exceed 2% 
8) York Road North sub area - the amount of A5 floorspace shoul d 
not exceed 3% 
9) York Road South sub area - the amount of A5 floorspace shoul d 
not exceed 2% 
 
Edge of centre A5 thresholds 
Within the following  edge of town centre locations the level of  A5 use for 
each area is detailed below: 
 
 East of Stranton - no A5  uses will be permitted 
 Mill House - no A5 uses will be permitted 
 West Victoria Road - no A5 uses will be permitted 
 Park Road West - no A5 uses will be permitted 
 Stranton and Brewery - no A5 uses will be permitted 
 Lynn Street North/Mainsforth Terrace North - no A5 uses will b e 
permitted 
 York Road edge of centre - the amount of A5 floor space should  
not exceed 7% 
 Avenue Road/Raby Road edge of centre - the amount of A5 
floorspace should not exceed 2%.  
 
Within the York Road South and Av enue Road/Raby Road location, if an A5 
use ceases then the threshold will be reassessed in a bid to reduce  t h e  
overall A5 uses within the area. Ultimately no new A5 uses will  be permitted. 
 
  199Retail and Leisure Park A5 thresholds 
Within the following Retail and Leisure park locations the leve l of A5 use for 
each area is detailed below: 
 
 Trincomalee Wharf - no A5  uses will be permitted 
 Tees Bay - no A5 uses will be permitted 
 West of Marina Way - no A5  uses will be permitted 
 The Marina - the amount of A5 f loorspace should not exceed 5% 
 
Local Centre A5 thresholds 
Within the following Local Centres the level of A5 use for each  a r e a  i s  
detailed below: 
 
 Claxton - no A5 uses will be permitted 
 Davison Road - no A5 uses will be permitted 
 Duke Street South - no A5  uses will be permitted  
 The Former Powlett Public House - no A5 u ses will be permitted  
 Stockton Road/Spring Garden Roa d - no A5 uses will be permitte d 
 Brierton Lane - the amount o f A5 floorspace should not exceed 15% 
 Belle Vue Way - the amount of A5 floorspace should not exceed 
17% 
 Brus Corner - the amount of A5 floorspace should not exceed 10 % 
 Brenda Road/Sydenham Road - the amount of A5 floorspace should  
not exceed 4% 
 Catcote Road - the amount of A5 floorspace should not exceed  9% 
 Chatham Road - the amount of A5 floorspace should not exceed  
17% 
 Clavering Road - the amount of A5 floorspace should not exceed  
10% 
 Duke Street North - the amount of A5 floorspace should not exc eed 
32% 
 Elizabeth Way - the amount of A5 floorspace should not exceed 
10% 
 Fens Shops – the amount of A5  floorspace should not exceed 13%   
 High Tunstall - the amount of A5 floorspace should not exceed 10% 
 Jutland Road - the amount of A5  floorspace should not exceed 2 4%   
 King Oswy - the amount of A5  floorspace should not exceed 9% 
 Middle Warren - the amount of A5 floorspace should not exceed 
17% 
 Murray Street - the amount o f A5 floorspace should not exceed 10% 
 Miers Avenue - the amount of A5 floorspace should not exceed 2 0% 
 Northgate/Durham Street - the amount of A5 floorspace should no t 
exceed 10% 
 Northgate/Union Street - the amount of A5 floorspace should no t 
exceed 6% 
 Owton Manor East - the amount of A5 floorspace should not exce ed 
13% 
 Owton manor West - the amount of A5 floorspace should not 
exceed  12% 
 Oxford Street - the amount o f A5 floorspace should not exceed 9%  200 Powlett Road/Lancaster Road - the amount of A5 floorspace shou ld 
not exceed 43% 
 Raby Road/Hart Lane Corner - the amount of A5 floorspace shoul d 
not exceed 4% 
 Raby Road/ Brougham Terrace - the amount of A5 floorspace 
should not exceed 16% 
 Seaton Front - the amount of A5 floorspace should not exceed 1 0% 
 Stockton Road/Cornwall Street  - the amount of A5 floorspace 
should not exceed 16% 
 The Former Saxon Pub – the amount of A5 floorspace should not 
exceed 15% 
 Warren Road - the amount of A5  floorspace should not exceed 13 % 
 Wiltshire Way - the amount o f A5 floorspace should not exceed 13% 
 Wynyard Road - the amount of A5  floorspace should not exceed 4 % 
 Wynyard Park - the amount of A5 floorspace should not exceed 
10% 
 
Villages 
A maximum of 1 hot f ood takeaway will be permitted within the l imits to 
development of each of the villag es in order to provide a local  service to the 
village and where this is demonstrably supported locally.  
 
All other locations  
Hot food takeaways will not be permitted outside of any designa ted retail or
commercial centre or the limits to development of any village. 
 
General 
Notwithstanding any proposals th at can convert to an A5 use und er 
permitted development rights then  the above thresholds should n ot be 
exceeded. 
 
In applying the criteri a within this policy the Borough Council  will have regard 
to the length of time that a unit has been vacant and will seek  to strike a 
balance between economic development, vitality and viability an d residents
health. 
 
Applicants are advised to liaise with the Borough Council’s Pla nning Policy
team for the most up to date statistics on each area and with t he Public 
Health team for advice relating to minimising the impact of A5 uses on the 
health of residents and visitors. 
 
Proposals that involve alterations to commercial fronts must be  designed in 
accordance with the Shop Fronts SPD. 
 
Main Town Centre Uses on Employment Land  
13.149 In order to protect the vi tality and viability of the To wn Centre and to protect 
industrial floorspace the Borough Council would wish to avoid t he 
development of retail uses in industrial areas. The Borough Cou ncil will seek 
to concentrate main town centre uses in sequentially preferable  locations.  In 
most cases sequentially preferable locations are those that are  readily  201accessible to the public by means of transport other than the p rivate car. Most 
industrial locations are either s et apart from, or on the perip hery of, residential 
areas and are therefore oft en not conveniently accessible.  
 
13.150 Locating main town centre  use development on allocated i ndustrial land could 
have the potential to prejudice the types of industrial develop ments that could 
be located in its vicinity. However some retail uses, such as t hose serving an 
ancillary function to the working population of the immediate a rea, may be 
appropriately located in industr ial areas. In appropriate circu mstances 
therefore ancillary retail uses  may be permitted on industrial land. Other retail 
uses, notably motor vehicle dealerships, petrol filling station s and car washes, 
may not be conveniently located within the Town Centre and may therefore be 
suitably located on industrial land. 
 
RC19: Main Town Centre U ses on Employment Land  
The Borough Council will seek to ensure that main town centre u ses are only 
permitted on industrial land where it can be demonstrated that development is 
in accordance with policy RC1 and: 
1) Is ancillary to the main use, or;  
2) Primarily serves trade customers or local employees, and;  
3) Is an appropriate use in an industrial area.  
 
Proposals falling into the A3 use class may be appropriate on e mployment 
land providing the development predominantly serves the people working in 
the immediate area. 
 
Proposals for A5 uses will not be permitted. 
 
Businesses will not be permitted to operate between the hours o f 11.30pm and 
7am. 
 
Proposals that involve alterations to commercial fronts must be  designed in 
accordance with the Shop Fronts SPD. 
 
Business Uses in the Home 
13.151 Working from home enables r esidents to have a flexible w orking lifestyle. Not 
all residents lives are suited to going to a place of work each  day often is it 
more convenient or makes economic sense to operate a business f rom the 
home. 
 
13.152 Working from home can invo lve a range of activities from  being an accountant, 
running a catalogue agency to childminding. Some may have littl e or no 
impact on surrounding properties. However others may cause sign ificant 
problems. Planning permission is  often not required provided th at there are no, 
or limited, adaptations to the pr operty, the main use of the dw elling remains as 
a home and there are no additiona l employees frequenting the ho use.  
 
13.153 Advice should first be s ought with regard to whether or not permission is 
required. If by virtue of the ty pe of business and its likely i ntensity, permission 
is required then the Borough Counc il must consider the business es impact on 
the property and surrounding area prior to approving an applica tion.  202 
13.154 Residential areas should be areas where residents can ex pect peace and 
quiet especially during certain times of the day i.e. early eve ning through to 
morning. If the business propos als are likely to have a negativ e impact upon 
the amenity of adjoining residents and give rise to issues such  as noise and 
disturbance along with dust, smell, vibration or fumes and if n o solution can be 
found to rectifying such impac ts, then permission may be refuse d. 
 13.155 If the business proposal w ould alter the character of th e area, possibly 
dominating an area or becoming in trusive, for example by increa sing the traffic 
level due to customers visiting the property leading to an incr ease of activity 
and possible congestion and/or p arking issues and no appropriat e solution can 
be found such as increasing the level of in-curtilage car parki ng or limiting the 
operational hours then permi ssion may be refused. 
 13.156 The Borough Council’s Econom ic Development team are avai lable to provide 
advice regarding setting up a business and if it is not possibl e to work from 
home then the team many be able t o direct residents to appropri ate work 
spaces or advise in business diversification.  
 
RC20: Business Uses In The Home 
The Borough Council will seek to ensure many flexible options f or 
employment are delivered across the Borough. The Borough Counci l will 
support residents who wish to run businesses from home providin g that: 
1) The residential appearance of the property is not significan tly 
altered. 
2) There is no significant detrimental effect on the amenities of the 
occupiers of adjoining o r nearby properties. 
3) There is no significant detrimental impact upon highway and car 
parking provision. 
4) There is no significant detrimental effect on the on the cha racter of 
the property or surrounding area. 
 
Proposals for A5 uses will not be permitted. 
 
Businesses will not be permitted to operate between the hours o f 6pm and 
8am. 
 
Commercial uses in residential areas 
13.157 In the older areas of the town there are pockets of smal l industrial, business, 
shopping or other commercial uses  sometimes intermingled with o ther uses. 
These are not of a sufficient int ensity to be included within t he defined local 
centres and are generally located within larger areas where hou sing 
predominates. An intensification of non-residential uses, for e xample, by large 
extensions to existing premises o r new use of dwellings may cau se difficulties 
relating to parking and servicing and may harm the amenities of  the occupiers 
of residential properties in particular.  
 13.158 Policy RC16 seeks to concentrate commercial development in the defined 
local centres. The Borough Counc il will therefore in general su pport proposals 
involving the redevelopment or c onversion to residential use of  commercial  203properties located in housing ar eas except where, as in the cas e of ‘corner 
shops’ for example, they provide an essential local service (se e policy RUR6).  
 13.159 Some larger non-residentia l properties located within th eir own grounds could 
be appropriately retained for commercial uses (including office s and smaller-
scale leisure developments), s ubject to the potential impact on  the amenities 
of the surrounding area and on its character. In this respect, such 
developments must be able to satisfactorily accommodate car par king and 
servicing requirements within  the curtilage of the property.  
 
RC21: Commercial Uses  In Residential Areas  
The Borough Council seeks to protect the vitality and viability  of the 
designated retail and commercial centres within the Borough and  the amenity 
of residents. Proposals for industrial, business, leisure, reta i l  a n d  o t h e r  
commercial development, or for their expansion, will not be per mitted in 
predominantly residential areas outside the defined retail and commercial 
centres unless: 
 
1) There is no significant detrimental effect on the amenities of the 
occupiers of adjoining or nearby premises by reason of noise, 
smell, dust or excessive traffic generation, and 
2) The design, scale and impact i s compatible with the characte r and 
amenity of the site and the surrounding area, and 
3) Appropriate servicing and pa rking provision can be made. 
 
Applications for hot food takeaw ays (A5 use class) will not be permitted. 
 
Businesses will not be permitted t o operate between the hours o f 6pm and 
8am.  
 
Proposals that involve alterations to commercial fronts must be  designed in 
accordance with the Shop Fronts SPD.  
  20414. LEISURE AND TOURISM 
 
14.1 Leisure and Tourism has a significant role to play in the growth of Hartlepool 
and is important for the sustain able development of the town. T h i s  i s  a  k e y  
aspect of the Hartlepool Vision, the Council’s strategic vision  document. The 
provision of adequate leisure facilities is critical for reside nts whilst the tourism 
offer attracts visitors from further afield.  The coastal locat ion of Hartlepool has 
been intrinsic to the development o f the town with the Borough’ s coastline 
important for its wildlife and its  historic interest but it is also an important asset 
in terms of providing opportuniti es for leisure and tourism. He nce the sense of 
place and the image of the town have strong associations to the  physical 
environment, both natural and created, linked to the coastal lo cation as well as 
the cultural identity associat ed with a long and successful mar itime heritage.   
 14.2 The value of leisure and tourism in today’s society should  n o t  b e  
underestimated. It plays an impo rtant role in mental and physic al health, the 
economy, social inclusion and we ll-being. The provision of such  facilities 
benefits residents and makes the area more attractive to visito rs and 
investors. Culture, tourism, s port and recreation businesses ac count for the 
5% of the sub-regional economy,  contributing £1bn per year to t he regional 
economy.  There has been considerabl e investment and growth in this sector. 
The tourism industry, for example, is witnessing an increase in  visitor numbers 
in general. It is anticipated that  this growth and development will continue and 
therefore this area of investment  remains a priority for the Lo cal Authority. 
 14.3 The majority of visitors to the town are day visitors with  the current leisure and 
tourism offer focused to accommodate this. However, the number of overnight 
visitors is increasing year on year facilitated by an increase of the variety of 
accommodation available to visitors.  This has a direct impact on economic 
expenditure within this sector associated with longer visitor s tays.    
 
14.4 There has been a positive upward trend in visitor numbers to Hartlepool since 
2009, over the same time period there has also been a general u pwards trend 
in employment directly attributed to tourism
64.  However, recent evidence65 
suggests that there has been a decli ne in tourism related emplo yment, 
particularly for part time and seasonal jobs.  This may be attr ibuted to a variety 
of causes, however full time emplo yment within the industry rem ains stable. 
 
Leisure  
14.5 Recreation and leisure infrastructure is critical for the sustainable future of 
Hartlepool, through ensuring and protecting a range of faciliti es for residents 
and visitors to encourage physical and cultural activity.  Ther e are various 
green spaces, parks and nature rese rves across the Borough.  In  addition, our 
cemeteries are being enhanced by being made into wildlife haven s which 
make them interesting to visit.  To the west, Summerhill Countr y Park 
provides the provision of outdoor activities and is a principle  gateway to the 
countryside. Ward Jackson Park preserves its Victorian heritage  alongside 
                                                           
64 Scarborough Tourism Economic A ctivity Model (STEAM) Trend Repo rt for 2009-2014 Global 
Tourism Solutions (UK) Ltd  
65 Tourism Supply - Value of Tourism Industries, ONS data 2011, V isit England available at 
http://www.t-stats-uk.co.uk/visitengland/SummaryReport.aspx   205modern facilities whilst the traditional seaside resort of Seat on Carew offers a 
modern promenade stretching from the edge of the sand dunes to Newburn 
Bridge and then onwards to the Ma rina.  It is extremely well us ed by walkers, 
cyclists and runners, many of whom come from other areas.  Sout h of the 
promenade and village is  the impressive Seaton Dunes which, tog ether with 
Seaton Common, form a Site of S pecial Scientific Interest (SSSI ).  Nearby 
Seaton Golf Course offers a renowned leisure facility and has a  
complementary wildlife value and sense of space.  All of this i s bordered by 
miles of clean, sandy beaches.  To the north, the historic Head land is a key 
destination with its town moor and heritage features such as St  Hilda’s Church 
and the Heugh Battery.  Beyond the Headland is Spion Cop Cemete ry 
renowned for combining its histor ic value with preserving impor tant coastal 
grassland.  Further up the coast, the Hart to Haswell Walkway i s very popular 
with walkers, cyclists and naturalists.  There are also smaller  Local Wildlife 
Sites such as the Greatham Beck Local Nature Reserve as well as  the smaller 
parks at Rossmere and Seaton.  J ust outside the Borough boundar y is the 
Saltholme RSPB reserve and the T eesmouth National Nature Reserv e in 
addition to extensive green spaces across the Borough.  They ar e all of 
immense value to residents who live around them.  Taken as a wh ole, 
Hartlepool’s combined assets o f heritage, the rural area, abund ant nature 
reserves and green spaces make it both a pleasant place to live  and a very 
attractive proposition for visitors  
  
14.6 This range of facilities is valued by local people with th ree in five visiting a 
natural space at least once a month; a quarter go for a country  walk at least 
once a week and two fifths of y oung people visit natural spaces  at least once a 
month66. The majority of visits to facilities are made by car with Sum merhill by 
far the most popular site; this is a key recreational and leisu re resource linking 
the town with the open countryside. The site provides a visitor  centre, climbing 
facilities, cycling, horse ridi ng, walking and other countrysid e activities in a 
location readily accessible to th e Hartlepool community as well  as to visitors to 
the town. There may be opportuni ties to extend the range of fac ilities provided 
although such development would excl ude motor sports and other noisy 
activities as these are consider ed to be incompatible with the general nature of 
Summerhill.  
14.7 As well as continued success of more traditional sports su ch as golf, rugby 
and football; noisy activities, i ncluding off-road motorised sp orts and clay 
pigeon shooting are, however, bec oming increasingly popular. Th ere is 
evidence of some motor cyclists and similar inappropriate vehic ular use of the 
beaches, sand dunes and other large areas of open space within the town.  
These unauthorised uses cause problems of disturbance and damag e to 
fragile areas, particularly im portant wildlife areas along the coast. In order to 
address these problems, proposal s for potentially disturbing ou tdoor activities 
will need to be carefully considered in the context of their po tential impact on 
the environment, adjacent land us es and occupiers of nearby pro perties and 
land.   
14.8 Indoor sports and leisure fa cilities include a wide variet y of sporting, leisure, 
social, cultural and educational centres including sports halls , museums, 
cinemas and theatres. Existing sports hall provision in the pub lic sector is 
                                                           
66Open Space, Sport and Recreati on Assessment - January 2015   206concentrated at Mill House Leisure Centre (swimming baths and m ulti-purpose 
leisure centre) in the central area of the town with smaller mu lti-use facilities at 
the Headland, Belle Vue and Brie rton.  The Council is currently  considering its 
medium/long term plans for the provision of wet and dry side sp orts provision 
within the Borough with the aspiration of providing a new swimm ing pool at the 
Brierton Sports Centre.    
14.9 A modern seven-screen cinema is located at the Marina whic h is considered 
adequate for the town’s needs. The Town Hall, within the town c entre, has 
been converted and upgraded in recent years to provide a theatr e which 
attracts national and local productions. There is also a cluste r of leisure 
orientated uses at Navigation Po int with cafes, bars, and resta urants located 
beneath residential apar tments on the eastern edge of the Marin a .   T h e  
majority of commercial units at the Marina are occupied, the ar ea is popular 
with both residents and visitors. There is a wide range of rest aurants in the 
town mainly clustered along Church Street and at the Marina. Th ere are 
opportunities to promote, enhance and develop this sector of th e economy 
further (particularly with fam ily orientated food and drink fac ilities).  
 
Tourism  
14.10 Tourism has become an integr al part of the Hartlepool eco nomy both directly, 
in terms of providing jobs and indirectly in terms of attractin g visitors and 
income to the town.  In 2011 the economic contribution of Touri sm (Direct 
GVA)
67 across the Tees Valley and Durham was £250 million.  The town’ s 
assets include: a range of attractions based on maritime herita ge and the 
Marina, the beaches at Seaton Care w; green tourism with its int ernationally 
important nature conservation si tes and Christian, historic and  military heritage 
sites particularly on the Headla nd. Building on the positive im pact of previous 
maritime festivals, the contribution which the Tall Ships event  in 2010 made to 
the local economy was extremely significant, not only in terms of the influx of 
                                                           
67 Tourism Supply - Value of Tourism Industries, ONS data 2011, V isit England available at 
http://www.t-stats-uk.co.uk/visitengland/SummaryReport.aspx  
 207expenditure but in prov iding a showcase for the town and its su rroundings, 
stimulating improved skill leve ls and business capacity in the service sector. 
 
14.11 Also located centrally within the town, Christ Church has  been converted into 
the town’s Art Gallery, Exhibi tion Centre and Tourist Informati on Centre. Other 
museum related visitor facilities are located at the Marina, He adland within St 
Hilda’s Church and the Heugh Gun Battery.  
 14.12 Green tourism relating to the natural environment offers much potential and if 
developed in a sensitive manner c an be of significant benefit t o the town. The 
Borough Council is committed to promoting green tourism . Hartlepool has a 
range of assets which can contribut e to green tourism including  a number of 
areas of ecological interest associated with the coast and rura l area which are 
of particular importance for bi rd and seal wat ching and general  quiet 
recreation. Enjoyment of these assets could be enhanced by impr oving access 
to the networks of paths and cycl eways although it is important  to ensure that 
this is carried out in a sensitive way so as to avoid damage to  these areas. 
 
Planning for Sustainable Leis ure and Tourism Provision  
14.13 The strength of the tourism and leisure market in Hartlep ool and the various 
economic, social and environment al benefits it has have been il lustrated 
above. It is considered critical that the Local Plan puts in pl ace the policy 
framework from which this sector  will be able to develop furthe r in the future, 
ensuring Hartlepool retains and develops its position as a regi onally significant 
visitor destination.  
  14.14 For Hartlepool, priorities  including the ongoing regenera tion in the Marina, 
Town Centre and Church Street provide a unique environment for entertainment, heritage and leisure activities. Such work shoul d involve the full 
range of “place-shaping” activities, including enhancing connec tivity, 
 208refreshing and adding to the existing portfolio of visitor attr actions and the 
interpretation of tourism assets. 
 14.15  Future major leisure and tourism developments in Hartlep ool will be expected 
to locate within the town centre  or the Marina. There are howev er two other 
areas in the Borough where such developments could be located d epending 
upon their scale and nature:  
 Seaton Carew: appropriate for seaside based recreational and 
leisure facilities.  Seaton Ca rew has an important supporting r ole 
especially in relation to the traditional seaside experience of fered and 
its nature conservation value co mplementing the nearby Saltholm e 
RSPB site within Stockton-on-Tees; the priority there is in strengthening physical, marketing  and functional links with Sal tholme 
as part of the wider n ature-based tourism o ffer of the Tees Val ley.  
 The Headland: appropriate for t ourism-related projects related  to its 
historic and cul tural heritage;  
 
14.16 The night time economy is a crucial part of the leisure i ndustry in Hartlepool. 
However, it is recognised that these activities must be closely  managed to 
minimise the impact on nearby residential areas. As such, the l ocal authority 
will continue to identify the mi xed use areas of Upper Church S treet and 
Victoria Road for uses which operate at times throughout the ni ght and early 
morning such as bars, restaurants and nightclubs, as covered in  Policy RC17 
(Night Time Economy). 
 
14.17 The rural area of Hartlepool  is one of the Borough’s grea test assets and 
presents opportunities for numerous  leisure and tourism activit ies and 
potential development. At the sa me time the tranquillity and la ndscape value 
must be protected and therefore,  whilst such development is enc ouraged, 
proposals will be carefully consi dered to ensure appropriatenes s within the 
setting. 
 
LT1: Leisure and Tourism 
The Council will work with key partner organisations to continu e to develop
and protect leisure and tourism facilities including high quali ty 
accommodation and cultural assets to  build on successful regene ration 
schemes. 
 
Major leisure and tourism developments in Hartlepool which are likely to 
attract large numbers of visitors will be expected to locate wi thin the Town 
Centre, the Mill House Edge of Town Centre Area or the Marina. 
 
However, Seaton Carew and the Head land are also considered appr opriate for 
such development depending upon their scale and nature:  
a) Seaton Carew: appropriate for seaside based recreational and  
leisure facilities.  
b) The Headland: appropriate for tourism-related projects relat ed 
to its historic and cultural heritage. 
 
Seaton Carew will be promoted a nd developed as a tourism destin ation 
which showcases and protects the EU designated bathing waters a nd  209Seaside Awards. Regeneration sch emes which improve the vitality  and 
viability of Seaton Carew whilst p rotecting and enhancing the C onservation 
Area and the settlement’s open seaside character will be promot ed and 
actively supported by t he Local Authority. 
 
The Council will encourage schemes which would enhance the hist oric 
nature of the Headland. The historic environment and maritime, military and 
Christian heritage of the Headland will be protected from devel opment which 
would be detrimental t o the character and sustainability of the  area.  
 
Major leisure or tourism developm ents on sites elsewhere will o nly be 
approved where it has been demonstrated that: 
1) All or part of the development could not be adequately 
accommodated on existing or potential sites in the above areas,  
and; 
2) They will provide major touri sm, leisure and/or regeneration  
benefits to the town, and 
3) The proposal will not detrime ntally affect the amenities of the 
occupiers of adjacent or nearby properties through noise, 
overlooking, overshadowing or  by creating a poor outlook. 
 
Summerhill will continue to be developed as a focus for access to the 
countryside, nature conservation and informal recreational and leisure 
activities such as walking, cycling and climbing. Proposals not  relating to its 
future development as a country p ark will not be permitted. 
 
The Council benefits greatly from the proximity of the Teesmout h National 
Nature Reserve, RSPB Saltholme Nat ure Reserve and Cowpen Bewley  
Woodland Park and will continue t o promote, encourage and impro ve green 
tourism through the provision of facilities for the observation  a n d  
interpretation of wildlife, hab itats and the natural environmen t.  
 
Leisure and tourism activities will only be approved where recr eational 
disturbance (e.g. walkers with dogs) is not identified as an is sue impacting 
upon European Directives, Sites of S pecial Scientific Interest (SSSIs) and 
Special Protection Areas (SPAs) , unless appropriate mitigation can be 
identified. 
 
Leisure and tourism developments within the rural area will onl y be 
appropriate where it is compliant with the policies set out wit hin the 
Protecting, Managing and Enhanci ng the Rural Area chapter of th is 
plan. 
 
The development of land for noisy outdoor sports and leisure ac tivities within 
the Borough will only be approved where: 
 
4) The site is not in close proximity to housing; 
5) Measures are taken to minimi se potential noise nuisance beyo nd 
the site boundaries, visual in trusion and overlooking. 
 
Smaller scale proposals for leisure and tourism outside of the identified 
areas will only be approved where  the developments benefit the local  210areas and there is no conflict with existing uses by way of use , amenity, 
noise or disturbance. 
 
‘More Vulnerable’ (See National Planning Practice Guidance floo d risk 
vulnerability classification) devel opment will not be allowed w ithin Flood 
Zone 2 and 3a unless supported by a Flood Risk Assessment that 
demonstrates that flood risk can b e effectively managed through out the 
lifetime of the development. 
 
 
The Marina 
14.18 The Marina area has develop ed significantly over the past  two decades acting 
as a driving force behind the re generation of Hartlepool and ad ding an extra 
dimension to the maritime herit age offer within Hartlepool. It will continue to be 
a major focus for tourism activity, the recent takeover of Hart lepool’s Maritime 
Experience by the National Museum of the Royal Navy presents th e next 
exciting step to development.  This new home of HMS Trincomalee  will 
accompany improved exhibition s pace and attractions and will pr ovide a 
catalyst for growth of all attractions in Hartlepool; it is env isaged that the 
museum will act as a hub to attract and disperse visitors to ot her tourist 
destinations across the town.  It is anticipated that this will  maintain and 
improve visitor numbers to the Borough and will see significant  investment into 
this sector.  The positive policy set out below aims to support  and facilitate this 
investment. 
 14.19 There are significant sites  within the Marina area which offer opportunity for 
development, these are the former Jackson’s Landing site at the  centre of the 
Marina and Trincomalee Wharf wh ich is a largely undeveloped sit e to the 
south of the Marina area.  Both si tes provide key investment op portunities for 
waterside development within the setting of the Marina and are priorities for 
the local authority to encourage  future viable uses for these s ites.    
 14.20 The wide range of restaurants available on Navigation Poi nt and the nearby 
accommodation complement the town  centre retail and leisure off er and attract 
customers from outside of the town. Supporting opportunities to  f u r t h e r  
enhance the Marina’s attractiveness to potential investors and tourists is a key 
priority for the Borough Council in the future. In this respect  the protection of 
waters within the Marina complex is important for the continued  attractiveness 
of the area for recreation in the form of water sports and coas tal wildlife 
conservation. It is therefore important to retain and enhance a ccess to the 
water and Marina.  
 
LT2: Tourism Development in the Marina 
The Marina will continue to be developed as a major tourist and  leisure 
attraction.  Tourist related facilities will be encouraged to c omplement those 
attractions already in place to create a tourism hub.  
 
Redevelopment of the former Jackson’s Landing site presents the  premium 
mixed use development opportunity within the Marina area as an exciting 
opportunity for tourism and leisure uses to be developed into a  bespoke, high 
quality, mixed-use, waterside development.    211 
In principle the following d evelopment would be supported on th is site: 
1) Landmark development such as a major visitor attraction; 
2) Cultural offer such as museu ms, exhibitions and event space;  
3) Conferencing facilities; 
4) Educational uses; 
5) Hotels and tourism accommodation; 
6) Small scale retail and commercial development, providing an 
alternative offer to the town centre; 
7) Residential units as a small ancillary element of mixed use 
developments will be supported; flats and apartments will only 
be permitted in cases of exceptional design;  
8) Public realm; and,  
9) High quality design which is complementary to and incorporat es 
the Seaton Highlight, enhancing the setting of the heritage ass et 
within the site.  
 
Redevelopment of Trincomalee Wharf as a mixed use site for resi dential, 
leisure, tourism, public realm, recreation and commercial uses will be 
supported. Proposals should comple ment development at the forme r 
Jackson’s Landing site and take advantage to the pivotal locati on of this site 
linking development of the Marina and National Museum of the Ro yal Navy 
with Church Street and the wider town centre.   
 
These developments should link to each other and to leisure and  tourism 
attractions across the Borough by incorporating and encouraging  
sustainable transport links through the provision and enhanceme nt of 
pedestrian and cycle routes, public realm and green infrastruct ure.   
 
Opportunities to improve connectivity with the water as part of  t h e  
redevelopment of the former Jacksons Landing site would be enco uraged. 
The Council will seek to protect the areas of  water within the Marina from 
development retaining the ambience and attraction of the Marina  
development as a whole.   
 
‘More Vulnerable’ (See National Planning Practice Guidance floo d risk 
vulnerability classification) devel opment will not be allowed w ithin Flood 
Zone 2 and 3a unless supported by a Flood Risk Assessment that 
demonstrates that flood risk can b e effectively managed through out the 
lifetime of the development. 
 
 Seaton Carew 
14.21 Seaton Carew is a traditional small seaside resort which attracts large 
numbers of day visitors all year  round; particularly during the  summer months.  
The promenade, with easy access to  the beach and sea, remains c entral to 
the popularity of Seaton Carew; t his freely accessible natural asset is 
complemented by the historic nat ure of Seaton Carew.  A number of major 
tourism and leisure projects have been developed in and around Seaton 
Carew in recent times, including  the Sports Domes, Play Builder  scheme and 
public realm improvements  to promenade and park.   
  21214.22 The resort is, however, in  need of further investment to build on these 
improvements to increase the r ange of facilities available to f urther enhance 
the visitor offer and widen the visitor appeal of the resort.  The built 
environment is also in need of investment.  The external appear ance of some 
of the properties requires enhanc ement and there are a number o f vacant 
commercial buildings within Seat on Carew which have a detriment al impact on 
the streetscape, the most prominent  of which is the Longscar Ce ntre. The 
large building, situat ed between The Front and the promenade, o ccupies a 
pivotal location in the townscape; the underuse of and physical  condition of 
the building has a significant detrimental impact on quality of  environment and 
the experience of Seaton Carew as  a quality seaside resort for residents and 
visitors. 
 14.23 The Borough Council’s prior ity is to improve the quality and experience of the 
environment to encourage visitors.  A masterplan has been devel oped for the 
area which sets out the following aims: 
 To develop a clean, family friendly environment; 
 To enhance public amenities, space and facilities for visitors  and 
residents; and 
 To support the economic v ibrancy of the area. 
The Seaton Carew Supplementary Pl anning Document is the basis f or this 
masterplan setting out guidelines for the development of the ar ea by securing 
a mix of commercial, leisure and housing in Seaton Carew. Impro vements to 
the promenade and addressing problem  buildings in Seaton Carew are key 
priorities.   
 14.24 In addition, improvements to public open space, connectiv ity within Seaton 
Carew, use of the beach and wider natural environment, to meet its full 
potential, and greater appreciation  of the historic environment  will build on and 
enhance the existing assets and provide key opportunities for e nhancing the 
overall visitor offer of the to wn that exists at Seaton Carew. 
 
LT3: Development of Seaton Carew 
Proposals for tourism and leisure developments within Seaton Ca rew, as 
identified on the Policies Map, will be permitted where they co mplement the 
character of the area and are in keeping with the development o f Seaton 
Carew as a seaside resort and prom ote opportunities for nature tourism.  
 
The Seaton Carew SPD identifies sites for commercial, recreatio nal and 
tourism facilities and residential development which will enhan ce the 
attraction of Seaton Carew for bot h residents and visitors.   
 
The Front and former Fairground site (4.76 hectares) is the foc us for 
regeneration of Seaton Carew as a seaside resort.  Development of this site 
should promote leisure and tourism uses which enhance the range  o f  
services available in Seaton Carew and takes full advantage of the location 
adjacent to the beach and the open aspect of the promenade. Ret ention and 
enhancement of public realm within this area is essential and c onsideration 
must be given to the impact upon the Conservation Area and othe r heritage 
assets in the vicinity of the site.  The Seaton Carew SPD sets out 
development and design principles;  these should be reflected in  development  213proposals. Residential uses are not considered to be appropriat e in this 
location between The F ront and the sea.   
 
For the redevelopment of the Longscar Centre site, the Borough Council will 
support proposals which: 
1) Reuse the current building with development appropriate to i ts 
beachside and open promenade setting. Development should enhanc e 
the current built form and improve connectivity with the adjace nt 
public realm, or 
2) Demolish and redevelop the site to enhance the quality of th e 
environment and visitor exp erience of Seaton Carew. 
 
Developments within, or which affect, the setting of the Conser vation Area, 
including developments within the vicinity of a Conservation Ar ea should 
take account of the character and setting of the Conservation A rea through 
appropriate design, scaling, siti ng, use of materials and impac t on the 
significance.  Proposals for external development of shops with in the 
Conservation Area will b e encouraged where t hey enhance the her itage asset, 
guidance is set out within the S hop Front and Commercial Fronta ges Design 
Guide Supplementary Planning Document. 
 
Development within Seaton Park is restricted to community, recr eational and 
leisure uses only.  Proposed development must be in keeping wit h the 
character of the park and should complement and enhance existin g facilities 
and the open aspect of the park should be retained.   
 
Further sports, leisure and recreational development may be app ropriate at 
the Sports Domes site providing that connectivity to Seaton Car ew is 
improved through the provision of  enhanced pedestrian and cycle  routes. 
 
Where appropriate the Council wil l seek the provision of interp retation to 
increase public understanding of t he Teesmouth and Cleveland Co ast SPA 
and Ramsar.   
  
 
Tourist Accommodation 
14.25 Hartlepool has seen an inc rease in the range of accommoda tion available for 
tourists and other visitors.  This is provided in several forms  including hotels, 
guesthouses, self-catering facilities, holiday lodges/chalets a nd touring/static 
caravan sites.  Despite a range of accommodation Hartlepool lac ks a high-end 
tourism offer.  The Council wi ll encourage the establishment of  further larger 
scale hotels and tourist accommodation within, primarily, the t own centre and 
Marina.   This will help to enc ourage the co ntinued viability a nd vitality of these 
areas and, along with the improvement in visitor attractions, w ill encourage 
longer visitor stays.    214 
14.26 Tourist accommodation at S eaton Carew will continue to ca ter for demand at 
the resort, primarily business tourism from the wider Tees Vall ey, and will also 
complement town-wide demand. The Headland is a suitable locatio n for 
accommodation such as guest houses and small hotels.   This lev el of 
provision should be in keeping with the character of the Headla nd.   Care w ill 
need to be taken to ensure that hotel uses do not have an adver se effect on 
the surrounding neighbourhood.    I n  addition, there has been a significant 
increase in domestic overnight t ourism for the purpose of busin ess creating 
further demand for midweek residential accommodation68, this has resulted in 
new hotels being built / extended  close to employment. The crit eria set out in 
Policy LT1 (Leisure and Tourism)  will be applied to new proposals for tourist 
accommodation. 
 14.27 Touring caravan sites, unless carefully sited and landsca ped, can have a 
detrimental impact particularly on the visual environment.   Ca re will need to 
be taken to ensure that adequate access can be provided.    The C ouncil has 
not identified any sites for touri ng caravans, however, there m ay be 
opportunities for a site, over th e plan period within the rural  area.  In addition, 
the rural area offers opportunities for the development of self  catering and bed 
and breakfast tourism accommodation and smaller scale caravan s ites 
through farm diversification schemes. 
 
LT4: Tourist Accommodation 
The Council will continue to encourage the enhancement of exist ing tourist 
accommodation and also the development of further tourist accom modation 
within the key tourist areas of t he Borough (the Town Centre an d Marina, the 
Headland, Seaton Carew and across the rural area). 
                                                           
68 Tourism Supply - Value of Tourism Industries, ONS data 2011, V isit England available at 
http://www.t-stats-uk.co.uk/visitengland/SummaryReport.aspx  
 215 
Proposals for new, or the extension of existing, accommodation will be 
supported to maintain and enhance an attractive, vibrant and vi able diverse 
tourism offer where they are: 
 
1) Of high quality design and materials in keeping with the cha racter 
of the area; 
2) Of an appropriate scale in-keeping with surrounding building s; 
and 
3) Located where the impact from increased visitors can be 
accommodated : 
a) By existing infrastructure capacity making best use of 
public transport provision and avoiding increased road 
congestion, and 
b) Without significant adverse impact upon the environment 
and biodiversity. 
 
Where appropriate the Council wil l seek the provision of interp retation to 
increase public understanding of t he Teesmouth and Cleveland Co ast SPA 
and Ramsar.   
 
 
LT5: Caravan Sites and Touring Caravan Sites 
Proposals for static, touring car avan and camping sites will on ly be approved 
where they are well screened so as not to intrude visually into  the landscape
and provided that: 
1) the surrounding infrastructure network is capable of 
accommodating the development;  
2) it is accessible by a choice of  means of transport to ensure  
sustainable linkages to amenities; 
3) appropriate landscaping is provided;  
4) adequate sewage and surface wa ter disposal facilities are av ailable; 
and 
5) there are appropriate on-site  amenity facilities for the sca le of 
development to help minimi se the need for travel. 
 
Where appropriate the Council will seek the provision of interp retation to 
increase public understanding of the Teesmouth and Cleveland Co ast SPA 
and Ramsar.    
 
Where appropriate the Council will seek the provision of a fina ncial 
contribution under Planning Oblig ations, to manage recreation o n the 
Teesmouth and Cleveland Coast SPA and Ramsar. 
 
Business tourism, eve nts and conferencing 
14.28 Hartlepool has a range of conferencing and events facilit ies for business and 
leisure.  The Borough Council wil l encourage further developmen ts which 
cater for such events.  More conference facilities and suitable  accommodation 
within Hartlepool can contribute to the whole tourism package o n offer in 
Hartlepool.    The Historic Quay, now part of the National Museum Royal Nav y,  216o f f e r s  a  k e y  l o c a t i o n  f o r  b u s i n e s s  t o u r i s m .    H o w e v e r ,  a s  p a r t  of the 
development of the Marina is set to become a key tourism and le isure hub, the 
Council believes that additional, alternative and complementary  facilities would 
offer a greater choice and increa sed attractiveness to potentia l conference and 
events clients.  In addition to t he Marina, Hartlepool College of Further 
Education has state of the art conferencing facilities and offe rs business and 
tourism related courses.   Theref ore the Borough Council will l ook to 
encourage further developments wh ich will create new facilities  for and to 
improve the business tourism and conference offer of Hartlepool .   
 
  
LT6: Business Tourism, Events and Conferencing 
The Council will encourage and promote improvements to existing  facilities 
and developments which complement the needs of business in term s of 
conferencing facilities and tourism. 
 
Proposals for development should be in accordance with policies  RC1 along 
with any other relevant polic ies on a case by c ase basis.  
  217 
15. THE HISTORIC ENVIRONMENT 
 
15.1 The Historic Envir onment is described as: 
“All aspects of the environment result ing from the interaction between people 
and places through time, including all surviving physical remains of past 
human activity, whether visible, bur ied or submerged, and landscaped and 
planted or managed fl ora.” (NPPF 2012) 
 
15.2 A Heritage Asset is a building, monument, site, place, are a or landscape 
identified as having a degree of significance meriting consider ation in planning 
decisions because of its heritage interest (NPPF Annex 2 ).  Heritage assets 
are of two types:  
1. those which have been recognised as  being nationally important and have 
been designated as such; these are designated heritage assets, and  
2. heritage assets that have not been designated, nevertheless some of 
which may be of national importance.  
 
15.3 Nationally there is high regar d for the preservation and e nhancement of the 
historic environment and heritage assets. As such this is an im portant 
component of the National Planning Policy Framework’s ambition to achieve 
sustainable development and the appropriate conservation of her itage assets 
forms one of the ‘Core Planning Principles’.  
 15.4 Hartlepool has a rich histor ic environment which makes a p ositive contribution 
to quality of life for residents.   This fabric includes a varie ty of important 
designated heritage assets including conservation areas, listed  individual and 
groups of buildings, Scheduled M onuments, a Protected Wreck, a registered 
park and garden and historic land scapes all of which are of spe cial historic 
and architectural character on a local or national scale. In ad dition, there are 
Heritage Assets that have not been designated which include Loc ally Listed 
Buildings and Archaeological S ites and Monuments which are reco rded on the 
Historic Environment Record (HER) for the area which is held by  T e e s  
Archaeology. The record is cons tantly changing and increasing a s new 
information emerges. 
 
15.5 The historic environment s erves an important role in defin ing the town’s 
character, culture and heritage. It provides a direct reminder of the historical 
evolution of Hartlepool, intrinsic  to the sense of place experi enced today.  As 
development creates a constant s tate of change, consideration o f the impact 
of this on heritage assets and t he historic environment is crit ical.  When this is 
not carefully managed and protected there is a risk of negative  changes upon 
the historic character of an ar ea impacting upon the retention of heritage 
assets, an irreplaceable resource for the interest and enjoymen t of current and 
future generations.   
 
15.6 Opportunities for protecti on, enhancement and development can be aligned 
with heritage conservation as the historic environment and heri
tage assets 
have a positive role to play wit hin the built environment contr ibuting towards 
economic development, regenerati on and the creation of sustaina ble 
communities. It helps promote H artlepool as an attractive place  in which to 
live, work and visit. A number of prominent visitor attractions  in Hartlepool  218have been developed on this ethos  of using heritage to support economic 
regeneration, tourism development  and cultural assets.  For exa mple Christ 
Church, a converted listed church, houses an art gallery and th e Heugh 
Battery, a scheduled monument, is now a military museum. 
 
Heritage Assets in Hartlepool   
15.7 The Designated Heritage Assets in the Borough of Hartlepoo l comprise eight 
Scheduled Monuments, 213 Listed Bu ildings, one Protected Wreck Site, one 
Registered Park and Garden and eight Conservation Areas. 
 
15.8 The eight Scheduled Monument s include areas of land such a s Low Throston 
deserted medieval village, struc tures like the Town Wall and oc cupied sites 
such as Heugh Battery.  The Prote cted Wreck is located in Seato n Carew and 
was discovered in 1996 on the beach after the shifting levels i n the foreshore 
sands exposed the outline of a w ooden ship.  It is thought to b e the remains of 
an east coast collier brig and is an example of one of very few  nationally. 
 15.9 The eight Conservation Areas are of varying character, inc luding two located 
within the central commercial area of Hartlepool (Stranton and Church Street), 
two located within the rural v illages on the outskirts of the t own (Elwick and 
Greatham), two located on the c oast (Headland and Seaton Carew) , one 
centred around Ward Jackson Park , a registered park and garden (Park), and 
a further area located in the predominantly late 19
th century residential area 
(Grange). 
 15.10 The full range of Heritage Assets for the area can be see n on the Tees 
Archaeology HER which is availabl e online and includes records of shipwrecks 
in the area and the results of t he ‘Rapid Coastal Zone Assessme nt’ funded by 
Historic England which identifi ed additional sites along the En glish coastline.  
 15.11 Hartlepool Borough Council has also identified 186 locall y listed buildings, 
which comprise buildings, st ructures, parks and open spaces tha t are 
considered to be of special local architectural or historic int erest.  These are 
 219included in the HER but a separate list of these can also be fo und on the 
Hartlepool Borough Council website. 
 
Heritage Strategy – Positive Approach 
15.12 In recognition of the value and important role the histor ic environment has to 
offer for the future of Hartl epool the Local Authority has deve loped a Heritage 
Strategy.  This document gives f urther detail on the context of  the historic 
environment, the challenges faced and details a positive and pr oactive action 
plan for addressing issues.   
 15.13 The Strategy also sets out monitoring and review procedur es to ensure the 
continued protection and enhance ment of all heritage assets.  T hese include 
Conservation Area Appraisals in place for the Headland, Park an d Grange 
Conservation Areas and visual assessments undertaken for Seaton  Carew, 
Church Street, Elwick, Greatham  and Stranton.  In order to asse ss the impact 
of development on heritage asse ts the Borough Council is commit ted to 
systematically reviewing one conse rvation area a year based on the oldest 
first.  Reviews will consider the appropriateness of Conservati on Area 
boundaries and the effectiveness of Article 4 Directions.  In a ddition two 
Conservation Area management plans  will be reviewed per year.   The list of 
locally significant buildings i s reviewed biennially and ‘Herit age at Risk in 
Hartlepool’ is regularly reviewed to ensure that the list conti nues to identify the 
rich heritage that local resi dents treasure and negative impact s on the historic 
environment are monitored and recorded.   
 
15.14 The Borough Council’s str ategic approach strengthens comm unication of the 
significant consideration given to the historic environment by everyone 
concerned with development and place making, particularly those  whose 
actions may affect it.  This also raises awareness of heritage values. It is only 
through understanding the signific ance of a place that it is po ssible to assess 
how the qualities that people value are vulnerable to harm or l oss. The 
approach in Hartlepool to monitoring and review set out in the Strategy 
strengthens communication.  The St rategy for the Historic Envir onment details 
heritage assets within the vicini ty of development sites alloca ted within this 
plan providing an evidential star ting point for the considerati on of the impact of 
development on heritage assets. 
 
15.15 The combination of reviewin g Conservation Areas, identify ing locally 
significant buildings and the heritage at risk in the Borough a ims to provide a 
comprehensive set of data on t he character and appearance of th e townscape 
which is held in the authority’s Historic Environment Record.  This record 
provides a sound basis not just fo r the conservation of the his toric environment 
but also for developments which impact on heritage assets.  It ensures that all 
development sustains and enhances  the townscape of Hartlepool. 
 15.16 This strategic approach wil l continue to be guided by the
 Borough Council’s 
Conservation Area Advisory Co mmittee.  The committee, comprisin g local 
residents associations, parish councils and amenity body’s, act s as a sounding 
board highlighting topics releva nt to local people that should be addressed.  
The Borough Council’s Heritage Champion chairs this Committee; this 
ensures key links with Planning Committee. 
  220Investment in the His toric Environment 
15.17 In recent years the authorit y has sought to consolidate i ts heritage assets 
through the provision of grants to improve the wider historic e nvironment along 
with focusing on indivi dual properties to accumulatively achiev e a goal of 
enhancement.  Significant schemes have included a £7.36 million  Townscape 
Heritage Initiative Scheme in  the Headland Conservation Area wh ich tackled 
key buildings, individual housin g grants and environmental impr ovements.  
More recently the authority prov ided grant assistance to reside ntial properties 
that were listed or located in a  conservation area for small sc hemes to make 
houses sound and restore traditi onal details.  The total value of investment 
from the local authority in the C onservation Grant Scheme to da te has been 
£535,905; this equates to 147 gran ts from 2006-2015 (no scheme in 2013). 
 15.18 The Borough Council continues to recognise the important role heritage has 
for future regeneration and economic  prosperity of the town.  A  key area of 
focus within the Hartlepool Visio n is the Church Street Conserv ation Area; In 
2016 the local authority secured £1.2million in grant funding f rom the Heritage 
Lottery Fund to support a Townscape Heritage Scheme focusing on  t h e  
improvement of buildings within,  and the setting of, the Conser vation Area.  
This links directly to investment from the Cleveland College of  Art and Design 
who are relocating and develop ing in the area and the wider Inn ovation and 
Skills Quarter, improving the hist oric environment can have a d irect impact on 
economic viability and vitality by creating quality places wher e businesses 
want to locate and people want to live.   
 15.19 Heritage assets can offer in teresting and flexible spaces  for living, working and 
playing however due to protec tion requirements enhancements oft en require 
specialist expertise which can be expensive.  This presents cha llenges for 
owners and potential occupiers as in some cases suitable uses c an be limited; 
for this reason some heritage assets remain vacant.  It is a ke y priority for the 
local authority to encourage suit able uses to ensure heritage b uildings remain 
in active use consistent with their conservation.  The Borough Council will 
continue to protect and will a ctively encourage the enhancement  of heritage 
assets, acknowledging that sympathetic changes to heritage asse t s  m a y  b e  
required from time to time to e nsure such heritage assets remai n used and 
valued. The use of constructive conservation approaches and pos itive use of 
planning powers will help achieve this.  
 
15.20 The Borough Council will c onsider the future preparation of a Heritage 
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) to provide further guidan ce and 
clarity on development relating to the historic environment and  will take 
account of Conservation Area Appraisals, Visual Assessments, an d Design 
Statements in determining applicat ions for development, alterat
ion and 
demolition. Considerat ion will be given to providing additional  p r o t e c t i o n  
including the possible use of Article 4 Directions. 
 15.21 The Borough Council will draw on existing skills to inves tigate funding 
opportunities for the historic env ironment to continue this inv estment where 
possible and advise individual bu ildings owners of the opportun ities that may 
be open to them to directly apply  for financial assistance. 
  221HE1: Heritage Assets 
The Borough Council will seek to preserve, protect and positive ly enhance all 
heritage assets.  Proposals which will achieve this or better r eveal the 
significance of the asset  will be supported. 
 
Proposals for any development (including change of use, extensi ons, 
additions, alterations, and demo lition (partial or total)) whic h has an impact 
on a heritage asset (both designa ted and non-designated) and it s setting will 
be required to: 
1) Preserve and /or enhance its special character, distinctiven ess, 
setting and townscape or landscape value in a manner which is 
appropriate to its significance; 
2) Be of high quality design which has a positive impact on the  
heritage asset. 
3) Ensure the sensitive and vi able use of the heritage asset. 
 
The Borough Council will seek to refuse proposals which lead to  substantial 
harm to, or result in the total loss of significance of, a desi gnated heritage 
asset unless it is evidenced that the harm or loss is necessary  to achieve 
substantial public benefit69 in accordance with national policy. 
 
Where a development proposal will  lead to less than substantial  harm to the 
significance of a designated heri tage asset it will only be per mitted where 
that harm is outweighed by the public benefits of the proposal.  
 
When assessing the impact of a proposal on a non-designated her itage asset 
a balanced judgment should be made.  In all cases great weight will be given 
to the assets’ conservation, pro tection and enhancement. 
 
In exceptional cases where the loss of a heritage asset is just ified based 
on the merits of development and public benefits of the proposa l, the 
Borough Council will ensure, through appropriate planning condi tions 
and obligations, that the developm ent will be implemented as pr oposed.   
 
Proposals should be in accordance with the Planning Obligations  SPD 
and where appropriate mitigation towards enhancing / protecting  a nearby 
asset by means of compensation fo r any loss may be required. 
 
Where appropriate the Borough Council will seek the provision o f 
interpretation both on and / or off site to increase public und erstanding of the 
heritage asset. 
                                                           
69 Public benefits may follow from  many developments and could be anything that delivers economic, 
social or environmental progress as described in the National P lanning Policy Framework ( Paragraph 
7). Public benefits should flow  from the proposed development. T hey should be of a nature or scale to 
be of benefit to the public at lar ge and should not just be a p rivate benefit. Howev er, benefits do not 
always have to be visible or a ccessible to the public in order to be genuine public benefits. 
Public benefits may includ e heritage benefits, such as: 
 sustaining or enhancing the significance of a heritage asset a nd the contribution of its setting 
 reducing or removing risks to a heritage asset 
 securing the optimum viable use of a heritage asset in support of its long term conservation   222 
A Heritage Statement should be provided with all applications a ffecting a 
heritage asset.  It should be proportionate to the significance  of the heritage 
asset under consideration.  This should detail the degree to wh ich proposed 
changes enhance or detract from that significance and the abili ty to 
appreciate it and demonstrate understanding of the potential im pact of the 
proposal on the assets significan ce and setting.  The Hartlepoo l HER should 
be referred to along with the Har tlepool Strategy for the Histo ric Environment.
 
 
 
HE2: Archaeology 
The Borough Council will seek to protect, enhance and promote H artlepool’s 
archaeological heritage and, where appropriate, encourage impro ved 
interpretation and presentation to the public. 
 
Where development proposals may af fect sites of known, or possi ble, 
archaeological interest an assessment from an appropriate speci alist source 
will be required prior to any planning application being determ ined (and may 
in some instances be required at validation stage determined on  a site by site 
basis). This assessment must include consultation of the Histor ic 
Environment Record and should be carried out during an early st age of the 
planning process to identify the likely impact on known or pote ntial heritage 
assets and assessment made in rela tion to their significance. T he 
assessment will also provide the basis for potential mitigation  strategies, 
including excavation and investigat ion, preservation in-situ of  important 
remains and archaeological sites,  provision of interpretation b oth on and / or 
off site to increase public unde rstanding of the heritage asset . 
 
 
Planning for Sustaina ble Conservation Areas  
15.22 There are eight Conservati on Areas across the Borough, fi ve of which are 
located within the main built up area these include the histori c part of the 
Headland, Church Street, Grange,  Park and Stranton. The other t hree cover 
the historic parts of Seaton Ca rew and the villages of Elwick a nd Greatham. 
These areas have benefited from public sector investment in rec ent years in 
recognition of their intrin sic value and importance.   223 
15.23 Each of these Conservati on Areas has unique qualities and  features which 
help to define their individual character. These may include gr oupings, 
orientation, massing and style of  buildings; special architectu ral details such 
as windows, doors and shop front design; finishing materials, d ecoration and 
ornamentation; streetscape, tre es, hedgerows, landscaping and b oundary 
enclosure, views and vistas. In considering applications for de velopment, 
alteration or demolition in thes e areas it is important that th ese special 
features are preserved and enh anced and that the quality of des ign is of a 
high standard. This does not m ean that no changes will be permi tted within 
Conservation Areas, but it does require that the significance o f each element 
of the Conservation Areas is u nderstood so that any works can b e better 
informed.   Potential harm to the Conservation Areas should be avoided but 
where harm cannot be avoided, suc h harm will be weighed against  the wider 
public benefits. 
 
15.24 Any development, alteration or demolition, should be care fully considered and 
designed to ensure that they are  complementary to and positivel y enhance the 
character and setting of a Conservation Area and heritage asset s within it. A 
high standard of design is expec ted for development in these ar eas and great 
care should be taken to ensure that unsympathetic design and in compatible 
changes of use do not occur. 
 15.25 The Borough Council is committed to its duty to effective ly manage the 
Boroughs Conservation Areas, thr ough the review of appraisals, visual 
assessments and management plans a llowing the reassessment of p riorities. 
Half of the Conservation Areas i n Hartlepool (Church Street, He adland, Park 
and Seaton Carew) are currently ‘ at risk’; this highlights that  these areas have 
been subject to neglect, decay or inappropriate development, wi th 
incremental and sustained chang e gradually weakening the charac ter of these 
heritage assets. 
 15.26 The aim of identifying thes e Conservation Areas as ‘at ri sk’ is that the 
importance of preservation a nd enhancement of these heritage as sets is 
highlighted publicly.  The Boroug h Council is actively seeking to improve these 
 224areas to ensure that the character is preserved and enhanced fo r the benefit 
and enjoyment of future generations, ultimately with the aim of  removing their 
at risk status. 
 
HE3: Conservation Areas 
The Borough Council will seek to ensure that the distinctive ch aracter of 
Conservation Areas within the Borough will be conserved or enha nced 
through a constructive conservation approach. Proposals for dev elopment 
within Conservation Areas will need  to demonstrate that they wi ll conserve or 
positively enhance the charact er of the Conservation Areas.  
 
In determining applications wit hin Conservation Areas and withi n their 
setting  particular regard will be given to the following:  
1) The scale and nature of the development in terms of 
appropriateness to the character of the particular conservation  
area; 
2) The design, height, orientat ion, massing, means of enclosure , 
materials, finishes and decoration to ensure development is 
sympathetic to and/or complementary to the character and 
appearance of the conservation area; 
3) The retention of original feat ures of special architectural interest 
such as walls, gateway entrances and architectural details;  
4) Retention of existing trees, hedgerows and landscape feature s 
and appropriate landscaping improvements incorporated into 
design proposals; 
5) The protection of important v iews and vistas and settings wi thin 
and into / out of the conservation area;  
6) Car parking, where required, should be located, designed and  
landscaped in such a way as to minimise impact on the character  
and appearance of the heritage asset, and 
7) Guidance provided in relevan t Conservation Area appraisals, 
management plans, visual assessments, design statements and 
supplementary planning documents.  
 
Proposals for demolition within Conservation Areas  will be carefully 
assessed, the Borough Council will only permit the demolition o f buildings 
and other features and structur es in a Conservation Area if it can be 
demonstrated that: 
8) The removal would help to conserve and/or enhance the charac ter, 
appearance and significance of  the Conservation Area, and 
9) Its structural condition is such that it is beyond reasonabl e  economic 
repair, or 
10) The removal is necessary to deliver a public benefit which substantially 
outweighs the impact on the signi ficance of the heritage asset.   
 
In the exceptional circumstances where any demolition is grante d, the 
Borough Council will require that detailed proposals for the sa tisfactory re-
development or after treatment of the site are secured before d emolition 
takes place. This will include t he requirement to record and ad vance 
understanding of the significance of the heritage assets to be lost (wholly or 
in part) in a manner that is pro portionate to their importance.   225 
Developments which affect the setting of a Conservation Area, i ncluding 
developments within the vicinity  of a Conservation Area should take account 
of the character and setting of the Conservation Area through a ppropriate 
design, scaling, siting, use of m aterials and impact on the sig nificance.  
 
Where there are important views and vistas within and otherwise  affecting the 
setting of a Conservation Area th ese should be protected or enh anced. 
 
The Borough Council will protect  and enhance Conservation Areas  and their 
features as part of a development. 
 
The Borough Council may consider the use of Article 4 Direction s in order to 
protect the integrity of buildin gs within Con servation Areas. 
 
 
Listed Buildings and Structures 
15.27 There are over 200 buildings  and structures which are lis ted as being of 
architectural or historic intere st within the Borough. Listed b uildings are an 
important part of Hartlepool’s h eritage and deemed of national importance. 
Each listed building has unique qualities and features which he lp to define 
their individual character; the pr ocess of listing has identifi ed their significance 
to be celebrated and to ensure that these important components of our 
historic environment can be enjoyed by present and future gener ations.  
These may include building style,  special architectural details , internal 
features, means of enclosure, and as with buildings in conserva tion areas, 
their massing, orientation and co ntribution as part of a group of buildings may 
help define the character of the area. It is important that the se buildings and 
their special features are cons erved and enhanced. This does no t mean that 
no changes will be permitted to listed buildings but the qualit y of any 
alterations or additions needs to be of a high standard and of an appropriate 
design. 
 15.28 The Borough Council has fo r many years proactively suppor ted and 
encouraged investment in listed buildings through out the town a imed at 
conserving and enhancing their physical character and facilitat ing new uses 
for buildings at risk. Assistance has been both monetary and ad visory towards 
restoration and replacement of im portant architectural features  to large scale 
grants for structural repairs and comprehensive refurbishment t o support 
restoration and reuse of larger  key vacant or underused buildin gs. These have 
often formed part of wider regener ation programmes. Notable suc cesses have 
included restoration and refurbis hment of Christ Church to crea t e  a  t o u r i s t  
information centre and art gallery, the former Co-op Central St ores within the 
town centre to residential and business use and the former Jesm ond Road 
Primary School into residentia l apartments.  The Heritage Lotte ry Funding 
secured in 2016 will support the restoration and refurbishment of buildings 
(including listed and locally list ed) in the Church Street Cons ervation Area. 
 15.29 In recognition of their val ue and importance the Borough Council will continue 
to be proactive in protecting,  enhancing and actively encouragi ng 
improvements to Listed Buildings  and structures. Any developmen t, alteration 
or demolition should be carefu lly managed and designed to ensur e that they  226are in keeping with and positivel y enhance the assets significa nce, character 
and setting.  The Borough Council recognises that the heritage assets are 
irreplaceable therefore the rete ntion and enhancement is vital to ensure their 
preservation for future generations. 
 
HE4: Listed Buildings and Structures 
The Borough Council will seek to conserve or enhance the town’s  listed 
buildings by resisting unsympathet ic alterations, encouraging a ppropriate 
physical improvement work, supporting appropriate and viable pr oposals to 
secure their re-use and restoration.  
 
In determining applications for listed buildings and structures  proposals 
should: 
1) Use traditional materials in sympathetic and complementary d esigns 
which are in keeping with the character and special interest of  t h e  
Heritage asset; 
2) Retain internal features and fi ttings which comprise an inte gral part 
of the character and special interest of the building, and; 
3) Support the enhancement or via ble use/re-use of the building .  
 
In the case of total demolition:  
4) There is no appropriate or viable use for the heritage asset  and 
appropriate marketing has demonstrated this; and  
5)  The fabric of the building is beyond reasonable economic re pair; and 
6) Retention and restoration th rough some form of charitable or  
community ownership is not p ossible or suitable; and 
7)  The harm or loss is outweighed by the benefit of bringing t he site 
back into use. 
 
In the case of partial demolition:  
8)  The part of the building to be demolished is beyond economi c repair, 
and;  
9)  The partial loss of the str ucture and/or architectural feat ures will not 
materially detract from the special character of the building c ausing 
substantial harm; and  
10) Evidence is provided to demons trate that the demolition wil l safeguard 
and enhance the remaining el ement of the heritage asset. 
 
Where any demolition is involved the Borough Council will requi re that 
detailed proposals for the satis factory redevelopment or after treatment of the 
site are secured before demolition takes place. This will inclu de the 
requirement to record and advance understanding of the signific ance of the 
heritage assets to be lost (wholly or in part) in a manner that  is proportionate 
to their importance and the impact. 
 
Setting 
To protect the significance of a listed building the Borough Co uncil will 
ensure harm is not caused through inappropriate development wit hin its 
setting.  Design should be sympathetic to and take advantage of , 
opportunities to enhance the setti ng of the listed building or structure.  
   227The Borough Council will seek to refuse developments to, or wit hin the 
setting of, a listed building or structure which will result in  t h e  s u b s t a n t i a l  
harm or total loss of significance of a listed building unless i t  c a n  b e  
demonstrated that this loss and/or harm is necessary to achieve  substantial 
public benefit which outweighs  this loss and/or harm.   
 
Where it is considered that a proposal will result in less than  substantial harm 
to the significance of a listed building or structure this harm  should be 
weighed against the public b enefits of the proposals. 
 
 
Locally Listed Buildings and Structures 
15.30 The Borough Council has put  together a Local List to iden tify buildings, 
structures, parks, gardens and open spaces in Hartlepool which are thought to 
be of special local architectural or historic interest, these a re non-designated 
heritage assets.  These assets do not have statutory protection  however their 
intrinsic value and contributions  to the character of their loc ality and 
determination of the sense of p lace render their importance and  every effort 
should be made to retain and wh ere possible enhance them.  
 15.31 To identify and encourage t he protection of locally impor tant heritage assets 
as well as raise the profile of local history, heritage and con servation of local 
distinctiveness the compiled Loc al List will be regularly revie wed and updated.  
This will ensure all buildings w hich make a significant contrib ution to their 
locality and setting however ar e not considered of significance  to be listed are 
included on the local list.  Com pilation of the list involves r esidents creating a 
sense of local ownership of t he significance of these heritage assets.  
 15.32 In recognition of their cont ribution to the character of their locality there will be 
a presumption against the demolit ion or removal of important fe atures of 
buildings included on the List o f Locally Important Buildings.  
 
HE5: Locally Listed Buildings and Structures 
The Borough Council will support the retention of heritage asse ts on the List 
of Locally Important Buildings particularly when viable appropr iate uses are 
proposed. 
 
In determining applications f or planning permission that affect  entries on the 
List of Locally Important Buildings particular regard to the fo llowing is 
necessary: 
1) The historic or architectur al importance of the building, 
2) Features which contribute signi ficantly to the character of the 
building, 
3) The group value, 
4) Their contribution to the appearance of the locality, 
5) Their scarcity val ue to the Borough, 
6) The design and means of e nclosure of the proposal,   
7) The scale, nature and importance of the proposed redevelopme nt 
which should clearly demonstrate how it would conserve or 
enhance the site or the setti ng of other buildings nearby, 
8) The works would support the enhancement of viable use/re-use  of  228the remaining part o f the building, and;  
9) Any redevelopment would resu lt in a public benefit which 
outweighs the loss of any p art of the building.  
 
Where a proposal affects the significance of a non-designated h eritage asset 
a balanced judgment should be weighed between the scale or the harm or 
loss against the public benefits of the proposal.  
 
Where any demolition is involved the Borough Council will requi re that 
detailed proposals for the satis factory redevelopment or after treatment of the 
site are secured before demolition takes place. This will inclu de the 
requirement to record and advance understanding of the signific ance of the 
heritage assets to be lost (wholly or in part) in a manner that  is proportionate 
to their importance and the impact. 
 
The Borough Council may consider the use of Article 4 Direction s in order to 
protect the integrity of buildings including on the List of Loc ally Important 
Buildings. 
 
Historic Shopping Parades 
15.33 There are a number of hist oric shopping parades within Co nservation Areas in 
Hartlepool, those which are sign ificant examples including mult iple buildings 
with traditional shop fronts in: 
 Stranton / Vicarage Gardens 
 The Front, Seaton 
 Church Street 
 
15.34 Each of these areas has benef itted from significant grant  investment where 
building owners have been encouraged to invest in the fabric of  the building, 
reinstating traditional features  such as shop fronts, windows a nd signage to 
improve the historic integrity of these heritage assets within the historic 
environment.  Protecting investm ent from incremental negative c hanges is an 
ongoing priority for the Borough Council.   
 
HE6: Historic Shopping Parades 
The Borough Council will support the retention of historic shop  fronts in the 
following shopping parades: 
a) Stranton / Vicarage Gardens 
b) The Front, Seaton 
c) Church Street 
 
Replacement shop fronts should respond to the context reinforci ng or 
improving the wider appearance  of the shopping parade within th e street. 
 
The preservation of traditiona l examples of shop frontages is i mportant for 
maintaining our highly valued built heritage and links with the  past however 
emphasis should also be placed on ensuring high standards of de sign for all 
shop fronts, be they traditional or contemporary in style. 
 
Development proposals should be compliant with Shop Front and 
Commercial Frontages Design Guide Supplementary Planning Docume nt.  229 
Heritage at Risk 
15.35 Heritage at Risk relates to those heritage assets which a re most at risk of 
being lost as a result of neglect, decay or inappropriate devel opment. 
This presents the key challen ge to the local authority in manag ing the Historic 
Environment.  In Hartlepool cu rrently four of the boroughs eigh t Conservation 
Areas are classified as at risk by Historic England.  There are  also currently 
Scheduled Monuments and ecclesiast ical buildings on the nationa l register.   
 15.36 The local authority continues to proactively manage herit age assets 
throughout the Borough and in addition to those heritage assets  identified as 
‘at risk’ by Historic England t he local authority has identifie d those at risk and 
placed these on a register.  The  register will be reviewed regu larly to seek to 
accurately define the state of  the Borough’s heritage assets.  The authority will 
work with owners to find solutions to remove buildings from the  list, aiming to 
remove one building from the list each year.  This work will in clude actively 
seeking uses for vacant buildin gs including, where appropriate,  marketing 
buildings and directly finding potential occupiers.  In additio n the Borough 
Council will work closely with owners to advise them of the pro cesses of 
making buildings sound and viable for future occupiers.  To sup port this 
development of a Heritage at Risk Strategy as an addendum to th e Hartlepool 
Heritage Strategy will be considered. 
 
15.37 It is noticeable that whilst schemes have come forward fo r properties which 
have been vacant for a prolonged period across the town there h as been less 
interest in structures within the town centre.   
 15.38 Buildings located within the town centre which have been vacant for a long 
period can become at risk as no suitable use can be found and, even if one is 
identified, there may be a conser vation deficit which makes suc h buildings 
unattractive and unviable to investors.  The investment generat ed by the 
Innovation and Skills Quarter and  the Regeneration Master Plan,  both of which 
focus on the town centre, should assist in funding for those as sets at risk.  
This will specifically benefit heritage at risk in the Church S treet Conservation 
Area as funding secured by the Borough Council for a Townscape Heritage 
Scheme will target grant s at such properties. 
 15.39 The Borough Council is proactively looking at the powers available to ensure 
that development of such proper ties is encouraged.  For example , the 
introduction of a Local Developm ent Order in the Church Street Conservation 
Area will simplify planning permission requirements which will lead to a 
reduction to the perceived barriers to encouraging investment i nto the area.  
 15.40 A further issue for the loca l authority is preventative a ction to ensure further 
incremental negative changes to heritage assets do not occur, t he aim of this 
is to ensure further heritage assets do not become ‘at risk’.  This is a particular 
issue impacting on Conservation A reas across the town and a key  contributor 
towards the Conservation Areas currently at risk in Hartlepool.   Advice will be 
provided by the authority in the form of leaflets to owners of relevant buildings 
for the maintenance and improvem ent of their properties.  Leafl ets are already 
provided on replacement windows and doors and this suite of inf ormation will 
be expanded to include other topi cs such as maintenance of buil dings, railings  230and shop fronts.  This will provi de building owners with source s of guidance 
when carrying out work to their property and assist in reinforc ing the sense of 
place. 
 
HE7: Heritage at Risk 
Retention, protection and enhan cement of heritage assets classi fied as ‘at 
risk’ is a priority for the Borough Council. The Borough Counci l will support 
the development of heritage assets which will positively conser ve and 
enhance these assets removing them from being classified as at risk and 
addressing issues of neglect , decay or other threat.   
 
In exceptional circumstances wher e a heritage asset is at risk and requires 
significant repairs to maintain or enhance its heritage value a nd the cost for 
repair and/or investigation is undeliverable by any other means , the 
redevelopment of the wider site  may be considered.  However thi s will only 
be an option when the proposed d evelopment does not create subs tantial 
harm or total loss of significan ce of a heritage asset.  In the  case of less than 
significant harm to the heritag e asset it must be demonstrated that any loss 
and/or harm is necessary and outweighed by the need to achieve substantial 
public benefit.  Where is it evi denced that risk has come about  as the result 
of deliberate neglect or damage , enablement development will no t be 
supported.  
 
Such development will be assessed on a site by site basis to se cure the long 
term future of a heritage asset. Any such scheme will also need  to be 
supported by Historic England a nd any other relevant statutory agencies. 
 
This policy should be read in c onjunction with and in accordanc e with the 
Heritage Chapter of the Planni ng Obligations SPD to establish a ny 
requirement for mitigation agai nst any harm to heritage assets.  
 
Where the Borough Council consider s that the condition of the h eritage asset 
continues to deteriorate and pos itive action is not demonstrate d by the 
owners to address this decline,  use of Compulsory Purchase Powe rs will be 
considered to safeguard the f uture of the heritage asset.    23116. NATURAL ENVIRONMENT AND GREEN NETWORKS 
 
16.1 In line with the Government’s emerging Natural Capital age nda, the 
Borough Council recognises the im portant role that Hartlepool’s  natural 
environment plays in enhancing peop le’s quality of life and imp roving 
quality of place.  The benefits of a high quality natural envir onment run 
as a cross-cutting theme through many of the policies and propo sals of 
the Local Plan.  A high quality environment can: 
  
 Encourage more people to liv e and work in Hartlepool 
 Complement efforts to attract new  economic growth and investme nt 
 Help to increase the number of visitors and boost the tourism 
economy 
 Provide more opportunities for  leisure and recreation with 
consequent benefits for people’ s health and well-being 
 Support measures to adapt to and mitigate against the potentia l 
impacts of climate change 
 16.2 The natural environment and green network policies in the Local Plan 
are designed to: 
 
 Protect and enhance the varied natural landscapes and geologic al 
features of the Borough 
 Maintain and enhance biodiversi ty, including opportunities thr ough 
development  
 Develop a green infrastructure network that provides a wide ra nge of 
benefits for local people and wildlife 
 Ensure that there are sufficient  more formal playing pitches a nd 
incidental open space to meet the needs of local communities, a nd 
that such green space is adequately protected 
 
Hartlepool’s Natural Environment and Green Networks 
16.3 The landscape character of  Hartlepool’s countryside consis ts of two 
distinct areas – the Durham Magnesian Limestone Plateau to the north 
and the Tees Lowlands i n the west and south
70.  The Durham 
Magnesian Limestone Plateau is an open, agricultural landscape with 
sharply defined boundaries in the  form of a steep limestone esc arpment 
to the west and a coastline of cliffs and bays.  The Limestone Plateau 
just reaches its southern and eas tern extent within the norther n part of 
Hartlepool Borough. An aquifer si ts below the Magnesian Limesto ne 
Plateau which is an important sour ce of drinking water for Hart lepool 
and other surrounding urban areas. The limestone escarpment is a 
prominent feature in the north west of the Borough and is the l ocation of 
an active limestone quarry at Hart.  In the north of the Boroug h the 
wooded Thorpe Bulmer Dene cuts i nto the landscape from the coas t. 
 
                                                           
70 Detailed profiles of these Natu ral Character Areas can be down loaded from the 
Government’s website: www.gov.uk /government/publications/nation al-character-area-profiles-
data -for-local-decision-making/ national-character-area-profile s.  23216.4 The Tees Lowlands characte r area forms a broad, open plain  
dominated by the meandering River Tees and its tributaries, wit h wide 
views to distant hills to the south.  Within Hartlepool, the Te es Lowlands 
comprise broad low-lying and gently undulating farmland and, to wards 
the south east of the Borough, mer ge into the flat, estuarine l andscape 
around the mouth of  the River Tees.   
 16.5 In 2000, the Borough Council  produced a Landscape Characte r 
Assessment
71 which contains a detailed analysis of the Hartlepool 
landscape and provides a tool that  can assist with informed dec ision 
making regarding development proposals and in drawing up propos als 
to enhance the landscape and natural environment. 
 16.6 The Borough’s coastline is i mportant for its ecological an d wildlife 
interest, particularly for inte rnationally important population s of 
migratory and wintering water bi rds.  The coastal strip also ha s areas of 
geological importance, including  the nationally important Hartl epool 
Submerged Forest Site of Speci al Scientific Interest (SSSI).  T he 
coastline is also an important  asset in providing opportunities  f o r  
recreation and tourism – Seaton Carew and its beaches have long  been 
a popular day visit attraction for people from Hartlepool and f urther 
afield.   
 
16.7 The mosaic of intertidal and wetland habitats within the T ees Estuary 
are internationally designated as  the Teesmouth and Cleveland C oast 
Special Protection Area (SPA) and a Ramsar site
72, due to its 
importance for water birds.  Par t of Hartlepool’s coastline is also 
designated as an SPA and currently there are proposals to exten d the 
SPA designation to cover the whol e of the coastline.  Currently , there 
are four nationally important Sit es of Special Scientific Inter est (SSSI) 
within the Borough, and four SSSIs partially located in the Bor ough.  
There is a National Nature Reser ve designated on part of the Te es 
Estuary, and currently there are six local nature reserves, for ty seven 
Local Wildlife Sites, and six Loc al Geological Sites within the  Borough. 
 
                                                           
71 Hartlepool Landscape As sessment; Landmark Pa rtnership on behal f of Hartlepool Borough 
Council, 2000  
72 A Ramsar site is a wetland o f international importance designa ted under the Ramsar 
Convention 1971  
 23316.8 The southern end of the Du rham Heritage Coast is the polit ical 
boundary with Hartlepool at Crimdon Dene. A total of 46 Heritag e 
Coasts have been set up around England and Wales by the Government, to conserve the best stretches of undeveloped coast , 
promote their natural beauty,  support local communities and 
businesses and improve visitor access. While they do not have a  
statutory designati on, the English ones are defined through agr eements 
between Natural England and coas tal local authorities and are 
protected through development cont rol within the planning syste m. The 
consultation draft Management Plan 2017-2025 seeks to extend th e 
Heritage Coast southwards to a scenic boundary. This would incl ude 
the dunes and extensive beach to wards Hartlepool Headland.      
 16.9 As a whole the Borough has relatively low tree cover compa red to other 
areas of the Tees Valley.  Notable exceptions are the Wynyard a rea in 
the south west of the Borough and Thorpe Bulmer Dene which form s 
most of the northern boundary of  the Borough.  In the 2006 Hart lepool 
Local Plan both these areas wer e designated as ‘local’ Special 
Landscape Areas to provide both additional protection from development and to encourage schemes for landscape enhancement.   
For a number of years most of the rural area of Hartlepool was included 
within the ‘Tees Forest’
73.  Although the Tees Fores t initiative no longer 
operates, most of the aims of the project74 remain relevant and are 
reflected in local plan policie s and other projects developed o r 
supported by the local authority. 
 
16.10 One of the features of Hart lepool, in common with other p arts of the 
Tees Valley, is areas of open spa ce extending from the countrys ide into 
the built-up area.  These green w edges can consist of both form al and 
informal open space and offer benefits for wildlife and local communities as well as maintain ing the separate identities of p arts of 
the urban area. 
 16.11 The green wedges, along wit h other areas of green/open sp ace such as 
playing fields, gardens, cemeter ies, and incidental open areas all form 
part of Hartlepool’s green infrastructure network.  In 2014 the  Borough 
Council adopted a Supplement ary Planning Document
75 (SPD) and 
Action Plan76 for green infrastructure.   These documents set out a 
strategy and programme of action for the future development of the 
green infrastructure network in Hartlepool. 
 
                                                           
73 The Tees Forest (formerly the Cleveland Community Forest) was originally designated in 
1991/92.    
74 The Tees Forest initiative sou ght to achieve a range of enviro nmental and community 
benefits including tree planting , landscape improvement, nature  conservation, agricultural 
diversification, recreation pr ovision and employment generation . 
75 Hartlepool Green Infrastructure – Supplementary Planning Docum ent; Hartlepool Borough 
Council, February 2014  
76 Hartlepool Green Infrastructure – Supplementary Planning Docum ent – Action Plan; 
Hartlepool Borough Council, February 2014   234Developing a strategy for the natural environment and green 
networks  
16.12 In the UK, many aspects of the natural environment are in  a declining or 
poor state.  The National Ecosystems Assessment77 found that around 
30 per cent of the services provi ded by the natural environment  are in 
decline.  Similarly, the recent  ‘State of Nature’ report78 indicated that of 
over 3,100 plants and animals moni tored over the last 50 years some 
60 per cent have declined.   
 16.13 The Government’s Natural Environment White Paper
79 recognises the 
economic and social benefits of t he natural environment as well  as its 
intrinsic value and sets out an agenda to achieve the recovery of nature 
moving from net loss to net gain.  Key points in this agenda ha ve been 
to reform the planning proces s to enable development to enhance  
natural networks while retainin g emphasis on protection and 
improvements, and establishing Local Nature Partnerships (LNP) to 
strengthen and coordinate local ac tion across administrative 
boundaries. 
 16.14 The Tees Valley Local Nature  Partnership (TVNP) was forma lly 
recognised by Government in July 2012 and covers the administra tive 
areas of the five Tees Valley local authorities.  Hartlepool Bo rough 
Council is a partner in the TVNP and has played an active role in its 
development.  As well as coordinating actions and developing pr iorities 
within the Tees Valley, the TVNP also plays a valuable role in cross-
boundary initiatives with adjoining LNPs.  In Hartlepool’s case  this is the 
Three Rivers LNP which covers C ounty Durham, including most of the 
Durham Magnesian Lime stone Plateau landscape  character area.     
 
Biodiversity and designated sites 
16.15 Local Plan policy reflects t he hierarchy of international , national, and 
locally designated sites and the differing levels of protection  afforded by 
national policy and re levant legislation
80.  The hierarchy and protection 
levels are summarised in the box below. 
     
                                                           
77 UK National Ecosystem Assessm ent; Defra and others, 2011.  The  Ecosystem Assessment 
was the first analysis of the UK’s  natural environment in terms  of the benefits it provides to 
society and continuing economic p rosperity.  It w as an inclusiv e process involving many 
government, academic, NGO and pr ivate sector institutions  
78 State of Nature - a collaborati on between 25 UK conservation a nd research organizations, 
2013.  The report can be downloaded at www.rspb.org.uk/stateofn ature  
79 The Natural Choice: securing the value of nature; Department f or Environment, Food and 
Rural Affairs, 2011.   
80 See National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 113; Departm ent for Communities & 
Local Government, March 2012; and  ODPM Circular 06/2005: Biodiv ersity and Geological 
Conservation – Statutory Obli gations and their impact with the planning system, August 2005.   235Table 15 – Hierarchy of International, national and locally designated 
sites 
 
Internationally important sites  (Special Protection Areas designated under 
the EU Birds Directive; wetland sites designated under the Rams ar 
Convention) 
 Development likely to have a significant effect on the interes t features 
of the site, alone or in combination with other plans and pro jects, or will 
adversely affect the integrity of the site, will not be permitt ed unless 
there are overriding r easons of public interest 
 Nationally important sites  ( S i t e s  o f  S p e c i a l  S c i e n t i fic Interest, National 
Nature Reserves) 
 Development on land within or o utside a designated site likely  to have 
an adverse effect (either indivi dually or in combination with o ther 
developments) on the interest f eatures of the site should not b e 
permitted.  Where an adverse effect is likely, any exception sh ould only 
be made where the benefits of the development clearly outweigh both 
the impact it is likely to have on the features of the site and  any broader 
impacts on the network of nat ionally important sites 
 Locally important sites  (Local Wildlife Sites; Regionally Important 
Geological/Geo-morphological Sites) 
 Development will not be permitted, unless the reasons for the 
development clearly outweigh the harm to the conservation inter est of 
the site.  Where development is approved compensatory measures will 
be required to maintain/enhance nat ure conservation interest   
 
16.16 While the protection of i nternationally and nationally im portant nature 
conservation sites is clearly set out in existing legislation a nd guidance, 
the Borough Council will have r egard to the indirect effects of  
developments proposed beyond t he boundaries of these designated  
sites.  For example a housing dev elopment could result in incre ased 
numbers of uncontrolled visits for  dog walking or other activit ies which 
in turn could have a detrimental impact on the interest feature s of the 
site.  In such cases it may be po ssible for example, to make al ternative 
provision for such activities , reducing pressure on and potenti al damage 
to, nature conservation interests. Some sites are close to inte rnationally 
important sites and are used by b irds which are an interest fea ture. 
These sites are functionally im portant to protected birds and 
development affecting them may need to be mitigated.  The Borough 
Council will therefore adopt a pre cautionary approach to such 
proposals. 
 16.17 A number of designated sites in Hartlepool form part of t he wider 
Teesmouth and Cleveland Coast S pecial Protection Area (SPA) whi ch 
itself comprises a number of i ndividual Sites of Special Scient ific 
Interest.  While the Tees Estuary as a whole continues to suppo rt 
certain bird species in internat ionally and nationally signific ant numbers, 
the overall numbers of birds in the estuary and surrounding are as has  236declined over recent years for r easons that are not fully under stood.  
Natural England is currently reviewing evidence with a view to recommending to Government an extension of the Teesmouth and Cleveland Coast SPA.  If accepted by Ministers for formal consu ltation 
the extended SPA will become a ‘potential’ SPA with the same le vel of 
protection as the existing, designated SPA.   
 16.18 There are six sites (see appen dix 6) within the Borough d esignated as 
Local Nature Reserves (LNRs) under the National Parks and Acces s to 
the Countryside Act 1949 (as amended).  These sites have geolog ical 
or wildlife features that are of special local interest.  Some of these sites 
are owned and/or managed by the local authority and where 
appropriate the Borough Council wi ll support the designation of  other 
sites as Local Nature Reserves. 
 16.19 The wider Tees Estuary is an area of significant economic  importance, 
not only for the Tees Valley but also within a national and int ernational 
context.  The area is of particular importance to the chemical and 
processing sectors and provides access to deep water port facil ities.  
The Borough Council, along with other local authorities in the Tees 
Valley, will continue to support further growth and investment in the 
area, while recognising the natio nal and international importan ce of the 
Estuary and its surroundings fo r nature conservation.   
 16.20 The Borough Council is a member of the Tees Estuary Partn ership
81 
(TEP) which has set a vision to  “create an estuary that is an e xemplar 
for nature conservation with thriving habitats and populations of birds 
and animals, and which drives sustainable economic growth and business investment in the area .  All users of the estuary will  have a 
common understanding of the envir onmental and socio-economic va lue 
of the Tees and the needs of other  stakeholders.  This promotes  
integrated and sustainable devel opment of the estuary alongside  
improvement of the habitats  and infrastructure.” 
 16.21 The TEP is currently in t he process of producing a Strate gic Master 
Plan for the estuary with key components relating to economic development and improving t he environment where economic 
development takes place, and to habitat creation and enhancemen t 
opportunities.  The TEP is also working with regulators and bus inesses 
to produce a Memorandum of Understanding in relation to the pro vision 
of advice, consents and assent. 
 16.22 The Borough Council supports  the production of a Strategi c Master 
Plan and Memorandum of Understandi ng for the Tees Estuary and w ill 
have regard to these when implem enting Local Plan policies.     
                                                           
81 The Tees Estuary Partnership wa s formed in January 2016 to coo rdinate the preparation of 
a Strategic Master Plan for the estuary.  The Partnership is co ordinated by the Tees Industry 
Nature Conservation Associati on (INCA) and membership includes relevant local authorities, 
the Local Enterprise Agency, the Local Nature Partnership, stat utory agencies, private sector 
businesses, and wildlife groups   237 
16.23 The concept of biodiversity accounting or offsetting may offer a future 
role in providing compensation for development which results in  a loss 
of nature conservation value. Bi odiversity accounting is a meth odology 
offering potential to recognise a nd quantify the environmental impact of 
development, and generating extra investment for habitat creati on by 
appropriate compensation schemes. A key principle of biodiversi ty 
accounting is that it is only after avoidance, mitigation and o n-site 
compensation have been fully inv estigated that any residual 
environmental damage can be considered for compensation off-sit e. 
Biodiversity accounting needs to show measurable outcomes that are 
sustained over time. In 2012 Defr a commissioned eight biodivers ity 
offsetting pilots in six areas and these ran until 2014. Evalua tion of the 
pilot has provided some encouraging lessons for applying biodiv ersity 
accounting in practical situati ons. At least one environmental 
consultancy is actively promoting biodiversity offsetting in th e planning 
sector and has developed a ‘metric’ for assessing all the relev ant 
criteria.  
 
 Ecosystem services 
16.24 The concept of ecosystem services has been gaining recogn ition and 
support over recent years as an ai d to understanding the use an d 
management of natural resources.   Everyone’s health and wellbei ng 
depends upon the services provided by ecosystems and their components: water, soil, nutrient s, and organisms.  Therefore 
ecosystem services are the proc esses by which the environment 
produces resources utilised by people such as clean air, water,  f o o d  
and materials.  The UK National Ecosystems Assessment
82 identified a 
framework to help u nderstand the different elements of ecosyste m 
services: 
  
 Provisioning services  – products obtained from ecosystems such 
as fresh water, food, fuel, m edicines and pharmaceuticals 
 Regulatory services  – benefits obtained fr om the regulation of 
ecosystem processes, including air quality, flood regulation, e rosion 
control, and car bon sequestration  
 Cultural services  – non-material benefits that people obtain from 
ecosystem services such as enjo yment and recreation, mental and  
physical health, employment , and sense of place/community  
 Supporting services  – services necessary for the production of 
other ecosystem services such as soil formation, primary produc tion 
and water cycling 
 
 
                                                           
82 UK National Ecosystem Assessm ent; Defra and others, 2011.  The  Ecosystem Assessment 
was the first analysis of the UK’s  natural environment in terms  of the benefits it provides to 
society and continuing economic p rosperity.  It w as an inclusiv e process involving many 
government, academic, NGO and priv ate sector institutions. 
  238Table 16 -  Example of ecosystem services applied to an area of 
woodland  
 
 Provide timber for building and  fuel, and potentially food wit h 
cover for game birds (Provisioning services) 
 Influence rain water run-off into surrounding land reducing fl ood 
risk, and regulate air quality by  removing pollutants (Regulato ry 
services) 
 Provide opportunities for leisu re and recreation, and contribu te 
to appreciation of the landscape (Cultural services) 
 
 
16.25 The Government’s ‘What nat ure can do for you’ publication83 h a s  
usefully summarised the key ecosystem services provided by the natural environment th at benefit people: 
 Resources for basic survival, such as clean air and water; 
 Contribution to good physical and mental health, through for e xample 
access to green space, and genetic resources for medicines; 
 Protection from natural hazar ds, through regulation of our cli mate; 
 Support for a strong economy, through raw materials for indust ry and 
agriculture, or through t ourism and recreation, and 
 Social, cultural and educational  benefits, including personal 
wellbeing and intera ction with nature 
 16.26 The National Planning Policy  Framework (NPPF) states that  t h e  
planning system should recognis e the wider benefits of ecosyste m 
services
84.  There is no single methodology or process in applying an 
ecosystem services approach to local planning.  However a broad  
appreciation of the concept of ecosystem services can help in understanding the implic ations for the natural  environment thro ugh the 
implementation of land use plan ning policies an d planning decis ions.   
 16.27 As part of the Local Plan preparation the concept of ecos ystems 
services is helpful in assessing the impact of policies and pro posals on 
the natural environment.  This includes: 
  
Sustainable development – an ec osystems services approach can b e 
important in drawing out the less obvious impacts on the natura l 
environment and achieving a balance alongside social and econom ic 
considerations   
 Climate change – as well as the impact on habitats and species , an 
ecosystems approach can highlight  the effect of climate change on the 
                                                           
83 What nature can do for you: a pra ctical introduction to making  the most of natural services, 
assets and resources in polic y and decision making; Department for Environment, Food & 
Rural Affairs, updated January 2015.  
84 National Planning Policy Framework paragraph 109; Department f or Communities and 
Local Government, March 2012.   239role of the natural environment i n supporting economic activity  and the 
need to develop sustainable ways of adapting to climate change 
  Sustainability appraisal – a sustainability appraisal/strategi c 
environmental assessment is an integral part of local plan prep aration.  
An ecosystems approach can allow greater appreciation of the ro le of 
the natural environment and develop ing options for its protecti on and 
enhancement. 
 
Woodland and Trees 
16.28 Woodland and trees are an im portant element of the natura l capital of 
the Borough.  They perform many  functions ranging from filterin g out 
pollutants and storing carbon to providing habitats for wildlif e and being 
a fundamental element of the l andscape.  There is now plenty of  
evidence to show that an environment with woodland and trees is  a  
better place to live and work.   
 16.29 Tree cover in Hartlepool is low compared to many other ar eas.  Only 
4.2% of the Borough is woodland compared to an average of 13% i n 
the UK.  In the urban area of  Hartlepool the mean tree canopy c over is 
2.6% compared to 8.2% for the UK. 
 16.30 The Borough Council has  developed a Tree Strategy
85 with the 
following objectives: 
 Retain and protect existing trees; 
 Maintain publically owned tr ees using good arboriculture 
management and ensure the safety and wellbeing of the public 
through the assessment and management of risk associated with trees, and 
 Increase the number of trees by planting more, and encouraging  
others to plant more 
 16.31 Some of the most important  areas of woodland are those cl assed as 
Ancient Semi-Natural Woodland ( ASNW) and Plantation on Ancient 
Woodland Sites (PAWS).  Planning Practice Guidance states that both 
should be considered equally in terms of the protection given t o ancient 
woodland in the National Planning Policy Framework and that the  
Forestry Commission should be consulted on developments involvi ng 
new or extended buildings within 500 metres of ancient woodland .  The 
Borough Council will ensure that t here is no loss or deteriorat ion of 
ancient woodland caused by devel opment, including implementatio n of 
a buffer between developmen t and ancient woodland. 
 16.32 In some cases development proposals may affect existing t rees worthy 
of protection, either on the site itself or on adjacent sites.  The use of 
Tree Preservation Orders will be considered when necessary to p rotect 
such trees.  If the loss of t rees through development cannot be  avoided 
                                                           
85 Hartlepool Tree Strategy 2011- 2016: Hartlepool Borough Council , 2011.   240then their replacement by tr ees/shrubs/hedges of an appropriate  scale 
and species for the area will be sought where practical. 
   
 
Agricultural Land 
16.33 A key element of ecosystems services is the condition of the soil.  Local 
authorities are required to pro tect the best and most versatile  land in 
their area.  Agricultural land is graded on a scale of 1 to 5, with the best 
and most versatile land defined by t he National Planning Policy  
Framework as grades 1, 2 and 3a .  There is no grade 1 agricultu ral land 
in Hartlepool but there are pockets of grade 2 land in an area stretching 
from north west of Hart village,  through Dalton Piercy towards 
Greatham.  There is currently no information for Hartlepool on the 
subdivision of grade 3 land into  grades 3a and 3b.  Development  will 
not be permitted on agricultural land classed as grade 2 unless  it can 
be demonstrated that it will have no adverse impact on the agri cultural 
land and its quality, and there ar e no material consideration t hat would 
outweigh the loss of agricultural land.  Use of areas of poorer  quality 
land will be sought in preferenc e to land of higher quality. 
 
Brownfield land 
16.34 The National Pl anning Policy Framewor k encourages the re- use of 
brownfield land provided that it is not of high environmental v alue86.  
The value of brownfield land c an vary greatly but it has been 
recognised that certain types of brownfield land can be of grea t 
importance for biodiversity.  Us ually this is where the underly ing 
substrates from the previous use have resulted in various types  o f  
sparse vegetation intermixed wi th open areas.  This mix of habi tats can 
provide suitable conditions for s pecialist plant and invertebra te species, 
including some that are rare on a national or regional scale an d its 
importance has been recognised as ‘Open Mosaic Habitat’, a UK Priority Habitat.  In Hartlepool,  several sites of brownfield l and have 
been identified as meeting the cr iteria to be designated as Loc al Wildlife 
Sites
87.  Some other areas of brownfie ld land, while not meeting the 
specific criteria for designation , also have value for biodiver sity.  
Although an area of brownfield land may have some biodiversity value, 
it does not necessarily prevent development.  In some cases it will be 
possible to retain the biodiver sity interest and part of the de velopment 
site, and in others recreate in terest of equal value on an adjo ining area.  
Brownfield sites with biodiversity value are included within th e lists of 
existing and potential ecological network s ites in appendix 10.  
 
  
                                                           
86 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 111; Department for Communities and 
Local Government, March 2012  
87 Criteria for the selection of  Local Wildlife Sites have been a greed by the Tees Valley Nature 
Partnership.  A copy of the select ion criteria is available on the Partnership website 
http://teesvalleynaturepartnership .org.uk//about-u s/local-wildl ife-and-geological-sites-in-the-
tees-valley.   241Aquifers 
16.35 Parts of the Borough are underlain with the Magnesian Lim estone and 
Sherwood Sandstone Principal Aquifers.  The Magnesian Limestone  is 
a highly permeable rock formati on capable of supporting large 
groundwater abstractions and is the most important aquifer in t he Tees 
Catchment Abstraction Management  Strategy area, providing an 
important source of potable water.   Water is abstracted from th e aquifer 
for public supply at several  places in the Borough. 
 16.36 Aquifers are vulnerable to various forms of pollution.  P roposed 
developments should therefore en sure that suitable pollution pr evention 
measures are in place to protect the water supplies from pollut ion.  In 
particular, any future develop ment that requires piling, deep f oundations 
or removal of soil and clay cover should be suitably managed so  that 
they do not produce new pathways for contaminants to enter the underlying groundwater.  In additi on, creation of new pathways which 
would allow high groundwater to inundate land causing localised  
groundwater flooding should be prevented.  
 
 Watercourses  
16.37 Watercourses throughout Har tlepool, in both rural and urb an areas, can 
play a valuable role as wildlife corridors, assisting in the mo vement of 
species between different habita ts.  There may be opportunities  as part 
of development and/or redevelopment proposals to improve watercourses through measures such as de-culverting and maintai ning 
open buffers from nearby development. 
 
 Special Landscape Areas 
16.38 Two areas in Hartlepool cont inue to be identified as Spec ial Landscape 
Areas and these need to  be protected thr ough the Local Plan pol icies: 
 The wooded area of Thorpe Bulmer Dene in the extreme north of the 
Borough, and 
 The woodland in the Wynyard a rea, together with other woodland  
pockets and farmland running north from Wynyard along the weste rn 
fringe of the Borough. 
 16.39 The Hartlepool Landscape Assessment
88 confirms the special features 
of these two areas: 
 
 Thorpe Bulmer Dene – the wooded landscape is generally of high  
visual quality, diversity and accessibility 
 Wynyard and the extreme rural west of the Borough – in terms o f 
visual quality, higher value farmland areas only occur in small  
clusters including the Coal Lane area north of Crookfoot Reserv oir, 
Amerston Beck/Pudding Poke Farm,  Amerston Hill, and Wynyard.  I n 
these areas the field units lar gely retain their original form and layout, 
making them extremely visually attractive with surviving exampl es of 
                                                           
88 Hartlepool Landscape As sessment; Landmark Pa rtnership on behal f of Hartlepool Borough 
Council, 2000.   242ridge and furrow evident in some l ocations.  The visual contrib ution 
of the forest belts along the Wy nyard transport corridor is ext remely 
important. 
 
  Coastal Change and Marine Planning 
16.40 As a coastal town, changes in coastal processes and the i mpact of 
climate change could have signif icant effects over the plan per iod and 
beyond.  Rising sea levels will ha ve implications for flood def ences and 
coastal erosion which in turn will impact on designated sites o f 
international and national impo rtance for nature conservation.  The 
Borough Council’s Shoreline Managem ent Plan II addresses these 
issues, considering the evolut ion of the coast over time and ho w to 
manage coastal change to ensure t he greatest environmental, soc ial 
and economic benefit. 
 
16.41 The Government is currently  bringing forward a new system  of marine 
planning.  The Marine Management  Organisation (MMO) will produc e 
marine plans for the whole of England’s coastline, and it has n ow 
commenced work on the production of a North East Marine Plan.  The 
aim is to have an adopted North East Marine Plan by 2019/2020.  The 
Borough Council has already been in volved in providing evidence  f o r  
the Marine Plan and wil l continue to liaise with the MMO during  t h e  
Local Plan process.   In the meantime, the Government has issue d a 
UK Marine Policy Statement
89 which explains the lin ks with terrestrial 
planning and identifie s the objectives.  The Local Plan should be 
consistent with marine policy do cuments and guidance.  With reg ard to 
the natural environment, one of the key objectives is ‘living w ithin 
environmental limits’ which includes: 
                                                           
89 UK Marine Policy Statement; HM Government, March 2011.  
 243 Ensuring that biodiversity is protected, conserved and where 
appropriate recovered, and loss has been halted 
 Ensuring healthy marine and coas tal habitats across their natu ral 
range that are able to support st rong, diverse biological commu nities 
and the functioning of healthy, resilient and adaptable marine ecosystems  
 16.42 A particular concern for designated nature conservation s ites is ‘coastal 
squeeze’.  This is caused when the inter-tidal area becomes nar rower 
(due for example, to rising s ea level) and is squeezed between the sea 
and the land.  In order to compensa te for future loss of inter- tidal habitat 
a large area of pasture land north of Greatham Creek has been reconnected to tidal waters, cr eating some 20 hectares of new i nter-
tidal habitat.   
 16.43 The Borough Council will ens ure that development has rega rd to the 
evolution of the coast over tim e and the need to avoid exacerba ting 
coastal squeeze, incorporating measures to mitigate this where appropriate.  
 16.44 The Borough Council will continually seek to improve bath ing water 
quality by ensuring that new dev elopment and associated sewerag e 
and treatment facilities have suffi cient capacity without compr omising 
environmental quality.  Sustainab le drainage systems can also h elp to 
improve bathing water quality an d reduce the impact of domestic  wrong 
connections.  
 
NE1: Natural Environment 
The Borough Council will protect, manage and enhance Hartlepool ’s natural 
environment and will ensure that: 
 
1) Development proposals are in accordance with the locational 
strategy outlined in policy LS1. 
2) Sites designated for nature conservation as shown on the Pol icies 
Map will be protected and, where appropriate, enhanced, taking 
into account the following hierarchy: 
a) Internationally designate d sites: these sites receive 
statutory protection.  Devel opment not connected to or 
necessary for the enhancement and/or management of the 
site will not be permitted unless it meets relevant legal 
requirements; A precautionary approach will be taken 
towards developments that may have indirect impacts on 
internationally designated sit es and appropriate mitigation 
measures or contributions to avo id detrimental impacts will 
be sought and delivered via the Hartlepool Mitigation 
Strategy and Delivery Plan  and other mechanisms. 
b) Nationally designated sit es: these sites also receive 
statutory protection.  Develop ment that would have an 
adverse affect on these sites w ill not be permitted unless it  244meets the relevant legal requirements;  A precautionary 
approach will be taken towards developments that may have 
indirect impacts on nationally designated sites and 
appropriate mitigation measures or contributions to avoid 
detrimental impacts will be sought. 
c) Locally designated sit es: development which would 
adversely affect a locally designated site, which is not also 
allocated for another use in the Local Plan, will not be 
permitted unless the reasons for the development clearly 
outweigh the harm to the conservation interest of the site.  
Where development on a locally designated site is 
approved, including sites that are also allocated for other 
uses, compensatory measures may be required in order to 
make development acceptable in planning terms and to 
mitigate against any loss of interest.  
 
Biodiversity accounting/offsetting may be considered as part of  
compensatory measures where on-site compensation is not 
possible.  
 
3) Designated Local Nature Reser ves are protected, managed and 
enhanced as sites with geological  and/or wildlife features that  are 
of special local interest.  W here appropriate the Borough Counc il 
will support the designation of f urther sites as Local Nature 
Reserves.   
4) Where appropriate an ecosystems services approach will be us ed 
to assess the impact of development proposals on the natural 
environment and the benefits it provides, including resource us e, 
health and well-being, protect ion from the affects of climate 
change, economic growth, and culture 
5) Ecological networks are enha nced and green infrastructure is  
protected and enhanced  
6) Development avoids harm to and, where appropriate, enhances 
the natural environment.  This could include, for example, crea ting 
and/or enhancing habitats to m eet the objectives of the Tees 
Valley Biodiversity Action Plan .  In seeking to avoid harm, 
development should follow the sequence of avoidance, mitigation , 
compensation.  Where sufficien t on-site mitigation and/or 
compensation are demonstrably  not possible, then off-site 
compensation will be considered.   Where significant harm from a  
development cannot be avoided (through locating on an 
alternative site), adequately mitigated or, as a last resort 
compensated for, the Borough Council will refuse planning 
permission.  The Borough Council will consider the potential fo r a 
strategic approach to biodiversi ty accounting in conjunction wi th 
the Tees Valley Local Nature Part nership and in line with the a bove 
hierarchy 
7) Existing woodland and trees of amenity value and nature 
conservation value are protected, and an increase in tree cover  
will be sought in appropriate locations in line with the Boroug h  245Council’s Tree Strategy.  Areas of ancient woodland, including 
ancient semi-natural woodland (ASNW), plantations on ancient 
woodland sites (PAWS), and anci ent or veteran trees outside 
ancient woodland, will be protect ed unless there are exceptiona l 
circumstances.  The Borough Council will also ensure that 
development does not result in the loss of or damage to ancient  
woodland (including ASNW and PAWS) by requiring the 
implementation of a buffer of at least 15 metres between 
development and the ancient woodl and site (depending on the siz e 
of the site).  For ancient or veteran trees, a buffer 15 times the 
stem diameter or 5 metres beyond the drip line of the leaf cano py 
should be maintained, whi chever is the greater.   
8) Where appropriate Tree Preservation Orders will be used to 
protect trees under threat from development proposals.  Where t he 
loss of significant trees/hedgerows cannot be avoided their 
replacement by trees/shrubs/hedgerows of an appropriate scale 
and species for the area will be sought where practical. 
9) Development avoids the best and most versatile agricultural land – 
identified as grades 1, 2 and 3a in the National Agricultural L and 
Classification – unless it can be demonstrated that there will be no 
impact on the agricultural land and its quality and there are n o 
material consideration that out weigh the loss of such land. 
10) In prioritising the re-developm ent of brownfield land, area s that are 
important for biodiversity will be retained or recreated within  the 
site, and remediation of contaminated land will be pursued. 
11) The major/principal aquifers underlying Hartlepool along wi th 
watercourses and other surface and coastal waters will be 
protected from over abstraction a nd contamination from pollutan ts 
and saline intrusion resulting from development.  Developments 
will be required to demonstrate that they do not impact on the 
major/principal aquifer underl ying Hartlepool, along with 
watercourses and other surface and coastal waters and they can 
achieve access to a sustainable wat er supply prior to approval.  
12) Opportunities are taken to retain, restore and de-culvert 
watercourses to improve their role and value as wildlife corrid ors 
and habitats. 
13) All development proposals, through the careful, sensitive 
management and design of development will ensure that the 
character, distinctiveness and quality of the Borough’s landsca pe 
is protected and, where appropriate, enhanced.   Any development 
within the Special Landscape Ar eas as defined on the Policies M ap 
or which will have a visual impact  on those areas will be requi red 
to demonstrate that they are in keeping with the area and will not 
have an adverse impact on th e area’s landscape character. 
14) Development has regard to coast al change, bathing water qua lity, 
and coastal processes over time, and in particular the need to 
avoid exacerbating coastal squeeze and incorporate measures to 
mitigate this where appropriate. 
 
Where appropriate Supplementary Planning Documents will be prep ared to  246provide more detailed guidance on safeguarding and enhancing Ha rtlepool’s 
natural environment and biodiversity.    
 
   Green Infrastructure 
16.45 Green infrastructure is now widely recognised as an essen tial core 
component underpinning the function, health and character of ur ban 
areas and communities.  Green infr astructure is a strategically  planned 
and delivered network of high quality green spaces and environm ental 
features including parks, open spaces, watercourses, trees and woodland, allotments, and privat e gardens.  Green infrastructur e should 
be designed and managed as a resource that provides a wide rang e of 
environmental and quality of life benefits for people who live,  work, visit 
and invest in Hartlepool.  Some of the key benefits of a well p lanned, 
high quality green infrastructure  network are highlighted in th e box 
below. 
  
Table 17 – Benefits of High Qua lity Green Infrastructure Network 
 
Climate change adaptat ion and mitigation 
Green space in towns is effective in reducing surface temperatu res and trees 
can perform cooling and shelte ring functions, as well as carbon  sequestration. 
 
Health and wellbeing 
Opportunities for exercise, reduc ing stress levels, improving m ental health, 
and better air quality.  
Economic growth and investment 
Green infrastructure can improv e the quality and image of an ar ea, 
encouraging new investment and  employment opportunities. 
 
Recreation and leisure 
Enhanced access to natural green space and more opportunities f or both 
formal and informal recreation.  
Flood alleviation and water management 
Green space allows natural filtra tion of surface water, and Sus tainable 
Drainage Schemes (SuDS) include elements of green infrastructur e; wetlands 
can store water and provi de a buffer against flooding. 
 
Biodiversity 
Green space in towns provides habitat and migration routes for many species, 
and increased opportuniti es for nature study.  
   
16.46 The Tees Valley Green Infrastructure Strategy90 provides a strategic 
approach to developing a network  of green corridors and high qu ality 
                                                           
90 Tees Valley Green Infrastructu re Strategy: Enhancing the envir onment and delivering the 
economic and sustainable visi on; Tees Valley Joint Strategy Uni t, Darlington, Hartlepool,  247green space across the Tees Valley.  The Strategy focussed 
particularly on the relationship between environmental quality and 
economic growth/regeneration, and how developing a well planned  
green infrastructure network can complement and support inward investment initiatives.   
 16.47 This approach is reflected in Hartlepool where the challe nge is to create 
attractive places and an environ ment that will encourage people  to live, 
work, visit and invest in the town.  Green infrastructure plann ing for 
Hartlepool includes the provisi on of a planned network that lin ks 
existing and proposed green spac es by way of green corridors ru nning 
through urban, suburban, urban fri nge and rural areas.  These g reen 
corridors include the coastal fr inge, green wedges, wildlife si tes, tree 
lined streets and roads, land used for recreation and leisure, and other 
green areas such as amenity open space, cemeteries and parks.  The 
multi-functional role of green in frastructure is also reflected  in the 
Borough Council’s Sustainable Community Strategy
91 w h e r e  t h e  
provision of high quality open sp ace, recreation and leisure fa cilities are 
key priorities. 
 16.48 In 2014 the Borough Council produced a Green Infrastructu re 
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD).
92  The vision of the SPD is 
that “By 2028 Hartlepool will have a high quality, multifunctio nal, 
accessible green infrastructure  network which enhances the 
community’s quality of life and a lso of wildlife”.  The SPD lis ts 10 
objectives which will help to deliver the vision.  As all objec tives are 
interrelated, delivery of one objective will help to deliver be nefits 
elsewhere.  The Borough Council will ensure that the SPD stays relevant and up to date th rough monitoring and review. 
 16.49 The SPD is accompanied by an Action Plan
93 which describes current 
or proposed projects that the Bo rough Council and its partners are 
working towards.  The Action Pl an will be updated on a regular basis to 
reflect works being carried out or where new schemes and improvements are identified.  T he Borough Council will ensure t hat 
green infrastructure contributions , where they are required fro m 
developments, will be used to m eet the objectives of the SPD. 
 16.50 Key elements to the green in frastructure policy include: 
  
Alleviating flood risk – green infr astructure can include plann ed new 
flood facilities such as balancing ponds and water storage area s.  
These can be valuable habitats wh ich support biodiversity, as w ell as 
                                                                                                                                                                      
Middlesbrough, Redcar & Cleveland, and Stockton-on-Tees Borough  Councils, North East 
Community Forests, Natural Engl and, CABE Space, Environment Age ncy, 2008.  
91 Hartlepool’s Ambition: The Sustainable Community Strategy for Hartlepool 2014-2020; 
Hartlepool Borough Council.  
92 Hartlepool Green Infrastructure – Supplementary Planning Docum ent; Hartlepool Borough 
Council, February 2014.  
93 Hartlepool Green Infrastructure – Supplementary Planning Docum ent – Action Plan; 
Hartlepool Borough Council, February 2014.   248providing recreation opportuni ties.  Undeveloped greenfield are as often 
have water flow pathways or wat ercourses running through them.  
These watercourses should be retained and where heavily modifie d, 
returned to a natural open channe l where practical.  Sustainabl e 
Drainage Systems (SuDS) can also provide green infrastructure 
elements as well as addressing su rface water drainage issues.  Further 
detail on the application of SuD S and how it can be incorporate d into a 
green infrastructure network can be found in the Hartlepool Str ategic 
Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA).94 
 Accessibility - to maximise the  benefits of green infrastructur e, it is 
important that it is easily access ible to all sections of the c ommunity, 
including those with mobility and visual impairments, through a  
sustainable access network.  Consul tation during the Local Plan  
process has highlighted this as an issue, and priority areas fo r improved 
access include along the A178 Tees Road west of Seaton Carew, between Hartlepool and Elwick, and west of the A19.  Opportunit ies will 
be taken to expand the rights of  way network, making it accessi ble for 
all.  A recent development has been t he enactment of the Marine and 
Coastal Access Act 2009; Part 9 of the Act has placed a duty on  
Natural England and the Secretary of State to create a path alo ng the 
whole of the English coastline.  A section of the England Coast al Path 
is now in place between North Gare car park, just south of Seat on 
Carew, and Sunderland.  The next section south of North Gare ca r park 
running to Filey (Yorkshire) has been approved, although the st retch 
between North Gare and the River Tees has been put on hold due to 
ownership and access issues.  How ever the Borough Council will 
support initiatives to resolve these issues and implement the c oastal 
path.    Outdoor play space – the provision of outdoor playing space wit hin 
developments and the retention, p rotection and management of gr een 
space are important as further h ousing growth takes place.  Suf ficient 
high quality green space within or  near housing areas helps red uce the 
need to travel.  Protecting and en hancing smaller areas of gree n space 
and landscaped thoroughfares, whic h may not currently be linked  into 
the green network, can help mai ntain and develop pedestrian and  
wildlife links to other parts o f the green network and enhance 
connectivity. 
 16.51 The NPPF makes provision for the designation of ‘Local Gr een Spaces’ 
which provide special protecti on against development for green spaces 
that are of particular importanc e and value for local communiti es.  The 
Borough Council will assist with designation of these green spa ces 
where appropriate, supported through the Local Plan or a 
neighbourhood plan. 
                                                           
94 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment Level 1, V olume 3 – SFRA guida nce for Spatial & 
Development Management; JBA Consulting for Hartlepool Borough C ouncil, May 2010.   24916.52 The Borough Council has undertaken an Open Space Assessme nt (see 
paragraph 16.72) to identify cu rrent and future open space 
requirements in the Borough.  As part of the Assessment, a comm unity 
needs consultation was carried out.  Although concluding that t he 
majority of residents considered that open space provision was satisfactory, there was strong support for additional park prov ision in 
the north/central area of the town.  This is being addressed th rough the 
development of the ‘North Linear Park’ concept which seeks to l ink and 
enhance open space to provide a “ park” experience distributed a cross 
various sites. 
 16.53 The Borough Council’s overarching approach is to protect,  manage and 
enhance the green infrastructure network throughout the Borough , and 
to develop links between and within existing and new areas of development.  Green infrastructure will be safeguarded from inappropriate development and t he Borough Council will actively  
improve the quantity and quality of open space, landscape corri dors, 
parks, and recreation/leisure fa cilities.  This approach is in line with the 
findings and recommendations of the Open Space Assessment and t he 
strategic objectives of the Tees  Valley Green infrastructure St rategy. 
 
NE2: Green Infrastructure 
The Borough Council will safeguard  green infrastructure within the Borough 
from inappropriate development and will work actively with part ners to 
improve the quantity, quality, management and accessibility of green 
infrastructure and recreation a nd leisure facilities, including  sports pitches, 
cycle routes and greenways throughout the Borough based on evid ence of 
local need.  The Borough Council will address identified shortf alls in the 
amount or quality of existing green  infrastructure, and enhance  g r e e n  
infrastructure management and maintenance so that users can saf ely access 
it. 
 
Green infrastructure includes: 
1) Strategic green corridors – th e River Tees; the coast/coasta l fringe; 
Saltholme to Cowpen Bewley, Wynyard and Hartlepool; Saltholme 
to Hartlepool Coast; and Marina/Town Centre to Summerhill and 
north west Hartlepool and Hartlepool Western Fringe. 
2) Green spaces identified on the Policies Map:  
a) Green wedges 
b) Parks and gardens 
c) Children’s playing space/areas 
d) Outdoor sport including playing fields 
e) Local green corridors 
f) Civic spaces 
g) Churchyards and cemeteries 
h) Allotments and community gardens 
i) Amenity open space 
j) Natural and semi-natural green space 
k) Other public open space not identified in the Open Space  250Assessment 
 
The Borough Council will support the development of the North L inear Park, 
and will assist with the designat ion of Local Green Spaces wher e these have 
been identified by local communi ties and/or as part of a neighb ourhood plan.  
 
The Borough Council will investigate the potential for improvin g access to 
open spaces and the countryside  and will seek opportunities to expand and 
improve the Rights of Way network, making it accessible to sect ions and 
groups in the community in accordance with policy QP3.  In part icular the 
Borough Council will support initiatives to extend the England Coastal Path 
south from North Gare. 
 
In accordance with policies  CC1 and CC2 the Borough Council wi ll support 
and encourage green infrastructure initiatives that can help al leviate flood 
risk and address surface water dr ainage issues by incorporating  Sustainable 
Drainage Systems (SuDS) including: 
3)   Physical mitigation measur es that reduce flood risk such a s 
watercourse improvements and wetl and creation to be used for 
flood attenuation 
4)   Schemes that address surface wa ter drainage issues in crit ical 
drainage areas 
5)   Measures to naturalise h eavily modified watercourses 
 
The loss of green infrastructure components will generally be r esisted. 
Proposals affecting the green wedges will be assessed against p olicy NE3. 
Proposals affecting playing fiel ds will be assessed against pol icy NE5. 
Development that results in the loss of churchyards and cemeter ies will not 
be permitted.  In exceptional ci rcumstances other green infrast ructure will 
only be considered for other uses where: 
6)   it can be demonstrated t o be surplus to needs, or 
7)   it has no other recreationa l, nature conservation or ameni ty 
function, or 
8)   it is in an area where the  local need has already been met  
elsewhere, or 
9)   it can be demonstrated tha t the area of open space is detr imental 
to the amenity of neighbours, or 
10)   it is too small or difficult to maintain. 
 
Where an area of open space is lost to development, the Borough  Council will 
impose planning conditions or a le gal agreement as appropriate,  t o  e n s u r e  
compensatory provision of an alternative site or enhancement of  adjoining 
open space. 
 
The Borough Council will seek to ensure that the development of  a  h i g h  
quality green infrastructure netw ork complements high quality d esign in the 
built environment in accordance with policies QP4  a n d  Q P 5 ,  a n d  w i l l  a l s o
seek to ensure that sufficient green space is provided as part of development 
on a case by case basis, and that, where appropriate, new devel opment 
incorporates measures to enhance biodiversity.   251 
 
Green Wedges 
16.54 Green wedges have been a key element of spatial planning for many 
years, not only in Hartlepool but throughout the urban areas of  the Tees 
Valley.  They are wedges or fi ngers of open space extending fro m the 
countryside well into the urban ar eas.  They provide convenient  a n d  
often extensive amenity open space and in many cases easy acces s to 
the countryside.  They also offer opportunities for improving a nd 
greening the wider environment, pr oviding recreational opportun ities 
and creating wildlife links as par t of an ecological network.  Green 
wedges can also help to delineate distinct parts of an urban ar ea and 
develop a sense of community and identity among local residents .  
 16.55 The following green wedges a re identified on the Policies  Map: 
 How Beck, Middle Warren; 
 Burn Valley; 
 Owton Manor; 
 Greatham Beck, South West Extension; 
 High Tunstall, and 
 Wynyard. 
 
16.56 How Beck green wedge has bee n developed as an integral pa rt of the 
Middle Warren housing developmen t.  It divides the strategic ho using 
area into two distinct entitie s, providing a high quality envir onment with 
footpaths and cycle ways linking into the adjacent housing. 
 16.57 Burn Valley green wedge is we ll established, providing a green corridor 
running towards the town centre.  It provides links to Summerhi ll 
Country Park at the western end and there is potential to enhan ce links 
from the eastern end into the town centre and the marina as par t of a 
developing green infrastructure network. 
 16.58 Owton Manor green wedge is a lso well established and exte nds from 
the open countryside through housi ng development to Catcote Roa d 
and on to Rossmere Park.  A number  of environmental improvement s 
have been made over recent years  and a cycle route and footpath s 
have been provided. 
 16.59 A major extension to the ur ban area – South West Extensio n – received 
planning consent in October 2015
95 (full permission for 144 dwellings; 
outline permission for 1,116 dwellings).  A green wedge is prop osed as 
an integral part of this develop ment.  The green wedge will be focussed 
along the route of Gr eatham Beck extending from the south of th e site 
to the north west.  As well as p roviding a high quality environ ment for 
the new housing, the green wedge w ill also provide opportunitie s for 
recreation and leisure.  As part of a developing green infrastr ucture 
                                                           
95 Minded to approve by Committee with decision notice yet to be issued at time of writing – 
October 2016.   252network, it will ultimately provide enhanced links towards Salt holme and 
the River Tees to the south east, as well as into the countrysi de to the 
west of Hartlepool. 
 16.60 An extension to the urban ar ea is also proposed at High T unstall.  A 
green wedge will form an integral part of this development exte nding in 
from the adjacent open countryside. 
 16.61 As part of the housing and business development at Wynyar d, a green 
wedge is identified extending fr om the open countryside to the west, 
principally along the south side  of the A689 towards the A19 ju nction 
but also including an extension no rth through the Wynyard devel opment 
toward the North Burn valley and out into the open countryside to the 
north.  As well as protecting areas of valuable green space, th e green 
wedge will also provide good oppor tunities for enhancing footpa th and 
cycle way links both into the open countryside and towards adja cent 
urban areas, help to improve w ildlife habitats,  provide more 
opportunities for leisure and rec reation, and provide a high qu ality 
environment to encourage new investment. 
 16.62 All green wedges will be reta ined as tracts of predominan tly open land 
and will be enhanced as part of t he green infrastructure networ k. 
Development involving new build ings or structures will not gene rally be 
permitted within the delineated gr een wedge areas.  However, be cause 
of their multi-functional role, there may be a need to provide ancillary 
buildings in connection with existing or proposed uses in the a rea which 
are compatible with the designa tion as a green wedge.  These co uld 
include for example, extensions t o school premises or the provi sion of 
buildings or facilities in connecti on with recreation/leisure a ctivities. 
 
NE3: Green Wedges 
The Borough Council will seek to protect, maintain, enhance and , where 
appropriate, increase the number of  green wedges to provide a w ide range of 
benefits for the town.  Developmen t within the fol lowing green wedges, as 
shown on the  Policies Map, will be strictly controlled: 
1) How Beck, Middle Warren; 
2) Burn Valley; 
3) Owton Manor; 
4) Greatham Beck, within the S outh West Extension housing site 
(policy HSG4); 
5) High Tunstall, within the proposed housing area (policy HSG5 ) , 
and 
6) Wynyard, as part of the new housing and business park (polic ies 
HSG6 and EMP1) 
 
Approval will only be given for t he development of buildings or  structures 
which: 
7)   comprise extensions to exist ing premises located within a green 
wedge, or  2538)   provide facilities ancillary  to existing or proposed recre ation, 
leisure, sporting or other uses compatible with the open nature  of 
the green wedge, or 
9)   relate to the provision, enha ncement or management of area s of 
biodiversity value, and 
10)   there is no significant ad verse effect on the overall int egrity of the 
green wedge. 
 
Proposals for landscape design, planting and other features wit hin green 
wedges should be in accordance with policy QP5, and should also  address 
the need for long term maintenance.  Where an integral part of development,
green wedges should be implemented at an early stage in the dev elopment 
process.  
 
Where appropriate, interpretation should be provided for natura l and historic 
features within green wedges. 
 Ecological Networks 
16.63 While it remains critically  important to continue to prot ect existing sites 
and areas of wildlife value, it has been recognised over recent  years 
that this will not be sufficient to halt and reverse the loss o f biodiversity.  
In the 2010 Defra report ‘Making Space for Nature’
96 it was concluded 
that England’s wildlife sites a re generally too small and too i solated, 
leading to declines in many char acteristic species.  With clima te change 
likely to exacerbate the situat ion, the report concluded that t hat 
England’s ecological network needed to be enhanced and that thi s 
enhancement could be summed up by the words, “more, bigger, bet ter 
and joined”. 
 16.64 The Government responded to ‘Making Space for Nature’ in 2011
97 and 
this was reflected in the Natural Environment White Paper98.  One of 
the key strands of the Government’s response in the White Paper  was 
to retain the protection and impr ovement of the natural environ ment as 
core objectives of t he planning system.   
 16.65 The National Pla nning Policy Framework
99 m a k e s  a  n u m b e r  o f  
references on how planning polici es can enhance ecological netw orks.  
These include identifying and mapping existing components of ecological networks and areas o f habitat creation that can conn ect 
them, planning for biodiversity across local authority boundari es, and 
identifying indicators to monitor biodiversity. 
 
                                                           
96 Making Space for Nature: A rev iew of England’s Wildlife Sites and Ecological Networks; 
chaired by Professor Sir John Lawton, submitted to the Secretar y of State, Department for 
Environment, Food & Rural Affairs, 16th September 2010.   
97 Government Response to the Maki ng Space for Nature Review; Dep artment for 
Environment, Food & Rura l Affairs, June 2011.  
98 The Natural Choice: securing the value of nature; Department f or Environment, Food and 
Rural Affairs, 2011.  
99 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 117; Department for Communities & Local 
Government, March 2012.   25416.66 An early attempt at identifying strategic wildlife corrid ors was made in 
the Cleveland Wildlife Strategy100 in the 1980s.  These corridors were 
also identified through policies in the Tees Valley Structure P lan101 and 
the relevant corridors in Hartlepool were: 
 the coastline; 
 the Tees Marshes south towards Port Clarence; 
 Greatham Creek to Crookfoot Reservoir, and 
 Wynyard to Greatham Creek via Claxton 
 16.67 These strategic wildlife corridors remain largely relevan t and functional 
today, and are able to form the basis of an ecological network in 
Hartlepool.  The Borough Council is  aware of the key ecological  
networks and features within th e Borough, and has sought to ens ure 
that they are maintained and not  harmed through development.  
However, securing improvements to the network has been more 
difficult.  In view of national guidance, the Borough Council w ill seek to 
ensure that all major development s take responsibility for not only 
protecting what currently exist s but also improves upon it.  Wh ile 
ecological networks exist at a  landscape scale, they are compos ed of 
elements of varying size and scale, and even small features suc h as a 
pond could have a significant effect on the viability of the ne twork.  All 
major developments therefore hav e the potential to enhance the 
network. 
 16.68 Hartlepool currently has 47 Local Wildlife Sites but a si gnificant number 
of these are small and isolated, making them vulnerable to exte rnal 
factors including climate change.   This can result in some spec ies being 
unable to move between sites and in creases the chances of losin g 
species from particular sites, leading to a continuing decline in 
biodiversity value.  Adopting a positive approach to the creati on of 
areas of habitat that enhance or e xpand existing wildlife sites , or which 
can form and improve links between sites, is essential in enhan cing 
biodiversity.   
 16.69 Hartlepool’s ecological network does of course form links  with 
neighbouring areas.  These ecologi cal links depend to some exte nt on 
the history of land management, but  also align with the natural  
character areas including north t o the Durham Magnesian Limesto ne 
Plateau and south and west to the Tees Lowlands, as well as the  
coastal fringe. 
 16.70 The Borough Council has pr epared an inventory of areas/si tes within 
Hartlepool, both designated and non- designated, which currently  have 
wildlife interest.  The inventory has also looked at other area s which 
could provide potential function al ecological links between the  existing 
wildlife sites.  The inventory has looked at the Borough as a s eries of 
                                                           
100 Cleveland Wildlife Strategy, C leveland County Council and Engl ish Nature, 1989  
101 Tees Valley Structure Plan; Tees  Valley Joint Strategy Unit on  behalf of Darlington, 
Hartlepool, Middlesbrough, Redca r & Cleveland, and Stockton-on- Tees Borough Councils, 
adopted February 2004.   255ecological networks based on sim ilarities of existing habitats and suites 
of species, and on the potential for enhancements to link those  habitats 
and species into a more resilient network.  Appendix 10 provide s brief 
descriptions of the sites and pot ential links on which the netw ork is 
based.  This is of course a simpl ification of what is a complex  and fluid 
situation with regard to ecologi cal networks.  However, it does  enable 
some indication of where there is potential for ecological enha ncements 
and habitat creation through devel opment plan policy and throug h 
development schemes. 
 16.71 The Tees Valley Local Natu re Partnership has undertaken a  similar 
exercise with its ‘Natural Networks and Opportunity Mapping’ pr oject.  
This was a Tees Valley wide exercise and therefore less detaile d than 
the Borough Council’s inventory.   However, it did identify ecol ogical 
links beyond Hartlepool, and helped to confirm a number of the key 
ecological links within the Boro ugh.  Diagram 8 shows priority and 
potential ecological networks in Hartlepool. 
 16.72 Key components of Hartlepool’s  ecological network Include : 
 The coastal fringe, which for over half its length is designat ed 
as part of the Teesmouth and Cleveland Coast Special 
Protection Area/Ramsar site, but almost all of the coastal 
fringe has some ecological o r geological designation; 
 Brownfield sites within the Tees Road/Brenda Road area in 
south east Hartlepool; the area already has ecological interest  
and there are opportunities to connect and enhance these features; 
 The riparian corridor
102 running along Dalton Beck near Elwick 
in the north down towards Greatham Beck and the coast; this area still retains a number of locally significant habitats and  
species that could be enhanc ed through further habitat 
creation; and 
 A corridor running along the we stern fringe of the Borough 
from the Wynyard area, which has some of the highest levels 
of tree cover in the Borough, to the Thorpe Bulmer Dene/Crimdon Dene area.  There is potential to improve 
biodiversity interest as part of new developments in the Wynyard area and there are oppor tunities for habitat creation 
and enhancement at and around a number of isolated sites within the wider agric ultural landscape.  
      
                                                           
102 Riparian refers to land adjoining a watercourse or land with a watercourse running through 
it  256NE4: Ecological Networks 
The Borough Council will seek to maintain and enhance ecologica l networks 
throughout the Borough.  Priority se ctions of the network are: 
1) Coastal fringe 
2) Tees Road/Brenda Road brownfield land 
3) Dalton Beck/Greatham Beck riparian corridor 
4) Rural west from Wynyard to Thorpe Bulmer and Crimdon Denes 
 
The Borough Council will also work with the Tees Valley Local N ature 
Partnership and adjoining Local N ature Partnerships to maintain  and enhance 
ecological networks at a landscap e scale across the Borough bou ndary.   
 
Where appropriate all developments will be required to maintain  and enhance 
ecological networks in the vicinity of the proposal, complying with policy 
QP5.  Where enhancements cannot be incorporated within the site  then an 
off-site contribution may be sought, in accordance with policy NE2 and policy 
QP1. 
 
 257Diagram 8 – Ecological Networks 
 258Playing Fields, Tennis Courts and Bowling Greens  
16.73 In 2014 the Borough Council commissioned an Open Space, S port and 
Recreation Assessment103.  The Assessment identified deficiencies and 
surpluses, and set locally derived open space and recreation pr ovision 
standards, addressing accessibi lity, quality and quantity.   
 16.74 Standards and recommendations from the Assessment with re gard to 
playing fields are: 
  Quality standard – 0.9 hec tares per 1000 population. 
 
 Accessibility standard – new faci lities should focus developme nt around 
existing club bases, avoiding the provision of dispersed pitche s.  
Provision required for new hous ing development should be locate d off 
site, or in conjunction with the development of a new club or s atellite 
club to an existing facility. 
 16.75 The Assessment concluded t hat a minimum level of 75.82 he ctares is 
required to meet baseline deman d.  When account is taken of the  need 
to add in space for changing accommodation and parking, plus a strategic reserve to maintain the level of facilities, the over all standard 
for playing fields equates to 0 .9 hectare per 1000 population.   
 16.76 Additional playing fields  and other facilities required a s part of strategic 
housing developments should be c oncentrated together as a hub t o 
facilitate effective use by clubs and organisations as well as the wider 
community. 
 
NE5: Playing Fields, Tennis Courts and Bowling Greens 
The Borough Council will protect  existing playing fields, tenni s courts and 
bowling greens.  Loss of these facilities will only be acceptab le in the 
following circumstances: 
1) where they are replaced by ne w provision which is at least 
comparable in terms of facili ties, amenity and location, or 
2) where they can best be reta ined and enhanced through the 
redevelopment of a small part of the site, or 
3) where there is up to date, r obust evidence (through for exam ple an 
Open Space/Recreation Assessment or the Playing Pitch Strategy)  
that demonstrates an excess of pro vision of playing fields, or their 
re-location achieves a better di spersal of provision which meet s the 
requirements of users and the local community, or 
4) where a proposed development, including school expansion or re-
building, takes place and the loss of some playing fields does not 
adversely affect the quantity, quality or use of any playing pi tches 
or any other sporting facilities on the site.  
5) where the provision of built  sport facilities will result in  the loss of 
playing pitches, the development is of greater benefit to sport  than 
                                                           
103 Open Space, Sport and Recreation Assessment, Ashley Godfrey As sociates on behalf of 
Hartlepool Borough Council, December 2014.   259the playing pitches it will replace and the needs for which cle arly 
outweigh the loss.  
 
Where playing fields, tennis courts and bowling greens are lost  t o  
development, the Borough Council will seek a planning obligatio n or 
condition to secure replacement or  enhancement of such land rem aining.  
 
When additional facilities are required to serve new housing de velopments 
and/or to meet an increase in demand for an activity, they shou ld be 
concentrated together as a hub to ensure effective use by clubs  and 
organisations as well as the wider community. 
 
Incidental Open Space  
16.77 There are a number of sma ll areas of incidental open spac e scattered 
throughout the built-up areas and vi llages.  These areas are an  
important element of the Borough’ s green infrastructure network , and 
are often regarded as extremely valuable by local communities, 
particularly in areas where ther e are few private gardens.  Suc h areas 
can provide visual amenity or separate different buildings/land  uses for 
environmental, visual or, sometimes, safety reasons.  Incidenta l open 
space often occurs in and around housing areas and can offer opportunities for informal activi ties such as play and dog walk ing.  Such 
areas can also have val ue as wildlife habitats. 
 
NE6: Protection of Incidental Open Space  
The loss of incidental open space will be resisted except where : 
1) it can be demonstrated that the area of open space is detrim ental 
to the amenity of neighbours or is  too small or difficult to ma intain, 
or 
2) it does not contribute significantly to visual or recreation al 
amenity, and where the need and function of the open space is 
met elsewhere in the locality. 
 
If an area of incidental open space is lost to development, the  Borough 
Council will impose planning conditions and/or seek obligations  t o  e n s u r e  
compensatory provision of an alternative site or enhancement of  nearby open 
space; this is in addition to any green infrastructure contribu tion required by 
policies NE2 and QP1.  Where developments incorporate areas of incidental 
open space, such areas will be protected through the use of con ditions.  
 
Main Transport Corridors  
16.78 The main road and rail corridors and their frontages can be an 
important part of the green network  and it is also important th at they 
give a good impression to both residents and visitors.  High st andards 
of landscaping, planting and design will be sought from new 
developments along the main transport corridors. 
   260NE7: Landscaping Along Main Transport Corridors 
Main road and rail corridors are considered to be an integral p art of the green 
infrastructure network, and a part icularly high standard of lan dscaping, tree 
planting and design will be required from developments adjoinin g the main 
communication corridors which include: 
1) A179 from the A19 to the town centre 
2) A1086 from Co. Durham and the A1048/A1049 approaches to the 
Headland 
3) A178 Tees Road from Greatha m Creek through Seaton Carew to 
the town centre 
4) A689 from the A19 and Billingham  to the town centre and Mari na 
5) B1276/B1277 in Seaton Carew a nd the south east Hartlepool 
industrial area 
6) Hart Lane in north west Hartlepool, and 
7) the main coast rail line.  
 
   
 
                              261APPENDIX 1: GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
 
Term Definition Abbreviation
Active Frontage The front of a building used for a shop, café or 
another service used by the public. It will usually include a display window  and a public entrance.  
Adopt To formally approve. Adoption often relates to 
Local Development Framework documents. They are formally approved by the Borough Council and become part of the planning policy framework for the Borough.  
Affordability Whether or not there are sufficient funds to 
purchase something. Affordability can often be referred to in housing terms, as it is a measure of what housing is affordable to certain groups of households.  
Affordable 
Housing Affordable housing is hous ing designed for those 
whose income generally deny them the opportunity to purchase houses on the open market as a result of the difference between income and the market cost of housing.  For further definition see NPPG.  
Allocated  Lands which has been ident ified on the Policies 
Map for a specific  type of development.  
Amenity The pleasant or normally satisfactory aspects of a 
location which contributes to its overall character 
and its enjoyment. Amenity is often a material consideration in planning decisions.  
Ancient 
Woodland An area that has been wooded continuously since 
at least 1600 AD.  Ancient woodland is divided into ancient semi-natur al woodland (ASNW) and 
plantations on ancient woodland sites (PAWS).  Both types of stand are classed as ancient woods.   
Aquifer Underground layer (stratum) of rock in which 
water naturally occurs. Water for human use may be extracted by wells or boreholes.  
Ancillary Uses A use which forms a small part of a larger use. 
For example, a factory may include a small shop selling items made in the factory. The shop is ancillary to the main use o f the site as a factory.   262Term Definition Abbreviation
Article 4 Direction A direction under Article 4 of the the Town & 
Country Planning (General Permitted Development) Order 1995 that allows the Secretary of State or Local Planning Authority to require a planning application for development that would normally not need one because it would be covered by permitted development rights. Local Planning Authorities need the 
approval of the Secretary of State in most cases.  
Associated 
infrastructure Also see infrastructure. 
Associated infrastructure is the infrastructure that would typically be expected on new developments such as roads, paths, cycle ways, pockets of incidental open space and landscaping such as trees and shrubs.  
Biodiversity All living things including trees, plants, animals 
and insects (including protected species).  
Biodiversity 
Action Plan A plan which sets out proposals to protect and 
improve the places where trees, plants, animals and insects live. BAP 
Biomass Plants and trees when used to create energy.  
Boundary 
Treatments The way the edges of developments are 
designed and enclosed. For example, the boundary treatment around a house will usually 
be a fence, wall or hedge.  
Brownfield Land/ 
Previously 
developed land  Previously developed land, also known as 
brownfield land which is or was occupied by a permanent structure (and the remains of such structure are visible).  
Building 
regulations Building Regulations apply in England & Wales 
and promote standards for most aspects of a building's construction, energy efficiency in buildings, the needs of all people, including those with disabilities, in accessing and moving around buildings.  
Built Environment Surroundings which are generally built up in 
character. The collection of  buildings, spaces and 
links between them fo rm such an area.  
Catchment Area The area around a town or village. The people in 
this area will look to the town or village to provide services. For example, people who live in villages in the west of the Borough may go to Hartlepool to do their shopping or to go to school. Their village is in the catchm ent area of Hartlepool.   263Term Definition Abbreviation
Change of Use Buildings are classified as having a use for 
example retail use. Planning permission is required for material change of use to building or land.  
Coastal Squeeze Coastal habitats that are trapped between a fixed 
landward boundary such as a sea wall, and rising sea levels and/or increased storminess.  The habitat is effectively ‘squeezed’ between the two forces and diminishes i n quantity and/or  quality.  
Commencement 
of Development The date at which work begins on site.  
Community 
Infrastructure 
Levy Introduced in the Planning Bill in 2007 and 
empowers Local Planning Authorities to make charges on new developments to help finance the infrastructure needed to support growth. CIL 
Community 
Facilities Services available to residents within the 
immediate area to provide the day to day needs of the community, this can include village halls, community centres, doctors, dentists, places of worship, recycling facilities and libraries.  
Community 
Strategy Provides the broad framewo rk for all services in 
Hartlepool. It sets out a long term vision for Hartlepool and details the principles and seven 
priorities necessary to achieve the vision and improve services.  
Commuted Sum A sum of money paid by a developer to the 
Borough Council to provide a service or a facility, rather than the developer  providing it direct.  
Comparison 
Goods Things we buy which are not food and which are 
not bought every day or every week, for example clothes, furniture, computers and cars.  
Compulsory 
Purchase  When land is taken without the agreement of the 
owner. Borough Council, housing authorities and highway authorities ar e among the bodies that 
have compulsory purchase powers.  
Connectivity 
 The degree to which something has connections, 
for example road connections, footway connections or the connection between area A and area B.  
Conservation 
Area An area of special historical and/or architectural 
interest which is designated by the Local Planning Authority as bei ng important to conserve 
or enhance.   264Term Definition Abbreviation
Constructive 
Conservation Is a positive, well-informed and collaborative 
approach to conservation. It  is a flexible process 
of helping people underst and their historic 
environment and using that understanding to manage change.   
Convenience 
Goods  Widely distributed and relatively inexpensive 
goods which are purchased frequently and with minimum of effort, such as newspapers and most grocery items.  
Curtilage The area of land associat ed with development. 
The curtilage of a dwellinghouse is normally its garden, the curtilage of    c o m m e r c i a l  u n i t  i s  
normally its ancillary open areas used for parking, servicing and landscaping. Buildings within the curtilage of a listed build ing are also considered 
to be listed.  
Deliverability The likelihood of a proposal for example, a 
housing site happening. The cost of developing a site, how desirable the area is, and the availability 
of funding all affect s deliverability.  
Density (Housing) A measure of the number of dwellings which can 
be accommodated on a si te or in an area.  
Design and 
Specification Provides precise and explicit information about 
the requirements for a development design.   
Designated 
Heritage Assets A World Heritage Site, Scheduled Monument, 
Listed Building, Protected Wreck Site, Registered Park and Garden, Registered Battlefield or Conservation Area designated as such under relevant legislation.   
Developer 
Contributions Relate to the provision of those items outlined 
within the Section 106 Legal Agreement or through the CIL charging schedule ie those things that the developer is required to provide to make the development acceptable in planning terms.  
Development Defined in planning law as “the carrying out of 
building, engineering, min ing or other operations, 
in on or under land, or the making of a material change of use of any building or land.”   265Term Definition Abbreviation
Development Plan See also Development Plan Document. 
The Development Plan for Hartlepool is currently 
the 2006 Local Plan . The development plan for 
the Borough sets out where development should be located and what principles it should conform to. In the future the dev elopment plan for the 
Borough will be the 2018 Local Plan,  any other 
DPDs and SPDs, these may include Tees Valley 
wide DPDs and SPDs. 
  
Development Plan 
Document A local development document in the local 
development framework which forms part of the statutory development pl an for the Borough. The 
Core Strategy, documents dealing with the allocation of land, Area Action Plans and the Policies Map  are all Development Plan 
Documents. DPD 
Dwelling A self-contained building or part of a building 
used as residential acco mmodation, and usually 
providing a home for a single household. A dwelling may be a house, bungalow, flat, maisonette or residentially converted farm building.  
Economic 
Viability 
Assessment  A means by which to assess the profitability of a 
proposed development.  EVA 
Ecosystems 
Services 
Approach The functions of ecosystems that are vital to 
support human life and health and well-being through provisioning, r egulating, supporting and 
cultural services. These include the creation of soil and the production of food, water and 
medicines; climate contro l, including floodwater 
storage; nutrient cycling and crop pollination and 
spiritual, cultural, educ ational and recreational 
benefits.   
Employment 
Allocations Sites specifically set aside for employment 
development. Employment in this context mainly refers to offices development, industry, storage and distribution, but can include other uses.  
 
 
Employment Area Industrial estates or other areas which are used 
primarily for warehousing, office or other business uses falling within use class B1, B2 and B8 Use Classes Order and/or where such uses are proposed.   266Term Definition Abbreviation
Employment 
Development Within the Local Plan  this type of development 
mostly relates to office and industrial type of 
employment. It does not specifically relate to other types of employment such as shop working or hospital staff although technically they are both a form of employment and building a new retail area could be employment development. Employment development mainly occurs in key 
employment areas as i dentified on the Policies 
Map.  
Employment Use Industrial, warehousing, o ffice or other business 
uses falling with class B1, B2 and B8 of the Use Classes Order.  
Energy 
performance Energy performance of a building means the 
calculated or measur ed amount of energy needed 
to meet the energy demand associated with a typical use of the building,  which includes, energy 
used for heating, cooling,  ventilation, hot water 
and lighting.  
Enterprise Zones Enterprise Zones are specific geographical areas, 
designated by the government, that benefit from certain tax incentives/breaks. Businesses within the Enterprise Zone are entitled to receive various types of financial aid. These include tax benefits, special financi ng and other incentives 
designed to encourage businesses to establish and maintain a presence within the identified zone.  EZ 
Environmental 
Impact 
Assessment By law some planning applications for larger 
developments need to be accompanied by a detailed document (EIA) which looks at the effects the proposal will have on wildlife, water 
quality, air quality and living conditions. EIA 
Environmental 
Statement A report submitted by the developer that sets out 
the elements of the scheme that address sustainable development i ssues, including the 
positive environmental, social and economic implications. ES 
Evidence Base The information gathered by a planning authority 
to support the preparation of development documents. It includes quantitative (numerical 
values) and qualitative (feelings and opinions) data.   267Term Definition Abbreviation
Examination or  
Examination in 
Public 
 An independent process where formal objections 
to a Development Plan Documents are considered by a government inspector. The Examination itself will be run by a government 
inspector. Many objections to DPDs will be considered through written comments made by objectors. However, objectors have a right to make their case in person at the Examination if 
they choose. EIP 
Executive 
Housing Areas Executive housing areas are  areas of high quality 
homes which are well designed, predominantly 
detached dwellings, with 4 or more bedrooms that 
are set in generous grounds within an attractive setting and the overall development is of a low density no greater than 10 dwellings per hectare.  
Farm 
Diversification 
 This is where a farm is used for other types of 
business as well as agriculture. Bed-and-breakfast accommodation or farm shops are an example of this.  
Financial 
Contribution A specific amount of money paid to the Borough 
Council.  
Floodplain Generally low lying areas adjacent to a 
watercourse, tidal lengths of the river or sea, where water flows in times of flood or would flow but for the presence of flood defences.   
Footprint The amount of land a development takes up. The 
footprint of a building is the amount of land it takes up.  
Form The shape of buildings and structures.  
Geodiversity A term to describe the wealth and variety of 
geological layers represented in the land underlying the district.   
Green 
Infrastructure The physical environment  within and between our 
cities, towns and villages. It is a network of multi-functional open spaces, including formal parks, gardens, woodlands, green corridors, waterways, street trees and open countr yside. It comprises all 
environmental resources, and thus a green infrastructure approach also contributes towards sustainable resource management.  
Green Space Includes open spaces, country parks, formal 
gardens, cemeteries, allotments, woodlands, wildlife areas, recreation grounds, sports pitches and parks.   268Term Definition Abbreviation
Greenfield Land  Land that has not been built  upon, or that has no 
remains of any precious building works. These areas of land can be large, such as vast open fields or small pockets of green space in urban areas and play a multifunctional role in society. (source: Green Infrastructure Planning Guide; Northumbria University, North East Community Forests, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, 
Countryside Agency, English Nature, Forestry 
Commission, Groundwork, 2005).  
Hartlepool Local 
Plan (2006) A Local Plan is a statutory document containing 
all the planning policies and standards that will be 
used to determine planning applications received by the Development Control Section. The plan is also intended to highlight areas where the Borough Council is seeking to encourage new development within the Borough.  
Hazardous 
Substances 
Consultation 
Zones By law, the Health and Safety Executive must 
keep lists of certain potentially dangerous materials. These are usually materials used in industry. They Borough Council will assess any Hazardous Substances applications for new development planned in the area near to where these materials are stored. This area is known as a consultation zone. The list of hazardous substances is kept by the Health and Safety Executive, which is par t of national government.   
Hectare A unit of land area equi valent to 10,000 square 
meters or 0.01 square kilometres. One hectare is approximately equivalent to 2.5 acres.  
Heritage The collective value inherited and passed on from 
one generation to another  through representative 
artifacts or remains, qualities which are worthwhile preserving for posterity.   269Term Definition Abbreviation
Heritage Assets A building, monument, site, place, area or 
landscape positively identif ied as having a degree 
of significance meriting consideration in planning decisions. Heritage assets are the valued components of the histor ic environment.  
 Heritage assets are of two types,  
1.    Those which have been recognised as 
being nationally impor tant and have been 
designated as such; these are designated heritage assets, and  
2.    Heritage assets that have not been 
designated, nevertheless some of which may be of nationa l importance.  
 Significance - The value of a heritage asset to this and future generations because of its heritage interests. That interest may be archaeological, artistic or historic. Another definition states that historic interest can include emotional meaning for comm unities derived from 
collective experience of a place.  Setting - The surroundings in which the heritage asset is experienced. Its  extent is not fixed and 
may change as the asset and its surroundings evolve. Elements of a setting may make a positive or negative contribution to the significance of an asset, may affect the ability to appreciate the significanc e or may be neutral.”  
Historic 
Environment  All aspects of the environment resulting from the 
interaction between people and place through time, including all surviving physical remains of past human activity whether visible, buried or submerged and landscaped and planted or managed flora. Those elements of the historic environment that hold significance are called heritage assets.  
Homes and 
Communities 
Agency The Homes and Communities Agency is the 
national housing and r egeneration delivery 
agency for England. The role is to create thriving communities and affordable homes. HCA 
Housing Market 
Renewal An initiative for improvements to the housing 
stock either by demolit ion and rebuild or by 
refurbishment. HMR  270Term Definition Abbreviation
Inclusive Design Inclusive design is design that address the needs 
of the widest possible audience, irrespective of age or ability. Inclusive design is imperative to 
ensure that development c an be used all people, 
to the greatest extent possible.   
Infrastructure Includes roads, rail, pipelines etc or social 
provision such as schools and community centres.  
Infrastructure 
Plan A Plan which demonstrates w hat infrastructure is 
required to support planned growth and development, how much it will cost, where the money will come from to provide infrastructure, and who will be responsibl e for its delivery.  
Intermediate 
Tenure This type of housing, also known as Shared 
Ownership or Shared Equity, enables people to privately buy a share of a  property being sold and 
pay a subsidised rent on the remainder.  
Land fill The practice of disposing of domestic and 
commercial waste in lar ge holes in the ground.   
Landscape The appearance of land, including its shape, 
form, colours and elements, the way these components combine in a way that is distinctive to particular localities, the way they are perceived, and an area's cultural and historical associations.   
Landscape 
Capacity Studies Studies carried out to asse ss the sensitivity and 
capacity of the landsc ape to incorporate 
development for example wind farms and turbines.   
Landscape 
Character 
Assessment A tool to identify and under stand the factors that 
give character to the landscape and to help inform policy and decisions about how the landscape may change in the future.  
Land use The use that exists on a certain area of land, 
various land uses could be residential, agricultural, open space etc.  
Layout The way and which buildi ng relate to each other.  
Lifetime Homes Lifetime Homes are ordinary homes incorporating 
16 design criteria that can be universally applied to new homes. Each design feature adds to the comfort and convenience of the home and supports the changing needs of individuals and families at different stages of life.    271Term Definition Abbreviation
Limits to 
Development The boundary (outlined on the proposal map) 
outside of which very little development should take place. The urban area is located within the limits to development; the rural area is located 
beyond the limits.  
Listed Building A building of special historical and /or 
architectural interest considered worthy of special protection which is listed and described in the statutory list of such buildings published by the 
Department for Culture Media and Sport.  
The Localism Act The Localism Act was introduced to Parliament in 
December 2010. The Act received Royal Accent on 15
th November 2011. The Act includes 
information with regar d to Neighbourhood 
Planning and gives Mini sters delegated powers to 
abolish regional planning and establish neighbourhood planning. HBC have to conform to the requirement s of the Act.  
Local Area 
Agreement LAA`s are a three year agreement, based on 
local Sustainable Communi ty Strategies, that set 
the priorities for a local  area between the Council 
and other key partnerships. LAA 
 
Local Centre Local centres include a range of small shops of a 
local nature, serving a small catchment. Typically, local centres might include services such as a supermarket, a newsagent, a sub-post office and a pharmacy. Other facilities could include a hot-food takeaway and launderette.  
Local 
Development 
Framework The overarching term given to the collection  of 
Local Development Documents which collectively will provide the Boroughs p olicies for meeting the 
community’s economic, environmental and social aims for the future of the area where this affects the development and use of land and buildings. The LDF also includes the Local Development Scheme, the Statement of Community Involvement and the A nnual Monitoring Report. LDF 
Local 
Distinctiveness 
 Local distinctiveness is the physical, 
environmental, economic or social factors that characterise an area (and most likely a combination of all four), as well as how an area interacts with others.  
Local Highway 
Network  All the roads within the Borough excluding the 
A19. (See strategic highway network).  
Local 
Infrastructure 
Plan See Infrastructure Plan. LIP  272Term Definition Abbreviation
Local List of 
Locally Listed 
Buildings List to identify buildi ngs, structures, parks, 
gardens and open spaces in Hartlepool which are thought to be of special local architectural or historic interest.  
Local Transport 
Plan Describes the long-term transport strategy for the 
Borough and sets out a programme of improvements to address the identified local transport problems. LTP 
Maintenance The repair and upkeep of a product.  
Major 
Development  Housing developments of  10 or more dwellings 
or 
 consideration of the principle of residential 
development on a site o f at least 0.5ha, and  
 other development with a floor area of 1000 m2 
or 
 a site area of 1 ha or more and  
 any development that requires the submission 
of an Environmental Assessment.  
Market 
Conditions  The prevailing performance of the economy 
across all sectors.  
Masterplan  A detailed plan of a site and the type of 
development that the Bo rough Council would 
seek to achieve for the whole site.  
Mitigation The term mitigation is used to refer to the full 
range of responses used to counter significant and unavoidable adverse impacts.  
Monitoring The regular and systematic collection and 
analysis of information to measure policy implementation. Planning authorities are required 
to produce an annual report covering the monitoring of policies in the Local Development Framework that they are responsible for preparing.  
National 
sustainable 
building standard At present there are three separate sets of 
regulations which influenc e national sustainable 
building standards. These are: CfSH, BREEAM and Building Regulations. These current mechanisms could be subject to change therefore policy criteria needs to be is flexible.    273Term Definition Abbreviation
Natural Capital Refers to the elements of t he natural environment 
which provide valuable  goods and services to 
people. The Government focu s that the state of 
natural capital matters , not just because people 
enjoy the aesthetic elem ents of landscapes and 
wildlife of England, but because of the wide-
ranging economic benefits  that natural assets 
provide when managed well.  
  
Off-Site  An area not within the planning application 
boundary.  
On-Site An area within the planni ng application boundary.  
Open Market 
Value The value of a product i f advertised on the open 
market. OMV 
Open Space 
Assessment An assessment of the qual ity and availability of 
open space within Hartlepool.  
Pepper Potting The principle of ensuring there is a spread of 
affordable housing throughout an overall development rather than all being provided in one 
specific area.  
Permitted 
development Types of development which do not need 
planning permission.  
Piecemeal Development that is ca rried out in an unplanned 
manner.  
Planning 
Condition A requirement attached to a planning application 
to ensure that the development is of a high standard and to help mitigate against any implications an application may have. Conditions can relate to types of materials or assessments that may have to be carried out. Conditions can only be enforced through the planning enforcement regime.   
National Planning 
Practice 
Guidance An online Government Guide to provide further 
guidance to support the NPPF. NPPG 
Planning 
Obligation A legally binding agreement between the 
Borough Council and developers. Planning obligations are used to secure funds or works for significant and essential elements of a scheme to make it acceptable in planning terms. Planning obligations are set out in an agreement often 
known as a ‘secti on 106 agreement’.   
Port Related 
Development Development that relies on access to the port for 
imports and exports of products and materials.   274Term Definition Abbreviation
Pre-Application The stage referred to prior to submission of an 
application.  
Policies Map A plan which shows policies and proposals for 
specific sites and locations. These are shown on an Ordnance Survey map.  
Public realm This is the space between and surrounding 
buildings and open spaces that are accessible to the public and include st reets, pedestrianised 
areas, squares, river frontages etc.   
Ramsar sites An ecological site designated under the Ramsar 
Convention. Ramsar Convention (Iran 1971) is an intergovernmental treaty that embodies the commitments of its member countries to maintain the ecological character of their wetlands of International Importance and to plan for the "wise use" or sustainable use, of all of the wetlands in their territories.    
Regeneration Carrying out works in order to make an area a 
better place to live and work in.  
Regional Spatial 
Strategy Formerly part of the Development Plan and 
prepared by the Regional Planning Body, Regional Spatial Strategies have now been abolished by the Government. RSS 
Registered Social 
Landlord's / 
Registered 
Providers Registered Providers are government-funded not-
for-profit organisations that provide affordable housing. They include hous ing associations, 
trusts and cooperatives. They work with local authorities to provide hom es for people meeting 
the affordable homes criteria. As well as developing land and building homes RSLs undertake a landlord function by maintaining properties and co llecting rent. RSL / RP’s 
Renewable 
Energy Energy generated from s ources which are non - 
finite and can be replenished, including solar power, wind energy and power generated from 
waste, biomass etc.  
Residential 
Amenity  Qualities of life enjoyed by people which can be 
influenced by the surrounding environment. For example a reasonable degree of privacy, freedom from noise, air pollution etc. normally expected at home.  
Rights of Way Public footpaths and brid leways as defined in the 
Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000, also where there is no legal right of way but where access is permitted by the landowner.   275Term Definition Abbreviation
Rights of Way 
Improvement Plan A long term spatial plan setting out actions that 
will improve the Local Access Network (including all public and permissive  rights of way). ROWIP 
Safeguarded 
Land Land which is set aside in case it is needed for 
development in the long term. It is not available for development in the short term because of the possible long term need.  
Saved Policies Polices from the 2006 Local Plan that have been 
saved and are a material consideration in determining planning applications.  
Scale The size of buildings.  
Scheduled 
Ancient 
Monument Ancient structure, usually unoccupied, above or 
below the ground which is protected by order of the Secretary of State.  
Section 106 Legal 
Agreement Legally binding agreement  entered into between 
a developer and the Borough Council. (See also Planning Obligations). s.106 
Section 278 
Agreement Where a development requires works to be 
carried out on the existi ng adopted highway an 
Agreement will need to be signed between the 
developer and the Borough Council under Section 278 of the Highways Act 1980.  
Intertidal 
Areas/Sensitive 
Intertidal areas The intertidal area is the portion of coastline 
between the point of the highest high tide on the shore and the point of the low tide. Sensitive 
intertidal areas are areas of special nature 
designation that are most under threat.  
Sequential 
Approach Considering options for sit es for development in a 
particular order. For example, in terms of new shops, we would first look for sites within a shopping centre Sequentia l approach and then 
for sites on the edge of the shopping centre before looking at sites  outside the centre.   
Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest  Site or area designated as being of national 
importance because of its wildlife plants or flower species and/or unusual or typical geological features. They are ident ified by Natural England 
and have protected status under the Wildlife and Countryside Act. SSSI 
Social Inclusion Making sure that everyone has access to 
services and opportunities no matter what their background or income.  
Social Rented Housing that is rented to a tenant by a Registered 
Social Landlord.   276Term Definition Abbreviation
Specialist 
Industries  Activities which handle or produce goods and 
services that are potentially polluting and hazardous both to humans  and the environment  
Special 
Landscape Areas Areas where the landscape characteristics give 
the area sufficient importance to warrant special recognition.  
Special 
Protection Areas  A site designated under the European 
Commission Directive on the Conservation of Wild Birds.  SPA 
Stakeholder Any individual or organisation that have an 
interest in development m atters with Hartlepool.  
Statutory Something required by law (statute), usually 
through an Act of Parliament or Statutory Instrument.  
Statutory 
Agencies Government agencies that  are established by 
statute, or law. Statutory Agencies include the Highway Agency, Historic England, the Environment Agency, the Health and Safety Executive, Natural Eng land and Sport England.  
Street Furniture Lamp posts, signs, seats, bins, phone boxes and 
other fixed items in st reets, roads and public 
spaces.  
Strategic Bus 
Corridors Bus routes with frequent and regular bus 
services.  
Strategic 
Environmental 
Assessment Strategic environmental a ssessment is a system 
of incorporating environm ental considerations, 
where there is likely to be significant effect, into policies, plans, programmes and strategies. It is sometimes referred to as strategic environmental impact assessment. The specific term strategic environmental assessment relates to European Union policy (European Union Directive on Environmental Impact Assessments (85/337/EEC). SEA 
Strategic Flood 
Risk assessment Assessments that provide an overview of flood 
risk from all sources within the Borough. This provides the Borough C ouncil, developers and 
other interested parties w ith general guidance on 
flood risk and issues associated with flooding.  SFRA 
Strategic Gaps A strategic gap is an area identified in the Local 
Plan to achieve the following strategic planning objectives: 1) To maintain the separate identity and amenity of settlements. 2) To prevent settlements coalescing.     277Term Definition Abbreviation
Strategic Housing 
Market 
Assessment Identifies the current and future housing need 
and demand in the Borough of Hartlepool and the 
Tees Valley.  SHMA 
Strategic 
highways/ 
Strategic highway 
Network The A19 forms the Strategic Highway Network 
within the Borough and is managed by Highways England.  
Sustainable 
Communities A sustainable community is one in which most of 
the services and facilities people need, including schools and shops, are easy to get to, preferably without the need to use a car.  
Subsidy A form of financial assistance paid to a business 
or economic sector.  
Sui Generis So unique that it is in a use class of its own and 
cannot be categorised with other uses such as A1 
shops, B1 businesses.  
Supplementary 
Note Information which supports  the development plan.  
Supplementary 
Planning 
Document A local development document providing further 
detail of policies in dev elopment plan documents 
or of saved Local Plan policies.  SPD 
Sustainability 
Appraisal Identifies and evaluates social, environmental 
and economic effects of str ategies and policies in 
an LDF document from the outset of the preparation process. It incorporates the requirements of the Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) Directive. SA 
Sustainability 
Statements Outlines the elements of  the scheme that address 
sustainable development i ssues including the 
positive environmental, social and economic implications.  
Sustainable To maintain the vitality and strength of something 
over a period of time wit hout harming the strength 
and vitality of anything else.  
Sustainable 
development  Development that meets the needs of the 
present, without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.   
Sustainable 
community Sustainable communities meet the diverse needs 
of existing and future residents, their children and other users, contribute to a  high quality of life and 
provide opportunity and choice. They achieve this in ways that make effective use of natural resources, enhance the environment, promote social cohesion and inc lusion and strengthen 
economic prosperity.   278Term Definition Abbreviation
Sustainable 
Drainage Systems Efficient drainage systems which seek to 
minimise wastage of water including the use of groundcover to enable maximum penetration of run off into the ground and, where appropriate recycling grey water within the development.  SuDS 
Tandem housing 
development Where a dwelling is located to the rear of another 
dwelling and they shar e the same access.  
Tees Valley Stockton, Hartlepool, M iddlesbrough, Redcar & 
Cleveland and Darlington Borough Council areas 
collectively known as the Tees Valley.  
Tenure Tenure refers to the arrangements under which 
the household occupies all or part of a housing unit.  
Threshold A level or point at which something would start or 
cease to happen or come into effect. An example of this would be a size of development at which a contribution may be sought, for example if the threshold is 15 and a developer has a scheme for 15 houses they may be required to contribute for affordable housing etc.  
Topography The gradient and variations in height within a 
landscape.  
Transfer Price The discounted price at w hich a developer would 
transfer a property to a  Registered Provider.  
Transport 
Assessment A Transport Assessment is a comprehensive and 
systematic process that set s out at an early stage 
transport issues relating to a proposed development and identifies what measures will be 
taken to deal with the anticipated transport 
impacts of the scheme.    TA 
Transport 
Statement A transport statement i s appropriate when a 
proposed development is expected to generate relatively low numbers of trips or traffic flows and would have only a minor impact on the transport network, the TS sets out how the developer will address the impacts that the development will have on the transport network. TS 
Travel Plans A Travel Plan is a package of measures to assist 
in managing the transport needs of an organisation.    T h e  m a i n  o b j e c t i v e  o f  a  T r a v e l  
Plan is to provide incentives for users of a development to reduce t he need to travel alone 
by car to a site.      279Term Definition Abbreviation
Tree Preservation 
Order A TPO (Tree Preservation Order) is an order 
made by a local planning authority which in general makes it an offence to cut down, top, lop, uproot, wilfully damage or wilfully destroy a tree without the local planning authority’s permission. TPO 
Urban fence A term given to the boundary outlined on the 
proposal map outside of which the Borough Council propose that very little development should take place.  
Urban fringe Predominantly open land on the edge of a 
settlement.  
Use Classes 
Order The Town and County Use Classes Order, 1987, 
a statutory order made under  planning legislation 
which groups land uses int o different categories. UCO 
Veteran Trees Trees that are or look old relative to others of the 
same species.  Their characteristics include: 
 Very large girth for the species 
 Hollow or hollowing trunk 
 A large quantity of deadwood in the canopy.   
Viable A term used if the total value of a development 
scheme minus total costs is greater than the existing use value of the land.  
Village Envelope Boundaries on a map beyond which the Council 
proposes that a village should not be allowed to extend.  
Voltage 
Optimisation 
Units Is a term given to the systematic controlled 
reduction in the voltages received by an energy consumer to reduce energy use, power demand and reactive power demand.   
 
  280APPENDIX 2: LIST OF KEY NATIO NAL GUIDANCE, PLANS, POLICIES AND 
STRATEGIES 
 
National Guidance, Plans, P olicies and Strategies Publisher Year 
Active Design, Planning for health and wellbeing through sport 
and physical activity Sport 
England 2015 
Planning Policy for traveller sites CLG 2015 
Planning healthy weight environments – a Town and 
Country Planning Associati on reuniting health with 
planning project TCPA 2014 
Public health and landscapes  creating healthy places 
landscape institute position statement Landscape 
Institute 2014 
National Planning Policy Framework CLG  2012  
NPPF technical guidance CLG 2012 
Hills Fuel Poverty report, C entre for Analysis of Social 
Exclusion  March 
2012 
Letter To Chief Planning Officers: Advertising Control – Provision Of DCLG Guidance CLG 16
th 
August 
2011 
Stemming the Flow - the Role  of Trees and Woodland in 
Flood Protection Woodland 
Trust 2014 
Letter To Chief Planning Officers: 
Design And Planning CLG 20th May  
2011 
 
Natural Environment White Paper,  Natural Choice, securing  the value of nature   Government 2011 
Planning For Places: Deliv ering Good Design Through 
Core Strategies CABE 2009 
UK Climate Projections  2009 (Ukcp09) Defra  2009 
The UK Low Carbon Transition Plan  DECC 2009 
Making Space for Nature – a  review of England’s wildlife 
sites and ecological networks Defra 2010 
Lifetime Homes, Lifetime Neighbourhoods – A National 
Strategy For Housing In An Ageing Society CLG 2008 
Outdoor Advertisements And Signs: A Guide For 
Advertisers CLG 2007 
Circular 01/2006 Design And A ccess Statements CLG 2006 
Conservation Principl es policies and guide  English 
Heritage 2008 
Manual For Streets i & ii DFT 2007  281The Urban Design Compendium 
 English 
Partnerships 2000/2007
Good practice guide on Pl anning for Tourism CLG 2006  
Design Review, How CABE Evaluates Quality in 
Architecture and Urban Design CABE 2006 
Safer Places: The Planning Syst em and Crime Prevention DCLG 200 4 
Planning  Policy  Statemen t 22 companion guide CLG 2004 
By Design: Urban Design in the Planning System – 
Towards Better Practice DETR and 
CABE 2000  
By Design: Urban Places in the Planning System, 
Towards Better Practice,       CABE 2000 
Secure by design  ACPOS 1989 
UK Marine Policy Statement HM 
Government 2011 
 
   282APPENDIX 3: LIST OF REGIONAL PLANS, POLICIES, GUIDANCE AND 
STRATEGIES 
 
Regional Guidance, Plans, Policies and Strategies Publisher Year 
River Tyne to Flamborough Head Shoreline Management 
Plan North East 
Coastal 
Authorities 
Group 2008 
The North East England Climate Change Adaptati on Study Climate N E 2008 
Summary of Climate Change 
Risks for North East Englan d To coincide with the 
publication of the UK Clim ate Change Risk Assessment 
(CCRA)  Cllmateuk 2012 
North East Renewabl e Energy Strategy North East 
Assembly 2005 
Wind Farm Development and Landscape Capacity 
Studies: East Durham Lim estone and Tees Plain  North East 
Regional 
Assembly 2007  
(Addendum 
2009) 
Landscape Appraisal for Onshore Wind Farm Development  North East 
Assembly 2003 
Other Relevant Sub-regional, guidance, plans, policies 
and strategies:  Publisher Year 
Connecting the Tees Valley Tees 
Valley 
Combined 
Authority 2016 
Tees Valley Strategic Economic Plan Tees 
Valley 
Unlimited 2014 
Tees Valley European Struct ural and Investment Funds 
Strategy 2014-2020 Tees 
Valley 
Unlimited 2014 
Tees Valley Strategic Infrastructure Plan Tees 
Valley 
Unlimited 2014 
Tees Valley Economic and R egeneration Statement of 
Ambition  TVU 2010 
Tees Valley Investmen t Plan (Draft)  TVU 2010 
Creating Thriving Communities in Tees Valley: Tees 
Valley Living A strategy for housing regener ation in the Tees Valley 
2010/2020 (Draft)  Tees 
Valley 
Living 
(TVL) 2010 
Tees Valley Climate Change Strategy   Tees 
Valley 
Climate 
Change 2010  283Partnership 
Tees Valley Housing Growth Point  TVU and 
TVL 2008 
Programme of Development  Tees 
Valley 
Local 
Authorities 2008 
Tees Valley Empty Property Strategy  Tees 
Valley 
Local 
Authorities 2008 
Tees Valley Green Infrastr ucture Strategy  TVU 2008 
Tees Valley City Region Multi Area Agreement  Tees 
Valley 
Unlimited 
(TVU)  
2008 
Tees Valley City Region Bu siness Case City Region 
Development Programme  Tees 
Valley Joint 
Strategy 
Unit (now 
TVU) 2006 
Tees Valley Biodiversity Action Plan Tees 
Valley 
Biodiversity Partnership 1999 
  284APPENDIX 4: LIST OF LOCAL P LANS, POLICIES, GUIDANCE AND 
STRATEGIES 
 
Other Relevant Sub-regional, Guidance, Plans, Policies 
and Strategies Publisher Year 
Hartlepool declaration on climate change HBC 2004 
Hartlepool climate change strategy  HBC 2007-
2012 
Hartlepool Healthy Wei ght Strategy HBC ongoing
Hartlepool Healthy Weigh t Action Plan HBC Ongoing
Local Flood Risk Management Strategy for Hartlepool 
Borough Council.   HBC Ongoing
  285APPENDIX 5: LIST OF EVI DENCE BASE DOCUMENTS 
 
Local Evidence Base Documents Year 
Hartlepool Local Infrastructure Plan 2016 
Hartlepool Heritage Strategy 2016 
The Hartlepool Retail Study 2015 
Hartlepool Open Space Assessment 2015 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment 2015 
Strategic Housing Land A vailability Assessment 2015 
Hartlepool Regenerati on Masterplan 2015 
Hartlepool Vision 2014 
Hartlepool Employme nt Land Review 2014 
Locally Listed Buildings in Hartlepool  2014 
Heritage at Risk in Hartlepool  2012 
Church Street Conservation Area Management Plan  2011 
Seaton Carew Conservation Area Management Plan  2011 
Hartlepool Economic Regenerat ion Strategy 2011-21 2011 
Seaton Carew Coastal Strategy 2010 
Hartlepool Strategic Flood Ri sk Assessment Level 2  2010 
Elwick Conservation Area Visual Assessment 2010 
Greatham Conservation Area Visual Assessment 2010 
Stranton Conservation Area Visual Assessment 2010 
North and South Tees Industrial Development Framework  2009 
Grange Conservation Area Charac ter Appraisal November  
 2009 
Church Street Conservation Area Visual Assessment June  
 2009  286Seaton Carew Conservation Ar ea Visual Assessment 2009 
Hartlepool Central Investment Framework  2008 
Southern Business Zone Study  2008 
Park Conservation Area Charac ter Appraisal September  
 2008 
Headland Conservation Area Character Appraisal  
 2007 
Local Economic Impact Scenarios Arising from 
Decommissioning and Potentia l New Build of Hartlepool 
Nuclear Power Station (2000) 2000 
Hartlepool Landscape Assessment 2000  287APPENDIX 6: NATURE CONSERVATION SITES  
 
Ramsar Site 
Teesmouth and Cleveland Coas t (part within Hartlepool) 
Special Protection Area 
Teesmouth and Cleveland Coast SPA (part within Hartlepool) 
National Nature Reserve 
Teesmouth NNR (part within Hartlepool) 
Sites of Special Scientific Interest 
Seaton Dunes and Common 
Hartlepool Submerged Forest 
Hart Bog 
Seal Sands (part wit hin Hartlepool) 
Cowpen Marsh (part within Hartlepool) 
Tees and Hartlepool Foreshor e and Wetlands (part within 
Hartlepool) 
Durham Coast (part within Hartlepool) 
Local Wildlife Sites 
North Burn Marsh 
The Howls Woodland 
Hart to Haswell Walkway  & Easington Road Verge 
Hart Warren Railway Embankment Grassland 
Naisberry Quarry Grassland 
Black Wood Marsh 
Pawton Hill Gill Grassland 
Beacon Hill Marsh 
Carr House Sands and West Harbour 
Crookfoot Reservoir 
Amerston Gill Woodland 
Hartlepool Power Station Wetland 
Thorpe Bulmer Dene  
Greenabella Marsh 
Close Wood Complex 
Bellows Burn Fen 
Whelly Hill Quarry Grassland 
Greatham Beck 
Hart Quarry 
Gunnersvale Marsh 
The Slake Saltmarsh 
Brierton Quarry Grassland 
Tilery Gill Grassland 
Elwick Hall Grassland 
Greatham Creek North Bank Saltmarsh 
West Carr Plantation 
Saltern Wetlands 
Phillips Tank Farm Grassland 
Tot Fenny’s Field Grassland  288Spion Kop Cemetery Grassland 
North Hartlepool Dunes 
Brenda Road Brownfield 
Craddon Bank Grassland 
Hart Cutting Grassland 
Rossmere Park Island 
Hartville Meadow 
High Stotfold Gill Grassland 
Queen’s Meadow Wetland 
High Newton Hanzard Verges 
Char Beck Grassland 
Zinc Works Field 
Butts Lane Field Margins 
Central Park Grassland 
Summerhill Country Park 
Seaton Common 
Brenda Road Sewage W orks Grassland 
Coronation Drive Orchid Embankment 
Local Nature Reserves 
Spoin Kop Cemetery Grassland (also LWS) 
Summerhill Country Park (also LWS) 
Hart to Haswell Walkway & Eas ington Road Verge (also LWS) 
Hart Warren Railway Embank ment Grassland (also LWS) 
Greatham Beck (also LWS) 
Seaton Dunes & Common SSSI 
  289APPENDIX 7: REGIONALLY IMPORTANT GEOLOGICAL/ 
GEOMORPHOLOGICAL SITES  
Local Geological Sites 
Long Scar and Little Scar Rocks 
Dalton Batts Rivercliff 
Hartlepool Headland 
Whelly Hill Quarry (also LWS) 
Naisberry Quarry (also LWS) 
West Crimdon Dene 
  290APPENDIX 8: BUILDINGS OF SPECIAL ARCHITECTURAL OR 
HISTORICAL INTEREST.   
This following list is for guidance only. As it is revised peri odically those 
seeking confirmation of the list ed status of a particular prope rty are advised to 
contact the Borough Council’s Conservation Officer.  
HARTLEPOOL 
 Grade I 
 High Street, St. Hilda’s Church. 
 Town Wall, Sandwell Gate and Town Wall 
 
Grade II* 
 Church Square Christ Church  (now Hartlepool Art Gallery) 
 2&3 Church Walk , Duke of Cleveland’s House 
 Stranton, All Saints Church  
 
Grade II 
 1-7 Albion Terrace 
 8,9,10,11,12 & 14 Albion Terrace 
 16A Baptist Street 
 Bath Terrace, Sebastopol Gun  
 3 Barkers Place & adjoining wall 
 Brougham Terrace St. Oswald’s Church 
 Church Square, Monument to Sir William Gray 
 Church Square, Municipal Buildings 
 16 Church Street, The Shades Hotel 
 17,18 & 19 Church Street, The Athenaeum 
 38 Church Street Midland Bank (now HSBC) 
 Church Street, Monument to Ralph Ward Jackson 
 42-46 Church Street, C hurch Square Chambers 
 71-72 Church Street, Bank Cham bers (now the Lighthouse PH) 
 Church Street, Royal H otel & Public House  
 Clarence Road, Drinking Fount ain (south east of William Gray H ouse)  
 Clarence Road, Former Central Library (now Leadbitter Building s) 
 Clarence Road, Old Registrar’ s Office (now Council Offices) 
 Durham Street, St. Mary’s Church  
 Durham Street, Former United Reform Church (previously the 
Independent Chapel). 
 Elwick Road, Meadowcroft & Meadowside 
 Elwick Road, Tunstall Hall Farmhouse 
 Elwick Road, Park Lodge , Ward Jackson Park 
 Elwick Road, Greystones  291 Friar Street, Old Manor House 
 Friar Terrace, Moor House 
 Friar Terrace, Mayfield House 
 Grange Road, St Paul’s Church 
 Grange Road, Wilton Grange 
 Grange Road, East & West Lodges and attached screen walls, Tun stall 
Court 
 High Street, St Hilda’s chuchyard, wall and gate piers 
 High Street, Water Pump 
 High Street, Wayside Cross 
 Hutton Avenue, St. Joseph’s Church 
 Jesmond Road Primary School, M asters House, Play Shed and 
Surrounding Wall 
 Lynn Street, The New Market Hotel 
 Middlegate, Borough Buil dings and Borough Hall. 
 27&29 Middlegate,  
 Northgate, Former Public Libra ry and House, (now Carnegie Buil dings) 
 Old Cemetery Road, T hroston Engine House 
 Oxford Street, St Aidan’s Church 
 Park Avenue, Pangbourne, Par kfield, Wrenwood, Parkside, 
Beechwood, Highnam & Jesmond 
 Park Avenue, Clock Towe r, Ward Jackson Park 
 Park Avenue, Bandstand Ward Jackson Park 
 Park Avenue, South African Wa r Memorial Ward Jackson Park 
 Park Avenue, Fountain Ward Jackson Park 
 125 & 127 Park Road 
 Raby Road, Odeon Cinema 
 81-87 Raby Road 
 Raby Road, Town Hall & telephone Kiosk 
 Radcliffe Gardens, War Memor ial in Redheugh Gardens. 
 1-8 Regent Square 
 9,10 & 11 Regent Square 
 1-7, 9-21& 23 Regent Street 
 10 & 12 Regent Street  
 6 Scarborough Street,  
 1-7 South Crescent 
 South Crescent, Remains of Town Wall 
 Speeding Drive Tunnel 
 62 Southgate & walls & railings 
 Southgate, Union House 
 Stockton Road, Strathmore House 
 Stranton, Former North Ea stern Cooperative Stores 
 Stranton, Bollards  
 Stranton, Lion sculpture and gate pier 
 Swainson Street, Grand Hotel 
 31& 33,34,35,36 36A Town Wall 
 The Vale, Low Tunstall Farmhouse & wall  292 Victoria Road, Wilkinson’s (fo rmer Binns Department Store)  
 Victoria Road, Former Wesley M ethodist Church, lamp standard a nd 
walls 
 Victoria Road, War Memor ial in Victory Square 
 2 Middlegate / Victoria St reet, Victoria Buildings 
 Victoria Terrace, Old Dock Offices & walls 
 Victoria Terrace, Old Customs House 
 Westbourne Road, Steelwo rkers War Memorial  
 West Harbour (North Pier)- beacon tower    
 13-17 Whitby Street, Former Post Office 
 14-16 Whitby Street, former Constitution Club 
 York Place, St Andrew’s Church 
 
SEATON CAREW 
 Grade II 
 Church Street, Holy Trinity Church 
 Church Street, Seaton Hotel 
 6, The Front, Marine Hotel 
 The Front, The Bus Stati on (including clock tower) 
 7,8,9,10,11,12,13 The Green. 
 The Green, Telephone Kiosk 
 The Green, Seaton Carew War Memorial 
 18 & 19 The Green 
 2 Green Terrace 
 5,6,7,8 South End 
 DALTON PIERCY  Grade II 
 College Farmhouse & cottage 
 Manor Farmhouse & cottage & outhouse 
 Priory Farmhouse & cottage 
 Rose Cottage & outhouse.  
 
ELWICK 
Grade II* 
 St Peter’s Church 
 
Grade II 
 Benknowle Lane, E lwick Windmill 
 Church Bank, Elwick Hall & flats 
 29 The Green, The Forge 
 Wilton Cottage  293 
GREATHAM 
Grade II* 
 West Row, St John the Baptist Church 
 
Grade II 
 Churchyard of the Church of St John the Baptist, Greatham War 
Memorial 
 2, 4, 6, 10, & 12 Front Street 
 16 &18 Front Street 
 Front Street, Dormer Parkhurst almshouses  
 Front Street, Greatham Ho spital of God, Almshouses 
 Front Street, Greatham Hospital of God, Chapel 
 Front Street, Barn 
 5 High Street 
 High Street, Briarmead & stable & wall 
 High Street, St Francis Co ttage & coach house & wall 
 High Street, Prospect Farm stor age building (now Prospect Cott age) 
 HART 
Grade I 
 Butts Lane, St Mary Magdalene Church 
 
Grade II*  
 Butts Lane, Medieval Wall 
 
Grade II 
 Butts Lane, Brus Wall 
 5, Front Street 
 Off Front Street, Voltigeur Cottage  
 Front Street, Home Farmhouse & cottage 
 Old School Lane, Hart Windmill 
 
NEWTON BEWLEY 
 Grade II 
 Mill House 
 
  294APPENDIX 9: LIST OF LOCAL CENTRES IN HARTLEPOOL 
 
1. Belle Vue Way  
2. Brenda Road/ Sydenham Road  
3. Brierton Lane  4. Brus Corner  5. Catcote Road  6. Chatham Road 7. Clavering Road  8. Claxton  9. Davison Road  10. Duke Street North 11. Duke Street South 12. Elizabeth Way  13. Fens Shops  14. High Tunstall  15. Jutland Road  16. King Oswy  17. Middle Warren  18. Murray Street  19. Miers Avenue  20. Northgate/Durham Street  21. Northgate/Un ion Street  
22. Oxford Road  23. Powlett Road East Raby Road/Hart Lane Corner  24. Raby Road/Hart Lane Corner 
25. Raby Road/Brougham Terrace  
26. Seaton Front  27. Springwell R oad/Stockton Road  
28. Stockton Road/Cornwall Street 29. The Former Powlett Public House  30. The Former Saxon Pub  31. Warren Road  32. Wiltshire Way  33. Wynyard Park  34. Wynyard Road  35. Owton Manor East 36. Owton Manor West 295APPENDIX 10 - EXISTING AND POTENT IAL COMPONENTS OF AN ECOLOGICA L 
NETWORK  Table 1: Rural West – East of A19 
Site Existing interest featur es or potential for habitat 
improvement/creation 
Elwick Hall Grassland LWS Specie s rich grassland and seasonal w ater bodies 
Tilery Gill Grassland LWS Small area of marsh/species rich neut ral grassland; 
potential for extending intere st features along the Gill 
Tilery Gill to Elwick Road Potentia l for creation of marshy are as and increasing 
farmland bird populations th rough appropriate planting 
and management regimes 
Craddon Bank Grassland 
LWS Small area of marsh and species rich grassland 
Char Beck Grassland LWS Species rich neutral grassland; potenti al through 
management to allow grassland species to expand 
The Howls Woodland LWS Ancient woodland 
Dalton Batts LGS Geological expo sure, old hedge; potential for pond & 
meadow creation 
Brierton North Farm Potent ial for pond/wetland creation 
Brierton Farm Young woodland & fishing ponds 
Brierton Shooting Lod ge Wetland feature 
Brierton Quarry Grassland 
LWS Some species rich grassland; potential for 
improvement through veget ation removal on sand 
exposures 
Claxton Some ponds and good number of farmland birds; 
potential for creation of new wetland habitats as part 
of green wedge within new development 
Claxton Grange Farm Existing ponds 
Sandpit Bungalow Pond Wetland habitat 
Claxton Tip Species rich g rassland and y oung woodland 
Claxton Beck/North Burn Signific ant watercourse and riparian fe atures 
Greatham Beck LWS Tree-lined beck ; some invasive vegetation req uires 
removal 
South of A689, between 
public right of way & 
Greatham Beck Arable area prone to flooding ; potential to develop into 
an extensive wetland 
Greatham Wood Mature woodland 
Queen’s Meadow Wetland 
LWS Wetland and species ri ch grassland with good 
numbers of amphibians; pot ential for further ponds 
and/or improvement to existing ponds 
South of Greatham village 
towards railway line (fields 
immediately either side of 
Greatham Beck) Former inter-tidal area, now arable but prone to 
flooding; could be converted  to inter-tidal habitat 
subject to consideration of flooding issues, or allowed to become freshwater marsh 
Cowpen Marsh SSSI/SPA Mainly in ter-tidal habitat important for birds & seals; 
also extensive ar ea of saltmarsh 
Saltern Wetlands LWS Small area o f saltmarsh, now converted to large inter-296 
 tidal habitat with freshw ater ponds on higher ground 
Greatham to Cowpen 
Bewlley Woodland Park Potential for ponds/small we tlands on low lying areas 
Tot Fenny’s Field Grassland 
LWS Species rich grassland with pond and we tland area 
Faith Wood Young woodland 
Cowpen Bewley Woodland 
Park LWS (within Stockton-
on-Tees) Young woodland, lake, ponds and species rich 
grassland 
Dalton Gorse Bushes Scrub area with potential for enhancement 
Blue House Pond  
 
Table 2: Rural West – West of A19  
Site Existing interest featur es or potential for habitat 
improvement/creation 
Beacon Hill Marsh LWS Wet flush c ontaining a diverse flora, als o acid 
grassland 
Tilery Plantation (within Co. 
Durham) Mature woodland 
Pawton Hill Gill Grassland 
LWS Diverse grassland flora 
Scotland Wood (within Co. 
Durham) Mature woodland 
High Wood Mature woodland 
Cow Pasture Wood Wood pasture  and some marshy areas; some 
protection from grazing required 
Crookfoot Wood Mature woodland 
Crookfoot Reservoir LWS Large water body supporting bat and bir d populations 
Amerston Gill Woodland 
LWS Mature woodland and diverse ground flora 
Close Wood Complex LWS Mature w oodland, part ancient semi-natur al; supports 
important bird populations 
High Stotfold Gill Grassland 
LWS Species rich neutral grassland, managed under 
stewardship 
Black Wood Mature woodland 
Black Wood Marsh LWS Small marsh ; potential to raise water leve l to prevent 
drying out 
Gunnersvale Marsh LWS Large mars h, with potential to expand due  to natural 
spring 
Amerston woodland 
planting Young woodland which will improve with maturity 
Amerston Moor Low intensity gr azing land, with potential for 
increasing farmland bird interest 
Gunnersvale Wood Mature woodland 
Sunderland Lodge Matur e woodland and pond 
North Burn Marsh LWS Large mars h in valley bottom that appears to be 
expanding naturally 
North Burn Valley Low lying area with potential to create furth er marshy 
areas 
North Burn/Close Beck Water course 297 
  
 
Table 3: Hart area 
Site Existing interest featur es or potential for habitat 
improvement/creation 
Crimdon House Farm (Co. 
Durham) Species rich meadow 
Crimdon Dene (Co. 
Durham) Mature woodland and watercourse 
Crimdon Road verge (part 
in Co. Durham) Species rich grassland; c ould be improved with scrub 
and young tree clearance 
Hart to Haswell Walkway & 
Easington Road Verge LWS Mature woodland and patches of species rich 
grassland; requires annual m anagement of grassland 
areas 
Hartville Meadow LWS Species rich grassland 
West Crimdon Dene LGS Exposures of limestone cliff 
Thorpe Bulmer Dene LWS Ancient w oodland with a ssociated ground flora 
Springwell Wood Young woodland; potential for new wetland area and 
improved access 
Hart Reservoirs Two large water bodies; support good numbers of  
bats 
Hart Quarry LWS Species rich gra ssland, important for bird popu lations 
Hart Cutting Grassland 
LWS Diverse grassland on exposed limestone 
Butts Lane Field Margins 
LWS Important for small mammals ; need to maintain areas 
of long grassland 
Hart Moor Woodland Young woodland – will improve as it matures 
Hart Bog SSSI Nationa lly important mire 
Bellows Burn Fen LWS Marsh su rrounded by conifer plantation; po tential to 
expand wetland area 
East Grange Woodland Young woodland – will improve as it mature s 
Whelly Hill Quarry LGS and 
Whelly Hill Grassland LWS Exposure of geological feat ures, and small area of 
species rich grassland 
 
Table 4: Coastal area  
Site Existing interest featur es or potential for habitat 
improvement/creation 
Hart Warren Dunes SSSI Active dune system & coastal grassland 
Tees & Hartlepool 
Foreshore & Wetland SSSI  Important for breeding and wintering water birds 
North Hartlepool Dunes 
LWS Active dune system & coastal grassland 
Britmag Coastal Fringe Potentia l for creation of additional are as of coastal 
grassland as part of new housing development 
Spion Kop Cemetery 
Grassland LWS Active dune system & coastal grassland 
West View Road Potential to  create coastal grassland 
Old Cemetery Road Existing cove r useful for migrant birds 
Central Park Grassland 
LWS Urban & coastal grassl and and other features of 
botanical interest 298 
 Spoin Kop Grassland Botanical in terest and some use of SPA bird s at high 
tide; potential to enhanc e with coastal grassland 
species  
Town Moor Some use by SPA birds at high tide 
Central Park Potential to diversify habitats 
Fish Sands Some feeding by SPA birds at low tide 
Victoria Harbour Used by wintering water birds 
Victoria Docks Some use by roosting birds 
The Slake Saltmarsh LWS Relic upper saltmarsh 
Middleton Beach Inter-tidal sand but little use by SPA birds 
Carr House Sands & West 
Harbour LWS Used by SPA birds 
Coronation Drive 
Promenade Some use by SPA birds at high tide 
Coronation Drive Orchid 
Embankment LWS Part designated as LWS  for urban grassland flora 
Seaton Sands Inter-tidal sand flat 
Seaton Dunes and 
Common SSSI Active dune system & coastal grassland 
Mayfair Centre Amenity grassland with some use by wintering wat er 
birds; value could be increased if grassland kept short and disturbance minimised in winter 
North Gare Sands 
(compartment of Seal 
Sands SSSI) Inter-tidal sand flat 
Zinc Works Field LWS Grazed gr assland which can support high nu mbers of 
passage migrants and low  to moderate numbers of 
wintering wildfowl 
Greenabella Marsh LWS Freshwater pools & ditches; potential for  further 
wetland features or to manage grassland areas 
Tees and Hartlepool 
Foreshore & Wetlands SSSI 
(Greenabella compartment) Brackish lagoons behind sea wall 
Greatham North Saltmarsh 
LWS Saltmarsh creation project 
Cowpen Marsh SSSI Saltmarsh and areas of inter-tidal habitat 
Seal Sands SSSI Inter-tidal mud flats 
 
Table 5: Urban area 
Site Existing interest featur es or potential for habitat 
improvement/creation 
West View Cemetery Mature trees ; potential to diversify tree st ock & 
structure 
Middle Warren Green 
Wedge Young woodland with stream & small ponds 
Phoenix Centre Moderately spec ies rich grassland and pond 
North Cemetery Mainly mature tr ees with some areas of long gras s; 
potential to diversify structure 
Ward Jackson Park Ornamental par k with small lake  and wetland a rea 
Family Wood West Young woodland 299 
 Summerhill Hill Lane Herb rich horse paddock with potential for  
enhancement 
Summerhill Country Park 
LWS Mixed woodland and grassland habitat 
Burn Valley Gardens Young woodland, and wetland grading into ma ture 
parkland 
Stranton Cemetery Potentia l to increase tree cover 
Rossmere Park Mature trees & small lake 
Golden Flatts Grazed area with small ponds; potential for subst antial 
new woodland 
Tata Steel bund Large woodland ar ea; potential to diversify str ucture 
by thinning & planting 
Brenda Road mounds Curr ently poor species diversity, but potent ial to 
increase species richness of grassland and create more open areas 
Sovereign Park Rank grassland/ditc hes; potential for small wetl and 
area 
Salt Barn Ponds Newly created ponds which should improve with 
maturity 
Autoglass site Moderately divers e grassland with potential for further 
diversification 
Brenda Road Brownfield 
LWS Wetland and grassland ar eas; potential for pond 
improvement 
Graythorp North Rank grassland with small pond; potential for 
additional pond 
Brenda Road Sewage 
Works Grassland LWS Urban grassland import ant for butterflies 
Seaton Meadows Landfill site with agreed re storation scheme 
Power Station Field  Rank grassland and scrub 
Phillips Tank Farm 
Grassland LWS Wetland area important for am phibians, butterflies and 
SPA birds 
Queen’s Meadow Wetland 
LWS  Wetland areas important for amphibians; potential to 
create additional ponds 
 
Colour key 
 Designated sites 
 Sites with existing biodiversit y interest but which do not cur rently meet criteria 
for designation 
 Sites which have no significan t nature conservation value but have potential 
for habitat creation and forming ecological links between exist ing areas of 
habitat 
  300 
 APPENDIX 11a: COMPATIBILITY OF LOCAL PLAN ALLOCATIONS WITH 
HEALTH AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE CONSULTATION ZONES OF MAJOR HAZARD ESTABLISHMENTS AND MAJO R ACCIDENT HAZARD PIPELINES 
 
In accordance with the advice of the Health and Safety Executiv e received during consul tation on the Hartlepool 
Local Plan Preferred Options, an assessment has been made of la nd allocations in the Local Plan and their 
compatibility with the consultati on zones of major  hazard estab lishments and major accident hazard pipelines.  The 
assessment is based on the Health  and Safety Executive’s Land U se Planning Methodology document.  Maps 
showing major hazard establishm ent consultation zones and major  accident hazard pipeline routes are included as 
Appendix 11b and Appendix 11c/  
In the HSE advice column in the tables below: DAA = Do not advise against development 
AA = Advice against development 
 
Major Hazard Establishments  
Baker Hughes, Tekchem Works, Tofts  Farm Industrial Estate, Bren da Road (HSE Ref: H0569) 
Local Plan Allocation Development 
Type Sensitivity 
Level HSE Advice 
Inner Zone General Employment Land (EMP3) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 (assumes less 
than 100 occupants 
in each building)  DAA 
Specialist Employment Land (EMP4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 (assumes less 
than 100 occupants 
in each building)  DAA 
Wind Turbine Area (CC4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1  DAA 
Local Wildlife Site (NE1) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public  2 DAA – by 
applying 
straddling rule 
Middle Zone General Employment Land (EMP3) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Specialist Employment Land (EMP4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Wind Turbine Area (CC4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Local Wildlife Site (NE1) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public  2 DAA 
Outer Zone General Employment Land (EMP3) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Specialist Employment Land (EMP4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Wind Turbine Area (CC4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Local Wildlife Site (NE1) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public  2 DAA 
 
Eastman Chemicals, Hunter House  Industrial Estate, Brenda Road (HSE Ref: H02079) 
Local Plan Allocation Development 
Type Sensitivity 
Level HSE Advice 
Inner Zone General Employment Land (EMP3) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 (assumes less 
than 100 occupants 
in each building)  DAA 
Wind Turbine Area (CC4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1  DAA 
Middle Zone General Employment Land (EMP3) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Wind Turbine Area (CC4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Outer Zone General Employment Land (EMP3) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Wind Turbine Area (CC4) DT1.1 1 DAA 301 
 Workplace 
 
Owen Cornings Polyfoam Ltd, Hunt er House Industrial Estate, Bre nda Road (HSE Ref: H3301) 
Local Plan Allocation Development 
Type Sensitivity 
Level HSE Advice 
Inner Zone General Employment Land (EMP3) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 (assumes less 
than 100 occupants 
in each building)  DAA 
Wind Turbine Area (CC4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Middle Zone General Employment Land (EMP3) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Wind Turbine Area (CC4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Outer Zone General Employment Land (EMP3) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Wind Turbine Area (CC4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
 
Phillips Petroleum Co. ( UK) Ltd (HSE Ref: H1279) 
Local Plan Allocation Development 
Type Sensitivity 
Level HSE Advice 
Inner Zone General Employment Land (EMP3) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 (assumes less 
than 100 occupants 
in each building)  DAA 
Specialist Employment Land (EMP4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 (assumes less 
than 100 occupants 
in each building)  DAA 
Local Wildlife Site (NE1) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public  2 DAA – by 
applying 
straddling rule 
Middle Zone General Employment Land (EMP3) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Specialist Employment Land (EMP4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Local Wildlife Site (NE1) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public  2 DAA 
Outer Zone General Employment Land (EMP3) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Specialist Employment Land (EMP4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Local Wildlife Site (NE1) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public  2 DAA 
 
Tioxide Europe Ltd, Greatham W orks, Tees Road (HSE Ref: H0571) 
Local Plan Allocation Development 
Type Sensitivity 
Level HSE Advice 
Inner Zone Specialist Employment Land (EMP4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 (assumes less 
than 100 occupants 
in each building)  DAA 
Local/National Wildlife Site (NE1) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public  2 DAA – by 
applying 
straddling rule 
Middle Zone General Employment Land (EMP3) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Specialist Employment Land (EMP4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Underground Storage ()EMP6) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Wind Turbine Area (CC4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Local/National Wildlife Site (NE1) DT2.5 Outdoor 2 DAA 302 
 use by public  
Outer Zone General Employment Land (EMP3) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Specialist Employment Land (EMP4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Wind Turbine Area (CC4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Local/National Wildlife Site (NE1) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public  2 DAA 
Green Infrastructure – Outdoor Sports 
(NE2) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public  2 DAA 
 
SABIC UK Petrochemicals Ltd, Seat on Road, Port Clarence (HSE Re f: H0402) 
N.B. This site is within Stockt on-on-Tees BC area but Consultat ion Distance extends into Hartlepool 
Local Plan Allocation Development 
Type Sensitivity 
Level HSE Advice 
Middle Zone Underground Storage (EMP6) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Local/National Wildlife Site (NE1) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public  2 DAA 
Outer Zone Underground Storage (EMP6) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Specialist Employment Land (EMP4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Local/National Wildlife Site (NE1) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public  2 DAA 
 
Norsea Pipeline Ltd, Teesside Operations, Seal Sands (HSE Ref: H4311) 
N.B. This site is within Stockt on-on-Tees BC area but Consultat ion Distance extends into Hartlepool 
Local Plan Allocation Development 
Type Sensitivity 
Level HSE Advice 
Inner Zone Specialist Employment Land (EMP4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 (assumes less 
than 100 occupants 
in each building)  DAA 
General Employment Land (EMP3) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 (assumes less 
than 100 occupants 
in each building)  DAA 
Local/National Wildlife Site (NE1) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public  2 DAA - by 
applying 
straddling rule 
Green Infrastructure  – natural & semi-
natural green space (NE2) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public 2 DAA – by 
applying 
straddling rule 
Middle Zone General Employment Land (EMP3) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Specialist Employment Land (EMP4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Underground Storage ((EMP6) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Local/National Wildlife Site (NE1) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public  2 DAA 
Green Infrastructure  – natural & semi-
natural green space (NE2) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public 2 DAA 
Outer Zone Specialist Employment Land (EMP4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Underground Storage ()EMP6) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Local/National Wildlife Site (NE1) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public  2 DAA 
Green Infrastructure  – natural & semi-
natural green space (NE2) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public  2 DAA 303 
  
Fine Organics Ltd, Seal Sand s Road (HSE Ref: H1875) 
N.B. This site is within Stockt on-on-Tees BC area but Consultat ion Distance extends into Hartlepool 
Local Plan Allocation Development 
Type Sensitivity 
Level HSE Advice 
Middle Zone Specialist Employment Land (EMP4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Local/National Wildlife Site (NE1) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public  2 DAA 
Outer Zone Underground Storage (EMP6) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Specialist Employment Land (EMP4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
General Employment Land (EMP3) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Wind Turbine Area (CC4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Green Infrastructure   - outdoor sport and 
natural & semi-natural green space (NE2) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public  2 DAA 
Local/National Wildlife Site (NE1) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public  2 DAA 
 
Major Accident Hazard Pipelines 
Northern Gas Networks Cowpen Bew ley/Warden Law (Transco Index N o. 2741) 
Local Plan Allocation Development 
Type Sensitivity 
Level HSE Advice 
No Local Plan allocations are affected by the 
route/consultation dist ances of this pipeline n/a n/a n/a 
 
Northern Gas Networks Cowpen B ewley/Naisberry (HSE Ref: 7820; T ransco Index No. 2077) 
Local Plan Allocation Development 
Type Sensitivity 
Level HSE Advice 
No Local Plan allocations are affected by the 
route/consultation dist ances of this pipeline n/a n/a n/a 
 
Northern Gas Networks Cowpen B ewley/Naisberry (HSE Ref: 7823; T ransco Index No. 2080) 
Local Plan Allocation Development 
Type Sensitivity 
Level HSE Advice 
Inner/Middle/Outer 
Zones (15m for all 
zones) 
 High Tunstall Strategic Housing Site 
(HSG5) DT2.1 Housing 2 AA 
South West Extension Strategic 
Housing Site (HSG4) DT2.1 Housing  2 AA 
Green Wedges (NE3) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public 2 AA 
An outline planning application (which has not been determined by the local planning autho rity) has been submitted 
for the High Tunstall strategic housing site.  Plans submitted as part of this application i ndicate the route of this 
pipeline running along the easte rn edge of the proposed develop ment.  The route is shown with an open space 
buffer on either side of the pi peline itself.  This open space buffer will be indicated on t he Local Plan Policies Map 
and reflected in any Master Plan or Development Brief for the l ayout and development of the site. 
The South West Extension strat egic housing site has planning ap proval (detailed for 144 dwellings, outline for 
1,116 dwellings) and the overall development scheme for the sit e takes into account the route of the high pressure 
pipeline, principally through the identification of a strategic  green wedge through the site.     
 Northern Gas Networks Valley Dr ive Spur (HSE Ref: 7826; Transco  Index No. 2083) 
Local Plan Allocation Development 
Type Sensitivity 
Level HSE Advice 
Inner/Middle/Outer 
Zones (15m for all zones) 
 High Tunstall Strategic Housing Site 
(HSG5) DT2.1 Housing 2 AA 
Green Wedges (NE3) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public 2 AA 304 
 No residential development will be allocated on t he Local Plan Policies Map within the consultation distance zone 
for the Valley Drive spur 
 
Northern Gas Networks Macrae R oad Spur (HSE Ref: 7825; Transco Index No. 2082) 
Local Plan Allocation Development 
Type Sensitivity 
Level HSE Advice 
Inner/Middle/Outer 
Zones (15m for all 
zones)  Green Wedges (NE3) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public 2 AA 
 
Northern Gas Networks Hall Farm /Brenda Road (HSE Ref: 7821; Tra nsco Index No. 2078) 
Local Plan Allocation Development 
Type Sensitivity 
Level HSE Advice 
Inner and 
Middle Zones 
(both 15m) 
 Specialist Employment Land (EMP4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
General Employment Land (EMP3) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Wind Turbine Area (CC4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Local/National Wildlife Site (NE1) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public  2 DAA – by 
applying 
straddling rule 
Outer Zone (22m) Specialist Employment Land (EMP4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
General Employment Land (EMP3) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Wind Turbine Area (CC4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Local/National Wildlife Site (NE1) DT2.5 Outdoor 
use by public  2 DAA  
 
Northern Gas Networks Brenda Ro ad/Tioxide (HSE Ref: 7827; Trans co Index No. 2084) 
Local Plan Allocation Development 
Type Sensitivity 
Level HSE Advice 
Inner/Middle/Outer 
Zones (3m for all 
zones)  
 Specialist Employment Land (EMP4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
General Employment Land (EMP3) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
Wind Turbine Area (CC4) DT1.1 
Workplace 1 DAA 
 
National Grid Gas Little Burdon/Billingham 6 Feeder Pipeline (H SE Ref: 7858; Transco Index No. 2115) 
Local Plan Allocation Development 
Type Sensitivity Level HSE Advice 
Inner Zone Prestige Employment Site Wynyard 
Business Park (EMP1) DT1.1 
Workplace 2 AA 
Outer Zone Prestige Em ployment Site Wynyard 
Business Park (EMP1) DT1.1 
Workplace 2 DAA 
The inner consultation distance  zone impinge marginally on the allocation for Wynyard Business Park.  The 
Borough Council will therefore co nsult with the Health & Safety  Executive on proposasl to develop this site for 
employment purposes.   
 
National Grid Gas Cowpen Bewley/Bishop Auckland 13 Feeder Pipel ine (HSE Ref: 8206); Transco Index No. 2471) 
Local Plan Allocation Development 
Type Sensitivity 
Level HSE Advice 
No Local Plan allocations are affected by the 
route/consultation dist ances of this pipeline n/a n/a n/a 
 
 305 
 Sabic Wilton/Grangemouth Ethy lene Pipeline (HSE Ref: 6904) 
Local Plan Allocation Development 
Type Sensitivity 
Level HSE Advice 
No Local Plan allocations are affected by the 
route/consultation dist ances of this pipeline n/a n/a n/a 
 
Ineos Teesside/Saltend Ethyl ene Pipeline (HSE Ref: 9669) 
Local Plan Allocation Development 
Type Sensitivity 
Level HSE Advice 
No Local Plan allocations are affected by the 
route/consultation dist ances of this pipeline n/a n/a n/a 
 306 
 Appendix 11b 
307 
 Appendix 11c 
308 
 Appendix 11d 
 
                                 
 
               
309 
  
Appendix 12 - The Monitoring Fram ework Hartlepool Local Plan HL P (2017) 
 
 
 
 
   T h e  M o n i t o r i n g  F r a m e w o r k      H a r t l e p o o l  L o c a l  P l a n   
     H L P  ( 2 0 1 7 )        
  
[This document should be read in conjunction with the Hartle pool Local Plan. It outlines the lega l requirements to monitoring 
Local Plans, sets out how policy targets and indicators are derived for the Borough and how these will be used to monitor polic y 
implementation during the plan period]  310 
       C O N T E N T S  
 
 
 I t e m   P a g e   
1 Introduction  3 
2 Why do we need to monitor 4 3 How will the Hartlepool Local Plan be monitored 5 
4 Policy targets 5 5 Policy indicators 5 6 Criteria for selecting indicators 7 7 The Hartlepool metho dological approach 7 
8 Hartlepool Local Plan monitoring schedule 8 9 List of main indicators  67 10 List of contextual indicators  70 11 Glossary of terms 72 
 
  311 
 1. Introduction  
 
1.1 Local Plans need to be continually reviewed and revised, pa rtly to be able to assess their 
success and partly to ensure the components of each authority’s  planning framework are 
updated to reflect changing circumst ances nationally and locall y.  
 1.2 The implementation of the po licies contained in the Hartlep ool Local Plan will require 
concerted action by a range of public, private and voluntary se ctor bodies working in 
partnership to develop the Borou gh. The role of this document i s to provide a clear and 
robust framework of how the pol icies will be monitored througho ut the plan period and to 
ensure that monitoring is in li ne with relevant United Kingdom (UK) and European Union 
(EU) legislation.  
 1.3 By assessing policy perform ance and/or poli cy implementatio n, monitoring can be used 
as a tool to ensure that investment and action can be co-ordina ted to facilitate efficient 
and effective delivery of devel opment within the Borough.  
 1.4 The requirement to monitor the broad effects of the Local P lan originally derives from the 
2004 Planning and Compulsory Purc hase Act 2004 (Section 35). Ho wever, this has now 
been updated by Regulation 34 of the Town and C ountry Planning (Local Planning)  
Regulations (2012) which outline s the basic information that ha s to be monitored and be 
made public through the Authorit y Monitoring Report (AMR).  
 1.5 In addition to progress on Loc al Plan preparation, activity  relating to the duty to 
cooperate and implementation of po lices in the Local Plan, the AMR can particularly 
highlight the contributions made by development, including sect ion 106 planning 
obligations, Community Infrastruc ture Levy and New Homes Bonus payments.  
  1.6 The Localism Act (2011) aims to change the powers of local  government in England by 
facilitating the devolution of decision-making powers from cent ral government control to 
individuals and communities. Following this Act, local planning  authorities can now 
choose which local plan targets and indicators to monitor as lo ng as they are in line with 
relevant UK and EU legislation. This is in addition to the mini mum requirements outlined 
in Regulation 34 of the Town and  Country Planning (Local Planni ng) Regulations (2012). 
 
1.7 In addition to above, the EU Directive 2001/42/EC, known as  the Strategic Environmental 
Assessment Directive (SEA Directi ve) requires the monitoring of  some 
programmes/plans of other organi sations such as the utilities t hat could have significant 
environmental effects. In the UK  these requirements are taken f orward by means of 
Strategic Environmental Assess ment (SEA) and/or Sustainability Appraisal (SA). The 
monitoring must include all signi ficant environmental effects o n the components of 
sustainable development (i.e. soc ial, environment and economic) .  
 1.8 With regard to Development Pl an documents, SA monitoring is  intended to provide 
important feedback on the success of the plan and progress towa rds delivering 
sustainable development. An SA report accompanies the Hartlepoo l Local Plan and 
predicts and evaluates the signifi cant effects of implementing the plan.  
   312 
 1.9 The SEA Directive requires that monitoring arrangements mus t be established to allow 
the actual significant effects of the Local Plan to be tested a gainst those predicted in the 
SA hence enabling appropriate remedi al action to be taken if re quired. Therefore where 
necessary some monitoring indi cators and targets will be drawn from the SA report.  
 
 
2. Why do we need to monitor?  
2.1 Monitoring is essential to establish both what has happened  in the past until the present 
time and what may happen in the f uture. It provides crucial fee dback into the process of 
policy-making and helps to address questions like: 
 
a) Are policies achieving thei r objectives and de livering susta inable development? 
b) Have policies had unintended consequences and to what extent ? 
c) Is there any justification fo r policy diversion from intende d objective(s)? 
d) Are the assumptions behind  the policies still relevant? 
e) Are targets being achieved? f) Does the Local Plan or some policies within it need reviewin g? 
g) What is the progress on the preparation of development docum ents in the Local 
Plan? 
h) What activities are in place  relating to the duty to coopera te? 
i) What value has been added to developm ent by for example contrib utions from 
Community Infrastructure Levy , Section 106 planning obligations , and New 
Homes Bonus Payments?  
j) What is the progress on the im plementation of any neighbourhood  plans?  
 2.2 In addition monitoring provides for the initiation of new d evelopment of other actions on 
the basis of agreed trigger point s. Trigger points are reached when a policy has had 
unintended consequences therefore calling for policy review.  
 2.3 However, unintend ed consequences are only of major concern when they cannot be 
justified and this usually points out to policy failure or unsu ccessful policy 
implementation. Monitoring looks at policy implementation, sett ing out agreed ways in 
which policies achieve desired results in the required timefram e. It also assesses 
progress in delivering the spat ial vision and objectives throug h the implementation of 
policies. 
 2.4 The key principles  of monitoring are: 
 
 Make use of existing data 
 Keep monitoring to the mini mum necessary for purpose 
 Be consistent with moni toring legal requirements 
 Define clear objectives, po licies, targets and indicators 
 Be transparent and clear  
 Be relevant and specific 
 Allow monitoring over time 
   313 
 2.5 Policies can divert from t heir intended objectives in the c ourse of monitoring over a 
period of time. It is important t o note that policy diversion d oes not necessarily mean 
policy failure but instead point  out to unintended policy conse quences which can either 
be positive or negative. Unintend ed consequences act as trigger  points to consider policy 
review and this depends on the ex tent of the policy diversion a nd whether there is any 
justification for the diversion or not.  
 
3. How will the Hartlepool Local Plan be monitored? 
 
3.1 Monitoring involves review ing a current situation by means of set targets and/or 
indicators against what has happened in the past or against set  baseline information. The 
set targets and indicators will be derived from: 
 
 the spatial vision  
 strategic objectives 
 policies 
 baseline information 
 SWOT analysis 
 predicted effects  from the SA report.  
 
 
4. Policy Targets   
4.1 A target  is the explicit statement of des ired results for a specific ind icator over a specified 
period of time. Targets should be  specific, measurable, achieva ble, realistic and time-
bound (SMART).  
 
4.2 Targets are usually numbers e.g. number of housing completi ons to be delivered 
annually in Hartlepool, number and length(s) of footpaths to be  completed annually in 
Hartlepool). Policy targets meas ure real world developments tha t can be directly 
influenced by the local plan. 
 
 
5. Policy Indicators   
5.1 Indicators are essential instruments for monitoring and eva luation. Indicators measure 
how far policies have gone towards meeting policy targets (i.e.  milestones) and provide 
the evidence required to know i f policies are heading in the ri ght direction or not.  
 5.2 Indicators exist in many di fferent forms. Performance indic ators i.e. ones that show 
results relative to what is plan ned will be used to monitor pol ices in the HLP. The 
diagram below shows different types of performance indicators, some of which will be 
selected to monitor the HLP.  
 
  314 
 Diagram 1: Types of Performance Indicators 
 
                           5.3 Policy indicators can either be direct or indirect. Direct indicators correspond precisely to 
results at any performance level whereas indirect indicators de monstrate the change or 
results where direct measures are  not feasible. Indicators are usually quantitative 
measures, i.e. a number, percent age (or share) , rate,  or rati o and give a direct 
imdication of policy performanc e. They can also give a qualitat ive measure of policy 
performance; for instance to ind icate people's judgments and pe rceptions about a 
subject.  
 5.4 Indicators measure how far policies have gone towards meeti ng policy targets (i.e. 
milestones) and provide the evidence required to know if polici es are heading in the right 
direction or not. Indicators should be simple to measure and no t complex. Their output(s) 
or outcome(s) help to adjust policies in the Local Plan should the need arise and also to 
react to unexpected progress or obstacles. 
 
  PERFORMAN
CE 
INDICATORSOutcome indicators:  Medium-term 
results 
Measure the intermediate results generated 
by programme outputs.  They often 
correspond to any change in people’s behaviour as a result of programme ( e.g increase in the number of tourists) Impact/contextual Indicators: Long term results Measure the quality and quantity of long-
term results generated by programme 
outputs (e.g. measurable change in quality of life, reduced incidence of diseases, reduced crime rates)  
 
Output indicators:  Short-term 
results 
Measure the quantity, quality, and 
timeliness of the impact on targets 
e.g. area and type of employment land uptake in a given time Input indicators: 
Measure the quantity, quality, and 
timeliness of resources — human, financial and material, technological and information — provided for an 
activity/project/programme 
Process indicators 
Measure the progress of activities in a 
programme/project and the way these are carried out (for example, referring to the degree of participation). 315 
 6. Criteria for sel ecting indicators 
 
6.1 Some questions that guide the selection of indicators are:  
 
 Does the indicator enable one to  know about the expected resul t or condition? 
 Does the indicator enable the assessment of likely significant  effects as identified 
in the SA?  
 Is the indicator defined in  the same way over time?  
 Are data for the indicator co llected in the same way over time ? 
Will data be available for an indicator? 
 Are data currently being collect ed? If not, can cost effective  instruments for data 
collection be developed? 
 Is this indicator important or relevant to the delivery of the  policies in the Local 
Plan? 
 Will this indicator provide suffi cient information in line wit h set targets? 
 Is the indicator quantit ative or qualitative?  
 
7. The Hartlepool Methodological Approach  
 
7.1 Indicators for the HLP will continue to be used flexibly – for instance if better ones 
become available or data stream c eases within the plan period t hen the precise indicator 
may change. Contingency plans are  also in place to consider rev iewed SA alternatives if 
the plan’s preferred proposals/opt ions fail. With reference to diagram 1 the following 
three types of indicators have been chosen to monitor the local  plan:  
 
 Output indicators (short term) 
 Outcome (medium term) 
 Contextual (long term) 
 These often (although not always) t ake the form of quantifiabl e variables 
 which  are used to help describe and measure wider social, env ironmental, 
 economic, physical, and demographic contexts in which a partic ular 
 phenomenon is operating.  Contex tual indicators tend to be def ined and 
 applied in such a way as to be measurable over space and/or ti me, 
 allowing comparison and/or benchmarking to be undertaken again st a 
 contextual baseline. Their choi ce is limited to the key charac teristics and 
 issues of the locality such as t hose identified in the SWOT an alysis. 
  
i. The Borough’s main issues and challenges as identified in th e SWOT analysis will 
be looked at and based on these, policies that seek to address the main 
challenges (i.e. threats, weaknesse s) and maximise opportunitie s will be grouped 
together according to their co mmon strategic objectives. 
- The grouped policies/strategic objectives will form the basis  of the 
Annual Monitoring Report (AMR) instead of reporting policies 
individually 
- However, the monitoring schedul e (on table 1) will look at in dividual 
policies so as to determine their targets and indicators to be monitored 
- Grouping policies for the AMR reflects that they collectively  have 
effects on the wider sustainabl e development of the Borough 
 316 
 ii. Baseline information will be derived from national, regiona l, sub-regional or local 
statistics and/or SA appraisal report. SA appraisals produce a great deal of 
baseline information upon which a comparison can be made betwee n predicted 
effects and actual effects of po licies which will be measured w hen the Local Plan 
is implemented.  
iii. Other sources of baseline information will be community st rategies, local transport 
plans, the Hartlepool vision docum ent and any other relevant st rategic documents. 
 
iv. Targets and indicators will be set based on (1, 2 and 3) ab ove and these will be 
measured annually against the bas eline information and what has  happened in 
the past. They will also be com pared, where necessary to SA pre dicted effects to 
show how the policies in the local plan are performing. 
 
v. The Authorities Monitoring Report (AMR) will be prepared ann ually to report on: 
a) the extent to which policies set out in this Local Plan are being 
 achieved or implemented, 
b) whether set targets are being met,  c) progress in preparing the Local  Plan development documents 
against milestones set out in t he Local development Scheme (LDS ), 
d) an annual updated ‘housing trajectory ’ which shows housing deli very 
in terms of net additional dwellin gs completed and estimated fu ture 
completions for the remai nder of the Local Plan period,  
e) net affordable dwellings completed,  
f) activities in place relat ing to the duty to cooperate, 
g) progress on the implementati on of any neighbourhood plans,  
h) contributions that have been m ade to development through the 
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL),  
i) the value added to development (such as infrastructure delivery ) 
through contributions from Section 106 Planning Obligations (S1 06 
POs), New Homes Bonus Payment s (NHBP), Local Development 
Orders (LDOs) and major projects,  
j) planning performance; how many  applications were received an d 
approved within the required time frame, 
k) the quality of developments through ratings from Hartlepool Borough 
Council (HBC) design standards 
 
  The Tees Valley Joint Minerals  and Waste Development Plan Doc uments 
 
  These Development Plan Document s (DPDs) will be monitored joi ntly with other 
 Tees Valley authorities. However , details specific to Hartlepo ol will be reported in 
 the AMR.  
  
 
7.2   Hartlepool Local Pla n Monitoring Schedule 
 
   Table 1 shows the Hartlepool L ocal Plan Monitoring Schedule and contains the  
  following elements:  
   
i. Strategic objectives as listed in the Local Plan  317 
 ii. A list of all policies as numbered in the Local Plan, group ed under each 
corresponding strategic objective 
iii. A brief description of policies and their objectives (both  strategic and 
specific) 
iv. Policy targets 
v. Policy indicators 
vi. Baseline information source(s) 
 
 For the purpose of this monitoring framework, only baseline in formation sources will be 
 identified. The baseline informa tion itself will be collected and collated at a later stage 
 when the first AMR based on this  schedule is bei ng produced.  
 
7.3 Monitoring Trigger points  
 
Whilst reporting on policy perfo rmance and policy implementatio n, the AMR will also 
assess those policies that are n ot performing as intended. Poli cies can divert from their 
intended objectives in the course of monitoring over a period o f time. It is important to 
note that policy diversion does not necessarily mean policy fai lure but instead point to 
unintended policy consequences whi ch can either be positive or negative. Unintended 
consequences act as trigger point s to consider policy review an d this depends on the 
extent of the policy diversion and whether there is any justifi cation for the diversion or 
not.   Trigger points for policies will  be agreed on in more detail at  a later stage by the time the 
first AMR is produced. However , the following general approach is proposed: 
- Unjustified negative policy consequences will be viewed as po licy 
failure thus trigger policy review  
- Justified negative policy cons equences will not be viewed as policy 
failure. However, this will be dependent on how long the policy  
repeatedly yields negative cons equences and whether or not plan s 
are in place to address the policy so that it performs positive ly (i.e. as 
intended) 
- Unintended positive policy c onsequences will not necessarily trigger 
policy review provided there is j ustification behind that perfo rmance 
and that the resultant developm ent thereof is of benefit to the  
Borough. However, if the result ant development is not of benefi t then 
the policy may be reviewed.  Table 1: Hartlepool Local P lan Monitoring Schedule  
 
Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 Sustainable Development  SUS1 The Presumption 
in Favour of Sustainable 
Development  To ensure that all 
development is 
sustainable, considering the economic, social 
and environmental 
impacts of all development and that such 
developments are 
approved without delay in line with the NPPF requirements 100% of development 
proposals should comply with policy Number of applications granted contrary to 
sustainable development principles GVA growth  per annum/per 
capita 
 
Total resident population  Local population growth rate 
 
Population age structure  Inward and outward migration  
Numbers of Households 
 Dwellings and average household size 
 
Demographic Structure: ethnic composition, social groups  
Household to income ratio 
 Deprivation  
Health 
 Education  
Crime and safety Statistics from:  
- NOMIS 
official 
labour 
market statistics,  
- Office for 
National 
Statistics ( ONS),  
- Tees 
Valley-
Combined Authority statistics 
(TVCA) and 
other 319 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 Locational Strategy  LS1 The Locational 
Strategy To maintain 
compact urban 
growth with 
expansion being located close to the built up area and in 
areas of strong 
economic growth.   To maintain 
strategic gaps and 
avoid development on the flood plain 100% of development 
proposals should comply with policy.   
For a breakdown of 
monitoring see individual policies that as a whole seek to meet the objectives 
of policy LS1 Number of developments approved in strategic 
gaps  
Number of developments approved outside 
designated  development limits   Number of developments approved on the flood 
plain  
  (see individual policies for detailed indicators) GVA growth  per annum  
 GDP 
 
Strategic gaps and green belt   Compactness of urban area 
 
Sense of place   Landscape character  
 
Safety and security   Flooding  National statistics: 
ONS, NOMIS  
Sub regional 
statistics: TVCA  Local statistics  Minimizing and Adapting to Climate Change  
CC1  Minimising and 
Adapting to 
Climate Change To ensure 
development is in 
the right location as 
to not unduly increase greenhouse gas 
emissions and to 
ensure that development is resilient and 
adaptive to the 
effects of climate change 100% of development 
proposals should comply 
with policy Number of applications permitted on brownfield 
land and/or  in sustainable locations   
Number of major applications approved with car 
charging points and/or renewable energy  Number of vacant buildings brought back into 
use 
 Number of renewable energy developments  HBC tonnes  CO
2 per capita per 
year  
 Average annual rainfall / frequency of storm events 
 Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA  
Local statistics on 
tonnes  CO
2: 
- per capita 
- per person 
- industry and 
commercial, 
domestic 
- road transport 
Number of vacant units: 
- retail surveys 
- English Heritage  
buildings at risk 
register,  
- HBC buildings at 
risk register.  320 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
CC2 Reducing and 
Mitigating Flood Risk  To ensure that new 
development is 
focused in areas of low flood risk (flood zone 1) 100% of new build to meet 
targets set by policy  
 Proportion of  applications 
granted by flood risk area type  
 
Number of developments permitted in higher flood risk zones contrary to the Environmental Agency advice on flood defence/water quality  
grounds Number of properties in areas at 
risk of flooding Environment Agency 
flood maps and  local statistics from HBC  321 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 Climate Change CC3 Renewable and 
Low Carbon 
Energy 
Generation To support 
renewable and low 
carbon energy generation schemes  that contribute towards a low 
carbon economy To contribute towards the 
achievement of set national targets for renewable 
energy (15% by 2020) and 
reduction of CO
2 emissions 
(80% by 2050) Number and capacity of permitted and installed 
renewable energy developments featuring: 
- large scale biomass energy  
- energy from waste 
- micro-wind turbines and roof mounted 
wind turbines 
- roof mounted solar technologies 
(including photovoltaic arrays and hot water panels) 
- heat pumps (ground source, air source 
and water source), 
- individual biomass boilers % energy provision from 
renewable sources for Hartlepool  Domestic CO2 emissions The following 
renewable energy sources 
developments  will be 
collated: 
- biomass 
- energy from 
waste   
- wave and 
tidal  
- small scale 
schemes  
(i.e.<0.5MW capacity) such as micro wind 
turbines, 
roof mounted solar 
technologie
s, heat pumps.   
Current domestic 
CO
2 emissions (see 
CC1) 322 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 Climate Change CC4  
Strategic Wind Turbine Development  
To to support appropriate wind turbine 
developments within 
designated areas to contribute towards a low carbon 
economy  
Delivery of up to 3 
additional turbines in the High Volts area and up to 4 turbines in the Brenda Road 
area  
Number and capacity of permitted/installed wind turbines   
Total installed renewable 
capacity  
 Domestic CO2 emissions   
The number and capacity of large 
scale wind turbine 
developments permitted/ installed will be collated 
CC5 Large Scale Solar 
Photovoltaic 
Developments  To support large 
scale photovoltaic developments in 
appropriate 
locations to contribute to a low carbon economy  Supporting proposals 
featuring large scale solar photovoltaics (i.e. with capacity of  0.5-50MW) Number and capacity of  permitted/installed large 
scale solar photovoltaics developments  Total  installed renewable 
capacity  Domestic CO2 emissions  The number of large 
scale solar wind turbine developments 
installed since the 
enactment of the Climate Change Act 2008 323 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 Infrastructure  INF1 Sustainable 
Transport Network To deliver an 
effective, safe, efficient, accessible 
and sustainable 
transport network, within the overall context of aiming to reduce the need to 
travel Increase opportunities for 
journeys by sustainable 
modes of transport 
 Implement schemes and projects that will help to 
deliver sustainable 
economic growth (by reducing congestion and delays for businesses) Number of schemes implemented to reduce 
traffic congestion and delays e.g.   
- schemes that have/will open up land 
for development 
- initiatives to improve bus/rail 
frequencies 
- bus/rail schemes to improve reliability 
 Cycle and footpaths created (detailing how they 
have improved accessibility and reduced reliance 
on private transport) Journey time reliability 
 
Improved access to key service 
areas and employment areas   Attractiveness of place to work, live and visit Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA  
Authorities Monitoring 
Reports (2006 to 2016)  
Bus patronage 
statistics from local public bus providers operating in 
Hartlepool  
 Local and regional  transport statistics  
Authorities Monitoring 
Reports (2006 to 2016) Local Transport Plan  
Monitoring 
Tees Valley Combined Authority Annual Transport 
Monitoring Report 
INF2 Improving 
Connectivity in 
Hartlepool To strengthen 
transport links with 
the Tees Valley sub-
region, region and beyond Same as INF1 above Same as INF1 above Same as INF1 above Same as INF1 above 324 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
INF3 University 
Hospital of 
Hartlepool To safeguard the 
University Hospital 
of Hartlepool site for the provision of health and related 
facilities An increase in the range of 
health services/facilities at 
the Hospital site Type of approved applications at the University 
of Hartlepool Hospital site Provision of high quality health 
facilities for the community Information from the 
NHS Trust and/or Clinical Care 
Commission on the 
range of services provided at the hospital 
INF4 Community 
Facilities To ensure that all 
sections of the local community have 
access to a range of 
community facilities that meet education, social, 
leisure/recreation, 
and health  Delivery of new and 
extended community facilities monitored 
with housing 
delivery Number of new community facilities granted 
permission per annum  
Number of community facilities lost  through 
closure, demolition, conversions etc % of Hartlepool residents 
finding it easy to access key 
services Community facilities 
survey 
INF5 Telecommunicatio
ns To support  the 
improvement and expansion of 
telecommunications 
networks, including high speed broadband 95% of all premises to have 
access to superfast 
broadband  % superfast 
broadband coverage across Hartlepool  ’cold spots’ of high speed broadband coverage 
and initiatives being pursued to address these Resilient and literate 
communities  Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA  Statistics on % 
broadband coverage 
in Hartlepool   Local statistics from Economic 
Regeneration 
(represents Hartlepool on the Digital Durham 
working group) 325 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 Quality of Place  QP1  
Planning 
Obligations  
To ensure finances 
are sourced from 
developments   to fund the mitigation or compensation for 
the impact of their 
proposals on the environment, infrastructure or 
services   
 Developer contributions will be monitored and 
a summary will be 
presented each year in the New AMR  
Amount of S106 and / or CIL monies received 
and spent  Developments funded by Planning Obligations 
funds  
Growth of the economy – GVA 
p.a  Adequate infrastructure 
in place to support our  
communities  Thriving communities  
Statistics from NOMIS, the ONS, 
TVCA 
 Information on amount of S 106 and 
/ or CIL monies 
received and spent Available (DC) 
QP2 Compulsory 
Purchase Orders  To work with owners 
to progress development of vacant and derelict 
land and buildings  Reduction in the number of 
vacant and derelict land and buildings  Number of vacant and derelict land/buildings 
recorded annually Growth of the economy – GVA 
p.a  
Improved and more attractive 
physical environment in the town Statistics from 
NOMIS, the ONS, TVCA  
Brownfield survey 
results, available up to 2012 but needs updating  326 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
QP3 Location, 
Accessibility, Highway Safety 
and Parking To ensure that 
development is safe 
and accessible 
along with being in a sustainable location, or has the potential 
to be well connected 
with opportunities for sustainable travel   
100% compliance with policy  
 
Road traffic, growth for cars same or lower than the national average  
 
Increase cycling and pedestrian counts  
Increase bus patronage 
(number of journeys)  No new accesses created for the A19(T), A689, A179 
and A178 other than new 
accesses associated with development allocated within the Local Plan Level of road traffic growth 
  Annual car ownership 
 
Cycling and pedestrian counts  Bus patronage figures  
 
Rate of road/traffic incidents   Maintaining traffic flows and safety on the primary road network.  Traffic flows for all  vehicle 
types in England 
 GDP per capita  
Car Ownership 
 Road safety  
NOMIS official labour statistics ONS, TVCA 
  
% of Hartlepool residents finding it easy to access key 
services or vice versa 
QP4 Layout and 
Design of New 
Development    To ensure all 
developments are designed to a high quality and positively 
enhance their 
location and setting 100% of development 
proposals should comply 
with policy and be in accordance with the Residential Design SPD Quality of housing stock and new development 
 
Number of adaptable homes  Number of landmark buildings Reduction in crime  
 
Increase in security and safety 
 Thriving communities   Investor confidence  
ONS, TVCA and/or  local statistics from 
Development Control 327 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
QP5 Safety and 
Security To ensure that all 
residents and 
visitors feel safe and secure within the borough by creating 
safe and secure 
environments To reduce crime and fear of 
crime throughout the Borough  
To reduce levels of skin 
cancer  Notifiable offences recorded by the police  
Public health statistics Crime and safety 
Public health – skin cancer ONS, TVCA and/or 
local statistics on crime and safety  
 
Annual Monitoring Reports (2006-2015)  
community safety and 
engagement team  Public health team 
QP6 Technical Matters To encourage 
investigation and addressing of  all site constraints and 
external influences 
that can have a significant impact on quality of 
developments, 
community health and well being  100% compliance with 
policy   
No applications permitted 
contrary to the advice of Council on the grounds of contaminated land, 
community health and other 
significant constraints that cannot be mitigated  
No significant development 
allowed on the best grade agricultural land Number of applications permitted contrary to the 
advice of council  on the grounds of 
contaminated land, community health and other 
significant constraints that cannot be mitigated   Number of applications permitted on the best 
grade agricultural land Community health and well 
being   
High Quality developments  
 Well designed developments  ONS, TVCA, Health 
and Safety Executive, 
Utilities Information 
 Local statistics on development 
constraints 
QP7 Energy Efficiency To ensure high 
levels of energy efficiency in all development 100% compliance with 
policy   All new buildings to 
incorporate energy 
efficiency measures   
 Number of applications permitted with energy  
efficiency measures secured 
 
Average expenditure by residents and businesses on fuel bills Rates of fuel poverty  
 
Index of Multiple Deprivation  
 Domestic  CO
2 emissions  Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA, Local statistics from Development Control  328 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
QP8 Advertisements  To ensure that 
advertisements are 
appropriately located within the Borough and are of 
an appropriate scale 
and size 100% compliance with 
policy   
No applications permitted 
that introduce visually obstructive features or  impact upon amenity or the 
safe use of vehicles, 
operation of traffic flow (including pedestrian and cycle traffic) Number of applications permitted that introduce 
visually obstructive features or  impact upon 
amenity or the safe use of vehicles, operation of 
traffic flow (including pedestrian and cycle traffic)  Safety and security  
  Sense of place  Local statistics from 
Development Control  Housing   HSG1 New Housing 
Provision (see 
detailed proposed 
monitoring at end of Table 1) To ensure that new 
housing provision in the borough is 
delivered through 
housing sites that have already been permitted, newly 
identified sites both 
within the urban areas and on the edge of the urban 
area, villages in the 
rural area and sites elsewhere in the borough The plan identifies a need 
to deliver 410 dwellings per annum to meet the need over the plan period.  
Total number of dwellings delivered annually  
 Housing Trajectory: Quantity of housing completions in the last 12 
months  
 A review of the housing policies may be required if there is three consecutive  years of significant 
unjustified under delivery (at least 30% each 
year)  GVA per Head  
 Total resident population   
Population growth rate 
 Number of people in priority need on housing register 
 
Housing Trajectory: Quantity of housing completions over the plan period Statistics from 
NOMIS, the ONS, TVCA 
 
AMR Housing Trajectory  (financial year 2014/15) 
 
Housing flows reconciliation figures    329 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
HSG2 Overall Housing 
Mix To ensure that all 
new housing, and/or 
the redevelopment 
of existing housing areas, contributes to achieving an overall 
balanced housing 
stock that meets local needs and aspirations, both now and in the 
future Delivery of a suitable range 
and mix of house types 
which are appropriate to 
their locations and local needs: 
- 100% executive 
housing at  North 
Pentagon Wynyard 
- full range of 
house types on all 
other sites Quantity of housing types delivered since start of 
plan period  
GDP  
Household tenure and mix 
 Quality of housing stock  
No. of people in priority 
need on housing register  balance of house types in the 
borough 
 Deprivation  Numbers of households  
and average household 
size  Total resident population. 
 
Age structure Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA,  
 local statistics from housing monitoring 
HSG3 Urban Local Plan 
Sites To deliver housing 
development on selected sites located within the 
urban area i.e. sites 
US1-US9 as illustrated on the proposals map Delivery of  approximately 
169 dwellings from urban 
sites that meet the housing 
needs in the particular area Number of dwellings delivered on urban sites 
 Types of dwellings delivered on urban sites  Density of dwellings delivered on urban sites 
 
Review may be needed if the brownfield sites are not coming forward at a similar rate as projected within the indicative trajectory and if HSG1 is 
significantly under delivering housing numbers.   Total resident population  
 Population growth rate  Number of people in priority 
need on housing register 
 Housing Trajectory: Quantity of housing completions 
over the plan period Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA  local statistics from 
housing monitoring 330 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
HSG4 The South West 
Extension 
Strategic Housing Site To deliver new 
housing (full range 
of types)  and 
associated infrastructure including community 
facilities and 
transport access on no more than 46.33ha of land on site Delivery of  1260 dwellings 
with an approximate density of 25/ha that meet the 
housing needs in the 
Borough Number of dwellings delivered on the South West 
Extension Strategic Housing Site  
 Types of dwellings delivered on the South West Extension Strategic Housing Site  
 
Density of dwellings delivered on the South West Extension Strategic Housing Site   
Policy may need reviewing if design criteria are 
stopping development coming forward to assess if it is too onerous.   Number of approved developments contrary to 
HSE advice within 15m of all HSE consultation 
zones (i.e. inner, middle and outer) at The South West Extension Strategic Housing Site GDP 
 Household tenure and mix 
 
Quality of housing stock  No. of people in priority 
need on housing register 
 balance of house types in the borough 
 
Deprivation  Numbers of households  and average household 
size 
 Total resident population.  
Age structure Statistics from 
NOMIS, the ONS, TVCA  
Local records from 
development control and planning policy  331 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
HSG5 High Tunstall 
Strategic Housing 
Site To deliver new 
housing (full range of types)  and associated 
infrastructure 
including community facilities and transport access on 
no more than 70ha 
of land on site Delivery of  1200 dwellings 
with an approximate density of 20/ha that meet the 
housing needs in the 
Borough Number of dwellings delivered at High Tunstall 
Strategic Housing Site   
Types of dwellings delivered at High Tunstall 
Strategic Housing Site  Density of dwellings delivered at High Tunstall 
Strategic Housing Site 
 Number of approved developments contrary to HSE advice within 15m of all HSE consultation zones (i.e. inner, middle and outer) at High 
Tunstall Strategic Housing Site GDP 
 Household tenure and mix 
 
Quality of housing stock  No. of people in priority 
need on housing register 
 balance of house types in the borough 
 
Deprivation  Numbers of households  and average household 
size 
 Total resident population.  
Age structure Local records from 
development control 
and planning policy  332 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
HSG6 Wynyard Housing 
Developments  To deliver new 
executive housing 
and associated  
infrastructure including community facilities on no more 
than 6.7ha of land at 
the North Pentagon and no  more than 16.8ha of land at Wynyard Park North Delivery of  100 dwellings in 
the North Pentagon  with an approximate density of  
15/ha 
 Delivery of  400 dwellings in Wynyard Park North with an 
approximate density of  
20/ha  To meet the executive housing need in the 
Borough Number of dwellings delivered at the North 
Pentagon (Wynyard)  
 Types of dwellings delivered at the North Pentagon (Wynyard) 
 
Density of dwellings delivered at the North Pentagon (Wynyard)  
Number of dwellings delivered at Wynyard Park 
North   Types of dwellings delivered at Wynyard Park North  
 
Density of dwellings delivered at Wynyard Park North  GDP 
 Household tenure and mix 
 
Quality of housing stock  No. of people in priority 
need on housing register 
 balance of house types in the borough 
 
Deprivation  Numbers of households  and average household 
size 
 Total resident population.  
Age structure Statistics from 
NOMIS, the ONS, TVCA  
Local records from 
development control and planning policy 333 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
HSG7 Elwick Village 
Housing 
Developments To deliver new 
housing (full range of types)  and associated 
infrastructure on no 
more than 1.67 ha of land on site Delivery of  35 dwellings at 
Potters Farm /North Farm with an approximate density of  21/ha 
 
Meeting the housing needs at Elwick Village  Number of dwellings delivered at Potters Farm 
/North Farm (Elwick)    
Types of dwellings delivered at Potters Farm 
/North Farm (Elwick)    Density of dwellings delivered at Potters Farm 
/North Farm (Elwick)   GDP 
 Household tenure and mix 
 
Quality of housing stock  No. of people in priority 
need on housing register 
 balance of house types in the borough 
 
Deprivation  Numbers of households  and average household 
size 
 Total resident population.  
Age structure Statistics from 
NOMIS, the ONS, TVCA  
Local records from 
development control and planning policy 334 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
HSG8 Hart Village 
Housing 
Developments To deliver new 
housing (full range of types) and associated 
infrastructure on no 
more than 2.2ha of land at Nine Acres and no  more than 
1.1ha of land at 
Glebe Farm Delivery of  30 dwellings at 
Nine Acres with an 
approximate density of 14/ha  
Delivery of  20 dwellings at 
Glebe Farm with an approximate density of  18/ha 
 
Meeting the housing needs at Hart Village  Number of dwellings delivered at Nine Acres 
(Hart)   
Types of dwellings delivered at Nine Acres (Hart)  
 Density of dwellings delivered at Nine Acres (Hart)  
 
Number of dwellings delivered at Glebe Farm (Hart)   
Types of dwellings delivered at Glebe Farm 
(Hart)   Density of dwellings delivered at Glebe Farm 
(Hart) GDP 
 Household tenure and mix 
 
Quality of housing stock  No. of people in priority 
need on housing register 
 balance of house types in the borough 
 
Deprivation  Numbers of households  and average household 
size 
 Total resident population.  
Age structure Statistics from 
NOMIS, the ONS, TVCA  
records from 
development control and planning policy 335 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
HSG9 Affordable 
Housing  To deliver affordable 
housing in respect of 
all applications or 
proposals for C3 residential developments that 
consists of a gross 
addition of 15 dwellings or more. These include 
residential new build, 
renewal of lapsed unimplemented planning permissions 
and changes of use 
and conversions Total of  144 affordable 
dwellings completed 
annually 
 A minimum of 18% affordable housing will be 
sought on all sites of 15 or 
more dwellings threshold  Reduce affordable housing need in the Borough to 
below 27.5% by end of the 
plan period Number of net annual additional affordable 
dwellings delivered by type (i.e. social rent, 
affordable rent or intermediate)  % of planning permissions for sites of 15 or more 
with at least 18% or more affordable housing GDP 
 Household tenure and mix 
 
Quality of housing stock  No. of people in priority 
need on housing register 
 balance of house types in the borough 
 
Deprivation  Numbers of households  and average household 
size 
 Total resident population  
Age structure 
 Affordable housing need Statistics from 
NOMIS, the ONS, 
TVCA 
 Local records from development control, 
planning policy, 
Housing Hartlepool 336 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
HSG10 
(see 
detailed proposed monitoring 
at end of 
Table 1) Housing Market 
Renewal To tackle the 
problem of the imbalance of supply and demand in the 
existing housing 
stock through co-ordinated programmes including Housing 
Market Renewal  Prioritise housing 
regeneration areas in central Hartlepool as identified in the Hartlepool 
Housing Strategy  Number of Housing Market Renewal projects 
delivered  Location of Housing Market Renewal projects 
delivered Market value of properties  
GDP  
Household tenure and mix 
 Quality of housing stock  
No. of people in priority 
need on housing register  balance of house types in the 
borough 
 Deprivation  Numbers of households  
and average household 
size  Total resident population 
 
Age structure  Affordable housing need Statistics from 
NOMIS, the ONS, 
TVCA 
 Local records from Housing  337 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
HSG11 Extensions to 
Existing Dwellings  to control 
inappropriate proposals for 
residential 
extensions in order to ensure that the residential amenity 
of neighbours and 
the visual amenity of the wider area is not compromised No applications permitted 
that compromise residential amenity of neighbours and the visual amenity of the 
wider area   Number of applications permitted contrary to their 
effect on residential amenity and visual amenity of wider area  Crime and safety  
 
Sense of place  
 Neighborhood amenity   
Visual amenity  
 Accommodation needs Statistics from TVCA 
 
Local records from 
development control 
HSG12 Residential 
Annexes To control the 
building of  residential annexes 
that have potential 
to be used as a separate permanent dwelling in future  No residential annexes 
applications permitted if 
they  have potential to be 
used as permanent  in future residential annexes permitted  Neighborhood amenity  
 
Visual amenity  
 Accommodation needs Statistics from TVCA 
 
Local records from 
development control, building control  
HSG13 Gypsy and 
Traveller 
Provision   
To provide for the needs of gypsies and travellers in accordance with the 
criteria of the policy Meet the assessed needs of 
gypsies and travelers  according to the Hartlepool 
Borough Gypsy and 
Travellers Accommodation Needs Assessment (GTAA) 2014 Number of approved gypsy and travelers pitches  
 
 Accommodation needs  
 
Demographic structure: 
Ethnic composition and social groups. Statistics from TVCA 
 
Local records from 
development control, planning policy  338 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 Strengthening the Local Economy  
EMP1 Prestige 
Employment Site Wynyard Business Park  To maintain the 
prestige status of 
Wynyard Business Park i.e. very high standard of design, 
generally low 
density development and a high quality 
environment 
capable of attracting major national and international inward 
investment  Delivery of high quality 
design development at 
controlled densities, with only B1 uses allowed at the frontage of the site 
alongside the A689  Amount of land developed for employment by 
use type delivered (i.e. gross total of additional commercial employment floor space in m
2 broken 
down into use classes  B1,B2 & B8) 
 Amount of land developed for employment by land type (i.e. Brownfield or Greenfield)  
 
Employment land available (ha)   Total amount of floor space completed for town 
centre uses (m
2) 
 Amount of employment land lost to non-employment development (ha)  
Enquiries for sites/premises at Wynyard 
 Number of approved developments contrary to HSE advice within the inner HSE consultation 
zone at the Prestige Employment Site Wynyard 
Business Park   GVA  growth per annum  
 
Increase in employment rate as % of working age (or reduction in unemployment figures)  
 
Employment by main occupation group   
Decrease in employment land 
availability (or increase in employment land take up rate)  
Investment rates NOMIS official labour 
market and ONS 
statistics (e.g. ratio of 
resident workers to jobs)   
TVCA 
economy/employment statistics   
Annual Monitoring 
Reports (2006-2015)  Local statistics from 
Economic 
Development  339 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
EMP2 High quality 
employment site at Queen’s 
Meadow with an 
Enterpise Zone (EZ) status on part of the site To maintain the high 
quality status of Queen’s Meadow 
Business Park i.e. 
development densities slightly higher than at 
Wynyard, fewer 
restrictions on the range and type of uses but still high 
environmental and 
design standards particularly along the A689 frontage Delivery of high quality 
design developments capable of attracting mainly 
local, sub regional and 
regional inward investment  Delivery of developments 
as outlined in the Queen’s 
Meadow Local Development Order (LDO):  
- Advanced 
engineering and 
advanced manufacturing 
-  Chemical, 
pharmaceutical 
and biotechnology 
- Renewable 
energy manufacturing Amount of land developed for employment by 
use type delivered (i.e. gross total of additional 
commercial employment floor space in m
2 broken 
down into use classes  B1, B2 & B8)  
Amount of land developed for employment by 
land type (i.e. Brownfield or Greenfield)   Employment land available (ha)  
 
Total amount of floor space completed for town centre uses (m
2) 
 
Amount of employment land lost to non-
employment development (ha)  EZ LDO developments delivered 
 
Enquiries for sites/premises at Queen’s Meadow GVA  growth per annum  
 Increase in employment rate as % of working age (or reduction 
in unemployment figures)  
 Employment by main occupation group  
 
Decrease in employment land availability (or increase in employment land take up rate)  
Investment rates NOMIS official labour 
market and ONS 
statistics (e.g. ratio of 
resident workers to jobs)   
TVCA 
economy/employment statistics   
Annual Monitoring 
Reports (2006-2015)  Local statistics from Economic 
Development 
  340 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
EMP3 General 
Employment Land To allow delivery of  
general employment uses that allow for greater flexibility in 
permitted uses at 
greater densities than EMP 1 and EMP2, but still 
promotes good 
design and environmental standards Delivery of developments in 
the Southern Business 
Zone (SBZ) in accordance 
with EMP3  Delivery of developments 
as outlined in the Oakesway 
Local Development Order (LDO):  
- Advanced 
Engineering & 
Advanced Manufacturing 
- Renewable 
Energy 
Manufacturing Amount of land developed for employment by 
use type delivered (i.e. gross total of additional commercial employment floor space in m
2 broken 
down into use classes  B1, B2 & B8) 
 Amount of land developed for employment by land type (i.e. Brownfield or Greenfield)  
 
Employment land available (ha)   Total amount of floor space completed for town 
centre uses (m
2) 
 Amount of employment land lost to non-employment development (ha)  
EZ LDO developments delivered at Oakesway 
Industrial Park GVA  growth per annum  
 Increase in employment rate as % of working age (or reduction 
in unemployment figures)  
 Employment by main occupation group  
 
Decrease in employment land availability (or increase in employment land take up rate) NOMIS official labour 
market and ONS statistics (e.g. ratio of 
resident workers to 
jobs) 
  TVCA economy/employmen
t statistics  
 Annual Monitoring Reports (2006-2015) 341 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
EMP4 Specialist 
Industries To allow delivery of  
specialist employment uses 
that allow for greater 
flexibility in permitted uses at greater densities 
than EMP 1 and 
EMP2, but still promotes good design and 
environmental 
standards Delivery of specialist 
employment uses in accordance with policy  
Delivery of developments 
as outlined in the Hartlepool Port Local Development Order (LDO):  
- Advanced 
Engineering & Advanced Manufacturing 
- Renewable 
Energy Manufacturing Amount of land developed for employment by 
use type delivered (i.e. gross total of additional commercial employment floor space in m
2 broken 
down into use classes  B1, B2 & B8) 
 Amount of land developed for employment by land type (i.e. Brownfield or Greenfield)  
 
Employment land available (ha)   Total amount of floor space completed for town 
centre uses (m
2) 
 Amount of employment land lost to non-employment development (ha)  
EZ LDO developments delivered at Hartlepool 
Port  GVA  growth per annum  
 Increase in employment rate as % of working age (or reduction 
in unemployment figures)  
 Employment by main occupation group  
 
Decrease in employment land availability (or increase in employment land take up rate) NOMIS official labour 
market and ONS statistics (e.g. ratio of 
resident workers to 
jobs) 
  TVCA economy/employmen
t statistics  
 Annual Monitoring Reports (2006-2015 
EMP5 Safeguarded 
Land for New Nuclear Power 
Station  To safeguard 140ha 
of land in the south eastern area for a potential nuclear 
power station in 
2025 Ensure land is available 
should the new power 
station be built  No developments permitted in the safeguarded 
area Land availability  
 
All economic benefits depend 
on whether the nuclear power station is built or not  Area as marked on 
the Local Plan 
proposals map 
EMP6  
 
  Underground 
Storage   
 
   To protect the 
aquifer, 
watercourses and adjacent nature conservation sites 
from underground 
development proposals  100% compliance with 
policy   No applications permitted 
for storage of toxic 
substances  Number and type of permitted developments  in 
the underground storage area contrary to advice 
from statutory agencies particularly the Health 
and Safety Executive, Environment Agency, Water Companies  Water quality  
 Protection of nature conservation sites 
 
Public health and safety     Local statistics from 
Development Control 342 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 Rural Area  RU1 Development in 
the Rural Area To support the 
rural economy and 
ensure that the 
rural area is protected and 
enhanced to 
protect its natural habitat, cultural 
heritage and 
landscape 
character. 
Development outside the 
development limits 
will be strictly controlled. 100% compliance with 
policy in accordance with 
the Hartlepool Rural Neighbourhood Plan Number of permissions granted contrary to the 
Hartlepool Rural Neighbourhood Plan, any other made neighbourhood plan or relevant design 
guides and statements.   
 Number and types of developments approved outside development limits that do not accord 
with the policy criteria GDP 
 Total resident population  
GVA from rural based 
businesses  Total number 
employed in rural based 
businesses  Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA 
 Previous AMRs 
RU2 New Dwellings 
Outside of Development Limits  To protect the 
countryside by only 
permitting new 
dwellings outside of development limits if there is clear 
justification for the 
need  100% compliance with 
policy in accordance with the Hartlepool Rural Neighbourhood Plan Number of dwellings approved outside 
development limits Countryside/ landscape 
character   Total resident population Statistics from TVCA 
 
Previous AMRs  343 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
RU3 Farm 
Diversification  To support and 
diversify the rural 
economy through farm diversification.  
 
 Supporting developments 
which form part of a farm 
diversification scheme Number and type of farm diversification schemes 
permitted in rural areas GDP 
 Total resident population 
 
GVA from rural based businesses  
Total number 
employed in rural based businesses Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA  
Local development 
control records  
RU4 Equestrian 
Development  To support the rural 
economy through 
equestrian development. Supporting developments 
which from part of equestrian developments   Number and type of equestrian development 
schemes permitted in rural areas GDP 
 Total resident population  
GVA from rural based 
businesses  Total number 
employed in rural based 
businesses Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA  Local development 
control records 
RU5 Rural Tourism  To enhance the 
Borough’s tourism 
offer by supporting rural tourism by taking advantage of 
opportunities that 
exist within the rural area  Delivery of  tourism 
developments in the rural area subject to compliance 
with policy  Number and type of rural based tourist schemes 
permitted/implemented   Number and type of tourist/visitor   
accommodation (i.e. caravan, holiday lodges, 
hotels camping sites) permitted/implemented  GDP 
 
Total resident population  GVA from tourism  
 
Total number employed in tourism  Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA 
 
Local development control records 344 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016  RU6 Rural Services Ensure uses 
considered to be of 
community value can 
be kept in public use and remain an integral part of 
community life.  To encourage and support 
the continued provision of uses considered to be of 
community value. Number of entries in the ‘list of assets of 
community value’ held by the Borough Council 
 Number of changes of use approved that do not accord with the policy criteria GDP 
 Total resident population 
 
GVA from rural based businesses  
Total number employed in rural 
based businesses Records from HBC 
Estates 
 Statistics from the ONS, TVCA 
 
Local development control records Retail and Commercial  Development  RC1 Retail and 
Commercial Centre Hierarchy  To ensure the retail 
hierarchy is adhered to and that the town centre first approach 
is followed and that 
other retail and commercial centres serve their function 
within the hierarchy. 
 100% compliance with 
policy  
 Reduce proportion of new retail development 
occurring out of designated 
centres  Delivery of ‘healthy’ and 
vibrant retail and 
commercial centres  across the Borough  Number of permissions granted contrary to policy 
for main town centre uses outside of the town centre  
Number of permissions granted contrary to policy 
for main town centre uses outside the designated centers   
% of vacant floor space brought back into use 
within the designated centres. GDP 
 Vitality and viability of the designated retail and 
commercial centers 
 Number employed in retail and leisure 
 
Employment rate  Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA 
 Previous AMRs  
Annual retail and 
commercial survey 
RC2 The Town Centre To diversify, support 
and protect the 
Town Centre as the 
sequentially preferable location for main town centre 
uses (above 300m2) Enhancing the sustainability 
vitality and viability of the Town Centre % of completed floorspace for main town centre 
use development occurring in town centre 
 
Retail and commercial vacancy rates in the town centre    
  GDP 
 
Sustainability of the Town 
Centre   Vitality and viability of the town 
centre  
 Number employed in retail and leisure industries  
 
Employment rate Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA 
 
Previous AMRs  Annual retail and 
commercial survey 345 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
RC3 Innovation and 
Skills Quarter  To encourage and 
promote the development of an 
Innovation and Skills 
Quarter in the Church Street Area by encouraging 
investment in 
Hartlepool College of Further Education, small scale starter 
units, improvements 
to the public realm and  pedestrianisation of some of Church 
Street Develop a master plan for 
investment in Church Street  
and implement 
developments by the end of the plan period   
No A4, nightclubs and A5 
uses permitted in the area outside of the late night uses area Master plan production GVA  
 
Local economy  Education  
 
Small businesses  Employment rate  
 
Improved pedestrian/shopper/visitor experience Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA 
 Local statistics of investments in the 
Church Street Area 
from Estates and Regeneration    
Previous AMRs 
 Annual retail and commercial survey 
RC4 Avenue 
Road/Raby Road Edge of Town Centre Area To ensure provision 
of a complimentary 
offer to the Town 
Centre with particular uses relating to health 
and wellbeing being  
encouraged at this Edge of Town Centre 
(EOTC)  No applications for drinking 
establishments (A4 use 
class) and hot food 
takeaways (A5 use class) to be permitted   
 Improving the 
sustainability, vitality and viability of Avenue Road/Raby Road EOTC 
area  Retail and commercial vacancy rates in the 
Avenue Road/Raby Road EOTC 
 Type of completed retail/commercial development in Avenue Road/Raby Road EOTC 
 
% of completed floorspace for retail or commercial development occurring in Avenue Road/Raby Road EOTC Local economy  
 
Town Centre sustainability, viability, vitality   
GDP 
 Sustainability of the EOTC  Vitality and viability of the EOTC 
 
Employment rate  Community health Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA 
 2014/15, 2015/16 retail and commercial survey 346 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
RC5 The Brewery and 
Stranton Edge of Town Centre Area To diversify, support 
and protect Brewery 
and Stranton EOTC 
 No applications for hot food 
takeaways (A5 use class) to be permitted   
Improving the sustainability, 
vitality and viability of Brewery and Stranton EOTC Retail and commercial vacancy rates in the 
Brewery and Stranton EOTC  
Type of completed retail/commercial 
development in Brewery and Stranton EOTC  % of completed floorspace for retail or 
commercial development occurring in Brewery 
and Stranton EOTC Local economy  
 Town Centre sustainability, 
viability, vitality  
 GDP  
Sustainability of the EOTC 
 Vitality and viability of the EOTC  
Employment rate 
 Community health  Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA  
2014/15, 2015/16 
retail and commercial survey 
RC6 East of Stranton 
Edge of Town 
Centre Area To diversify, support 
and protect East of 
Stranton  EOTC No applications for drinking 
establishments (A4 use class) and hot food takeaways (A5 use class) to 
be permitted  
 Improving the sustainability, vitality and viability of East 
of Stranton EOTC Retail and commercial vacancy rates in East of 
Stranton EOTC  Type of completed retail/commercial 
development East of Stranton EOTC 
 % of completed floorspace for retail or commercial development occurring in East of 
Stranton EOTC Local economy  
 Town Centre sustainability, viability, vitality  
 
GDP  Sustainability of the EOTC 
 
Vitality and viability of the EOTC  Employment rate  
Community health  Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA  2014/15, 2015/16 
retail and commercial 
survey 347 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
RC7 Lynn Street Edge 
of Town Centre Area To diversify, support 
and protect East of Stranton  EOTC No applications for hot food 
takeaways (A5 use class) to 
be permitted 
 Improving the sustainability, vitality and viability of Lynn 
Street EOTC Retail and commercial vacancy rates in Lynn 
Street EOTC  
Type of completed retail/commercial 
development in Lynn Street EOTC  % of completed floorspace for retail or 
commercial development occurring in Lynn 
Street EOTC Local economy  
 Town Centre sustainability, 
viability, vitality  
 GDP  
Sustainability of the EOTC 
 Vitality and viability of the EOTC  
Employment rate 
 Community health  Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA  
2014/15, 2015/16 
retail and commercial survey 
RC8 Mill House Edge 
of Town Centre 
Area To diversify, support 
and protect Mill 
House EOTC No applications for drinking 
establishments (A4 use class) and hot food takeaways (A5 use class) to 
be permitted  
 Improving the sustainability, vitality and viability of Mill 
House EOTC Retail and commercial vacancy rates in Mill 
House EOTC  Type of completed retail/commercial 
development in Mill House EOTC 
 % of completed floorspace for retail or commercial development occurring in Mill House 
EOTC Local economy  
 Town Centre sustainability, viability, vitality  
 
GDP  Sustainability of the EOTC 
 
Vitality and viability of the EOTC  Employment rate  
Community health Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA  2014/15, 2015/16 
retail and commercial 
survey 348 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
RC9 Park Road West 
Edge of Town Centre Area To diversify, support 
and protect Park Road West EOTC No applications for drinking 
establishments (A4 use class) and hot food 
takeaways (A5 use class) to 
be permitted   Improving the sustainability, 
vitality and viability of Park 
Road West  EOTC Retail and commercial vacancy rates in Park 
Road West  EOTC  
Type of completed retail/commercial 
development in Park Road West  EOTC  % of completed floorspace for retail or 
commercial development occurring in Park Road 
West  EOTC Local economy  
 Town Centre sustainability, 
viability, vitality 
 GDP  
Sustainability of the EOTC 
 Vitality and viability of the EOTC  
Employment rate 
 Community health  Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA  
2014/15, 2015/16 
retail and commercial survey 
RC10 West Victoria 
Road Edge of 
Town Centre Area To diversify, support 
and protect West 
Victoria Road EOTC No applications for drinking 
establishments (A4 use 
class) and hot food takeaways (A5 use class) to be permitted  
 
Improving the sustainability, vitality and viability of West Victoria Road EOTC Retail and commercial vacancy rates in West 
Victoria Road EOTC 
 Type of completed retail/commercial development in West Victoria Road EOTC 
 
% of completed floorspace for retail or commercial development occurring in West Victoria Road EOTC Local economy  
 Town Centre sustainability, viability, vitality 
 
GDP  Sustainability of the EOTC 
 
Vitality and viability of the EOTC  Employment rate  
Community health 
 Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA 
 
2014/15, 2015/16 retail and commercial survey 349 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
RC11 York Road South 
Edge of Town 
Centre Area To diversify, support 
and protect York 
Road South EOTC No applications for drinking 
establishments (A4 use class) and hot food takeaways (A5 use class) to 
be permitted  
 Improving the sustainability, vitality and viability of York 
Road South EOTC Retail and commercial vacancy rates in York 
Road South  EOTC  Type of completed retail/commercial 
development in York Road South EOTC 
 % of completed floorspace for retail or commercial development occurring in York Road 
South EOTC Local economy  
 Town Centre sustainability, 
viability, vitality 
 GDP  
Sustainability of the EOTC 
 Vitality and viability of the EOTC  
Employment rate 
 Community health   Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA 
 2014/15, 2015/16 retail and commercial 
survey 
RC12 The Marina Retail 
and Leisure Park To diversify, support 
and protect The 
Marina Retail and 
Leisure Park Enhance the value of The 
Marina as a major attraction 
for both residents and visitors   
To reduce vacancy rates 
 Redevelopment of the longstanding vacant Jackson’s Landing 
 
Control the number of permitted hot food takeaways  (A5 Use Class ) 
at the Marina  Retail/ leisure/ commercial vacancy rates in the 
Marina 
 
Type of completed retail/commercial/leisure  development in the Marina   % of completed floorspace for 
retail/commercial/leisure development occurring 
in the Marina GDP 
 Local economy  
 
Town Centre sustainability, viability, vitality  
Sustainability of  retail and 
leisure parks    Vitality and viability of retail and leisure parks   
 
Employment rate  Number employed in retail and 
leisure 
 Residents and visitor numbers  Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA 
 AMRs  Annual retail/ commercial/leisure 
survey 350 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
RC13 West of Marina 
way Retail and Leisure Parks  To diversify, support 
and protect the West of Marina Way Retail and Leisure 
Parks Attracting more visitors 
 
To reduce vacancy rates 
 Delivery of improved landscaping, footpaths and  
cycle tracks  
 Increase connectivity of the area with the Town Centre, 
Marina Retail & Leisure 
Park, transport interchange  Retail/ leisure/ commercial vacancy rates West of 
Marina way 
 
Type of completed retail/commercial/leisure  development West of Marina way  
% of completed floorspace for 
retail/commercial/leisure development occurring West of Marina way GDP 
 Local economy  
 
Town Centre sustainability, viability, vitality  
Sustainability of  retail and 
leisure parks    Vitality and viability of retail and 
leisure parks   
 Employment rate  Number employed in retail and 
leisure 
 Residents and visitor numbers Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA 
 AMRs  Annual retail/ 
commercial/leisure 
survey 351 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
RC14 Trincomalee 
Wharf Retail and Leisure Parks  To diversify, support 
and protect the Trincomalee Wharf Retail and Leisure 
Park Attracting more visitors  
 
To reduce vacancy rates  Improving connectivity  with 
Town Centre and The 
Marina by sustainable modes of transport; cycling and walking  
 
No applications for hot food takeaways (A5 use class) permitted   
 Retail/ leisure/ commercial vacancy rates in 
Trincomalee Wharf  
 Type of completed retail/commercial/commercial development in Trincomalee Wharf  
 
% of completed floorspace for retail/ commercial/leisure development occurring in Trincomalee Wharf  
 GDP 
 Local economy  
 
Town Centre sustainability, viability, vitality  
Sustainability of  retail and 
leisure parks    Vitality and viability of retail and 
leisure parks   
 Employment rate  Number employed in retail and 
leisure 
 Residents and visitor numbers Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA  
2014/15, 2015/16 
retail and commercial survey 352 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
RC15 Tees Bay Retail 
and Leisure Park To diversify, support 
and protect Tees 
Bay Retail and 
Leisure park  Improving the offer at Tees 
Bay by improving the overall environment and connectivity 
 
Not permitting applications for further food retailing, A4 and A5 uses  Retail/ leisure/commercial vacancy rates in Tees 
Bay 
 
Type of completed retail/commercial/leisure development in Tees Bay   
% of completed floorspace for 
retail/commercial/leisure development occurring in Tees Bay  GDP 
 Local economy  
 
Town Centre sustainability, viability, vitality  
Sustainability of  retail and 
leisure parks    Vitality and viability of retail and 
leisure parks   
 Employment rate  Number employed in retail and 
leisure 
 Residents and visitor numbers Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA  
2014/15, 2015/16 
retail and commercial survey 353 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
RC16  The Local Centres  To diversify, support 
and protect local 
centres in recognition of the important service 
they provide to their 
local communities Local Centres will be 
equally as sequentially preferable location as the town centre for uses below 
300m
2 floorspace  
 Controlling the number of hot food takeaways in 
accordance with policy 
RC18 Retail and commercial vacancy rates in the local 
centers   
Type of completed retail/commercial 
development in the local centres   %  completed floorspace for hot food takeaways 
in local centres  Local economy  
 Town Centre sustainability, 
viability, vitality 
 GDP  
Sustainability of the local centre  
 Vitality and viability of the local centre  
 
Employment rate  Community health  (obesity levels/rates) Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA 
 Previous AMRs  
Annual retail and 
commercial survey 
RC17 Late Night Uses 
Area   To support 
development in 
appropriate 
locations that contribute positively to the night time 
economy in the 
borough 100% compliance with 
policy   Locating developments 
operating after 11.30pm 
only in the night time economy area  Number of permitted developments  operating 
after 11:30pm located outside the night time 
economy area Local economy  
 
Community well being  Local records from 
Development Control 
RC18 Hot Food 
Takeaways  To protect the 
vitality and viability 
of the network of retail and commercial centres 
within the borough 
along with seeking to protect the residential amenity 
of nearby residents.  Controlling hot food 
takeaway proposals 
according to criteria set in 
policy  Number of hot food takeaways permitted contrary 
to criteria set in the policy    Vitality and viability of retail and 
commercial centres   
Obesity levels  
 Health and wellbeing  Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA  
Previous AMRs 
 Public Health team  
Annual retail and 
commercial survey 354 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
RC19 Main Town Centre 
Uses on 
Employment Land To control main 
town centre uses on 
employment land  100% compliance with 
policy  
 
No A5 uses permitted on industrial land  Number of main town centre uses permitted on 
employment land 
 
Number of A5 uses permitted on employment land  Vitality and viability of retail and 
commercial centres   
Local economy  
 Employment   Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA  
Local statistics – 
Economic Development/business rates records  
RC20 Business Uses in 
the Home To ensure many 
flexible options for 
employment are 
delivered across the borough 100% compliance with 
policy  
 Number of businesses run from home  
 Number of businesses run from home that require planning permission  Local economy  
 Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA  
Local statistics – 
Economic Development/business rates records 
RC21 Commercial Uses 
in Residential 
Areas To protect the 
vitality and viability of the designated 
retail and 
commercial centres within the Borough and the amenity of 
residents Controlling commercial 
uses in residential areas   No applications for hot food 
takeaways (A5 use class) in 
predominantly residential areas  Number of commercial uses permitted in 
residential areas outside retail and commercial centres    
Number of hot food takeaways (A5 use class) 
permitted in residential areas outside designated retail and commercial centres   Vitality and viability of retail and 
commercial centres  
  Health and wellbeing  Statistics from the 
ONS, TVCA  Local statistics – 
Economic 
Development/business rates records 355 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 Leisure and Tourism Development  LT1 Leisure and 
Tourism  To develop leisure 
and tourism 
facilities, including 
high quality tourist  accommodation in designated key 
tourist areas  Increase and improve 
facilities for sustainable  tourism Number and type of permitted developments for 
leisure and tourism  
 Number and type of completed developments for leisure and tourism  
 
Number and type of leisure and tourism developments outside  designated locations  
Number of leisure and tourism developments 
within the rural area contrary to the criteria within the Protecting, Managing and Enhancing the Rural Area policies. GVA  
 
Mental and physical health 
 Social inclusion and well-being.  
Number employed in tourism 
and leisure  Employment rate  
 
Sense of place  NOMIS official labour 
market,  ONS and TVCA statistics  
  
Annual Monitoring Reports (2006-2015)  
Local statistics from 
Economic Development  
Local development 
control statistics  
LT2 Tourism 
Development in 
the Marina To continue 
developing the 
Marina as the major tourist and leisure attraction, in 
particular to support 
the redevelopment of Ward Jackson building  and 
Trincomalee Wharf  
site Increasing and supporting 
improvements of facilities for sustainable  tourism at 
the Marina  Number and type of permitted developments for 
leisure and tourism  
 Number and type of completed developments for leisure and tourism  
 
Number and type of leisure and tourism developments outside  designated locations  
Initiatives and enquiries to redevelop the Ward 
Jackson building  and Trincomalee Wharf Site GVA  
 Mental and physical health 
 
Social inclusion and well-being.  Number employed in tourism 
and leisure 
 Employment rate   Sense of place NOMIS official labour 
market,  ONS and TVCA statistics  
  
Annual Monitoring 
Reports (2006-2015)  Local statistics from 
Economic 
Development  Local development control statistics 
 356 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
LT3 Development of 
Seaton Carew  To continue 
developing Seaton Carew as a major 
sea side resort and 
to ensure developments within the core area of 
Seaton Carew are 
complimentary to the character of the area Determining proposals in 
accordance with the Seaton 
Carew SPD 
 Preventing residential development in the area 
between The Front and the 
sea at the Front and former Fairground site.  Number and type of permitted developments for 
leisure and tourism   
Number and type of completed developments for 
leisure and tourism   Number and type of leisure and tourism 
developments outside  designated locations 
specified in the Seaton Carew SPD  Initiatives and enquiries for tourism and leisure 
developments at Seaton Carew  
 Preventing inappropriate development   GVA  
 
Mental and physical health  Social inclusion and well-being. 
 
Number employed in tourism and leisure  
Employment rate  
 Sense of place NOMIS official labour 
market,  ONS and 
TVCA statistics  
  Annual Monitoring Reports (2006-2015) 
 
Local statistics from Economic Development 
 
Local development control statistics  
LT4 Tourist 
Accommodation  To encourage the 
enhancement of existing tourist accommodation and 
also the 
development of further tourist accommodation 
within the key tourist 
areas of the borough Delivery of good quality 
tourist accommodation  Number and type of tourist accommodation 
permitted 
 Number and type of tourist accommodation delivered   GVA  
 
Mental and physical health 
 Social inclusion and well-being.  
Number employed in tourism 
and leisure  Employment rate   
Sense of place NOMIS official labour 
market,  ONS and 
TVCA statistics  
  Annual Monitoring 
Reports (2006-2015) 
 Local statistics from Economic Development 357 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
LT5 Caravan Sites 
and Touring 
Caravan Sites  To deliver well 
screened static, touring caravan and 
camping sites that  
do not intrude visually into the landscape Delivery of safe and secure 
static, touring caravan and 
camping sites  Number of camping/static caravan/touring 
caravan sites permitted contrary to policy  Sense of place 
 
Safety and security  Annual Monitoring 
Reports (2006-2015) 
 Local statistics from Economic 
Development 
LT6 Business 
Tourism, Events and Conferencing  To encourage and 
promote improvements to 
existing facilities and 
developments which complement the needs of business, in 
terms of 
conferencing facilities and tourism.
 
 Compliance with policy  Number of permitted developments related to 
business tourism, events and conferencing  Number of enquiries related to business tourism, 
events and conferencing  GVA  
 Local economy  
 
Employment rate   Local statistics from 
Development Control 
and  Economic 
Development Heritage   HE1 Heritage Assets  To preserve, protect 
and positively 
enhance all heritage 
assets in the Borough i.e. both designated and non-
designated Minimise the proportion of 
planning applications approved against the 
advice of specialist 
conservation staff  Promoting schemes that 
secure, protect and 
enhance heritage assets  Number of approved applications where an 
objection from a specialist conservation staff has 
been received     Schemes implemented to secure heritage assets  Cultural  heritage  
 Sense of place   
Safety and security  
 Tourism   
Visitor numbers  
Conservation of historic environment ONS and TVCA 
statistics   
English Heritage and 
National Trust  information   
Historic England 
information   Local statics from 
Conservation and 
Countryside     358 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
HE2 Archeology To protect, enhance 
and promote 
Hartlepool’s archaeological heritage and where 
appropriate, 
encourage improved interpretation and presentation to the 
public Minimise the proportion of 
planning applications 
approved against the advice of  specialist archeology staff  
 
Promoting schemes that secure, protect and enhance archeological 
assets Number of approved applications where an 
objection from a specialist archeology staff has been received 
 
Schemes implemented to secure archeological assets  Archeological heritage 
 Tourism  
 
Visitor numbers   Conservation of historic 
environment 
 ONS and TVCA 
statistics   
Archeological Society  
 English Heritage and National Trust  
information  
 Historic England information  
 
Local statics   
HE3 Conservation 
Areas  To ensure that the 
distinctive character 
of conservation areas within the Borough will be 
conserved or 
enhanced through a constructive conservation 
approach No increase in the number 
of conservation areas 
added to the heritage at risk 
register  Conservation Area Appraisals undertaken 
 
Number of conservation areas removed from the heritage at risk register  
Number of conservation areas added to the 
heritage at risk register Cultural heritage  
 
Heritage assets   Safety and security  
 
Sense of place   Conservation of historic 
environment ONS and TVCA 
statistics   English Heritage and 
National Trust  
information   Historic England 
information  
 Local statics from Conservation and Countryside 359 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
HE4 Listed Buildings 
and Structures  To conserve or 
enhance the town’s 
listed buildings and structures  No increase in listed 
buildings and structures at 
risk across the Borough  Number of listed buildings at risk  
 
Number of listed structures at risk   Cultural heritage  
 Heritage assets   
Safety and security  
 Sense of place  
Conservation of historic 
environment  ONS and TVCA 
statistics   
English Heritage and 
National Trust  information   
Historic England 
information   Local statics from 
Conservation and 
Countryside 
HE5 Locally Listed 
Buildings and Structures  To support the 
retention of heritage 
assets on the List of Locally Important Buildings  Minimising loss of locally 
listed buildings and structures   Number of locally listed buildings  
 Number of locally listed structures  Cultural heritage  
 
Heritage assets  
 Safety and security   
Sense of place 
 Conservation of historic environment ONS and TVCA 
statistics  
 English Heritage and National Trust  
information  
 Historic England information  
 
Local statics from Conservation and Countryside 360 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
HE6 Historic Shopping 
Parades  To support the 
retention of historic 
shopfronts in the following shopping parades:  
Stranton/Vicarage 
Gardens, The Front at Seaton and Church Street  maintaining our highly 
valued built heritage and 
links with the past for this and future generations  Loss of historic shop fronts  Cultural heritage  
 Heritage assets   
Safety and security  
 Sense of place  
Conservation of historic 
environment ONS and TVCA 
statistics   
English Heritage and 
National Trust  information   
Historic England 
information   Local statics from 
Conservation and 
Countryside 
HE7  Heritage at Risk To retain, protect 
and enhance heritage assets 
classified as ‘at risk’ Decrease the number of  
heritage assets classified as 
‘at risk’   Promote schemes that 
secure, protect and 
enhance ‘at risk’ heritage assets Number of promotion schemes implemented to 
secure, protect and enhance ‘at risk’ heritage assets Cultural heritage  
 
Heritage assets  
 Safety and security   
Sense of place 
 Conservation of historic environment ONS and TVCA 
statistics  
 English Heritage and National Trust  
information  
 Historic England information  
 
Local statics from Conservation and Countryside 361 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 Natural Environment  NE1 Natural 
Environment To protect, manage 
and enhance Hartlepool’s natural 
environment No net loss or harm on sites 
designated for nature conservation 
and no damage on the 
special landscape areas at Wynyard and Thorpe Bulmer Dene 
 
Implement positive management schemes and enhance nature  
conservation sites Amount of wildlife habitat lost/gained as a result 
of planning  permissions (ha)  
Amount of ancient woodland lost as a result of 
planning permissions (ha/number) Amount of priority species lost/gained as a result of planning permissions (ha/number) 
 
Changes to sites designated for conservation as a result of planning permissions (international sites, national sites and local sites)  
 
SDL 160-00, LWSs in positive management in previous 5 yr period (number/%)   
 Attractive natural environment  
 Biodiversity  
Ecological services  
 Sense of place   
Investment in local economy  
Health and well being Aesthetic value of landscape  River water quality: length 
assessed as at least fairly good 
for chemical & biological quality Local ecology 
statistics 
 
Singe Data List (SDL) website   
Environmental 
Records Information Centre (ERIC)  
S106 developer 
contributions  for mitigation towards impact on the natural environment  
NE2 Green 
Infrastructure  To safeguard, 
improve, increase the quality and quantity of green infrastructure across 
the Borough No net loss of any green 
infrastructure components 
as outlined in the policy Quantity of green infrastructure gained 
/enhanced/ lost through planning permissions (ha)   Borough wide net gain/loss of green 
infrastructure (ha) Economic growth and 
investment 
 Climate change adaptation and mitigation 
 
Health and wellbeing  Recreation and leisure  
Flood alleviation and water 
management  Biodiversity 
 
Health and well being Local statistics 
development control   S106 developer contributions for 
green infrastructure   362 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
NE3 Green Wedges  To protect, maintain 
and, where appropriate, 
increase the number 
of green wedges to provide a wide range of benefits for 
the town.   Strict control of 
development in the green 
wedges as outlined in the policy   Number of approved developments on allocated 
green wedges   
Quantity of green wedges gained/enhanced/lost 
through planning permissions (ha)  Net loss of green wedges Borough wide (ha) 
 
Number of approved developments contrary to HSE advice within 15m of all HSE consultation zones (i.e. inner, middle and outer) in all Green 
Wedges 
 Climate change adaptation and 
mitigation  
Health and wellbeing 
 Recreation and leisure  
Flood alleviation and water 
management  Biodiversity 
 
Health and well being Local statistics 
development control 
 
S106 developer contributions for green infrastructure   
NE4 Ecological 
Networks To maintain and 
enhance ecological 
networks throughout the Borough  Prioritising the coastal 
fringe, Tees Road/Brenda 
Road brownfield land, Dalton Beck/Greatham Beck riparian corridor and 
Wynyard for enhancing  
ecological networks at a landscape scale  Number of implemented management schemes 
to enhance ecological networks in prioritised 
locations in Borough   Management work undertaken on designated 
and non-designated sites 
 Quantity of habitat created or management plan put in place as part of development permissions Ecosystem services  
 
Biodiversity Local ecology 
statistics /surveys 
 
S106 contributions towards ecological networks  
NE5 Playing Pitches 
Tennis Courts 
Bowling Greens   To protect existing 
playing pitches 
(including playing 
fields, tennis courts and bowling greens) No net loss of playing 
pitches, tennis courts or 
bowling greens   Quantity and/or number of new/lost playing 
pitches, tennis courts, bowling greens  Net quantity and/or number of new/lost playing pitches, tennis courts, bowling greens  Health and well being  
 Local statistics 
development control   
S106 contributions 
towards playing pitches, tennis courts or bowling greens 
NE6 Protection of 
incidental open 
space   To protect and 
enhance existing amenity open 
spaces across the 
Borough  Minimize  loss of  incidental 
open space  Quantity of ‘incidental open space’ lost as part of 
development proposals (ha) 
 Health and well being Local statistics 
development control   363 
 Theme Policy 
No Policy  
Description Policy  
Objectives Targets Output/Outcome Indicators i.e. short , 
medium terms and more localised impact Contextual Indicators i.e. long 
term, wider social, 
environmental and economic 
impacts Baseline 
Information 
source(s) as at May 
2016 
NE7 Landscaping 
along main 
transport corridors  To improve the 
visual environment 
along main transport corridors Implement well designed 
landscape management schemes and tree planting 
along main transport 
corridors   Records of management schemes and number 
of planted trees on main transport corridors in the 
Borough  Visual amenity  
Increased sense of place and  
perception  Local statistics  
 Note:  
1. All or most of the output/outcome indicators will be monitored annually at a local level 
2. Long term/contextual indicators will be monitored annually at a wider national level and 
most of these will thus be reflected within  national, regional and sub regional statistics 
 364 
 Proposed Monitoring for Housing Delivery 
 
The emerging Local Plan proposes  an annual housing target of 41 0 dwellings per 
annum and this includes 65 dwelli ngs/annum to make up for a sho rtfall created by 
demolitions from HMR sites. The HM R initiative identifies a tot al of 1950 dwellings to 
be demolished over the plan period at a repl acement rate of 50% . Therefore a total 
of 975 dwellings (i.e. 65 per  annum) will be requi red over the plan period (see 
HLP01/1 Table 6: Housi ng Target Breakdown).  
Since demolitions from HMR sit es have already been accounted fo r in the 410 
dwellings/annum deliver y rate, actual demolitions from HMR site s during the plan 
period will therefore be excluded in calculating net housing de livery in the emerging 
plan. Housing delivery from HMR s ites will theref ore be monitor ed separately from 
the rest of housing sites to avo id double counting in working o ut total annual 
demolitions. Hence the following monitoring mechanism for housi ng delivery is 
proposed:   Indicator H1: Housing delivery at HMR sites   
HMR Site 
Location/Name  Number of new dwellings 
 (A) Number of Demolitions  
(A1) Net  dwellings delivered   
(A-A1) 
    
 
Estimated HMR demolitions 1950 dwellings, estimated replacement 975 dwellings 
 
The following table (Indicator H2), will be used to monitor the  net delivery of the 
housing requirement as set out i n policy HSG1: New Housing Prov ision   
Indicator H2: Annual Net Housing Delivery (excludes demolitions  and replacements 
on HMR sites)  
 Urban Sites Urban Edge Rural Sites Other (e.g. change of use & 
conversions)  
Number of new/additional  dwellings  A B C E 
Number of demolished dwellings  A1 B1 C1 E1 
Net additional dwellings A-A1 B-B1 C-C1 E-E1 
Annual net housing delivery  (A -A1)+(B-B1)+(C-C1)+(E-E1) 
 
For conversions E = number of dwellings  after conversions; E1 = number of 
dwellings before conversions.    365 
 List of Main Indicators  
 Sustainable Development  
1. Number of applications granted contrary to sustainable devel opment 
principles 
 
Locational Strategy  
2. Number of developments approved in strategic gaps 
3. Number of developments approv ed outside designated developme nt limits  
4. Number of developments approved on the flood plain  
 
Climate Change  
5. Number of developments permitt ed contrary to key statutory b odies’ advice 
(e.g. Environmental Agen cy, Natural England etc) 
6. Proportion of applications g ranted by flood risk area type  
7. Number of developments permi tted in higher flood risk zones  
 
Infrastructure  
8. Number of schemes implemented  to reduce traffic congestion a nd delays 
9. Cycle and footpaths created ( detailing how they have improve d accessibility 
and reduced reliance on private transport) 
10. Bus patronage figures  11. Annual car ownership 12. Number of new community fa cilities granted permission per a nnum 
13. Number of community facilitie s lost through closure, demoli tion, conversions 
etc 
14. Type of approved applications a t the University of Hartlepo ol Hospital site 
15. % superfast broadband cove rage across Hartlepool 
16. ’Cold spots’ of high speed broadband coverage and initiativ es being pursued 
to address these 
17. Number and capacity of permi tted and installed renewable en ergy 
developments 
18. Cycling and pedestrian counts 
 
Quality of Place  
19. Amount of S106 and / or CIL monies received and spent 
20. Number of vacant and dere lict land/buildings recorded annua lly 
21. Level of road traffic growth 22. Bus patronage figures  23. Rate of road/traffic incidents  24. Quality of housing st ock and new development 
25. Notifiable offences  recorded by the police 
26. Number of applications permitte d contrary to the advice of council on the 
grounds of contaminated land, comm unity health and other signif icant 
constraints that cannot be mitigated 
27. Average energy efficiency rati ngs of buildings in the Borou gh 
28. Average energy efficiency ratings for public buildings 366 
 29. Numbers of applications permi tted that intro duce visually o bstructive features 
or impact upon amenity or the safe  use of vehicles, operation o f traffic flow 
(including pedestrian and cycle traffic)  
 
  367 
 Housing 
30. Total number of dwellings de livered annually (i.e. new buil d)  
31. Net additional dwellings in previous years (i.e. less demol itions) 
32. Net additional dwellings for the reporting year (i.e. less demolitions) 
33. Managed delivery target  34. Actual annual housing delivery  
35. Housing delivery and de molitions at HMR sites 
36. Quantity of new affor dable housing delivered 
37. Housing types completed 38. Number of affordable dw ellings delivered annually  
39. Reduction in housing needs (e. g. number classified as in pr iority need) 
40. Number of approved pitches for Gypsies and Travellers  
41. Number of approved developmen ts contrary to HSE advice with in 15m of all 
HSE consultation zones (i.e. i nner, middle and outer) at High T unstall 
Strategic Housing Site  
42. Number of approved developmen ts contrary to HSE advice with in 15m of all 
HSE consultation zones (i.e. i nner, middle and outer) at The So uth West 
Extension Strategic Housing Site  
 
Employment and Local Economy 
43. Quantity of employment land uptake by use type and land typ e (B1/B2/B8 on 
Brownfield or Greenfield land) 
44. Available employment land on employment allocations 
45. Total amount of floor space co mpleted for town centre uses (m
2) in allocated 
employment sites 
46. Quantity of employment land lo st to non-employment developm ent 
47. Enquiries for sites/premis es at Wynyard and Queen’s Meadow 
48. Enterprise Zone Local Devel opment Order developments delive red 
49. Enquiries for sites/ premises at Queen’s Meadow 
50. Number and type of permitted developments in the allocated underground 
storage area 
51. Number of approved developmen ts contrary to HSE advice with in the inner 
HSE consultation zone at the Pres tige Employment Site Wynyard B usiness 
Park   
 
Rural Area  
52. Number of permissions granted contrary to the Hartlepool Ru ral 
Neighbourhood Plan  
53. Number and type of developmen ts approved outside of develop ment limits in 
the rural area  
54. Number of dwellings approv ed outside development limits 
55. Number and type of farm divers ification schemes permitted i n rural areas 
56. Number and type of equestrian development schemes permitted  in rural areas 
57. Number and type of rural bas ed tourist schemes permitted/im plemented  
58. Number and type of tourist/vis itor   accommodation (i.e. ca ravan, holiday 
lodges, hotels camping site s) permitted/implemented 
59. Total number employed in rural based businesses 368 
 60. Number of entries in the ‘lis t of assets of community value ’ held by the 
Borough Council 
 
Retail and Commercial Development  
61. Vacancy rates in the de fined town centre boundary  
62. Vacancy rates in edge of town centre areas  
63. Vacancy rates in leisure and retail parks 64. Vacancy rates in local centres   65. Master plan production for in vestment in Church Street   
  
Leisure and Tourism  
66. Number and type of permitted/co mpleted developments for lei sure/ 
tourism/conferencing 
67. Number and type of leisure and tourism developments outside  designated 
tourist locations 
68. Initiatives and enquiries to  redevelop the Ward Jackson bui lding and 
Trincomalee Wharf Site 
69. Initiatives and enquiries for tourism and leisure developme nts at Seaton 
Carew 
70. Number and type of tourist a ccommodation permitted/delivere d  
 
Historic Environment  
71. Conservation Area Appr aisals undertaken  
72. Number of conservation ar eas added/removed from the heritag e at risk 
register 
73. Number of approved applicati ons where an objection from a s pecialist 
archeology staff has been received 
74. Number of locally listed buildings and structures 
75. Number of listed buildi ngs/structures at risk 
76. Number of promotion schemes i mplemented to secure, protect and enhance 
‘at risk’ heritage and archeological assets 
 
Natural Environment 
77. SANGS provided to mitigate ha rm on internationally protecte d sites through 
developer contributions  
78. Amount of wildlife habitat l ost/gained as a result of plann ing  permissions (ha) 
79. Amount of ancient woodland lost as a result of planning per missions 
(ha/number) 
80. Amount of priority species lost/gained as a result of plann ing permissions 
(ha/number) 
81. Changes to sites designated for conservation as a result of  planning 
permissions (international sites , national sites and local site s) 
82. SDL 160-00, LWSs in positiv e management in previous 5 yr pe riod 
(number/%) 
83. Quantity of green infrastruc ture gained /enhanced/ lost thr ough planning 
permissions (ha)  
84. Borough wide net gain/loss o f green infrastructure (ha) 
85. Number of approved developmen ts on allocated green wedges 369 
 86. Quantity of green wedges gained/enhanced/lost through plann ing permissions 
(ha) 
87. Net loss of green we dges Borough wide (ha) 
88. Number of implemented managem ent schemes to enhance ecologi cal 
networks in prioritised locations in Borough 
89. Management work undertaken on designated and non-designated  sites 
90. Quantity of habitat created or  management plan put in place  as part of development 
permissions 
91. Quantity and/or num ber of new/lost playing pitches, tennis courts, bowling 
greens  
92. Net quantity and/or number o f new/lost playing pitches, ten nis courts, bowling 
greens 
93. Amount of S106 developer contri butions received for playing  pitches 
94. Quantity of ‘incidental open space’ lost as part of develop ment proposals (ha) 
95. Records of management schemes  and number of planted trees o n main transport 
corridors in the Borough 
96. Number of approved developmen ts contrary to HSE advice with in 15m of all 
HSE consultation zones (i.e. i nner, middle and outer) in all Gr een Wedges 370 
 List of Contextual Indicators  
 Sustainable Development  
1. Total resident population 
2. Local populat ion growth rate 
3. Population age structure 4. Inward and outward migration 5. Numbers of Households, Dwellin gs and average household size 
6. Demographic Structure: ethni c composition, social groups 
7. Household to income ratio 8. Socio-economic Groups 9. Economic deprivation 10. Health 11. Education/lifel ong learning and skills 
 
Locational Strategy  
12. Gross Value Added (G VA) growth per annum  
13. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) 14. Strategic gaps 15. Compactness of urban area 16. Sense of place 17. Landscape character  18. Safety and security  19. Flooding 
 
Climate Change  
20. Domestic CO
2 emissions 
21. Average annual rainfall  / frequency of storm events 
22. Flooding risk areas  
 
Infrastructure  
23. Traffic flows for all vehicle types in England 
24. Car Ownership 25. Journey time reliability  26. Cycling and walk ing indicators 
27. % of Hartlepool residents fi nding it easy to access key ser vices 
28. MW Renewable energy capacit y installed by type in UK 
29. % energy provision from renew able sources for Hartlepool 
30. Domestic energy consumption  
 
Quality of Place  
31. Crime rates 
32. Public/community safety and security 33. Public/community health and well being  
34. Quality of developments 35. Rates of fuel poverty  36. Index of Multiple Deprivation (IMD) 37. Attractive physical and built environment 
 371 
 Housing  
38. Total housing completions  (National and Hartlepool)  
39. Household Tenure and mix  40. Housing Vacancy Rates/ Num ber of long term empty properties  
41. Property type and size of occupi ed dwellings across Hartlep ool 
42. House prices (simple ave rage) and house price index 
43. Numbers of households and average household size 
44. Quality of housing stock 
 
Employment and Local Economy   
45. Gross Value Added growth p.a. / Per capita 
46. Gross Domestic Product 47. Employment rate as % or working age 48. Employment by Main Occupation Group 49. Economic Inactivity  50. Business counts  51. Business Demography: Ent erprise Births & Deaths 
 
Rural Area  
52. Rural Economy: Enterprise Births and Deaths  
 
Retail and Commercial Development 
53. GVA from the retail industry 
54. Viability, sustainability and vitality of town centres 
 
Leisure and Tourism 
55. GVA from leisure and tourism  
56. Viability, sustainability and vitality of the tourism indus try  
 
Historic Environment  
57. Cultural heritage assets  
 
Natural Environment 
58. Aesthetic value and condition  of landscape character areas (assessed 
through LCA) 
59. Bathing water quality  
60. River water quality (chemic al and biologica l quality) 
61. Air quality 
62. Condition of sites  designated for nature conservation (inte rnational, national 
and local) 
63. Ecosystem services  64. Biodiversity status 
65. Priority habitats condition 
66. Climate change effects 
67. Flood alleviati on and water management 
68. Collaborative work with other SPA / SAC authorities 
69. Natural England co ndition status data 372 
 Glossary of terms  
 
 
AMR  - Annual Monitoring Report 
CIL  - Community Infrastructure Levy  DPD  - Development Plan Document EOTC  - Edge of Town Centre  ERIC  - Environmental Reco rds Information Centre  
GDP  - Gross Domestic Product GVA  - Gross Value Added HBC  - Hartlepool Borough Council  HLP   - Hartlepool Local Plan  IMD  - Index of Multiple Deprivations LCA  - Landscape Character Assessment  LDO  - Local Development Order LDS  - Local Development Scheme LWS  - Local Wildlife Site  NHBP  - New Homes Bonus Payments NHS  - National Health Trust NOMIS - National Online Manpower In formation System (ONS, UK) 
ONS  - Office for National Statistics SA  - Sustainability Appraisal SAC  - Special Area of Conservation  SANGS - Suitable Accessibl e Natural Green Space  
SEA  - Strategic Environm ental Assessment (Directive) 
SDL  - Single Data List  
S106 PO - Section 106 Planning Obligations  
SPA  -  Special Protection Area  
TVCA  - Tees Valley Combined Authority                      373 
 Appendix 13 – List of 2006 Hartlepool Local Plan policies super seded by this 
Local Plan 
 
GENERAL ENVIRONMENTAL PRINCIPLES 
GEP1 General Environmental Principles 
GEP2 Access for All GEP3 Crime Prevention by  Planning and Design 
GEP7 Frontages of Main Approaches GEP9 Developers’ Contributions GEP10 Provision of Public Art GEP12 Trees, Hedgerows and Development  GEP16 Untidy Sites GEP17 Derelict Land Reclamation GEP18 Development on Contaminated Land 
 
INDUSTRIAL AND BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT  
Ind1 Wynyard Business Park 
Ind2 North Burn Electr onics Components Park 
Ind3 Queens Meadow Business Park Ind4 Higher Quality Industrial Estates Ind5 Industrial Areas Ind6 Bad Neighbour Uses Ind7 Port-Related Development Ind8 Industrial Improvement Areas Ind9 Potentially Polluti ng or Hazardous Developments 
Ind10 Underground Storage 
Ind11 Hazardous Substances 
 
RETAIL, COMMERCIAL AND MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT 
Com1 Development of the Town Centre 
Com2 Primary Shopping Area Com3 Primary Shopping Ar ea – Opportunity Site 
Com4 Edge of Town Centre Areas Com5 Local Centres Com6 Commercial Improvement Areas Com7 Tees Bay Mixed Use Site Com8 Shopping Development Com9 Main Town Centre Uses Com10 Retailing in Industrial Areas Com11 Petrol Filling Stations Com12 Food and Drink Com13 Commercial Uses in Residential Areas Com14 Business Uses in the Home Com15 Victoria Harbour/North Docks Mixed Use Site Com16 Headland – Mixed Use  374 
 TOURISM 
To1 Tourism Development in the Marina 
To2 Tourism at the Headland To3 Core Area of Seaton Carew To4 Commercial Development Sites at Seaton Carew To6 Seaton Park To7 Green Tourism To8 Teesmouth National Nature Reserve To9 Tourist Accommodation To10 Touring Caravan Sites To11 Business Tour ism and Conferencing 
 
HOUSING 
Hsg1 Housing Improvements 
Hsg2 Selective Housing Clearance Hsg3 Housing market Renewal Hsg4 Central Area Housing Hsg5 Management of Housing Land Supply Hsg6 Mixed Use Areas Hsg7 Conversions for Residential Uses Hsg9 New Residential Layout –  Design and Other Requirements 
Hsg10 Residential Extensions Hsg11 Residential Annexes Hsg12 Homes and Hostels Hsg13 Residential Mobile Homes Hsg14 Gypsy Site  
 
TRANSPORT 
Tra1 Bus Priority Routes 
Tra2 Railway Line Extensions Tra3 Rail Halts Tra4 Public Transport Interchange Tra5 Cycle Networks Tra7 Pedestrian Linkages: Town Centre/ Headland/ Seaton Carew 
Tra9 Traffic Management in the Town Centre Tra10 Road Junction Improvements Tra11 Strategic Road Schemes Tra12 Road Scheme: North Graythorp Tra13 Road Schemes: Development Sites Tra14 Access to Development Sites Tra15 Restriction on Access to Major Roads Tra16 Car Parking Standards Tra17 Railway Sidings Tra18 Rail Freight Facilities Tra20 Travel Plans  375 
 PUBLIC UTILITY AND COMMUNITY FACILITIES 
PU3 Sewage Treatment Works 
PU6 Nuclear Power Station Site PU7 Renewable Energy Developments PU10 Primary School Location PU11 Primary School Site  
DEVELOPMENT CONSTRAINTS 
Dco1 Landfill Sites 
 
RECREATION AND LEISURE 
Rec1 Coastal Recreation 
Rec2 Provision for Play  in New Housing Areas 
Rec3 Neighbourhood Parks Rec4 Protection of Ou tdoor Playing Space 
Rec5 Development of Sports Pitches Rec6 Dual Use of School Facilities Rec7 Outdoor Recreational Sites Rec8 Areas of Quiet Recreation Rec9 Recreational Routes Rec10 Summerhill Rec12 Land West of Brenda Road Rec13 Late Night Uses Rec14 Major Leisure Developments   
THE GREEN NETWORK 
GN1 Enhancement of the Green Network 
GN2 Protection of Green Wedges GN3 Protection of Key Green Space Areas GN4 Landscaping of Main Approaches GN5 Tree Planting GN6 Protection of Incidental Open Space  
WILDLIFE 
WL2 Protection of Nationally Impor tant Nature Conservation Site s 
WL3 Enhancement of Sites of Special Scientific Interest WL5 Protection of Local Nature Reserves WL7 Protection of SNCIs, RIGSs and Ancient Semi-Natural Woodlan d 
 
CONSERVATION OF THE HISTORIC ENVIRONMENT 
HE1 Protection and Enhancement of Conservation Areas 
HE2 Environmental Improvem ents in Conservation Areas 376 
 HE3 Developments in the Vici nity of Conservation Areas 
HE6 Protection and Enhancement of Registered Parks and Gardens 
HE8 Works to Listed Buildings ( Including Partial Demolition) 
HE12 Protection of Loca lly Important Buildings 
HE15 Areas of Historic Landscape  
THE RURAL AREA  
Rur1 Urban Fence 
Rur2 Wynyard Limits to Development Rur3 Village Envelopes Rur4 Village Design Statements Rur5 Development At Newton Bewley Rur7 Development in the Countryside Rur12 New Housing in the Countryside 
Rur14 The Tees Forest Rur15 Small Gateway Sites Rur16 Recreation in the Countryside Rur17 Strategic Recreational Routes Rur18 Rights of Way Rur19 Summerhill- Newton Bewley Greenway Rur20 Special Landscape Areas  
MINERALS 
Min1 Safeguarding of Mineral Resources 
Min2 Use of Secondary Aggregates Min3 Mineral Extraction 
Min4 Transport of Minerals 
Min5 Restoration of Mineral Sites  
WASTE 
Was1 Major Waste Producing Developments 
Was2 Provision of ‘Bring’ Recycling Facilities Was3 Composting Was4 Landfill Developments Was5 Landraising Was6 Incineration 377 
 Appendix 14: Table 7 methodology 
 
(A) Baseline housing target 
The housing requirement for the plan period is 6150 dwellings. Pro-rata this is 410 
dwellings per annum. However, i n order to take account of the l ead-in period for the 
strategic housing sites that t he Council has allocated the hous ing trajectory has been 
staggered with an annual r equirement for the fi rst five years o f 350 dwellings, an 
annual requirement for years 6- 10 of 400 dwellings and an annua l requirement for 
years 11-15 of 480 dwellings. For  clarity, the annual housing r equirement includes 
the following elements: 
 20% affordable housing delivery buffer  
 Strategic (i.e. pre-2016) housi ng under-delivery backlog carri ed forward  
 
(B) Add under-delivery 201 6-2017 (Liverpool method) 
Under-delivery which has occu rred since 2016 has to be added to  the housing 
target. There was under-deliver y of 235 dwelli ngs in 2016-2017.  This has been 
added to the annual housing targets by spreading it over the pl an period (the 
Liverpool method). So (B) is the baseline housing target plus t he 2016-17 under-
delivery.    
(C) 20% NPPF paragraph 47 buffer target  
Paragraph 47 of the NPPF states t hat local planning authorities  should identify and 
annually update a supply of suffi cient deliverable sites suffic ient to provide five years 
worth of housing against their housing requirem ents with an add itional buffer of 5% 
(moved forward from later in t he plan period) to ensure choice and completion in the 
market for land.  Where there has  been a record of persistent u nder-delivery of 
housing, the buffer should be increased to 20%.  For the period up to 1
st April 2017 there has been a re cord of persistent under-
delivery. Therefore a buffer of  20% has been added to (B) for y ears 1 to 6. As the 
NPPF states that this should be brought forward from later in t he plan period, the 
same number of dwellings has be en subtracted from (B) for years  11 to 15. So (C) is 
the baseline housing target p lus both post-2016 under-delivery carried forward and 
the NPPF Para 47 buffer target.      
Explanatory note - windfalls 
It will be noted that the housing delivery sources in table 7 i ncludes windfalls. These 
have been previously referred to in the Council’s housing traje ctory work as specific 
sites. However, the Local Plan  Inspector suggested at the heari ng for Matter 7 – 
Housing Supply that these might be considered as windfalls. HBC  officers have 
reflected on this suggestion and c onsider that there is compell ing evidence that 
windfall sites will continue to c ome forward. An allowance has therefore been made 
based on specific intelligence t hat there are sites which will come forward as 
windfalls. Such intelligenc e includes the following: 378 
  Sites owned by HBC and which do not have a planning permission  for 
housing or do have a planning permission but the planning permi ssion is 
unlikely to be delivered but which  HBC Estates have advised tha t there will be 
housing delivery on the sites.   
 Sites where there is strong dev eloper interest and where devel opment would 
be consistent with local and national planning policy.  
The sources for the windfall al lowance are ther efore land owned  by HBC Estates 
and which there is strong evidenc e will be developed for reside ntial purposes and 
sites where there has been active  discussions between HBC offic ers and developers 
or agents and there is clearly a  strong commitment to implement  a residential 
scheme on the site. In adopting th is approach HBC officers have  sought to avoid 
reliance upon past trends continui ng but rather bas e windfall d elivery projections on 
specific intelligence about potential windfall sites.  
  