 The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     1
Large Print versions can be made available by request. 
Please call 01424 451098
Produced by Hastings Borough Council, Planning Policy Team, February 2014 
Printed by Rother District Council on paper from sustainable sources.2   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     3
Contents
Foreword .............................................. 5
Part One – Introduction and objectives
Chapter 1: Introduction ................................ 9
Chapter 2: About Hastings  ............................ 12
Chapter 3: Strategic Objectives  ........................ 22
Part Two – Development StrategyChapter 4: The Development Strategy  ................. 28
Part Three – Planning StrategyChapter 5: Spatial Areas  .............................. 42
Part Four – Theme based policies
Chapter 6: Developing Sustainable Communities  ....... 58
Chapter 7: Protecting our Environment ................. 64
Chapter 8: Housing  ................................... 72
Chapter 9: The Local Economy  ........................ 78
Chapter 10: Community Infrastructure ................. 84
Chapter 11: Transport & Accessibility  .................. 87
Part Five – Key Diagram ............................. 93
Part Six – Monitoring & Implementation ............ 95
Part Seven – AppendicesAppendix 1: Superseded Policies ...................... 104
Appendix 2: Housing Trajectory ....................... 124
Part Eight – Glossary ............................... 127
Part Nine - Index of Policies  ....................... 1354   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Figure number Description Page
Figure 1 The documents that make up the Hastings Local Plan 9
Figure 2 Map showing Hastings location in the South East 12
Figure 3 Population estimates by age structure 2011 and 2028 14
Figure 4 Map showing the Western, Central and Eastern Areas 29
Figure 5 Map showing the Planning Focus Areas within Western, Central and 
Eastern Areas30
Figure 6 Map Showing Western Area 42
Figure 7 Map showing Central Area 46
Figure 8 Map showing Eastern Area 51
Figure 9 Map showing The Seafront 54
Figure 10 Indicative plan of green areas 66
Figure 11 Housing trajectory graph 124
Table number Description Page
T able 1 Delivering the housing allocation 2011 - 2028                                       (Position as at 01 April 2013)33
T able 2 The indicative quantity of development for Western Area 44
T able 3 The indicative quantity of development for Central Area 48
T able 4 The indicative quantity of development for Eastern Area 53
T able 5 Timetable for introduction of changes to building regulations 60
T able 6 Provision for affordable housing of Previously Developed Land 74
T able 7 Provision for affordable housing on Greenfield land 74
T able 8 Monitoring and Implementation Framework 102
T able 9 Superseded Policies 123
T able 10 Calculating 5-year housing land supply 125
T able 11 Index of Policies 136List of Figures
List of TablesThe Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     5
Foreword 
Planning shapes our environment: where we live, work and play. The new Hastings 
Local Plan presents an opportunity to improve the way we do things in the future - how we use land, what we build, how our town centres will develop and change, and how planning decisions fit with other policies and strategies.
Hastings Borough Council has reached an important stage in the preparation of 
this plan. The Hastings Planning Strategy sets out the key planning policies that will guide how the borough develops. The Strategy shows how much development will be allowed, where and when.  It shows what we’ll need to do to provide homes and jobs 
for Hastings residents, and to continue the regeneration of the area. But none of this is straightforward.  
We have to stick to government rules about what we put in the plan, and in particular how many new homes we need to provide.    And it’s important to note that the Hastings Local Plan is just that: a plan.  We can’t make development happen, nor can we make developers do exactly what we want them to.  What 
we have to do is make sure our plan and the policies in it are as robust as possible, to give us the strongest 
possible influence over development proposals that come forward.  
We need to make sure that the regeneration of our town continues, and that economic growth and 
prosperity are at the heart of our plan. But we also need to protect the heritage of Hastings, in terms of both historic buildings and open spaces, while ensuring new development is of the highest possible quality, particularly in our town centres and seafront. At first sight, these principles might seem to be at odds.  But to maximise the economic opportunities for our town and its residents, we need to make Hastings an attractive and desirable place to visit, live, and do business. In this way, we can do our best to maximise both the prosperity and quality of life for our residents. But we must also be precise, and targeted: what’s best for Hastings Town Centre might not be best for St Helens, nor even St Leonards Town Centre. We need to develop the character, diversity and uniqueness of every part of our borough, recognising the different needs of our increasingly diverse communities. This requires bespoke tailoring, not a blanket thrown over the whole town. Our new Plan looks ahead to 2028, during which time all manner of unpredicted changes might happen. So the plan is intended to be flexible, and will need to be kept up to date. We will regularly monitor the plan to assess its progress and effectiveness, and carry out reviews when they are necessary.
So this plan is important: it will affect dramatically how the town changes in the coming years. It will  
shape the look, feel and prosperity of Hastings not just for us, but for generations to come. When the Normans came almost a thousand years ago, they had no development plan. And they didn’t consult local people. But their developments influenced the town in ways we can still see today. We can be every bit as influential!
Councillor Peter Chowney
Lead Member, HBC
 
6   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     7
Part One – Introduction and Objectives
Chapter 1: Introduction
Chapter 2: About Hastings Chapter 3: Strategic Objectives
The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011- 2028, adopted February 2014     78   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     9
Chapter 1: Introduction
What is this document about?
1.1 Planning affects many aspects of our lives – from where we live, work and shop to where and how we can spend leisure time.  Effective planning is about managing change rather than letting it happen in an unplanned way. 
The Hastings Local Plan
1.2 The Hastings Local Plan will be a set of planning documents, maps and written policies to show where, in what form and in what quantities development can take place. It will set out how Hastings is expected to change over the time period up to 2028, and will reflect other strategies and policies in the area including matters such as education, health and economic development priorities.  The documents that make up the Hastings Local Plan are shown in the diagram below:
Figure 1: The documents that make up the Hastings Local Plan
1.3 The Hastings Planning Strategy - this is what you’re reading now.  It has informed other Local Plan 
documents by setting an overall framework for the future of the town.  More detail about how we have developed the Hastings Planning Strategy is given below.
1.4 The Hastings Development Management Plan - this identifies development sites to meet the vision in the 
Planning Strategy and contains detailed policies for development management, against which planning applications will be assessed.
1.5 Infrastructure Delivery Plan and Schedule - this provides supportive evidence of what physical, social, and environmental infrastructure is required to support delivery of the Planning Strategy.Chapter 1: Introduction10   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
1.6 Neighbourhood Plans – these pr ovide the opportunity for local people to prepare detailed plans for their own 
local area.
1.7 Supplement
ary Planning Documents - These provide greater detail on policies in the Local Plan.
1.8 The Local De
velopment Scheme, Statement of Community Involvement, Local Plan Monitoring Report 
and Policies Map are procedural elements undertaken as part of the planning process. More detail on these 
documents is available on our website at:
www.hastings.gov.uk/en
vironment_planning/planning/localplan/documents/ and 
www.hastings.gov.uk/en
vironment_planning/planning/localplan/policies_map/   
Changes to the planning system
1.9 This Strat egy was formerly known as the Local Development Framework Core Strategy. The National Planning 
Policy Framework1, which was published in March 2012 aims to simplify the plan making system, and in the 
interests of keeping things simple, we have renamed the Core Strategy the Hastings Planning Strategy.
1.10  The Localism Ac
t 2011 provided for the abolition of regional spatial strategies, including the South East 
Plan, which previously set a housing target for Hastings.  As part of the preparation of the Planning Strategy, the Council undertook work to establish a locally determined housing target.  Therefore, while the evidence underpinning the preparation of the South East Plan provided the foundations, the Council has supplemented this through further examination of more recent information to determine the most appropriate level of future housing development.
Planning for waste and minerals
1.11  The management of w aste and production of minerals are carried out in a manner that usually extends 
beyond the boundaries of a single District or Borough Council. It is important therefore that the need for such activity is considered in a wider geographical context and for this reason, planning for waste and minerals is carried out by East Sussex County Council, the South Downs National Park Authority and Brighton & Hove City Council.
1.12
 Local planning policy f
or this is contained in the East Sussex, South Downs and Brighton & Hove Waste and 
Minerals Plan, adopted February 20132.  Alongside the Hastings Local Plan, the Waste and Minerals Plan forms 
the development plan for the area. District and Borough Councils therefore also need to take relevant polices in these plans into account when reaching decisions on planning applications. Planning applications for waste and minerals activity are considered by East Sussex County Council.
Further information about the Hastings Planning Strategy
1.13  This document; the Hastings Planning Str ategy, provides a long-term plan to deliver regeneration and 
sustainable growth in the town up to 2028. In accordance with national planning policy, the Planning Strategy seeks to achieve this, following the approach of the presumption in favour of sustainable development. The Hastings Development Management Plan is more specifically concerned with individual development sites and specific details.  The purpose of the Planning Strategy is to set an overall framework for the future of the town and it:
• sets
	out	the	vision	f
or	the	f
uture	sust
ainable	de
velopment 	and	r
egeneration 	of	the	to
wn	up	to	2028.
•
identifies 	the	k
ey	issues	to	be	addr
essed	thr
ough	the	planning	sy
stem	and	sets	out	gener
ally	ho
w	w
e
intend to deliver new housing, jobs and infrastructure and also contains policies for protecting our most
important green spaces and historic townscapes.
1 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/2010-to-2015-government-policy-planning-system  2 
www.eastsussex.gov.uk/environment/planning/development/mineralsandwaste/The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     11
• sets	out	how	we’ll	accommodate 	future	levels	of	housing	growth.
•
sets
	
guidelines
	
for
	
the
	
pattern
	
of
	
land
	
uses
	
around
	
the
	
town.
• forms
	
the
	
context
	
for
	
other
	
Local
	
Plan
	
documents
	
that
	
will
	
be
	
prepared
	
in
	
the
	
future.
• clearly
	
shows
	
how
	
planning
	
policies
	
and
	
the
	
use
	
of
	
land
	
will
	
support
	
the
	
key
	
targets
	
in
	
the
	
Hastings
	
&
St Leonar
ds Sustainable Community Strategy 2009 - 2026.
• joins
	
up
	
planning
	
and
	
land
	
issues
	
with
	
plans
	
and
	
proposals
	
affecting
	
health,
	
equalities,
	
community
saf
ety, housing, regeneration, community development, employment, education, transport and the
environment set out in the Hastings & St Leonards Sustainable Community Strategy.
1.14
 During the period up to 2028 the Hastings Planning Str
ategy will be reviewed to reflect progress in its delivery, 
and it is anticipated that this would be carried out in time to have a revised Strategy adopted by no later than 
the mid - point of the plan period (i.e. 2019/20).
Writing the Hastings Planning Strategy
1.15  W e have gone through several stages in producing the Planning Strategy. The first stage – “Issues and Options” 
was carried out at the end of 2006, when we presented an overview of the local issues, and suggested options for addressing them. We asked for comments, inviting further issues and options to be identified too.
1.16
 The next st
age “Preferred Approaches” took into consideration the comments we received as part of the ‘Issues 
and Options’ consultation, studies on issues such as flood risk and land for housing, and assessments of the environmental, economic and social impacts of the different issues and options that have been put forward.
1.17
 In July and August 2011 w
e carried out a further round of informal consultation to gather views on a locally 
set housing target for the period up to 2028, as well as new policies and changes to policies since the previous consultation.
1.18
 What the C
ouncil considered the final version of the Planning Strategy, taking account of the comments 
received on earlier drafts of the document, was submitted to the Government for independent examination in October 2012.  The Plan was subject to a further round of consultation on Main Modifications during May - June 2013, and was subsequently found Sound in 2013.  The Council formally adopted the Hastings Planning Strategy on 19 February 2014.
1.19
 The shape and f
orm of the Planning Strategy has inevitably evolved over time in response to our understanding 
of the key issues, and to points raised by those who responded to the earlier stages in its preparation. We have tried to make the document succinct and easy to understand; while sufficiently comprehensive to provide a clear explanation about the spatial planning approach the Council intends to follow.
Confused by the Plan?
1.20  W e have done our best to keep jargon and technical terms to a minimum and we have included an explanation 
of some of the terms used in the glossary at the back of this document. If you would like further clarification please contact us on 01424 451098 and we will try to help.
1.21
 Y
ou can find further information about the Hastings Planning Strategy by looking on our website at
www.hastings.go
v.uk/environment_planning/planning/localplan/hastingsplanningstrategy/ Chapter 1: Introduction12   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Chapter 2: About Hastings 
2.1 Hastings is a community of some 90,000 people located between the sea and the High Weald behind it. Its 
issues and potential are distinctly urban rather than rural. Together with Bexhill there is an urban area with a population around 135,000. Its history is shaped partly by its relationship to the sea, but also by its distance (60 miles) from London and the physical constraints of geography. The town has 8 miles of coastline and is surrounded by the mainly rural district of Rother, bordered by the High Weald to the north, Combe Haven Valley to the west and Fairlight to the east.
Figure 2: Map showing Hastings location in the South East
2.2 The Borough has developed from a small fishing port to a substantial town in several phases but two of them 
have particularly shaped its development:
•	 The	creation	of	St	Leonards	by	James	Burton	and	the	expansion	of	Hastings	in	the	Victorian	era	led	to	
the establishment of the towns as successful resorts, mainly for Londoners
•	 The	development	of	both	new	housing	and	employment	through	the	Town	Development	Area	(TDA)	
scheme, which was initially promoted, with the Greater London Council, as a London overspill project in 
the 1970s and early 80s.
2.3 Although tourism no longer has the pre-eminent role it enjoyed up until the 1960s, it will continue to be an important part of the Hastings economy.  Indeed current signs are that the traditional seaside tourism is in fact experiencing something of a revival in Hastings and the UK in general.  However, following its decline in the 1960s, in an effort to broaden the economic base of the town, a significant manufacturing employment was established on new employment estates as part of the TDA developments but, with a new younger population introduced to Hastings with the accompanying housing developments, it was insufficient to fully make up for the decline in tourism. Conditions were therefore set for the beginning of an extended spiral of decline – in The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     13
Chapter 2: About Hastings
common with many other seaside towns.  Poor road and rail links meant that Hastings was too isolated from 
the commercial opportunities and markets of London for rapid recovery.  Poor communication continues and, indeed, with transport improvements in other parts of the region, such as the High Speed One (HS1) rail link and trunk road improvements elsewhere, Hastings has continued to fall further behind in relative terms over the last two decades. Thus, local business is at a disadvantage and it is a disincentive to investment. Slow journey times also make it difficult for local people to commute to jobs elsewhere, not only to London, but also to other employment centres such as Crawley/Gatwick and Brighton. As a result, Hastings has become one of the most disadvantaged communities in the UK.
2.4 In 2004 the conditions were created to begin the town’s revival. Following a decision by government not   to support the creation of a Hastings by-pass the local councils and MPs persuaded government to invest substantially in the regeneration of Hastings and Bexhill. Around £200m has been invested to create a new University Centre, College, employment space and other regeneration activity through the Hastings & Bexhill Task Force. Simultaneously partners have taken dramatic action to improve education, reduce crime and begin to improve the private housing stock. A real effort has been applied to encourage and enforce improvement to the built and natural environment.
2.5 We have embraced the potential that culture has to raise aspiration locally and attract visitors from abroad and the UK.  Our beach based fishing fleet has been joined by the new Jerwood Art Gallery and performance area.  Local people are working hard to restore the Victorian Pier to new life with the help of Heritage Lottery funding.
2.6 Our Planning Strategy is aimed at developing a town which is economically and socially dynamic. This means creating sufficient opportunity for new homes, employment and retail activity.  Without growth we cannot provide the context for addressing the needs of those currently excluded from the economic and social life of the town, or attract and retain a balanced population.  
2.7 We reject the idea that environmental action is a barrier to growth, and consider the town’s superb built environment and natural environment as a key factor in our continued revival.  They are assets to be both enjoyed and used to attract new people and investment to our town.
2.8 Our ambition is a town which is:
•	 Prosperous	
•	 Inclusive	and	cohesive•	 “Green”
•	 Interlinked	to	the	wider	economy
•	 Skilled
•	 Healthy
•	 Diverse
2.9 This document balances these demands and is interwoven with the planning policies of the neighbouring 
Rother District Council reflecting our combined economic and functional linkages. It puts in place policies designed to attract and retain the people and investment we need for the future and the changes in population.
2.10 The economic downturn has slowed Hastings’ ability to build upon regeneration investment. The Planning Strategy aims to put the right planning policies in place to enable Hastings to continue its regeneration as the economy grows; and to provide the framework for future economic, environmental and social action.
A changing population
2.11 Hastings population has tended to be younger than the rest of East Sussex and currently, we have an age group profile more similar to the national picture.  Based on the housing growth proposed between 2011 and 2028, the population is forecast to grow by 3.2%.  At the same time a growth in the number of households is expected to increase from 41,100 in 2011 to 44,500 in 2028 (an increase of 8.2%).  This is a reflection of changes in how we live, with more people living longer and more people living alone.  The working age population is forecast to remain static between 2011 and 2028.  14   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
2.12 As figure 3 shows, by 2028 there will be a greater proportion of older people, with particular growth in the 
post retirement age group (30% in 2028, compared to 24% in 2011).  Although we need to plan now to provide the housing, health and social provision for older people, this does not mean simply accommodating projections, but requires a comprehensive strategy to make the area more attractive to younger people and people of working age.
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 16000 18000 20000 
00-14 15-29 30-44 45-59 60-74 75+ Source Data: East Sussex County Council Population Estimates by Age Structure 2011 and 2028 
2011 
2028 
 Figure 3: Population estimates by age structure 2011 and 2028
Deprivation
2.13 In common with a number of coastal areas in the UK, Hastings has suffered from several discouraging 
economic trends in the recent past, a vulnerable and low wage mainly service sector economy, unemployment issues and significant levels of deprivation.  The town’s economic revival is a long term process and although significant advances have been made Hastings is still one of the most deprived Local Authority areas in England (19th most deprived out of a total of 326).  Deprivation is widespread and this is reflected in the fact that of the 53 Super Output Areas in Hastings, 15 of these neighbourhoods fall within the worst 10% in England and a further 9 rank in the worst 20% (Index of Multiple Deprivation, 2010). Furthermore, 12 of the town’s 16 wards contain one or more of these neighbourhoods. 
2.14 The Council as part of a multi-agency effort, will need to have a particular focus on addressing the causes of deprivation which result in low skills, poor educational attainment, ill health, poverty, lack of job opportunities, poor quality housing and high crime rates.
Achieving a step change in the economy
2.15 The Hastings economy is weak in south-east terms, and wages are correspondingly low. Hastings has an economically active rate of 72.7%, well below the South East average, at 79.7% (NOMIS July 2012 – June 2013). Analysis of ‘job density’ is important in terms of the potential to find work locally, compared to the South East, Hastings has a lower job density (0.63 and 0.80 in 2011 respectively) – by implication there are therefore fewer jobs per person.
2.16 Our research has shown that we need to achieve a big improvement in the town’s economy if we are to achieve regeneration benefits for everyone.  We need to diversify the town’s economic base and reduce its The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     15
Chapter 2: About Hastings
reliance on public sector jobs; support small businesses to set up and grow; get more people into work through 
skills training and education, and provide better paid jobs.  As well as providing major new space in the town centre and elsewhere, our older employment areas need to be renovated and improved if they are to meet the needs of modern business requirements.  This would help to encourage inward investment as well as sustaining the existing businesses in the town. 
2.17 Hastings has been pursuing an ambitious, collaborative approach to economic and cultural renaissance.  Since its formation in 2003, Sea Space and the wider Hastings & Bexhill Task Force has:
•	 constructed	over	18,000m²	of	high	quality	business	space	in	Hastings,	including	Lacuna	Place	and	a	
Creative Media and Innovation Centre
•	 facilitated	over	7,000m²	of	education	space	for	higher	/	further	education	use	–	Hastings	is	now	a	
University town;
•	 established	Enviro21,	a	modern	industrial	park	focused	on	the	growth	of	environmental	technology	
companies and advanced manufacturing, now known as the Queensway Employment Corridor;
•	 created	capacity	for	1,700	new	jobs,	including	the	decision	by	SAGA	in	late	2010	to	locate	into	Hastings’	
Priory Quarter, creating up to 800 additional private sector jobs.
2.18 These developments offer a real and lasting opportunity to promote the town as a thriving, high quality 
business location and a desirable place to live and enjoy quality recreation time. Following the abolition of the regional development agency, SEEDA, the Secretary of State for Business Innovation and Skills authorised the transfer of the majority of the assets of Sea Space to a new not for profits company “Sea Change Sussex” in 2011.  Sea Change’s 10 year development programme concentrates initially on the Hastings and Bexhill areas and is designed to build on the progress that Sea Space achieved through its major regeneration programme that ran to 2011.  
Housing – supply and demand
2.19 The supply of new housing and ultimately the number of new homes that are built in the town over the plan period will have an important role in the town’s continuing revitalisation. There are some key features of the Hastings housing market which distinguish it from other parts of the South East. These include comparatively low house prices; but declining affordability for local people, a bias to smaller dwellings; imbalanced in- migration; a large private rented sector and high levels of deprivation. Left unchecked, some of these processes will continue to act as drivers of change making housing less affordable for local residents, and doing nothing to improve the prospects for economic development and regeneration. Instead, diversifying and renewing our housing stock through new development has an important role to play in fostering much needed economic regeneration and countering the processes that can lead to blighted neighbourhoods.
2.20 Both the quality and type of existing homes and future homes have a part to play in assisting regeneration efforts.  The quality and mix of new homes within Hastings will be important to the local economy in terms of (i) existing businesses and their ability to attract employees; and (ii) new businesses setting up or locating in the town.  The right type of housing could also help retain and attract skilled workers and their families to the town.  A more skilled workforce should enhance the ability of Hastings to attract mobile business investment and thus contribute to economic development.
2.21 At the same time, access to a decent home for everyone is the foundation for a decent quality of life and a key priority for the Council and its partners.  Increasing the availability, affordability and quality of housing for all sections of our community, and enabling residents to access homes that are affordable, accessible and appropriate for their needs and aspirations is a priority.16   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
2.22 The need for affordable housing far exceeds supply.  Throughout a decade of rising prices (1998-2008) and 
through the current economic downturn, average house prices in Hastings have consistently remained below the average for the South East – the gap being around £40,000. This is due to a range of factors including the mix of housing
3.  However, the affordability of housing is about the relationship between income and house 
prices.  In Hastings, this ratio is on a par with many areas in the South East because of our low wage economy.  The average “lower quartile” or cheapest 25% of available market housing, is currently priced at 6-7 times the “lower quartile” or lowest 25% average yearly income in Hastings
4.
2.23 There is also a significant number of people who want a home but lack the finances to either buy or rent one without assistance, and so rely on private renting with top-up support from local housing allowance.  Data on housing benefit recipients shows that 6,350 claimants in Hastings live in the private rented sector
5.  This 
indicates that the private rented sector is playing a significant role in meeting housing need in Hastings and that the number of households on the housing register would be higher if it were not for this supply of low-cost rented accommodation.  However, we also know that there is a high proportion of this privately rented accommodation, often in multiple occupation, which is well below minimum acceptable standards.  There are some 2,800 Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMO) throughout the town
6.  Evidence shows that 64% of all 
HMOs fail to meet the Government’s Decent Homes Standard.  Many suffer from low standards of fire safety, management and maintenance, and in some cases, tenants are treated very poorly and the buildings are a focus for crime and anti social behaviour.   
2.24 There is, therefore, a pressing need for more housing to help support the regeneration agenda in Hastings, and more choice of housing, especially affordable housing, to ensure that people have somewhere to live and somewhere that meets their needs.     
Limited space for growth/development
2.25 There are limits to the amount of land available for development and regeneration purposes within the town and outward expansion is constrained by protected landscape and countryside such as the Hastings Country Park and the High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB). We are aiming to make the best use of previously developed land in the urban areas for both residential and employment development purposes. We also need to work closely with neighbouring Rother District Council. Hastings, together with most of the neighbouring district of Rother, functions as a labour market or “Travel to Work Area” (TTWA). TTWAs are defined as areas in which the bulk (at least 75%) of the resident, economically active, population also work. Together, the Hastings and Rother area has one of the weakest economies in the  South East and the future  of Hastings will be increasingly related to what happens in neighbouring Bexhill.  We are therefore working closely with neighbouring Rother District Council to make sure the communities of both Hastings and Bexhill benefit from the regeneration of the two towns.
Retail and Hastings Town Centre
2.26 Hastings Town Centre underwent a major planned improvement and expansion during the 1990s with construction of the Priory Meadow Shopping Centre and pedestrianisation of the main shopping streets. This enabled it to fulfil its natural role as a sub regional centre. Its catchment area takes in Hastings   and St Leonards, parts of Bexhill and the more rural communities to the north and east of Hastings. Competing centres are Eastbourne, Tunbridge Wells and Ashford. It is important the vitality and viability of retail areas in Hastings, including Hastings town centre are safeguarded and enhanced. Failure to plan for future retail needs will mean that these competing centres will begin to absorb the share of the spending that Hastings currently attracts. This would lead to decline of the centre and maybe an inability for it to serve even the needs of 
Hastings residents.
3 Hastings & Rother Strategic Housing Market Assessment update 2009/10. www.hastings.gov.uk/environment_planning/planning/localplan/
evidence_base/shma/
4 As above, to measure housing market affordability in an area, the ratio of lower quartile house prices to lower quartile earnings is used, ie. this 
ratio shows if people with the lowest income can afford the cheapest housing.  A high ratio means that housing is less affordable. 
5 Hastings & Rother Strategic Housing Market Assessment update 2009/10. www.hastings.gov.uk/environment_planning/planning/localplan/
evidence_base/shma/  
6 2007 Private sector house condition surveyThe Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     17
Chapter 2: About Hastings
Keeping the special character of the town
2.27 Our seaside location, wooded valleys, varied wildlife and surrounding countryside, together with the many 
distinctive conservation areas and attractive Victorian housing stock all contribute to the special character of Hastings. Our challenge is to conserve and enhance the best of this and at the same time enable high quality development to meet future needs.
Dealing with climate change
2.28 As a coastal town, we need to plan ahead to deal with the potential impacts of climate change - the risks from flooding now and in the future, the need to reduce carbon emissions through the better design of buildings and reuse of building materials, and the encouragement of development to incorporate on-site renewable energy generation.  We also need to support the role of our greenspaces in helping to deal with flooding and providing shade and cooler environments to help cope with global warming.
Low land values
2.29 Land values in Hastings are generally lower than surrounding areas and the rest of the South East. This can affect the economic viability of development and in turn, development contributions to affordable housing, transport and community infrastructure. We need to get the balance and flexibility right in terms of securing benefits for the community and promoting the development necessary for the town’s regeneration so that it is still economically viable to develop sites and provide the infrastructure to meet community needs arising from such new development.
Accessibility and transport 
2.30 In terms of the national road network, the primary access is the A21 from London and the A259 which runs along the coast. Rail services run along the coast to Brighton in the west and Ashford to the east. There is a choice of service routes into London. London Charing Cross/Cannon Street is the most direct but there are also services to Victoria and, now, with High Speed One, St Pancras via Ashford is a practical option. However, although the choice of rail routes is good, journey times are slow. For example, the fastest route to London (Charing Cross), only 60 miles away, takes over 90 minutes and is even slower during peak times. Road journeys are similarly slow and it is possible to drive from London to Bath in the time it takes to get to Hastings.
2.31 The local business community consistently point to the need for improvements to the A21 and A259, and the rail links to London and Ashford as being vital to making Hastings a more attractive place for businesses to locate in and to operate from.
2.32 There have been some improvements to rail services in recent years - in terms of rolling stock and station improvements. However, apart from some expected line speed improvements between Hastings and Ashford, no major schemes are currently anticipated that will shorten journey times on the other routes. Nor is there to be   a step change in the speed of road connections although some significant improvements are being sought: On the A21, the Tonbridge to Pembury improvement will deal with the biggest cause of journey unreliability between Hastings and London/M25.  
2.33 In April 2013, the Government approved the final funding bid for the Bexhill - Hastings Link Road. Construction is expected to be completed by December 2014.  This will provide an alternative link between the two towns relieving the most congested road on the local network. More importantly, the Link Road will open up land for housing and major employment development in North East Bexhill and is seen as the key infrastructure investment needed to continue economic revival in the two towns.18   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
2.34 For local travel within the town, policies are directed towards encouraging greater use by bus, rail, cycling and
 walking. The rail network offers a good option for some local journeys, particularly between Hastings and 
Bexhill. For the majority of local journeys though, bus is the main mode of public transport. For some years, efforts to increase the use of buses have been pursued jointly by Hastings Borough Council, East Sussex County Council and the bus company through the Quality Bus Partnership. It has proved successful with a significant growth in bus passenger numbers over several years.
2.35 Cycling is promoted through the introduction of safe cycle routes. The seafront route between Hastings and Bexhill is now complete and plans to extend it with links inland will be brought forward through the Local Plan.
Making more of our seaside location
2.36 The Seafront is a key component of the identity of the town, and the challenge here is to maximise its potential.  Major economic activity now and in the future will enhance the quality of life of local residents, improve the attractiveness of the town to tourists and visitors and support new business investment. 
2.37 The Seafront provides a great opportunity to forge and strengthen the cultural experiences on offer; whether it’s through outdoor festivals, cafés and pubs, or galleries and museums.  The Jerwood Gallery and its associated facilities are an example of how regeneration can be well combined with new cultural offerings and make the most of a seafront location.
2.38 In common with many coastal towns, the decline of the tourism industry resulted in many of the ‘grand’ Regency and Victorian seaside properties being converted into flats and Houses In Multiple Occupation in the 1960s and 70s. The tourism strategy is now based around attracting more staying visitors back to the town and encouraging the retention and development of good quality tourism accommodation combined with an active programme of arts and cultural events and festivals.
A Shared Approach to Future Prosperity
Why do we have a shared approach?
2.39 Hastings Borough Council and Rother District Council recognise the close inter-relationship between Hastings and Bexhill.
2.40 This is not only a reflection of their physical proximity (being virtually co-joined with their centres some 5 miles apart), but they are economically inter-dependent. Hastings is the centre of the “travel to work area” for much of Rother District. Some 9,000 people commute across the Hastings/Rother boundary each day, a half of which are between Hastings and Bexhill. Between them, the two towns serve a much wider area and both have important roles as centres for education, employment and housing.
2.41 This level of connectivity inevitably means that, to a large extent, the towns face similar (though not identical) issues and that their futures are intertwined. Added to this, both towns are reliant on the same road and rail infrastructure, neither of which is currently serving the area well, especially in terms of helping economic investment.
2.42 It is therefore important that the strategies for development and change for Hastings and Bexhill need to be consistent, and complimentary, to be fully effective.  As such, a common approach has been agreed as the basis for joint working, to secure a more prosperous future for Hastings and Bexhill.  This focuses on shared issues of regeneration, accessibility, and use of land on the urban fringes, especially where a countryside park between the two towns is being jointly progressed.The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     19
Chapter 2: About Hastings
The Bexhill - Hastings Link Road
2.43  The Bexhill - Hastings Link R oad, as shown on the key diagram, will enter Hastings north of Crowhurst Road 
junction with Queensway. The Link Road is a key priority for both Hastings and Rother Councils, and is central 
to improving transport conditions in Bexhill/Hastings and supporting the £300m of economic regeneration funding that has already been invested in education, business and residential infrastructure projects in the two towns. Delivery of the scheme will facilitate further economic regeneration as well as enable large scale housing and employment development in the Bexhill/Hastings area. This will help to address the issues of lower than average household income, high levels of unemployment compared to the rest of the region, as well as deprivation issues in Hastings specifically.
2.44
 The Bexhill - Hastings Link R
oad will contribute to relieving congestion along the A259, allowing businesses 
to operate more efficiently and improving the health and quality of life of people living in the vicinity of the A259. The complementary works of developing the Combe Valley Countryside Park, implementing cycle routes and a ‘greenway’, a quality bus corridor along the A259 between Glyne Gap and Filsham Road, and localised improvements to the Harrow Lane and Queensway junctions on The Ridge, will enhance the positive impacts of the scheme and improve access for pedestrians, cyclists and public transport users.
2.45
 The A21 Baldslo
w Improvement scheme, which focused on addressing the issues of access between 
Queensway and the A21 particularly along The Ridge, was cancelled following the Government’s Comprehensive Spending Review (CSR) in October 2010.  As part of this decision, it was highlighted that the scheme was unlikely to come forward in this CSR period or the next (i.e. not before 2019).  Despite the scheme’s cancellation, the improvement of Baldslow junctions is still seen as having major potential to continue the delivery of housing and economic regeneration in Hastings and we will continue to work with East Sussex County Council, and through the Local Enterprise Partnership to seek improvements and, if necessary, lobby the Government for support.
2.46
 These major tr
ansport improvements would reduce the peripheriality of Hastings, improve journey time 
reliability for businesses through to Kent, the M25 and beyond, as well as support inward investment and business expansion.
2.47
 The join
t statement of intent is set out below:
Hastings and Rother Councils’ shared approach to future prosperity for the Hastings and Bexhill area
Economic regeneration and growth will be generated through joined up working concentrating on:
• Increasing
	
economic
	
activity
	
and
	
investment,
	
supported
	
by
	
the
	
development
	
of
	
high
	
quality
	
education
opportunities and in
tegrated skills training;
• Securing
	
investment
	
in
	
and
	
otherwise
	
assisting
	
areas
	
of
	
socio-economic
	
need,
	
with
	
particular
	
regard
	
to
incr
easing employment opportunities;
• Ensuring
	
a
	
range
	
of
	
housing
	
supply
	
across
	
Hastings
	
and
	
Bexhill
	
to
	
support
	
sustainable
	
growth,
	
including
f
or economically active people and families;
• Developing
	
the
	
economy,
	
healthy
	
lifestyles,
	
the
	
role
	
of
	
culture,
	
sports,
	
arts,
	
tourism
	
and
	
leisure;
• Increasing
	
transport
	
infrastructure
	
capacity,
	
through
	
the
	
Local
	
Transport
	
Plan
	
2011-2026,
	
prepared
	
in
association with East Sussex C
ounty Council, notably by early construction of the Bexhill - Hastings Link
Road, improved access to the A21 at Baldslow, as well as measures to foster more sustainable travelpatterns; and
• Implementing
	
the
	
Combe
	
Valley
	
Countryside
	
Park,
	
together
	
with
	
other
	
cross-boundary
	
urban
	
fringe
de
velopment/management schemes20   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
The Vision for Hastings
2.48 The overall Planning Strategy vision is:
 “By 2028 Hastings, founded upon our unique heritage, natural environment 
and seaside location, and supported by social, economic, cultural and environmental regeneration will be a safe and thriving place to live, work and visit, that offers a high quality of life, and has a strong economy and sustainable future.”
2.49 We have also written a statement to describe what the different areas of Hastings might be like in 2028, when the vision has been fulfilled.  This is based on what people have said in our consultations and on the strategic objectives we’ve drafted to achieve the vision.
2.50 Remember this is a vision.  It will evolve as the town changes.  We have to be realistic and recognise that it is impossible to precisely predict and shape the future.
Vision Statement: Take a trip to Hastings in 2028:
2.51 As soon as you arrive at Hastings Station you feel a sense of civic pride and welcome unmatched elsewhere in the South East.  The streets and squares around you are safe, clean, and attractive and filled with people.  Even though the waiting buses and taxis are ready to drive you to your destination, you simply want to walk and experience the vitality and energy of this vibrant town on foot.
2.52 Your first sight is University Centre Hastings and Sussex Coast College buzzing with healthy, bright students, keen to learn and secure future work in a wide range of creative, cultural and environmental industries that have developed in our town over the past decade.  Look closer and you’ll find there are students of all ages, not just the young.  Adult learning is now an accepted part of the culture of Hastings, and the education sector continues to grow.
2.53 Your next sight is the new town centre drop-in health Clinic, a thriving family health centre focussed on healthy living and well-being.  Town centre workers and visitors, as well as residents can access health treatment promptly and easily and most arrive on foot or by bike.  With the vast improvements in leisure facilities, cycleways and quality open space, the overall health of Hastings’ citizens has improved.
2.54 Once into the town centre you are surprised by the intensity and diversity of quality housing, shops, offices, cafes, bars and restaurants, and a new library, registration service and wedding venue. These are set out in a range of distinct commercial quarters that contribute to the evening economy and a thriving nightlife, particularly attractive to the growing student population.
2.55 Walking left takes you into the refurbished and expanded Priory Meadow shopping centre with good links in to surrounding streets and neighbourhoods newly alive with specialist shops and services.  Right takes you into vibrant Priory Quarter and Trinity Triangle buzzing with cafes, restaurants and lively new leisure facilities. And straight ahead takes you to one of the best seafronts in Britain, leading you on to the well utilised mixed commercial centres in the Old Town and Central St Leonards. By mixing different commercial uses and providing opportunities for urban living, each of these areas has experienced greater numbers of visitors and improved crime figures.
2.56 The revitalised seafront provides fun, cultural, health and leisure activities for all ages, which contribute to the town’s year round visitor economy: toddlers playing pools, adventure playgrounds, beach volley ball, go karting, multi-use games area, new beach huts, art and maritime museums, a wide variety of beachfront stalls, bars and cafes – and all set in a well lit, beautiful landscape filled with stunning public art and art activities.  
2.57 The Seafront has retained its distinctive character, and remains an attractive location for hotels and guesthouses to locate. Significant landmarks are easily accessible along the Seafront, from West Marina to the The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     21
Chapter 2: About Hastings
east, along to St Mary in the Castle and to the Jerwood Gallery in the west. The Pier is now also fully restored 
and funding for the remaining improvements is secured. Cycle routes between Hastings and Bexhill are also complete, providing easy access between the two towns.
2.58
 Which w
ay to walk along the seafront? East to take in the jewel of Hastings’ maritime heritage in Hastings Old 
Town, and indulge in world class gallery visits at The Jerwood and delicious fish dishes, or west to the classic architecture of Burtons’ St Leonards and the wild beauty of Bulverhythe beach and West St Leonards beyond. Traffic along the A259 is well managed and is safe for pedestrians and cyclists enjoying the national cycleway route. Seafront properties are also well maintained by owners who are keen to contribute to the overall quality of the town’s built environment.
2.59
 A
t each end of the Seafront, the stunning Country Parks are even more attractive and accessible to visitors and 
residents than ever before. The town has a unique setting on the edge of the High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, and our policies for greenspace enhancement and protection have ensured that Hastings as a whole has avoided urban sprawl and, despite growth, still remains a compact, sustainable community that has impacted lightly on its surroundings. The character of the gill valleys that extend into the town provide green lungs for wildlife and recreation, extending links into the surrounding countryside, contributing to an extensive and functional green infrastructure network. Most new development has been on brownfield and urban infill sites and all new schemes are sustainably designed to be zero carbon, energy and water efficient and enhance biodiversity.
2.60
 T
ransport improvements have meant that wherever people live, they have easy access to a wide range of 
employment opportunities – from large scale employers on new sites and business parks off Queensway, to micro businesses in supported town centre and neighbourhood business communities throughout Hastings.  Business diversity is paramount, so as well as large scale offices, we have ensured an increase in small scale incubation space and revitalisation of run down industrial estates.  Peak hour traffic congestion is minimal now that businesses, schools and public sector agencies have adopted green travel plans.  We have the smallest ecological footprint of all towns on the south coast and the town centre area now benefits from a state of the art district heating system catering for the needs of businesses, residents and the college and university.
2.61
 Ov
er 3,000 homes have been built in the town since 2011, empty homes have been bought back into use 
and existing buildings have been improved inside and out. This has provided a mix of styles, design, sizes and affordability to meet the differing needs of residents.  Many more people are now in quality housing that they could not access before.  New homes are built to high sustainability standards that are fully adaptive to the effects of climate change and are closely linked in with the green infrastructure network.  This network enables wildlife migration, cools the urban environment and provides accessible opportunities for walking, cycling and recreation for local communities. Green roofs, grey water recycling and sustainable urban drainage systems are now standard features of all new developments.
2.62
 Hastings is a w
ell known focal point of the South Coast, recognised by most in the South East, and further out.  
People are proud to live in the town and identify with their own local communities. The town’s population has increased with many skilled professionals and their families coming in the past 10 years, attracted by quality housing, a wide range of career choices and the promise of a high quality of life by the sea. Many people work from home taking advantage of modern flexible fibre optic and other information and communications technology; others use improved links to London, Ashford and Brighton to reach their workplaces.
2.63
 Hastings r
emains a popular tourist and cultural destination, and hosts many festivals that bring the whole 
town together, as well as attracting visitors from all over the South East.  Hastings has always been famous for its culture and history and is now planning for the major celebrations in 2066, which will attract international interest.22   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Chapter 3: Strategic Objectives
Objective 1: 
Achieve and sustain a thriving economy
This will be achieved through: 
1a) working with Rother District Council to ensure regeneration in the Hastings/Bexhill area is beneficial to the 
economy, environment and communities of both towns.
1b) providing for 20,500m2 of retail floorspace in the town centre by 2028
1c) continuing to support and develop the education sector in the town
1d) increasing the supply and range of job opportunities in accessible locations across the town, as part of achieving a more sustainable pattern of development and activity
1e) promoting state of the art telecommunications infrastructure to enable flexible working and to attract investors
1f) reducing the levels of out-commuting by providing more jobs in the town
1g) in collaboration with the business community, retaining employment land and premises throughout the town, together with new educational, research and higher educational facilities, which contribute to the functioning and growth of the local economy  
1h) supporting economic development and regeneration with particular emphasis on developing the key economic growth sectors which include hi-tech, knowledge-based and creative industries, manufacturing and the growing finance/insurance sector
1i) allocating and protecting appropriate land for business uses in locations such as the employment areas at Castleham, Churchfields, West Ridge, Ivyhouse Lane, Ponswood and the Queensway Employment Corridor 
1j) encouraging the redevelopment of older employment areas to meet modern requirements in terms of space, size and service provision and to provide for physical investment and improvement.
1k) ensuring that the jobs created are accessible to the maximum number of the town’s residents through transport, education and skills training, particularly within the most deprived areas such as Central St Leonards, Hollington and the Ore Valley  
1l) developing Hastings and St Leonards Town Centres as the focus for employment in the office, retail, leisure, cultural and service sectors, with Hastings Town Centre being the primary focus 
1m) recognising the importance of a healthy, properly functioning natural environment as a foundation for sustained economic growth, as well as prospering communities and personal wellbeing.  A good quality natural environment creates opportunities for recreation and leisure and is attractive to people and business investment alike.  
 The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     23
Chapter 3: Strategic Objectives
Objective 2: 
Ensure everyone has the opportunity to live in a decent home, which they can afford, in a community in which they want to live
This will be achieved through:
2a) providing for at least 3,400 net new dwellings between 2011 – 2028
2b) prioritising new housing on previously developed land to assist regeneration where possible
2c) ensuring an appropriate mix of housing is provided in terms of tenure, price, type, size and location, having 
regard to the accommodation needs of the town
2d) making decent housing accessible to more people by increasing the provision of affordable housing, having regard to issues such as fuel poverty and improving/regulating the quality of existing accommodation in the town and bringing vacant dwellings back into use
2e) providing more opportunities for people to live in Hastings town centre through identifying opportunities for mixed use schemes and making best use of space above shops, and widening the range of housing available in Central St Leonards, particularly through the provision of good quality affordable housing.
Objective 3: Safeguard and improve the town’s environment
This will be achieved by
3a) protecting, enhancing and improving the quality of the town’s biodiversity, and in particular, its sites 
of international, national, regional and local nature conservation importance through better habitat management
3b) conserving and managing the historic environment for future generations
3c) identifying, protecting and improving a strategic green infrastructure network of green spaces, cycle and pedestrian routes, water and other environmental features, recognising the unique character of its functions 
3d) providing open spaces, recreation facilities and streets that are well designed, safe and accessible that satisfy the recreational, health and amenity requirements of the population and visitors
3e) recognising the unique place that the historic environment holds in the town’s cultural and maritime heritage and the multiple ways in which it supports and contributes to the economy, society and daily life
3f) minimising and reducing the environmental impacts of development, including water, noise, light and air pollution
3g) ensuring that all development is designed to a high quality, creating buildings and a sense of identity, place and neighbourhood that enhances local character and distinctiveness
3h) ensuring new development only occurs where there is adequate capacity in existing services, facilities and infrastructure or where this capacity can be reasonably provided.
3i) ensuring developments contribute to the national objective of no net loss of biodiversity by requiring developers to show how their proposals will contribute positively to the natural environment and avoid harm to biodiversity, adequately mitigate for unavoidable damage, or as a last resort compensate for unavoidable damage.24   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Objective 4: 
Addressing the impacts of climate change 
This will be achieved by:
4a) ensuring that development is located and designed so as to minimise susceptibility to the impacts of climate 
change, resource demand and the risk of flooding
4b) identifying opportunities for renewable energy and combined heat and power schemes
4c) recognising the potential of green infrastructure to help combat the harmful effects of climate change
4d) requiring all development to be designed to include appropriate climate change mitigation and adaptation measures such as green roofs and walls, sustainable drainage systems, multi-functional green space, biodiversity enhancement and protection, waste reduction and recycling facilities and flood risk management
4e) requiring developers to demonstrate how energy efficiency and carbon dioxide reduction is being achieved through their development proposals
Objective 5: Supporting sustainable communities
This will be achieved by:
5a) working with partners to improve the quality of life in the town -  particularly in most deprived neighbourhoods 
5b) supporting the hierarchy, vitality and viability of the Town, District and Local centres, with an emphasis on 
maintaining access to local shops and services
5c) providing an adequate and accessible network of health facilities to improve health, emotional wellbeing and life expectancy
5d) co-locating services and community facilities to maximise access and efficiencies 
5e) enabling an increased take-up of sports, leisure and cultural activities by residents and visitors through the provision of accessible and affordable facilities and programmes
5f) ensuring developers provide or contribute to the infrastructure needs arising from new development e.g. access, education, open space, play areas
5g) reducing crime and the fear of crime through a design led approach
5h) promoting access to a healthy natural environment that contributes positively to our physical and mental health and educationThe Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     25
Chapter 3: Strategic Objectives
Objective 6: 
Provision of an efficient and effective transport system
This will be achieved by:
6a) working at a local, county and national level to secure improvements in strategic transport infrastructure such 
as the Bexhill - Hastings Link Road and improvements to the A21 and A259 roads
6b) working at a local, county and national level to secure improvements to rail and regional services to the town.
6c) working with East Sussex County Council and Rother District Council to deliver the Local Transport Plan 3 and measures for the Hastings and Bexhill priority area
6d) working with transport providers and the Quality Bus Partnership to improve local bus services, including through the creation of bus priority lanes 
6e) supporting development which reduces the need to travel, especially by car
6f) providing and improving a network of safe, good quality walking and cycling routes and ensuring provision of appropriate facilities for sustainable transport users.
Objective 7: Making best use of the Seafront and promoting tourism
This will be achieved by:
7a) ensuring the seafront has a range of day long and year round activities and facilities that attract residents, 
workers and visitors
7b) supporting the growth and development of the tourism industry in Hastings by retaining and encouraging day visitors and attracting high spending staying visitors, maximising the value of visitor spend, and spreading tourist activity throughout the year.
7c) resisting the loss of seafront visitor accommodation to other uses, and encouraging the provision of new visitor accommodation 
7d) working with local communities to secure a sustainable future for Hastings Pier, the redundant White Rock Baths, and other key landmark sites along the Seafront such as St Mary in the Castle and West Marina  
7e) encouraging artists and related tourists and visitors through increasing opportunities for vibrant art and craft studios, markets, chalets and retail 
7f) helping to promote water based leisure, including the coastal based sports clubs
 26   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     27
Part Two – Development Strategy
Chapter 4: The Development Strategy
i) Planning Focus Areas
ii) Housingiii) Employmentiv) Shopping
 
The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011- 2028, adopted February 2014     2728   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Chapter 4: The Development Strategy
4.1 This chapter sets out the overall strategy for Hastings. It deals with the big issues, setting out how much 
development we need, where it will take place, and by when. It explains the three spatial areas that have been identified within the town, and then concentrates on housing, employment and shopping.  The extent of the built up area boundary will be reviewed through the Development Management Plan process.  
As well as the policies on Housing, Employment and Shopping in this chapter, each is dealt with further in part 4 of this document - Theme Based Policies:
Housing in Chapter 8: Housing 
Employment in Chapter 9: Local Economy (i) EmploymentShopping in Chapter 9: Local Economy (ii) Town Centres
Complying with the Duty to Co-operate
4.2     The Council acknowledges the importance of ongoing co-operation with relevant bodies, particularly Rother 
District Council and East Sussex County Council7.  Co-operation will therefore continue with these authorities 
and with other bodies as appropriate, especially with regard to housing and employment development.  This will take place as the Planning Strategy is monitored and reviewed in the light of such considerations as subsequent survey material, national planning policies and their implications for planning policies and proposals for the Borough, District and County. Of special relevance in this regard are likely to be the full, objectively assessed needs for market and affordable housing, explored further on in this chapter, and the implications for them of the completion of the Bexhill – Hastings Link Road.
The presumption in favour of sustainable development
4.3     When considering development proposals, we will take a positive approach that reflects the presumption in favour of sustainable development contained in the National Planning Policy Framework. We will continue to work proactively with applicants jointly to find solutions which mean that proposals can be approved wherever possible, and to secure development that improves the economic, social and environmental conditions in the area and the wider objectives of this Plan.
 Planning applications will be assessed in accordance with the policies in the Local Plan as a whole and will be dealt with promptly and approved unless material considerations indicate otherwise.
 Where there are no policies relevant to the application or relevant policies are out of date at the time of making the decision then the Council will grant permission unless material considerations indicate otherwise – taking into account whether:
	 •			Any	adverse	impacts	of	granting	permission	would	significantly	and	demonstrably	outweigh	the		 	
   benefits, when assessed against the policies in the National Planning Policy Framework taken as a   
   whole; or 
	 •		Specific	policies	in	that	Framework	indicate	that	development	should	be	restricted
7 The Duty to Co-operate is required by Section 33A (1) of the Planning and Compulsary Purchase Act 2004 introduce in the Localism Act 2011 The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     29
i) Planning Focus Areas
Locations for development
4.4 Hastings is a small and urban area, and the pattern of future development will be spread around the town. In 
order to give a picture of what is planned where, we have divided the town into three spatial areas – Western Area, Central Area and Eastern Area.  The Seafront has also been identified as a broad area of change, although levels of development will be set out in the respective spatial areas.
Figure 4: Map showing the Western, Central and Eastern Areas
The Planning Focus Areas
4.5 To provide a more local perspective and sense of place, the town has been divided further into a number of Planning Focus Areas.  These are areas where there is an identifiable community or geography, or where landscape or function means that they make a logical area for spatial planning.  In some cases they are areas that have common problems or issues.  Boundaries have been drawn as close as possible to Super Output Area (SOA) boundaries, as this is the geography used for the presentation of important statistics such as the Indices of Multiple Deprivation (IMD) and Census data.  Chapter 4: Development Strategy30   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
4.6 The planning f ocus areas will provide a useful framework setting the scene for the preparation of the more 
detailed Development Management Plan, and any Neighbourhood Plans that may be produced by the 
community.  The 13 planning focus areas are:
1. Little Ridge & Ashdo
wn
2. Gr
eater Hollington
3. F
ilsham Valley & Bulverhythe
4. St Helens
5. Silv
erhill & Alexandra Park
6. Maze Hill & Burtons’ St Leonar
ds
7. C
entral St Leonards & Bohemia
8. Hastings T
own Centre
9. Old T
own
10. W
est Hill
11. Hillcr
est & Ore Valley
12. Cliv
e Vale & Ore Village
13. Hastings C
ountry Park
Figure 5: Map showing the Planning Focus Areas within Western, Central and Eastern Areas
4.7
 Str
ategies for each of the 3 broad spatial areas, including a range of housing development in these areas are 
set out in the sections that follow.  Individual sites to meet the overall housing target (see Policy DS1) will be 
allocated in the Development Management Plan, although it is important to note that the detailed level of work required for this may result in some adjustments to the numbers and proportions set out in each of the 3 spatial areas.  These adjustments will still be acceptable however, provided that they do not diminish the overall total of housing to be delivered.The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     31
ii) Housing
Why do we need more homes?
4.8 Access to a decent home f or everyone is the foundation for a decent quality of life.  A priority of the Council 
and the Local Strategic Partnership is to increase the availability, affordability and quality of housing and to 
ensure all sections of our community, in all housing tenures, enjoy safe, desirable, affordable and accessible housing that is appropriate for their needs and aspirations.
4.9
 We kno
w that the area of Hastings Borough and Rother District operates largely as a single housing and  
labour market. We also know that there are some key features of our housing market which distinguish it from other parts of the South East. These include comparatively low house prices; declining affordability for local people, a bias to smaller dwellings; imbalanced in-migration; a large private rented sector and high levels of deprivation. Left unchecked, some of these processes will continue to act as drivers of change making housing less affordable for local residents, and doing nothing to improve the prospects for economic development and regeneration. Instead, diversifying and renewing our housing stock through new development has an important role to play in fostering much needed economic regeneration and countering the processes that can lead to blighted neighbourhoods.
4.10
 Pr
oviding the right mix of well designed, good quality housing in conjunction with employment opportunities, 
has the potential to offer a real and lasting opportunity to promote the town as a thriving, desirable place to live, work and enjoy quality recreation time.  
4.11
 In determining the number of new homes w
e need to plan for up to 2028, we have therefore considered the 
role new houses can play in assisting growth and regeneration.  We have also taken into account current demographic projections; the number of people in housing need, and critically, the town’s capacity to accommodate new housing development.  Though new housing may form an important part of regeneration efforts, we have to reconcile this with the fact that Hastings is a tightly constrained urban area, surrounded by areas of high environmental and landscape importance.
Supporting regeneration
4.12  The Council’s pr eferred way forward is a housing target that allows us to support the following objectives 
without increasing the pressure to build in the town’s most environmentally sensitive areas:
• Employment-led 	gr
owth	–	a	sc
ale	of	housing	gr
owth	that	is	pr
oportionate 	to	the	to
wn’s	ability	to	attr
act
new jobs, ret
ain existing ones and help facilitate sustainable travel to work patterns
• Meet	the	needs	of	those	of	w
orking	age,	including 	pr
omoting	the	right	mix	of	housing	that	encour
ages
higher skilled people to mov
e to the town and to create opportunities for younger people to remain in
Hastings.  This includes providing more family homes and larger dwellings
• Maximise 	the	pr
ovision	of	aff
ordable	housing
•
Meet	the	needs	of	those	r
esidents	curr
ently	living	in	unsuit
able	accommod
ation	–	such	as	o
vercrowded
properties or those in disr
epair
• Provide 	f
or	the	needs	of	the	gr
owing	number	of	people	of	r
etirement 	age
Capacity to accommodate housing growth
4.13  The demand for new housing arising f rom trend-based population and household change and growth would 
result in a need to build many more new homes than previously thought possible – some 6,8638 new homes by 
2028 or 404 per year.  Taking trend-based population projections in isolation ignores factors such the physical Chapter 4: Development Strategy
8 Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) June 2013: https://www.hastings.gov.uk/content/planning/planning_policy/adopted_local_plan/
supportingdocs_evbase/461705/Hastings_and_Rother_Strategic_Housing_Market_Assessment_Update_June_2013.pdf32   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
limits to outward growth, therefore it would not be sensible to use trend-based projections alone to determine 
a future housing target.  It is clear from the Council’s Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA)9 
that attempting to meet the level of housing growth implied by the trend-based demographic projections would require substantial release of greenfield land beyond the current built-up area of the town.  However, choices with regard to the location of new housing and the outward expansion of Hastings are very limited.  The town’s environmental assets, including the nationally important High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) to the north and east of the existing built-up area; the Marline Valley Woods Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) to the north-west, the internationally important Hastings Cliffs Special Area of Conservation (SAC) on the eastern boundary, and the network of important green spaces across the town including Hastings Country Park to the east and Combe Valley Countryside Park to the west, all act as restraints to major outward growth.    
4.14 The potential to bring forward greenfield land in the north-west of town, with a view to making a strategic   land allocation, has been investigated. This is the only major remaining area of the Borough which is free from nationally important landscape and wildlife designations. The land in question (Land at Breadsell Lane) abuts the nationally important Marline Valley Woods SSSI. Housing potential at Breadsell Lane has been carefully assessed with advice from Natural England and the conclusion reached is that, based on current research, a site could not be allocated. This is because its delivery would be highly uncertain due to the degree to which development might impact adversely on the nationally important Marline Valley SSSI is unknown.  
4.15 Instead, if we are to comply with sustainable development objectives, future housing requirements will need to be met essentially through the identification of development opportunities in the urban area; by including an allowance for windfall development; and by making more efficient use of the existing residential stock by bringing back into residential use long term empty homes.  
Higher density development 
4.16 The potential for higher density10 residential development and the contribution this can make to meeting 
housing requirements has been explored.  Higher density development, provided it is associated with good design, is considered appropriate for many areas of the town, particularly locations in or close to the town and district centres, or in other areas well served by public transport.  Higher density development can help improve affordability and address the housing needs of younger people such as first time buyers or, at the other end of the spectrum, people looking to down size and/or those whose children have left home.  
4.17 The potential for a mix of higher density development is already reflected in the Council’s estimates of housing capacity through the inclusion of sites that have planning approval or potential sites where high density development may be appropriate, (this is subject to further examination through the Development Management Plan). Requiring all or the majority of new development to be built at high densities, as a result of adopting an unrealistically high housing target, is considered to run counter to the planning objectives for the town and national planning guidance.  
Making the best use of urban and brownfield land
4.18 Future housing requirements will, instead, be met through the identification of a mix of development opportunities which will provide for a range of types and sizes of new dwellings in the urban area and by making more efficient use of the existing residential stock – by bringing back into residential use long term empty homes.
4.19 We will look to develop brownfield housing sites first, wherever possible, although a mix of both brownfield and greenfield may be needed to meet the 5 year supply (see paragraph 4.28 for an explanation of the five year supply).
4.20 Empty homes are a wasted asset, and a good deal of progress has been made by the Council in tackling empty homes in recent years.  However, whilst bringing empty homes back into use does not increase the overall housing stock, it does increase the efficient use of the existing stock.  In 2010 there was estimated to be 
9 www.hastings.gov.uk/environment_planning/planning/localplan/strategic_housing/   
10 High, medium & low density development are >50/ha, 30-50/ha and <30/ha respectively  The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     33
approximately 400 long term empty homes in the town.  By long term, we mean homes that have been empty 
for 2 or more years.
Balancing homes and jobs
4.21  Our housing t arget figure aims to support urban renaissance, and to accommodate further development in a 
way that respected environmental constraints.  In particular, it is important not to use demographic forecasts alone as a driver for housing development.  This is because the relationship with the economic growth and regeneration, and environmental constraints is much more important in Hastings.  The scale of housing development has been determined on the basis that housing growth should not outstrip the ability of the local economy to provide jobs at a corresponding rate.  Otherwise we would simply be adding to unsustainable out-commuting.  A degree of net out-commuting is not necessarily detrimental to local prosperity, but the trend of an increasing reliance on this, much by car, does have adverse consequences in terms of sustainable development.  It is also a sign of an inherent weakness in the local economy.
Working with Rother District Council
4.22  In accor dance with national guidance and as part of the Duty to Co-operate, the Council has worked with and 
will continue to work with Rother District Council to explore strategic priorities including housing needs across the whole Hastings and Rother housing market (HMA). Housing need has most recently been assessed in the 2013 Strategic Housing Market Assessment Update.
The New Homes target
4.23  Betw een 2011 and 2028 the net new homes target will be for at least 3,400 homes, based on the rationale set 
out in paragraph 4.12.
4.24
 The t
arget is equivalent to at least 200 net new homes per annum.  This target will be achieved mainly through 
the delivery of identifiable development sites between 2011 and 2028.  
4.25
 Windf
all development has made a significant contribution to housing delivery in the past. Small site windfalls 
(less than 6 dwellings) will continue to come forward over all years of the Plan up to 2028. An average of 35 windfall dwellings per year has been assumed between 2016/17 and 2027/28, this potential supply can be seen as providing the necessary flexibility around meeting the housing target which is a minimum, by either increasing the total amount of house building, or as a contingency if allocated sites do not come forward as planned for any reason.
4.26
 The new homes will be deliv
ered primarily through private development, but there will be considerable 
partnership working with Registered Providers (RPs) in the delivery of affordable housing.
Sources of new homes likely to come forward by 2028 Net number of units
Units completed 2011/12 - 2012/13 373
Commitments – sites under construction, with planning permission or resolution to grant planning permission1,209
Small site (5 or less net dwellings) commitments 2013/14 – 2015/16 157
Existing Local Plan allocations (excluding those without an extant permission) 747
Other sites potentially developable sites - no planning status (informed by the 
SHLAA and the merging Development Management Plan document)771
Small site (less than 6 dwellings) windfall allowance 2016/17 – 2027/28 (12 years x 35 dwellings)420
TOTAL 3,647
T
able 1: Delivering the housing allocation 2011 – 2028 (Position as at 01 April 2013) Chapter 4: Development Strategy34   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
4.27 Strategic Policies FA1, FA2 and FA5 show a broad distribution of the proposed housing land supply.  Individual 
sites to meet the overall housing target will be identified in the Development Management Plan.   
4.28 The Council is required to demonstrate and maintain a continuous rolling supply of specific deliverable sites sufficient to provide five years worth of housing against the overall housing target. National guidance requires the 5-year supply to include an additional allowance of 20%. The Local Plan Monitoring report will track the progress of housing completions against Policy DS1 and make an annual reassessment about the adequacy of the supply of deliverable and developable housing land. The Council will use the monitoring process to manage land supply. Action will be triggered to increase supply if monitoring reveals that housing completions have fallen below the expected rate of delivery set out in the trajectory and a review of site deliverability indicates that the trajectory is unlikely to be recovered over the next five years without action.  
4.29 The latest monitoring update (2013-14) shows that there are sufficient housing sites to meet the 5 - year requirement (including the 20% buffer) with the potential to deliver 1,232 housing units from 2014/15 to 2018/19. The housing trajectory is shown in Appendix 2. For future information regarding housing land supply, please see the most recent Local Plan Monitoring Report at www.hastings.gov.uk/environment_planning/planning/localplan/monitoring
4.30 The Development Management Plan and future reviews of the SHLAA may identify new sites, thereby reducing the reliance on windfall. This will be reported on in the Local Plan Monitoring Report.
POLICY DS1: New Housing Development
The target for housing development will be at least 3,400 net new homes for the period 2011 – 2028. 
Sites will be allocated in the Development Management Plan to meet this target.
In order to maintain and make effective use of the existing housing stock, the Council will bring back 
into residential use empty housing in line with its Empty Homes Strategy.
In order to protect the existing stock of family size housing, existing homes should remain as 
dwellings unless they are unsuitable for residential uses, or would be replaced with new residential development.
A ‘plan, monitor and manage’ approach will be adopted based upon the Local Plan Monitoring 
Report and updates of the Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment, through which progress on housing delivery and the continuous maintenance of a five-year rolling supply plus 20% will be tracked.
Housing Implementation Strategy:
Housing land supply will be managed in the following way:
If the Local Plan Monitoring Report reveals that the five-year housing land supply plus 20% cannot 
be met, the Council will take action to increase the supply of deliverable housing sites by: 
•	 Working	with	land	owners,	public	bodies	and	developers	to	bring	sites	forward;
•	 Promoting	Hastings	and	particular	sites	to	investors;•	 Investigating	reasons	for	the	delay	in	sites	coming	forward	and	consider	using	Compulsory	
Purchase	powers	if	necessary	in	order	to	progress	development;
•	 Using	its	own	land	to	stimulate	development/interest.
The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     35
11 With the abolition of the regional development agency - SEEDA, the local arrangements for taking regeneration forward are being recast but 
local partners are determined to continue and build on the progress achieved to date
12 Business uses are those essentially within Class B of the Use Classes Order, including offices, research and development uses, light manufacturing, 
general industry, warehousing/storage and similar “sui Generis” uses
13 East Sussex County Council 2011 policy based population projections June 2013iii) Employment
4.31 National policy indicates that local authorities need to set out a clear economic vision and strategy for their 
area which positively and proactively encourages sustainable economic growth.
4.32 Hastings is a major employment centre not just for residents of Hastings but also in the wider Hastings labour market or travel-to-work-area (TTWA) which embraces most of Rother (over 90% of its population) and is bordered by Eastbourne, Tunbridge Wells and Ashford.  Yet in economic terms Hastings is weak, ranked amongst the 20 most deprived boroughs in the Country, with low levels of educational achievement and skills levels, lower average earnings compared to the rest of the South East and in recent years falling job density, (that is the ratio of total jobs to people of working age population).  Until very recently, in common with other south coast towns, Hastings has not developed as a location for inward investment, relying on local business growth and the public sector as economic drivers.  
4.33 However, Hastings has been pursuing an ambitious, collaborative approach to economic and cultural renaissance. Following its formation in 2003, the former agency, Sea Space
11 and the wider Hastings & Bexhill 
Task Force has:
•	 constructed	over	18,000m²	of	high	quality	business	space	in	Hastings,	including	One	Priory	Square,	
Lacuna Place and a Creative Media and Innovation Centre
•	 facilitated	over	7,000m²	of	education	space	for	higher	/	further	education	use	–	Hastings	is	now	a	
University town;
•	 established	Enviro21,	a	modern	industrial	park	focused	on	the	growth	of	environmental	technology	
companies and advanced manufacturing;
•	 created	capacity	for	1,700	new	jobs,	including	the	decision	by	SAGA	in	late	2010	to	locate	in	Hastings’	
Priory Quarter, creating up to 800 additional private sector jobs.
4.34 These developments offer a real and lasting opportunity to promote the town as a thriving, high quality 
business location and a desirable place to live and enjoy quality recreation time.  
Providing for new jobs 
4.35 This section focuses on economic development and specifically business uses12.  
4.36 Population projections13 show a static workforce – when housing growth and other projections are factored in.  
An important qualification about these projections is that they represent what is projected to happen based on the current population structure and past patterns of migration, as well as prevailing economic activity rates (2008 base).  Planning for a static workforce in effect represents planning for the status quo, and fails to take account of important policy factors, in particular:
•	 national	policy	to	stimulate	economic	growth
•	 the	strong	local	commitment	to	reverse	the	economic	fortunes	of	the	area,	not	least	to	address	relatively	
low economic activity and high unemployment
•	 desire	to	reverse	the	long	term	trend	towards	increased	dependence	on	jobs	elsewhere
4.37 The Planning Strategy therefore aims to assist employment creation through the provision of land and 
premises for employment purposes and by encouraging the development of more family housing.  This is intended to alter the characteristics of in-migration.Chapter 4: Development Strategy36   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
4.38 The Employment Strategy and Land Review (ESLR)14, updated August 2011 and jointly prepared with Rother 
District Council, estimates that the total number of jobs needed in Hastings over the period 2008-2028 is 
c.6,470.  This is based on achieving higher economic activity rates and a closer balance between the number of indigenous jobs and the number of local workers. Out-commuting is not in itself detrimental to local prosperity, particularly where people are able to travel to better paid jobs and thus bring more money into the Hastings economy. However, sometimes it is an indicator that there is insufficient availability of jobs locally. Overall therefore, although it is to be expected that there will be many workers travelling both into and out of Hastings to work (particularly within the travel to work area), the Plan seeks a healthy economy where there are sufficient jobs within the Borough to support the population. In sustainability terms a better balance of homes and jobs locally is desirable.  
4.39 If it was not for regeneration activity and major intervention, it is forecast that total employment (labour demand) in Hastings would grow by very modest amounts.  Labour demand forecasts suggest that jobs growth will be in mainly public services, including public administration, health and educational sectors.  This reflects their important share of employment currently and ignores the considerable regeneration activity which has already seen the successful development of educational, media and eco-industries.  It also clearly highlights the need to diversify the town’s economic base and a key objective of increasing the supply and range of job opportunities across the town, as part of achieving a more sustainable pattern of development and activity.  Our aim is to maintain and strengthen the provision for those sectors where we have particular strengths such as manufacturing and specialist engineering businesses. Examples of which are vacuum pumps and contact lens manufacture.  We will also support cultural and artistic ventures.  Sectors, and particularly high value sectors, which we would like to grow, include knowledge-based sectors such as eco-industries and creative media.
4.40 It is clear that the provision of employment land and premises needs to be supported by an array of other interventions to succeed.  As well as the Council’s own commitment to fostering economic activity, there are multi-agency efforts (more fully documented in the ESLR) centred around investment in education and training; business support services; promotional activity; planned investment in transport infrastructure and ICT connections.
Business land and premises 
4.41 Major improvements in the town’s economy are needed if we are to achieve regeneration benefits for everyone.  The Planning Strategy will assist in this process by ensuring that sufficient land is identified for employment purposes to allow for future growth in jobs and to encourage business investment by providing choice in the types and locations of employment premises.  The amount of land identified should provide for employment growth that at least matches workforce growth, allows for higher levels of economic activity and reduces reliance on out-commuting.  
4.42 The ESLR concluded that in order to meet the economic regeneration objectives for Hastings and Rother, provision should be made in Hastings for between 65,000 and 70,000m
2 of employment floorspace between 
2008 and 2028.  This target primarily relates to business accommodation15.
  
14 www.hastings.gov.uk/environment_planning/planning/localplan/evidence_base/ 
15 comprises use classes B1 – Business, B2 – General industrial and B8 – Storage or distribution, as defined by the Use Classes Order 2010The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     37
POLICY DS2: Employment Growth
To support the town’s role as a major employment centre and as the focus for economic 
regeneration, local economic growth and diversification will be met through the development of up to 70,000m
2 of employment floorspace between 2008 and 2028 and will be achieved by:
•	 the	continuing	development	of	new	office	based	employment	opportunities	at	Priory	Quarter	in	
Hastings	town	centre;		
•	 the	development	of	Enviro21	Innovation	parks	in	the	Queensway	Employment	Corridor,	circa	
15,300m2
•	 the	development	of	floorspace	opportunites	on	existing	employment	areas	across	the	Borough	
by 2028 primarily at the following locations: Churchfields, Castleham, Ponswood, West Ridge and also Ivyhouse Lane
•	 encouraging	the	renewal	of	the	existing	older	stock	of	employment	premises	through	the	
implementation of an employment land and premises protection policy
•	 encouraging	the	provision	of	live/work	units	within	housing	developments
Relationship with North East Bexhill
4.43 The regeneration of Hastings also needs to be considered in the context of the impact of development outside of the town, and in particular, the North East Bexhill proposal in Rother District.  This is a major development area	aiming	to	provide	some	50,000m²	of	commercial	development.		It	has	the	scope	to	meet	the	needs	of	both local and in-moving occupiers.  The available land at North East Bexhill plays a complementary role to that of Hastings as an employment centre by providing opportunities for employment development as part of an urban extension on a scale not possible within the constrained urban area of Hastings.  
4.44 North East Bexhill represents one of the most important new land releases within the Hastings travel to work area. However its implementation is dependent on the completion of the proposed Bexhill – Hastings Link Road. There are other important opportunities for business development within the Borough, notably Priory Quarter and the Queensway area. Nevertheless, whilst the identified employment land commitments in Hastings are not dependent on the implementation of the road scheme per se, any delays in its progress to completion would have a negative impact on those proposals too, due to:
a) the knock-back to business confidence
b) the reduced scale and range of investment that Hastings and Bexhill could accommodate, would 
constrain the potential of the are for regeneration.  
iv) Shopping
New retail development 
4.45 National planning policy requires us to promote the vitality and viability of town centres, and emphasises that it is important that retail needs are met in full, and not compromised by limited site availability.  It sets out that town centre sites should be identified first, and if these are not suitable or viable, edge of centre sites should be considered next, and then other accessible locations. 
 4.46 Later in this plan, policy E3, sets out a hierarchy of commercial centres where retail and employment opportunities are concentrated, to be protected and appropriate new ventures welcomed. Chapter 4: Development Strategy
38   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
What does the evidence show?
4.47 In 2006, a study on the retail needs of the town up to 2021 was first prepared, which was then updated in 
both 2010 and 2011.  The Retail Study now looks ahead to 2028, taking account of updated forecasts and projections.  Combined together, these three studies identify a number of issues related to the provision of new retail floorspace in the town:
a) The vast majority of retail floorspace need will be for comparison goods (includes items purchased on a 
non-frequent basis, such as clothing, footwear, household and recreation goods).
b)	 In	order	to	retain	its	market	share,	Hastings	Town	Centre	needs	up	to	approximately	20,500m²	of	
additional comparison goods floorspace in the period 2014 to 2028. This is a gross figure (i.e. it includes sales space, storage and ancillary space) and an allowance for related service trade shops (e.g. restaurants, coffee bars, hairdressers etc).  
c) If this scale of development does not take place in Hastings Town Centre, the town’s position in the regional shopping hierarchy will deteriorate. Immediate competitors such as Eastbourne and Tunbridge Wells will absorb an even greater share of the spending of Hastings and Bexhill residents.
d) The need for additional convenience goods floorspace (everyday essential items including food, drink, newspapers, confectionery) will be minimal.
e) The need for retail warehouse floorspace (electrical, DIY, furniture etc) between 2014 and 2028 would be	approximately	2,800m²	gross.		Floorspace	need	prior	to	2014	has	been	more	than	satisfied	with	the	construction of Wickes store at Ravenside
f) There could be up to 1,600 jobs from the growth of retailing up to 2028, if all the retail capacity identified in the study is met.
4.48 Whilst there is no immediate need for this additional retail floorspace, it is essential that it is provided for over the Planning Strategy period, up to 2028.  We have therefore undertaken an initial assessment of sites, to determine the potential in Hastings Town Centre to accommodate this level of growth.  This revealed only a small number of infill sites that could potentially provide additional floorspace, but not on the scale required.
4.49 As a result, the uncertainty over a potential town centre location for this level of retail development has meant that we are unable to identify a particular site at this time.  A new town centre boundary where such development will be supported will be identified on the Policies Map prepared as part of the Development Management Plan process. It will therefore be down to market forces to determine when, and if, the economic situation is right for this scale of retail development.
4.50 The Council also recognises the potential impact of special forms of trading to its town centres, particularly online, mail order and tele-shopping. The impact is hard to predict, especially during a long plan period up to 2028. Notwithstanding this, the Council considers that for this reason alone it is important to emphasise its policies of regeneration and enhancement and to promote the centres as attractive destinations for shopping, tourism, leisure and cultural activities. A visit to a town centre should be a fulfilling experience.
4.51 Policy DS3 below sets out a sustainable approach in that it would support the retail role of Hastings and St Leonards Town Centres. Both locations are more accessible by foot and by public transport than out-of-centre locations, and would generate prime shopping frontage and meet the needs of retailers.
Retail warehousing
4.52 The retail study also identified a requirement for further land for retail warehousing.  We do not believe a suitable town centre site for retail warehousing is available.  We will therefore adopt a sequential approach to site selection as required by government guidance.  In particular, suitable sites should be accessible by means other than by car.  The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     39
POLICY DS3: Location of Retail Development 
The retail need for new comparison goods floorspace is estimated to be 20,500m² for the period 
2014 -2028.  This need is to be met primarily within Hastings Town Centre. 
The Hastings Town Centre development will be undertaken primarily by the private sector, but 
the Council could use its compulsory purchase powers to assist in land assembly if appropriate.  The development will be phased to occur in the period 2014 to 2028.  Retail development will be supported on sites within or well related to the established shopping area of the town centre.  If for any reason this retail need cannot be accommodated in the town centre, then the Council will pursue a sequential approach to site selection, looking first for potential sites on the edge of the town centre or at the district centres, including St Leonards, and then at out-of-centre sites that are in accessible locations.
2,800m² of retail warehousing needs for the period 2014 to 2028 will be met on edge-of-centre sites 
or out-of-centre sites, which are well served by a choice of means of transport. 
Site identification for both comparison goods and retail warehousing will be undertaken as part of 
the Development Management Plan. Chapter 4: Development Strategy40   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     41
Part Three – Planning Strategy
Chapter 5: Spatial Areas
i) Western Area
ii) Central Area
iii) Eastern Areaiv) The Seafront
 
The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011- 2028, adopted February 2014     4142   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Chapter 5: Spatial Areas
i) Western Area
 
Figure 6: Map showing Western Area
An Introduction to Western Area
5.1 Western Area comprises the planning focus areas of Little Ridge & Ashdown; Greater Hollington and Filsham & Bulverhythe.
5.2 It covers the western side of the town, and encompasses a mix of housing, employment and green space areas.  There is a diverse mix of people in the area with some well established communities and residential neighbourhoods.  
5.3 Western Area has 4 out of the 6 major existing employment areas in the town, with a strong emphasis on manufacturing and engineering.  There are several major supermarkets, the Conquest Hospital and Ashdown House, which are significant sources of employment for the town.
5.4 The total Western Area population is 28,218 (Mid 2012 population estimates, ONS), with the highest proportion of residents (27%) falling in the 45-64 age categories.
5.5 Data from the 2010 Index of Multiple Deprivation (released in 2011) shows that Little Ridge & Ashdown is the least deprived Planning Focus Area in Western Area, and the town as a whole. Greater Hollington however, ranks as the 4th overall most deprived focus area in Hastings, and is the 2nd most deprived in terms of education, skills and training. Filsham & Bulverhythe rank 11th overall, 2 below Little Ridge & Ashdown. 8.6% of households in Western Area are in fuel poverty.
5.6 The Hastings and St Leonards Academies opened in the existing school buildings in September 2011.  Building works on the new St Leonards Academy have been undertaken on the Filsham Valley site, which opened fully in September 2013.   
5.7 Part of the Grosvenor Gardens conservation area falls within the Western Area.The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     43
Strategy for Western Area
5.8 The strategy for Western Area is to focus on its potential for employment and housing development, whilst 
protecting and enhancing existing areas of greenspace.
5.9 We will identify key seafront development sites at West Marina and maximise the potential for sustainable building in the area through linkages with existing areas of high heat demand at the Conquest Hospital, and by exploring opportunities for renewable energy schemes in Combe Valley Countryside Park.
5.10	 Between	1,100	and	1,290	new	homes,	and	approximately	36,700m²	of	employment	floorspace	will	be	
provided in Western Area up to 2028, in accordance with Policy FA1 below.  The range of dwelling numbers provided, give a broad indication of the number of new homes that are deliverable in the Plan period, for each of the Planning Focus Areas in Western Area.
The Bexhill - Hastings Link Road
5.11 The Bexhill – Hastings Link Road will enter Hastings at Queensway, within Western Area. Further detail on its implementation and importance to the Planning Strategy is set out in Chapter 11: Transport and Accessibility. 
Employment opportunities
5.12 The Queensway Employment Corridor is a core area of employment development opportunities located adjacent to Queensway. The aim here is to attract companies from around the UK and Europe, and growing  the environmental technologies and services sector, as well as others who place importance on environmentally sustainable business. The Queensway Employment corridor involves the development of two key sites in Hastings, one of which has some units let.
5.13 In addition to new employment floorspace, it is important that we focus on reinvesting in, and making the most out of the existing employment areas of Castleham, Churchfields and Ponswood, as well as the smaller employment areas at West Ridge and Whitworth Road.
5.14 Development and redevelopment of these areas will include reducing carbon emissions and facilitating good environmental management, which will cover energy, transport, water, habitat and waste impacts.  This will draw on an existing pilot low-carbon renovation project on a Council owned site on Castleham estate.
Combe Valley Countryside Park
5.15 The park is being developed and managed through joint working between Hastings Borough Council, Rother District Council and East Sussex County Council. The Countryside Park covers approximately 600 hectares and will conserve and enhance the green space between Hastings and Bexhill and strengthen the connections between the two towns. It includes the Pebsham landfill site, the fields at Glyne Gap, the Combe Haven Valley Site of Special Scientific Interest and the coast at Glyne Gap.
5.16 The vision for the park is to “create and manage a high quality sustainable, attractive and accessible multifunctional countryside area to serve the recreational and economic needs of residents and visitors”.  The space will be used for leisure, relaxation, sport, ecology and education. The park will provide access to the countryside, whilst balancing the need to proactively manage wildlife habitats.
5.17 The current plans envisage an activity park in the vicinity of the landfill site, a coastal park to its south, a wetland wildlife area to the north and an environmental educational centre to the north east.
5.18 The countryside park will help to meet a county-wide open space deficiency within the locality as identified within the East Sussex Open Spaces Strategy and serving an urban population of 130,000 people, is fundamental in achieving the shared approach to regeneration for Bexhill and Hastings.  It will also be an important part of the green infrastructure network, providing linkages to the rural areas surrounding Hastings, (see Policy EN2).Chapter 5: Spatial Areas44   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
5.19 A Development Strategy Review and Implementation Plan 2012-2015 for the park has been approved by 
Hastings, Rother and East Sussex Councils. This will be regularly updated and revised to guide how the park changes and develops up to 2028.
Environmental opportunities
5.20 The Hastings Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Study (2009) has shown that there may be some potential for wind energy along the urban fringe areas, which may include Combe Valley Countryside Park.  We intend to take a positive approach to delivering renewable energy development in the town, and will work in partnership with Rother District Council in considering and identifying sites in urban fringe areas.  Any consideration of 
sites that do come forward within Combe Valley Countryside Park will need to give due consideration to the 
Parks objectives and purpose of its designation, in line with part b) of Policy SC6.
5.21 Through heat mapping, the Conquest Hospital has been identified as an area of high heat demand.  This presents potential for the introduction of Combined Heat and Power (CHP) systems and district heating networks into the existing building stock.
5.22 Some of the most significant wildlife habitats in the town are located within Western Area; the ancient woodland SSSI of the Marline Valley, Filsham Reedbeds LNR and the Combe Haven SSSI and the ancient woodland LNR of Churchwood.  These lie adjacent to the wider countryside and the High Weald AONB, providing links to the wider countryside and habitat and species diversity.   
5.23 It is important for us to continue to work with key partners to improve the quality of current wildlife sites by better habitat management; increasing the size of existing wildlife habitats; enhancing connections between sites and creating new sites where we can, using the green infrastructure network and therefore reducing the pressure on wildlife by improving the wider environment. 
5.24 Flooding is a key issue within parts of Western Area, although the area does benefit from sea defences to protect against tidal flooding.  Flood zones 2 and 3 encompass areas at Glyne Gap, Bulverhythe Recreation Grounds, along Combe Haven between Pebsham and the Combe Haven Holiday Park, the Combe Haven Valley, to the South of Bulverhythe Road to Cinque Ports Way and along parts of the Hollington Stream, particularly at Harley Shute playing fields.   Development in these areas will need to demonstrate how flood risk has been addressed in accordance with Policy SC7, through the application of the sequential and exception tests where necessary, and the submission of detailed flood risk assessments.
POLICY FA1: Strategic Policy for Western Area
The following table sets out the overall indicative quantity of development for Western Area, which 
will be explored in further detail in the Development Management Plan.  
Planning Focus Area Housing – range of dwellings by area up 2028Employment – m
2 
of additional (net) employment land up to 2028Retail - m
2 of 
additional (net) retail comparison floorspace up to 2028
1. Little Ridge and Ashdown220 - 280 Mixed B1, B2, B8 – c.23,400m²	(at	Queensway	& Whitworth Road) 0m²
2. Greater Hollington 250 - 310 Mixed B1, B2, B8 c.13,300m²	(at	Churchfields, Castleham & Ponswood Industrial Estates) 0m²
3. Filsham Valley and Bulverhythe630 - 700 0m² 0m²
Total 1,100 - 1,290 36,700m² 0m²
Table 2: The indicative quantity of development for Western AreaThe Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     45
In Western Area, we will also:
a)	 ensure	development	along	the	Queensway	Employment	Corridor	meets	high	standards	of	
environmental sustainability within what is practical and economically viable
b) support the development of land at West Marina for a mix of housing and leisure uses
c) encourage the retention of existing, and provision of more high quality visitor accommodation 
along the Seafront, the main arterial routes, and close to other generators of demand
d)	 be	less	strict	in	retaining	premises	in	their	existing	land	use	(as	defined	by	the	relevant	Land	Use	
Classes Order) providing a sound employment based case can be made to secure employment development at Ponswood, Churchfields, Castleham and West Ridge 
e) support research and development facilities aligned to the needs of local industries as well as further improvements to the town’s educational infrastructure
f) support the delivery of the proposed Bexhill - Hastings Link Road and A21 Baldslow Link improvements, and work to secure their timely provision
g) work with Rother District Council and East Sussex County Council to establish and manage Combe Valley Countryside Park as a sustainable multi-functional countryside area with recreation, biodiversity conservation and regeneration opportunities, and support its development in line with the Park Development Strategy and Implementation Plan
h) work with Rother District Council to explore renewable energy opportunities on the Fringes, including Combe Valley Countryside Park, subject to compatibility with Policy SC6: Renewable Energy Developments
i) protect, manage and enhance the green spaces network, in particular, the Marline Valley Woods and Combe Haven Sites of Special Scientific Interest, the Filsham Reedbeds, Marline Valley Woods, Ponds Wood and Churchwood Local Nature Reserves and significant open spaces at Church Wood, Bexhill Recreation Ground and the Seafront
j) support the implementation of the strategic network of cycle routes to link communities and facilities, particularly from the Conquest Hospital down towards Hastings Town Centre and out to Combe Valley Countryside Park as identified on the Policies Map
k) direct development to areas at the lowest risk of flooding, and require site specific Flood Risk Assessments to be provided for development in areas at a higher risk as identified in the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment - in the vicinity of Bulverhythe and West Marina and the Combe Haven River,	Stonehouse	Drive,	Upper	Glen	Road	Hollington	Old	Lane	and	Gillsmans	Hill
l) explore opportunities for combined heat and power (CHP) connected to district heating systems or combined cooling, heat and power (CCHP) for development proposals within the vicinity of the Conquest Hospital
m) support the opening and development of the St Leonards Academy at Filsham Valley school site
 Chapter 5: Spatial Areas46   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
ii) Central Area
Figure 7: Map showing Central Area
An Introduction to Central Area
5.25 Central Area comprises the planning focus areas of St Helens, Silverhill & Alexandra Park, Maze Hill & Burtons’ 
St Leonards, Central St Leonards & Bohemia, Hastings Town Centre and West Hill. It is the most densely populated spatial area, with 46,040 residents, and has the lowest proportion of 0-15 year olds in the town, at just 16.9% (ONS Mid 2012 population estimates).
5.26 Each area has its own unique identity, ranging from the active Hastings Town Centre with over 500 retail units and predominantly privately owned or private rented housing, to the expansive Alexandra Park, surrounded by large Victorian properties. Silverhill provides local shops and small businesses that are popular with local residents, as well as an Asda supermarket, whilst St Helens is predominantly residential, with a high proportion of privately owned properties. 
5.27 Central Area contains 15 out of the 18 Conservation areas in the town.  Data from the 2010 Index of Multiple Deprivation (released in 2011) shows that Central St Leonards & Bohemia and Hastings Town Centre are the most deprived planning focus areas in Central Area, ranking 2nd and 3rd in Hastings as a whole. Conversely, St Helens is one of the least deprived planning focus areas, highlighting the diversity of this spatial area.  Central St Leonards & Bohemia and Hastings Town Centre are also the most deprived areas in Hastings in terms of fuel poverty, with 17.3% of households in the Town Centre in fuel poverty, and 17.6% in Central St Leonards & Bohemia.
5.28 A significant amount of regeneration funding has been focused in the town centre in recognition of these issues, particularly in terms of improving the education offer at the University of Brighton Hastings Campus and the new Sussex Coast College. In addition, the new office and retail developments at Priory Quarter will ensure the quality of space available is improved, and contribute positively to the local economy.The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     47
5.29 Taken together, all these developments will work towards maintaining and improving the vitality and viability 
of Hastings town centre, for the benefit of the town as a whole.  Hastings town centre will continue to be a focus for change and growth; along with infill and extension opportunities at some of the town’s existing employment estates.
Strategic policy for Central Area
5.30 Major developments and improvements planned in the town centre form the focus for change in Central Area, although tourism, flooding, open space and housing are also key considerations for the area as a whole.  It will also be important to support educational growth and associated facilities, including accommodation for 
students and the evening and night time economy.
5.31 The focus on regeneration in Central St Leonards and the wider South St Leonards area will continue, 
particularly in terms of housing mix and tenure in Central St Leonards.  We will also continue to support Central St Leonards and Silverhill as district centres, and introduce management measures to retain and focus the function of Bohemia as a local shopping centre.
5.32	 Between	1,220	and	1,500	new	homes,	21,700m²	of	employment	floorspace,	and	approximately	20,500m²	of	
comparison goods retail floorspace will be provided in Central Area up to 2028, in accordance with Policy FA2 below. Table 4 gives a broad indication of the potential number of new homes that are deliverable by 2028, for each of the Planning Focus Areas in Central Area.
Environmental opportunities
5.33 Through heat mapping, Hastings Town Centre and Summerfields Sports Centre have both been identified as areas of high heat demand.  This presents potential for the introduction of Combined Heat and Power (CHP) systems and district heating networks into the existing building stock, particularly alongside any large scale new retail development in the case of Hastings Town Centre.
5.34 Given that Central Area is the most densely populated of the 3 spatial areas, it is essential that communities within have access to good quality open space.  Despite its urban nature, the town as a whole does have a surprising wealth of good quality open spaces and nature reserves, which we need to enhance and develop, to help the connections between human well being and the natural environment.  Key parks and open spaces in Central Area include St Helens Woods Local Nature Reserve, Summerfields Woods Local Nature Reserve and the national heritage awarded park, Alexandra Park.
5.35 Our commitment is to ensure that we properly value nature and open spaces by safeguarding and managing them, to enhance their wildlife value and encourage access for all sectors of the community.
Cultural opportunities
5.36 There is significant potential for building on the existing cultural offer in both St Leonards and Hastings town centres.  The Hastings Cultural Regeneration Strategy, specifically looks to developing cultural quarters in Central St Leonards built around studio and workshop space for the creative industries, and in Hastings Town Centre from the White Rock to Station Plaza.  It will be important to support creative businesses in this area, encouraging the take up of empty units for studios and workshops in these locations where appropriate.Chapter 5: Spatial Areas48   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
POLICY FA2: Strategic Policy for Central Area
The following table sets out the overall indicative quantity of development for Central Area, which 
will be explored in further detail in the Development Management Plan.
Planning Focus Area Housing – range of dwellings by area up to 2028Employment – m
2 
of additional (net) employment land up to 2028Retail - m
2 of additional (net) 
retail comparison floorspace up to 2028
4. St Helens 210 - 250 0m² 0m²
5. Silverhill and Alexandra Park300 - 360 0m² 0m²
6. Maze Hill and Burtons St Leonards220 - 280 0m² 0m²
7. Central St Leonards and Bohemia240 - 300 0m² A modest quantity of retail development would be supported in Central St Leonards compatible with function as a district centre
8. Hastings Town Centre200 - 240 B1(a) – Approx. 21,700m²	(the	remaining phases of the Priory Quarter)Up	to	20,500m²	of	comparison	retail space in town centre
10. West Hill 50 - 70 0m² 0m²
Total 1,220 - 1,500 21,700m² Up	to	20,500m²			Note:	Any	retail development in Central St Leonards or elsewhere would contribute to the meeting of the identified need of 20,500m²
Table 3: The indicative quantity of development for Central Area
In Central Area, we will also:
a) support further delivery of regeneration and change in Hastings Town Centre by 2028
b) support research and development facilities aligned to the needs of local industries as well as 
further improvements to the town’s educational infrastructure
c) protect and enhance Central St Leonards and Silverhill as District Centres
d) focus on improving the physical environment, the quality and mix of housing and the local economy in Central St Leonards
e) consider the rationalisation of the primary retail area, to protect the function of Bohemia as a local shopping centre
f) explore opportunities for Combined Heat and Power connected to District Heating systems in the vicinity of the Summerfields Sports Centre
g) support the implementation of the strategic network of cycle routes from the town centre out to strategic open spaces, the seafront, nature conservation areas and community facilities as identified on the Policies Map 
h) protect, manage and enhance the green spaces network, in particular, the Local Nature Reserves at Old Roar Gill and Summerfields Woods and other significant open spaces at Alexandra Park, Old Roar Gill, BOS Field, St Helens Wood, West Hill, Summerfields Woods, Hastings Cemetery , pedestrian only streets in the town centre, the Seafront, William Parker Sports College, Sandhurst recreation ground, Gensing Gardens, St Leonards Gardens, Warrior Square and Horntye ParkThe Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     49
i) ensure all developments take account of past flooding and the impact of anticipated future 
climate changes on flooding in the Town Centre. Aim to reduce the overall level of flood risk in the area through the layout and form of the development, improvements to local defences and the application of suitable sustainable drainage systems.
j) encourage the retention of existing, and provision of more high quality visitor accommodation along the Seafront, the main arterial routes, and close to other generators of demand 
k) protect and enhance architectural heritage, particularly in the conservation areas
l) encourage mixed use developments and explore the potential for ‘living above the shop’
m) support densities of at least 40 dwellings per hectare in Hastings Town Centre, and Central St Leonards and Silverhill district centres
Hastings Town Centre
5.37 The Hastings & Bexhill Task Force developments over recent years have already made Hastings Town Centre more vibrant, and we now need to make sure this is taken forward in the longer term.  It is important to maintain and improve the role of the town centre as a pleasant, lively and safe place for shopping, recreation, education, employment, and as a place to live, as well as developing the evening economy.
5.38 The town centre will remain a focus for education and employment, and the centre’s role as a sub-regional shopping centre will be enhanced through the development of an additional 20,500m
2 of comparison goods 
floorspace to meet projected retail needs (see Policy FA3).
5.39 We will also encourage the development of cultural quarters in Hastings Town Centre from the White Rock Theatre to Station Plaza, by encouraging the re-use of empty units for studio purposes where appropriate.
POLICY FA3: Strategy for Hastings Town Centre
In Hastings Town Centre we will:
a) provide for c.21,700m
2	(net)	employment	floorspace	at	Priory	Quarter	by	2028
b) provide for 20,500m2 (gross/net) retail comparison goods floorspace up to 2028
c) achieve a more even mix of housing tenure 
d) promote competitiveness in terms of the range and type of shops operating in the area
e) ensure the area is attractive to visitors and support the retention of visitor accommodation
f) promote accessibility by local public transport, walking and cycling, and for people with 
disabilities
g) develop the evening economy
h) promote and encourage improvements to the public realm as part of new development schemes and in day to day repairs and maintenance
i) promote leisure and cultural facilities including a new library, registration service and wedding venue, and support the development of cultural quarters between White Rock & the America Ground and Station Plaza through the Development Management Plan 
j) protect and enhance architectural heritage, particularly in the conservation area
k) maintain the distinctiveness of the area in terms of architecture, townscape and function
l) improve the existing housing stock and quality of life for residents
m) encourage mixed use developments and explore the potential for ‘living above the shop’
n) seek to reduce the number of long term empty homes
o) control the distribution and mix of Houses in Multiple Occupation within the area
 Chapter 5: Spatial Areas50   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Central St Leonards
5.40 Central St Leonards presents a complex mix of social, environmental and economic challenges. It has some of 
the highest unemployment levels and lowest household incomes in the town. At October 2011 12.1% of the resident population between 16 – 64 were claiming Job Seekers Allowance compared to 7.7% for the town as a whole (NOMIS). Also, in 2011 average household mean income within the area was £25,448 in comparison to £30,715 for the town as a whole (source: CACI, 2011).
5.41 In recognition of this Central St Leonards remains a priority regeneration area for the Council.  We are focusing on key physical, social and economic interventions to bring about a ‘step change’ in the area, and aim to change peoples’ perception of Central St Leonards, to achieve long-term economic growth, inward investment and a better quality of life for the local community.
5.42 Central St Leonards has a large proportion of privately rented dwellings and houses in multiple occupation, many of which are well below modern standards. This is partly a reflection of the age and type of the housing stock. There is a predominance of large Victorian properties, which have been converted to multi-occupancy. It is important that we encourage larger family units in Central St Leonards to ensure a better mix of dwelling sizes and tenure, and help to encourage a more permanent, less transient local population in Central St Leonards.
5.43 The area was declared a Housing Renewal Area in 2003 and a range of investment and enforcement programmes have resulted in significant improvement. Nevertheless the area is still significantly deprived and the Borough Council has established a further 3 year housing- led regeneration programme called the Coastal Space Project St Leonards to build upon earlier work. This is a joint funded initiative between Hastings Borough Council, Local Space and AmicusHorizon Housing Association with the support of the Homes and Communities Agency. It is aligned with a proactive enforcement programme, empty property action and the extension of private sector licensing of higher risk HMO properties. Accompanying the housing renewal is a range of supporting action linked to the economic and social regeneration of the area.
5.44 Central St Leonards is a place that is positively changing. The area has many independent retailers and has attracted a number of new businesses over the past few years, thereby drawing new residents and visitors to the town. Central St Leonards serves an important role as a district shopping centre, and we need to take a flexible approach in terms of the different types of uses we allow, whilst ensuring its function as a local centre is not compromised. A positive attitude to the development and use of existing commercial and employment spaces is also essential in order to provide opportunities for local entrepreneurship and skills training. It is important that a range of business premises is available, including affordable and managed space for small businesses and start-ups. Detailed management policies regarding the retail centre will be further examined in the Development Management Plan.
POLICY FA4: Strategy for Central St Leonards
In Central St Leonards, we will:
a) support the development of key sites in Central St Leonards, including the former Hastings 
College site in Archery Road, the Coastal Space Project and Alpha Café site, to be taken forward as opportunities arise 
b) maintain and enhance the area’s role as a District shopping centre through the protection of a retail core – to be identified in the Development Management Plan
c) support the retention, development and conversion of properties for training and small business, community uses, arts and cultural sector, supporting the development of a cultural quarter in Central St Leonards through the Development Management Plan.
d) support positive proposals for activities on the St Leonards seafront including Bottle Alley, Warrior Square promenade, West St Leonards (bathing pool site) and other parts of the seafront
e) continue to concentrate resources on improving housing conditions and reducing the number of empty dwellings in the area
f) seek to achieve a better mix of housing by encouraging the provision of larger  dwellings (2 or more bedrooms), and supporting innovative housing schemes that will help to improve the perception of the areaThe Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     51
g) encourage the building of a range of different sized housing units,  including conversions and 
changes of use, to provide a mix of dwelling unit sizes within single developments (rather than being limited to a mix of 1 and 2 bed units)
h) work with the Homes and Communities Agency and Housing Associations to achieve greater levels of housing choice in the area by promoting more affordable housing
i) grant planning permission for suitable proposals that tackle key buildings that are in need of repair. A flexible approach to their future use will be adopted if this assists in securing their future viability.
j) ensure that development proposals and improvements to the existing housing stock take into account the historic character of the area
k) seek to reduce the number of long term empty homes
l) control the distribution and mix of Houses in Multiple Occupation within the area
m) promote and encourage sustainable modes of transport, specifically through the improvement of pedestrian and cycle routes
 
iii) Eastern Area
Figure 8: Map showing Eastern Area
An Introduction to Eastern Area
5.45 Eastern Area is made up of the Old Town, Hillcrest & Ore Valley, Clive Vale & Ore Village and Hastings Country Park planning focus areas. 16,087 people live in Eastern Area (ONS, Mid 2012 population estimates, and it has the highest proportion of young people when compared to the rest of the town  with 21%  in the 0-15 age category.
5.46 This is one of the most diverse areas in the town.  In addition to residential areas like Halton, Clive Vale, West Chapter 5: Spatial Areas52   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Hill and the Pilot Road area, Eastern Area also offers the attractions of the Old Town and the Stade, Hastings 
Country Park Nature Reserve, and Hastings Cliffs Special Area of Conservation, and business accommodation at the Ivyhouse Lane employment area.
5.47 The expansive Old Town Conservation area falls within Eastern Area, along with the Tillington Terrace Conservation area further north.
5.48 Data from the 2010 Index of Multiple Deprivation (released in 2011) shows that the Hillcrest and Ore Valley Planning Focus Area is the most deprived in Hastings overall. The Old Town is the 7th most deprived overall, but 11th out of 13 for the education domain.  12.3% of households in the Eastern Area are shown as being in fuel poverty.
5.49 Work is ongoing to regenerate this area and tackle deprivation. In recent years 2 major schemes have been brought forward - The Stade improvement scheme, which includes the Stade Hall, seafood training kitchen, high quality café and open air event space, in addition to the Jerwood Gallery itself, and the Sussex Coast College site in Parker Road. The Hastings and St Leonards Academies opened in the existing school buildings in September 2011, with students moving into the new building on the Hillcrest site in February 2013 and building work for the Hastings Academy being completed in September 2012.
Strategy for Eastern Area
5.50 The strategy for Eastern Area is to continue regeneration efforts on the Ore Valley Development sites at Ore Valley and the wider area, and secure a sustainable future for the area.  Managing and mitigating recreational pressure from new development in the area on the Hastings Cliffs Special Area of Conservation will be a significant part of this strategy.
5.51 In addition, it is important to improve the vitality and viability of Ore as a District Centre and Old Town as a local centre, and support the development of the Hastings Academy.
5.52 Between 740 – 920 new homes and employment floorspace to be determined through further study and the Development Management Plan will be provided in Eastern Area up to 2028, in accordance with Policy FA5 below. Table 4 below gives a broad indication of the potential number of new homes that are deliverable in the Plan period, for each of the Planning Focus Areas in Eastern Area. 
Hastings Old Town
5.53 Hastings Old Town is historically and architecturally a valuable part of the town and, also very popular as a tourist attraction - through both the unique shopping offer, and the leisure activities available on the Seafront and at the Stade.  Businesses also serve the local community and this balance gives year round life and vitality to the area.
5.54 It is therefore important to build on this tourism and cultural offer, and ensure that the area continues to function strongly as a local shopping centre, protecting its unique architectural heritage.
Environmental opportunities
5.55 The Hastings Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Study (2009)16 has shown some potential for wind energy 
in a small area of Hastings Country Park. We will explore the potential for a further turbine in this area to help offset the carbon emissions resulting from implementation of the whole development strategy for the town.
5.56 There is also potential for a joint urban fringe management approach to the north of the town, approaching The Ridge, with Rock Lane to the east and Ivyhouse Lane to the west with Rother District Council. The area lies within the High Weald AONB, but its quality and accessibility could be improved to provide a valuable amenity for residents in both areas.  In assessing the appropriate balance of land uses, and their management, further consideration will be given to the scale of future employment development at Ivyhouse Lane, as well as the potential for housing and for securing environmental, amenity and access improvements.
16 www.hastings.gov.uk/environment_planning/planning/localplan/evidence_base/The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     53
5.57 The eastern area of the town has the most significant wildlife areas in terms of international importance and 
designation.  Hastings Country Park Nature Reserve is the largest area of publicly accessible natural habitat in the town, and forms the gateway to the High Weald.  The spectacular countryside and diverse range of habitats and species mean that the Nature Reserve is one of our prime visitor attractions. However, it also provides out of season opportunities that are currently under utilised.
5.58 It is important for us to continue to work with key partners to improve the quality of current wildlife sites by better habitat management; increase the size of existing wildlife habitats; enhancing connections between sites and create new sites where we can, using the green infrastructure network and therefore reducing the pressure on wildlife by improving the wider environment.
POLICY FA5: Strategic Policy for Eastern Area
The following table sets out the overall indicative quantity of development for Eastern Area, which 
will be explored in further detail in the Development Management Plan.
Planning Focus Area Housing – range of dwellings by area up to 2028Employment – m
2 
of additional (net) employment land up to 2028Retail - m
2 of 
additional (net) retail comparison floorspace up to 2028
9. Old Town 50 - 70 0m² 0m²
11. Hillcrest and Ore Valley440 - 540 Further study required through Development Management Plan to determine0m²
12. Clive Vale and Ore Village250 - 310 0m
20m²
13. Hastings Country Park0 0m² 0m²
Total 740 - 920 Potential for mixed B1, B2, B8 – at Ivyhouse Lane Industrial Estate – subject to further study0m²
Table 4: The indicative quantity of development for Eastern Area 
In Eastern Area we will also:
a) adopt a joined up approach with Rother District Council to the use and management of land 
between Ivyhouse Lane and Rock Lane, to secure environmental and access improvements in association with development in the locality
b) protect and enhance the Old Town as a local centre to better meet people’s day-to-day needs, and encourage the retention of traditional shops and shopping facilities in George Street and the High Street
c) maintain and enhance Ore Village as a District Centre and improve accessibility as far as possible
d) protect and maintain the unique townscape of Hastings Old Town, a visitor attraction in its own right
e) encourage the retention of existing, and provision of more high quality visitor accommodation along the Seafront, the main arterial routes, and close to other generators of demand
f) support research and development facilities aligned to the needs of local industries as well as further improvements to the town’s educational infrastructure
g) protect, manage and enhance the green network of nature areas and open spaces that include Hastings Country Park Nature Reserve and associated national and international designated wildlife areas such as Hastings Cliffs Special Area of Conservation and Hastings Cliffs to Pett Beach Site of Special Scientific Interest and other significant open spaces at the Ore Valley Development site, the Seafront, Hastings Country Park and West HillChapter 5: Spatial Areas54   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
h) aim to achieve National Nature Reserve (NNR) status for the Hastings Country Park, as part of 
Council’s Biodiversity Action Plan, area by 2015
i) explore the potential for renewable energy opportunities in Hastings Country Park to meet the town’s long term energy needs
j) support the implementation of the strategic network of cycle routes that will link communities to the strategic open spaces, the seafront, nature conservation areas and community facilities, particularly along the Seafront and up to Ore Village as identified on the Policies Map
k) encourage local communities to access areas of open space
l) support the opening and development of the Hastings Academy at Hillcrest school site
m) support densities of at least 40 dwellings per hectare in the Old Town and Ore Village
iv) The Seafront
Figure 9: Map showing The Seafront 
An Introduction to The Seafront
5.59 The Seafront is very much the public face of the town and one of our prime assets.  We need to plan change in the area to make more of economic, leisure and health opportunities associated with a seafront location, make the beach and promenade accessible to all sectors of the community and continue to encourage owners of seafront properties to invest in the upkeep and repair of their buildings to continue to improve the towns’ image.The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     55
Strategy for The Seafront 
5.60 The strategy for the Seafront is to build on the existing tourism economy and continue to enhance the 
Seafront and public realm.  
5.61 The Seafront Strategy was prepared under the direction of the Hastings & Bexhill Task Force, Tourism South East, Hastings Borough Council and Rother District Council in 2005, which was refreshed in 2013 to generate a new action plan.  This is an economic strategy to regenerate Hastings and Bexhill by using the seafront as the area’s best asset. We will support the delivery of key projects and proposals taken from the Seafront Strategy through policies in this Plan and the Development Management Plan where necessary.
Tourism and the public realm
5.62 Recent years have seen significant improvement along the Seafront.  The Marina Pavilion has now been restored, there have been improvements to the physical environment through the Council’s Grotbusters scheme, a multi-use games area and volleyball court have been installed along the promenade.  The Jerwood Gallery and surrounding space and the extension to the National Cycle Network was completed in 2012.
5.63 The town also continues to host popular festivals, for example, Jack in the Green, Seafood & Wine, Hastings Old Town Carnival Week and Hastings Week throughout the year, attracting visitors from outside of the town.
5.64 Despite these improvements, it is still important for us to continue to focus on tourism and environmental improvements, taking account of the effects of climate change and rising sea levels.  Expanding and maintaining an all year round tourist season is of great importance, and we need to ensure the correct types of accommodation and visitor attraction are available to support this.  We need to retain and improve our existing visitor attractions and accommodation along the Seafront, and direct new visitor accommodation there too.
5.65 The Jerwood and associated Stade developments will help bring new visitors to the area, and are likely to raise expectations of the seaside environment.  In the past, improvements to the public realm have tended to be ad hoc and dependent on new developments, so it is important for us to continue to obtain private and public investment, and promote public art to enhance and maintain the surroundings.
5.66 The development of Combe Valley Countryside Park and the extension of the National Cycleway Network, together with future development at West Marina, will also promote the importance of the Bulverhythe and West St Leonards areas as the western gateway to the town.
Environmental issues
5.67 Flood defences located along the Bulverhythe area of the coast are the responsibility of the Environment Agency. These were enhanced in 2006, and provide a 1 in 200 year standard of protection.  
5.68 Coast Protection assets include seawalls, groynes and shingle banks are the responsibility of Hastings Borough Council. The South Foreland to Beachy Head Shoreline Management Plan states that the long term policy is to “hold the line” in providing protection for the frontage, which means that coastal defences in the town are likely to be maintained in good working order for the foreseeable future.
5.69 Over the past few years the Council has built a new rock groyne to prevent wave overtopping at Carlisle Parade and is carrying out a programme of groyne refurbishment.
5.70 Further investment will be required to maintain the existing standard of defence and to compensate for the effects of climate change (including sea level rise and an increase in intensity, severity and frequency of coastal storms).  Planned investment includes the construction of additional rock groynes at Carlisle Parade, enhancement and repair of the Harbour Arm and eventual replacement of the existing timber groynes. In addition the Council will continue to recycle shingle that accumulates at the eastern end of the coastline to areas where it is eroded.Chapter 5: Spatial Areas56   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Cultural opportunities
5.71 Following the opening of new cultural venues at The Stade Open Space, Stade Hall and Jerwood Gallery, we 
need to ensure the best use is made of existing venues, particularly along the Seafront. We will encourage
 the development of cultural quarters at the Old Town and the Stade, making the most of the fishing industry, its museum and the Jerwood Gallery..
  
POLICY FA6: Strategic Policy for The Seafront
Along the Seafront, we will:
a) encourage the regeneration of key landmark sites along the seafront, from the Stade to 
West Marina, supporting development that builds on the Seafront’s distinctive heritage and attractiveness as a destination for leisure and recreational activity
b) take forward key projects and proposals in the Seafront Strategy to contribute to a co-ordinated plan for the Coastline in Hastings and Bexhill
c) implement the strategic network of cycle routes along the Seafront to connect with the strategic open spaces, nature conservation areas and community facilities in the rest of the town
d) support leisure and residential development to create an appealing  destination at West Marina 
e) continue to lobby and support the delivery of the Hastings - Bexhill Link Road to relieve congestion along the A259
f) support proposals for bringing the White Rock Baths building back in to use, or intermediate proposals for leisure at this site
g) encourage new visitor accommodation along the Seafront and in Hastings Town Centre
h) support a sustainable future for Hastings Pier
i) encourage the development of all year round tourist attractions to provide permanent jobs
j) install a seafront playground, other smaller play spaces, and a trail of fitness equipment at key locations
 The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     57
Part Four – Theme Based Policies
Chapter 6: Developing Sustainable Communities
Chapter 7: Protecting our Environment
i) The Built Environment
ii) The Natural Environment
Chapter 8: Housing
Chapter 9: The Local Economy
i) Employment
ii) Town, Districts & Local Centres
iii) Tourism and Visitors
Chapter 10: Community Infrastructure
Chapter 11: Transport & Accessibility
 
The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011- 2028, adopted February 2014      5758   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Chapter 6: Developing Sustainable 
Communities
Managing change
6.1 The Government is committed to the creation of sustainable communities – that is, creating and maintaining places where people want to live and stay.  To achieve this, and realise the vision of the Planning Strategy, we have prepared an overall framework for managing change in the town up to 2028, supported by more detailed policies dealing with different aspects of change. The role of design and access statements in supporting good design in development is set out in Policy SC2.
POLICY SC1: Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way
Growth and change will be managed so that development meets sustainability objectives, avoids 
significant vulnerability to the impacts of climate change, improves the quality of the natural environment, supports the diverse needs of communities and provides vibrant, safe, healthy and inclusive places where existing and future residents want to live and work.  This will be achieved through:
a) endeavouring to meet housing needs of all sectors of the community, including the provision of 
affordable housing
b) providing access to education, training and jobs and supporting the creation of new enterprises to bring economic prosperity and greater self-sufficiency
c) improving access and ease of mobility for all in new and existing developments, but especially for sensory and physically impaired or disabled people
d) supporting the social, economic and environmental regeneration of disadvantaged areas and communities
e) enhancing the cohesion and vitality of communities, providing neighbourhoods with a vibrant and accessible mix of flexible and compatible uses, services and community facilities
f) requiring new development to make provision for fibre-based broadband infrastructure
g) managing flood risk and reducing the potential effects of climate change on existing and future communities
h) providing accessible forms of development that reduce the need to travel by car and are integrated with public transport and other sustainable modes of travel, allow for ease of movement and provide safe environments
i) requiring high quality distinctive architecture and urban design which adds to local character and sense of place
j) reducing opportunities for crime and disorder through innovative design and the clear distinction of public and private space
k) providing an accessible greenspace network and protection and enhancement of biodiversity
l) protecting against light, air, water, land and noise pollution.
m) supporting the move to a low carbon economy
n) providing everyone with access to a good quality natural environment
o) ensuring that the amenity of development proposals in proximity to existing wastewater facilities is protected
 The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     59
POLICY SC2: Design and Access Statements
Design and access statements accompanying planning applications should demonstrate the 
evolution of the design prior to submission, the rationale behind the scheme, and how it meets the criteria of policy SC1.  Place specific design briefs may also be appropriate depending on circumstances, suitability and timing.
Developments should follow the waste hierarchy, as set out in the prevailing Department for 
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) guidance
17, in the choice of building materials and 
construction methods used, and include this in the Design and Access Statement
6.2 This policy will be supported by more detailed design policies in the Development Management Plan.   
Addressing climate change
6.3 Climate change is likely to result in wetter, warmer winters and drier, hotter summers, along with a rise in sea levels. Summer rainfall in the South East is projected to decrease by 8% in the 2020s, 19% in the 2050s and by 23% in the 2080s
18.
6.4 The planning system is able to ensure that the design and location of development proposals take into account the need to adapt to future climate change through both its ability to grant planning permission and the allocation of suitable development sites in plans. In particular, planning has a role in:•	 ensuring	inappropriate	development	does	not	take	place	in	areas	at	high	risk	of	river	or	sea	flooding;
•	 ensuring	development	does	not	make	water	shortages	and	drought	worse;
•	 helping	to	manage	high	temperatures,	particularly	in	urban	areas	through	protection	and	management	
of urban greenspace; and
•	 controlling	the	spatial	design	of	new	development,	such	as	its	layout	and	orientation.
6.5 In Hastings, we intend to take a pro-active approach to reducing the town’s carbon emissions, and ensuring 
sustainable development and high quality design are at the heart of our approach to plan making and development management. It may be appropriate in the longer term to consider the potential for water-based energy from the sea such as wave and tidal power. We also recognise that existing buildings too, can add to the town’s overall carbon emissions and therefore these should be considered in any strategy towards dealing with climate change. Private and community energy generation or water harvesting also has the potential to reduce utility bills and fuel poverty. We will encourage the installation of renewable energy and micro-generation technologies and energy and water efficiency measures within existing development.
6.6 We are committed to providing an additional 3,400 homes and significant levels of commercial development up to 2028. We therefore need to reduce our carbon dioxide (CO
2) and other greenhouse gas emissions, in line 
with the targets set in the Climate Change Act 2008, and to offset the additional (approximate) 3,000 tonnes projected to result from the planned development in the town
19.
6.7 Climate change mitigation and adaptation measures such as micro-generation, green roofs and walls, sustainable drainage systems, networks of green spaces, the protection and enhancement of biodiversity, waste reduction and recycling, and flood risk management are all now essential components of good planning and design along with the more traditional concerns such as sense of place, local distinctiveness and designing out crime.
17 Defra, 2011 Guidance on applying the Waste Hierarchy http://www.defra.gov.uk/publications/2011/06/15/pb13530-waste-hierarchy-guidance/ 
or as superseded  
18 source: UK Climate Change projections 2009 South East central estimate based on medium emissions scenario
19 source: Hastings Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Study 2009 Chapter 6: Sustainable Communities60   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
POLICY SC3: Promoting Sustainable and Green Design
All development must be designed to:
a) incorporate appropriate climate change mitigation and adaptation measures such as green roofs 
and walls, sustainable drainage systems, multi-functional green space, protecting and enhancing biodiversity, waste reduction and recycling facilities, water efficiency, flood risk management, and the use of recycled materials in new development
b) enable a low carbon future in a changing climate
Innovative design proposals that enhance and attractively contrast local surroundings will be supported.
Working towards zero carbon development
6.8 Whilst we recognise the importance of micro-generation technologies in reducing harmful gas emissions, this overall strategy seeks to implement an energy hierarchy by achieving energy efficiency first, before looking at implementation of other forms of renewable energy generation on a larger scale. The Hastings Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Study (2009)
20 did not identify any sites as being suitable for exceeding national standards 
for sustainable building set by either the Building Regulations or the Code for Sustainable Homes.  Our policy therefore concentrates on how best to achieve low carbon development in line with the requirements set by the Code for Sustainable Homes and the step-by-step tightening of the Building Regulations. The national timetable for this is as follows:
Year Target Private Sector Public Sector
2008 Introduced 1 May 2008 None Level 3
2010 Code Level 3 - A 25% improvement in energy efficiency compared to Part L of the Building Regulations 2006Level 3 Level 4
2013 Code Level 4 – A 44% improvement in energy efficiency compared to Part L of the Building Regulations 2006Level 4 Level 6
2016 Code Level 6 – Zero Carbon homes Level 6 Level 6
 Table 5: Timetable for introduction of changes to building regulations  
POLICY SC4: Working Towards Zero Carbon Development
The energy hierarchy below sets out the most suitable and cost effective method of achieving low 
carbon development.  Developers are required to follow the hierarchical approach in achieving the energy and carbon dioxide emission requirements of the Building Regulations, for all new residential development.  New non-residential development is encouraged to follow the same approach. 
1. to improve energy efficiency through thermal and fabric performance improvement measures, 
then:-
2. provide on-site renewable energy generation or on-site connected heating, or Combined Heat and Power (CHP) technologies, or Combined Cooling, Heat and Power (CCHP) systems then:-
3. the remainder of the CO
2 reduction targets to meet the Building Regulations targets should be 
met through suitable additional measures such as larger CHP or district heating systems or Mega Watt (MW) scale wind offsetting.
20 www.hastings.gov.uk/environment_planning/planning/localplan/evidence_base/ The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     61
Developers are encouraged to meet higher standards than those required nationally, and pursue 
additional low carbon or renewable energy generation measures where practicable.  
Compliance with this policy approach is required to be demonstrated through design and access 
statements submitted with a planning application.
Heat density opportunity areas
6.9 Although it is intended that zero carbon homes and carbon reduction in other non-residential buildings will be delivered through national building regulations, it is critical that the local planning system helps to direct the shift needed towards low carbon development and communities.  
6.10 Through heat mapping, the Hastings Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Study (2009) identified two high heat demand areas of the town:
•	 Conquest	Hospital
•	 Summerfields	Sports	Centre
6.11 Development in these areas could present opportunities for the introduction and expansion of Combined Heat 
and Power (CHP) systems and district heating networks into the existing build stock.
6.12 There may also be a further opportunity to support the introduction of district heating in the town centre.  We will continue to explore options for further heat density opportunity areas, and these will be identified in the Development Management Plan.
POLICY SC5 – District Heating Networks and Combined Heat and Power Systems
To facilitate compliance with the Government’s timetable to deliver zero carbon homes and 
buildings, Hastings Borough Council will explore opportunities for Combined Heat and Power systems connected to district heating networks in the vicinity of the Conquest Hospital, Summerfields Sports Centre, and Hastings town centre.   Opportunity areas will be identified in the Development Management Plan.
Renewable energy schemes
6.13 The Hastings Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Study (2009) assessed the town’s potential to provide large scale renewable energy.
6.14 The study concluded that approximately 4-5MWe (Megawatts electricity) of large scale wind power will be required to offset the carbon emissions resulting from planned development in the town, taking account of the strengthening of the government’s sustainable building standards.  
6.15 In response to this, the study identified potential for wind energy in both Combe Valley Countryside Park (within both the Hastings and Rother areas) and at Hastings Country Park.  This is in addition to the planned 2MW (megawatt) turbine at the Queensway Employment Corridor.
6.16 Reliability on the local biomass resource (conifer, non-coniferous, mixed and coppice woodland resources) is limited due to inaccessibility within the borough boundary, and competition in the surrounding area, for example, surrounding rural areas have much more available woodland.
6.17 The Council will therefore take a positive approach to delivering renewable energy developments in the town, and will work in partnership with Rother District Council in considering and identifying sites in urban fringe areas.  Any consideration of sites that do come forward within Combe Valley Countryside Park will need to give due consideration to the Parks objectives and purpose of its designation, in line with part b) of Policy SC6
Chapter 6: Sustainable Communities62   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
POLICY SC6: Renewable Energy Developments
Proposals for renewable energy developments, including any ancillary infrastructure or building will 
be supported unless:
a) their scale, form, design, material and cumulative impacts is unacceptable to the local landscape 
or	built	environment;	and
b) they would adversely impact on the local community, economy, biodiversity or historic interests
c) the scale and impact of developments in nationally recognised designations, such as the High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, Sites of Special Scientific Interest, Scheduled Monuments, Conservation Areas, Listed Buildings or Registered Parks and Gardens, is not compatible with the purpose of their designation
The Council will investigate the town’s potential for accommodating renewable and low carbon energy sources and supporting infrastructure.  Suitable sites will be identified through the Development Management Plan.
Flood risk and water quality
6.18 The 2008 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA)21 identifies that flood risk in Hastings is attributed to several 
sources.  These include tidal and river flooding, groundwater and sewer flooding, and surface water run off.  The most significant flood risk problem exists towards the west of the town around the Bulverhythe area, where groundwater, surface water run-off and tide locking combine to create high levels of flood risk.  Higher flood risk areas are also mostly apparent along the Seafront, and around the Hollington Stream and Combe Haven River.
6.19 The SFRA identifies the areas that are affected by groundwater flooding risk, and the extent of the minor aquifers.  As this covers a significant area of the town, it is important that these resources are protected from the risks posed by any new large scale commercial development, particularly in West St Leonards and central parts of the town.  The Development Management Plan will set out potential development sites in vulnerable areas that could impact on water quality, and consider the measures that need to be taken.
6.20 The Cuckmere and Sussex Havens Catchment Flood Management Plan (2009) and the Hastings Surface Water Management Plan (2011) both highlight that surface water flooding is likely to increase, with further action in the future required to reduce the impacts of climate change. Without future reductions in the amount of surface water generated, the economic and physical development of the town could be compromised. Sustainable Drainage Systems should therefore be designed to provide additional capacity to store run off.
POLICY SC7: Flood Risk 
The Council will support development proposals that avoid areas of current or future flood risk, and 
those that do not increase the risk of flooding elsewhere.  
The Council will adopt a risk-based sequential approach to determining the suitability of land for 
development, in accordance with the principles set out in national planning policy relating to Flood Risk and the Hastings Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 2008.
Following application of the sequential and exception tests where necessary, development proposals 
will need to:
•	 be	of	flood	resistant	or	resilient	design
•	 ensure	the	most	vulnerable	land	uses	are	directed	away	from	the	areas	at	highest	flood	risk	on	a	
site where there is more than one flood zone.
•	 manage	surface	water	run-off	appropriately,	particularly	in	the	Combe	Haven	Catchment	Area,	in	
accordance with the Council’s adopted Surface Water Management Plan and its standing advice
21 www.hastings.gov.uk/environment_planning/planning/localplan/evidence_base/The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     63
Developers will particularly need to address flood risk in areas at the highest risk, such as 
Bulverhythe, Combe Valley Countryside Park and Hastings Town Centre. 
Adaptation of all developments to reduce the risk of flooding will be sought through a variety of 
suitable measures, including the use of Sustainable Drainage Systems.  Proposals for the long-term management of these should be submitted to the Council at or before the planning application stage.
6.21 It is acknowledged that Hastings is within an area of ‘water stress’ as defined by the Environment Agency, and that we must continue to work towards reducing water consumption in the town.  Compulsory water metering and changes to the Building Regulations will restrict water usage and assist in reducing current demand.  Measures within Policy SC2 also seek to ensure that all new development is designed to incorporate water efficiency measure to reduce demand on water supply.
Coastal change
6.22 The South Foreland to Beachy Head Shoreline Management Plan First Review (2006)22 explores how climate 
change and natural processes will shape the shoreline over the next 100 years, and the implications this will have on coastal management.  For the coastal strip along Hastings Seafront to Bulverhythe and Glyne Gap, the long term policy is to ‘hold the line’ to prevent flooding and erosion of the seafront, and protect economic, tourism and residential assets.
6.23 For the section of the coast from Fairlight Cove to Hastings, the policy is ‘no active intervention’, allowing natural cliff retreat. There is no existing or planned development within this area.
6.24 In view of the above, the Council does not consider it necessary to identify a Coastal Change Management Area in addition to the work undertaken on the Shoreline Management Plan.
 
 
22 South East Coastal Group website at www.se-coastalgroup.org.uk  Chapter 6: Sustainable Communities64   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Chapter 7: Protecting our Environment
i) The Built Environment
Historic environment
7.1 Hastings has a very rich and varied historic environment. Historic interest exists in our buildings, our landscape 
and below ground level. In all, there are 6 scheduled monuments, over 900 listed buildings, 18 conservation areas, 2  registered historic parks, 300 archaeological sites/monuments/finds locations, and 27 archaeological notification areas within the town.  The many historic buildings and spaces combine with the town’s stunning topography to deliver a uniquely attractive and high quality historic townscape. The character of these historic areas contributes to a strong sense of place and local distinctiveness, and contributes significantly to our distinctive and rich cultural heritage, which is highly valued by many local people. The high quality historic townscapes in Hastings and St. Leonards provide attractive living and working conditions for the town’s residents, and have the potential to draw in incoming investors and new residents, both now, and in the future. The town’s rich history and historic areas contribute strongly to our tourism offer, an important sector of the local economy. 
7.2 There has been a sustained programme of Council investment in the historic environment, over the last 20 years, in order to overcome problems of long-term neglect and decay in many historic buildings.  Numerous historic buildings have now been repaired, and had original architectural features reinstated, through the sustained use of conservation grant schemes, supported with external funding from organisations like English Heritage and the Heritage Lottery Fund.  This combined long-term investment means that the historic built environment in Hastings is now in a much better condition than in previous years.  More recently, unsightly building frontages have also been improved, through the Council’s highly successful Grotbusters scheme, raising the general quality of key street frontages.
7.3 Although significant progress has been made in terms of improving building condition, the historic environment is still vulnerable to loss and inappropriate change. It is critical that these special historic buildings and areas are protected, now and in the future.  Active management of our historic environment will be required, to ensure that its significance is protected, enabling future generations the opportunity to experience and enjoy these special places.
7.4 Not all locally important features of historic or architectural interest are listed or part of a Conservation Area. However, they can still provide a valuable contribution to the local historic environment and can make an important contribution to creating a sense of place and local identity. This could include buildings and other structures and features, archaeological remains, historic open spaces and the wider historic landscape or townscape. Building and structures of local importance will be identified in a Local List.
7.5 The Council is committed to using its statutory planning powers, where necessary, to preserve and enhance the town’s unique built heritage.  The Historic Environment Record (HER) held by East Sussex County Council provides important evidence about the historic environment in Hastings.  In order to comply with Government policy, over coming years, the Council will add further to this evidence base so that we can fully assess the significance of heritage assets and the contribution they make to their environment.
POLICY EN1: Built and Historic Environment
To promote understanding and appreciation of the historic environment the Council will, within three 
years from the adoption of the Development Management Plan, develop a historic environment strategy for the conservation of the historic environment, including those heritage assets identified as being most at risk through neglect, decay or other threats. This will reinforce the historic environment record for the borough, a key information source in assessing the impact of future development on the historic environment.
Importance will be placed on new development making a positive contribution to the quality, 
character, local distinctiveness and sense of place of historic buildings and areas.The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     65
Particular care will be given to protecting the significance and setting of the following heritage assets:
a)	 Listed	buildings;
b)	 Conservation	areas;
c) locally listed heritage assets
d)	 historic	parks	and	gardens;
e)	 scheduled	monument	sites;	and	
f) areas of archaeological potential and known archaeological find sites
There is a presumption in favour of the conservation of heritage assets and their settings.  The more 
important the asset, the greater the weight that will be given to the need to conserve it.  As heritage assets are irreplaceable, any harm or loss will require clear and convincing justification.
Development which sustains and enhances the significance of heritage assets and/or their 
setting will be encouraged.  The Council will look for opportunities to enhance or better reveal the significance of the designated heritage assets, such as listed buildings and Conservation Areas, in the town.  Investment in the appropriate repair and restoration of heritage assets, where works will enhance their significance, will be encouraged and supported by the Council.
There are many areas of the Borough where there is high archaeological potential, but where 
the extent of the likely finds is, as of yet, unknown.  Great care needs to be taken to protect this archaeological resource through the planning process.   
Detailed design policies to protect the town’s heritage assets will be set out in the Development 
Management Plan.
ii) The Natural Environment
Green Infrastructure 
7.6 A healthy natural environment is essential to our economic prosperity, health and well being; it helps conserve 
and reverse the decline in biodiversity and is fundamental to minimising the extent of future climate change.
7.7 The following planning policies support the Council’s Environmental Policy Statement (March 2010)23, 
particularly in relation to the key areas of protecting the natural environment and tackling and adapting to climate change.  
The green infrastructure network
7.8 The network of green spaces (also known as the green infrastructure network) includes open spaces, woodlands, wildlife habitats, parks, recreation areas and other natural areas that provide multiple social, economic and environmental benefits. The protection, management and enhancement of this network is especially important in a dense urban area like Hastings.
7.9 Identifying a green infrastructure network is not only about protecting green space, but also has an important role in mitigating the effects of climate change, making Hastings attractive to firms and businesses, fostering community activity and  improving physical and mental health and well being.
7.10 The green infrastructure network has a number of functions including:
•	 enhancement	and	protection	of	biodiversity,	including	opportunities	to	mitigate	the	potential	impacts	of	
new development
•	 provision	of	a	natural	cooling	effect	to	mitigate	the		urban’	heat	island’	effect.	This	should	reduce	the	
need for energy hungry cooling systems and increase comfort levels in outdoor spaces
23 www.hastings.gov.uk/environment_planning/cleaner_hastings/environmental_policy/Chapter 7: Protecting our Environment66   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
•	 providing	space	for	sustainable	drainage	to	absorb	excess	rainfall.	Green	spaces	can	provide	an	efficient	
and cost-effective ‘soakaway’ for rainwater and a reservoir for grey water storage
•	 providing	local	access	to	shady	outdoor	space
•	 increasing	opportunities	for	healthy	living	e.g.	allotments	for	food	growing	and	spaces	for	recreation	and	
exercise
•	 supporting	regeneration	by	making	Hastings	an	attractive	place	to	live	and	work	in•	 protecting	historic	landscapes,	archaeological	and	built	heritage	assets
•	 providing	sustainable	transport	routes
•	 delivery	of	ecosystem	function	benefits	such	as	air	purification,	storm	water	drainage	and	reduced	
atmospheric carbon dioxide
•	 providing	a	barrier	to,	and	absorbing,	noise•	 contributing	to	social	inclusion	by	providing	places	and	spaces	for	community	activities•	 to	provide	young	people	with	opportunities	for	creative	and	challenging	play	in	a	natural	setting
•	 allowing	for	species	movement,	particularly	in	the	face	of	climate	change
•	 providing	a	network	of	footpaths	and	Rights	of	Way,	and	strengthened	links	between	nature	reserves	
and greenspaces.
POLICY EN2: Green Infrastructure Network
By properly valuing nature and the benefits that arise from our natural environment and 
green spaces, we will establish and protect a green network comprising open space and nature conservation areas, to conserve and enhance priority natural areas, and the connections between them.
The green network will ensure that everyone has access to natural, semi-natural and managed open 
space, and will maximise opportunities to conserve and enhance biodiversity.  New development will contribute to this network.
The extent of the network will be established in the Development Management Plan, and will be 
clearly shown on the Policies Map
Figure 10: Indicative plan of green areas
This indicative plan illustrates green areas across the Borough.  It displays how the 
movement of species goes beyond drawn and physical boundaries and creates a network of 
interconnected spaces that the Council is aiming to protect and enhance.The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     67
7.11 The green infrastructure network will be delivered through:
•	 financial	contributions	from	developers	potentially	through	Community	Infrastructure	Levy	should	this	
be the approach adopted by the Council and/or Section 106 Agreements)
•	 how	the	Council	manages	its	own	land
•	 working	with	East	Sussex	County	Council	to	provide	footpaths	and	cycle	ways	across	the	town.
Biodiversity and the natural environment 
7.12 The town boasts a European designated Special Area of Conservation (SAC) at Hastings Cliffs, 3 nationally 
designated Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) at Combe Haven Valley, Marline Valley and Hastings Cliffs to Pett Beach, 8 Local Nature Reserves (LNR) and 25 Local Wildlife Sites. These are the priority natural areas, and together with the coast, rivers, woods, streams, fields, parks and open spaces, are the assets that make up the natural fabric of the town
7.13 We have a statutory duty to ensure biodiversity is not lost and that the green infrastructure network is protected from development and, where possible, strengthened to provide the widest range of linked environmental and social benefits for the town, its wildlife and its citizens. In line with Government policy, we will move from net biodiversity loss to net gain, by supporting healthy, functioning ecosystems and coherent ecological networks.
7.14 All the wildlife sites and key open spaces in the town support a healthy functioning ecosystem that contributes to a better quality of life and to people’s sense of well-being.  It is important this ecosystem is protected from development and where possible, strengthened as part of the wider green infrastructure network.  
7.15 The Hastings Local Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP) identifies all of the town’s national priority habitats, including a description of the habitat and its location along with national targets and objectives relating to the habitat. The BAP shows that the majority of areas of high biodiversity importance in the town occur in the designated sites mentioned above. The Council’s BAP strategy is to enhance biodiversity by focusing on the management and protection of this green network of designated sites, which are in themselves ecologically diverse and contain priority species and habitats.
7.16 Biodiversity Opportunity Areas (BOAs) have been identified by Sussex Local Nature Partnership at Combe Haven and Marline Valley, Hastings Fringe and Romney Marsh (includes Hastings Country Park). These are part of a Sussex wide network of BOAs and identify where the greatest opportunities for habitat creation and restoration lie.
7.17 Further information on these BOAs is available from the Sussex Local Nature Partnership website at              www.sussexlnp.org.uk/support-services
POLICY EN3: Nature Conservation and Improvement of Biodiversity
The town’s biodiversity and geological resources will be protected and enhanced.  Priority will be 
given to:
a) protecting, managing and enhancing the Hastings Cliffs Special Area of Conservation, and other 
protected biodiversity and geodiversity sites and features including Sites of Special Scientific Interest, Local Nature Reserves and Local Wildlife Sites around the town
b) ensuring development contributes to the national objective of no net loss of biodiversity by requiring developers to show how their proposals will contribute positively  to the natural environment, avoid harm to biodiversity, adequately mitigate for unavoidable damage, or as a last resort, compensate for unavoidable damage.
c) ensuring proposals for development comply with national and local planning policies relating to biodiversity, and with national Standing Advice published by Natural England.
d) improving the integrity and biodiversity of the green infrastructure network, Chapter 7: Protecting our Environment68   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
e) minimising potential negative impacts of new development on the Hastings Cliffs Special 
Area of Conservation through the delivery of new greenspace across the Borough and through appropriate recreation management of Hastings Country Park and other key natural green spaces around the town
f) meet our obligations to halting the loss of biodiversity and work with our partners to create opportunities for enhancing biodiversity both in and outside the town
g) protecting woodland, particularly ancient woodland and veteran trees
h) strengthening populations of protected and target species
i) improving site management and increasing public access to areas of nature conservation importance 
j) influencing and applying agri-environment schemes, woodland grant schemes, flood defence and other land management practices to deliver biodiversity targets
Potential adverse effects on the Hastings Cliffs Special Area of Conservation arising from levels of new development set out in the Planning Strategy will be mitigated through improvements to the existing Broomgrove Local Wildlife Site, Combe Valley Countryside Park and the green spaces network as a whole.
7.18 Recreational activity within Hastings Country Park will continue to be managed to avoid adverse effects on the Special Area of Conservation as a result of any increased recreational demand. Enhanced measures will be introduced if and when necessary, to ensure continued avoidance of adverse effects. Collectively, these measures will spread the recreational load and ensure adverse effects on the Special Area of Conservation will be avoided.
7.19 The details of these measures are set out in the Appropriate Assessment of The Hastings Planning Strategy (May 2010), and Update in March 2012 available at www.hastings.gov.uk/environment_planning/planning/localplan/sustainability/ 
7.20 Ancient Woodland is a nationally important and threatened habitat which is irreplaceable.  Most ancient woodlands have been in existence since the end of the last Ice Age.  They are of special cultural, heritage and biodiversity value.  National guidance and legislation protects Ancient Woodland from development.  Development in the vicinity of such woodland, however, may also impact upon it and these impacts will be 
considered.  
7.21 Across Hastings Borough there are many areas of Ancient Woodland.  These are an important 
wildlife habitat, have great amenity value for the community and are an asset to the wider heritage landscape.  Further information on Ancient Woodland is also set out in background document “Ancient Woodland Inventory of Hastings” (2010), available on our website at                                                                                                                 www.hastings.gov.uk/environment_planning/planning/localplan/evidence_base/#woodland. These areas of Ancient Woodland, as shown on the Polices Map, are therefore, protected from the adverse impact of development by policy EN3 and also as described in policy EN4.
POLICY EN4: Ancient Woodland
Planning permission will only be granted for development near or adjacent to an area of ancient 
woodland, shown on the Policies Map, if it can be convincingly demonstrated that the proposals will not adversely affect that ancient woodland and the need for development outweighs the importance of them. The layout of any development encroaching into, or close to, such woodland must take account of the designation and be designed so as to minimise the impact upon it.
The Council may impose conditions on any planning permission and/or seek to enter into legal 
agreement(s) to secure the protection, enhancement and management of ancient woodland affected, directly or indirectly, by development proposalsThe Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     69
7.22 Some areas of the Borough that are particularly important for their contribution to their wildlife habitat should 
be protected. Local Nature Reserves (LNR) protect wildlife habitats and the natural heritage, but they also have a broader community role:
•	 To forge opartnerships between the local authority, local nature conservation organisations and local people
•	 To provide an ideal environment for children to learn about nature
•	 To increase people’s awareness and enjoyment of wild plants and animals
7.23 Local Wildlife Site (LWS) is a non-statutory designation applying to a site of Borough-wide importance. The designation seeks to provide recognition of the wildlife value of these sites to the local community and, where possible, to prevent significant damage arising from developement.
7.24 Both LNR and LWS, as displayed on the Policies Map, will be protected, managed and enhanced as described in policies EN5 and EN6
POLICY EN5: Local Nature Reserves (LNR)
Areas designated or proposed as Local Nature Reserves (LNR) will be safeguarded and protected. 
Proposals for development within Local Nature Reserves, or likely to have an adverse effect on them directly or indirectly, will only be permitted if:
(a)			the	need	for	development	outweighs	the	importance	of	the	site	for	nature	conservation;	and
(b)   any harm to the nature conservation interest of the site is clearly and demonstrably kept to a             
  minimum.
Where development is permitted, the Council may attach planning conditions and/or may seek to 
enter into legal agreement(s) to ensure the continuing protection and enhancement of the nature conservation interest and to provide compensatory measures and/or site management.
POLICY EN6: Local Wildlife Sites (LWS)
Development proposals within or adjacent to Local Wildlife Sites (LWS) will only be permitted where 
there is a local need which outweighs any harm to the nature conservation interest. 
The Council may attach conditions to any planning permission and/or may seek to enter into 
agreement(s) to minimise the harm and/or secure the protection, enhancement and management of the nature conservation interest.Chapter 7: Protecting our Environment70   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Conservation and enhancement of landscape
7.25 The overall strategic approach to landscape protection will support the action priorities as far as possible, for 
the Come Haven Valley and High Weald Coast Landscape Character Areas, as set out in East Sussex County Council’s Landscape Character Assessment. Of particular significance to the town, is the High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB), which is a key asset of Hastings’ landscape and the surrounding areas. It runs from East Grinstead and Tunbridge Wells in the north, down to Hastings and Rye on the Coast.
7.26 The AONB is designated for its rolling hills, small, irregular fields, abundant woods and hedges, scattered farmsteads and sunken lanes. The protection of these special quality landscapes is becoming increasingly important, particularly given increasing pressure for development to support the town’s regeneration.
7.27 Potential for joint urban fringe management with Rother District Council exists in particular in the area to the north of Hastings, with Rock Lane to the east and Ivyhouse Lane to the west. The area lies within the AONB and could be improved to provide a valuable amenity for the surrounding areas.
7.28 The overall strategic approach to landscape protection will be supported by further detailed policies in the Development Management Plan. The following policy will be implemented through decisions on planning applications and the land management practices of the Council and its partners.
POLICY EN7: Conservation and Enhancement of Landscape
The Council will protect and enhance the town’s landscape including:•	the distinctive landscape setting of the town, particularly the structure of ancient gill   
woodlands, open spaces and the relationship and clear division between the unspoilt coastline of Hastings Country Park Nature Reserve, the surrounding countryside and the built-up area
•	the High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty
•	the undeveloped coast
The Council will have regard to the High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty Management Plan as a method of protecting and enhancing the Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, and will work with Rother District Council to improve access to and management of urban fringe areas, in line 
with the shared vision for Hastings and Bexhill.
Open spaces 
7.29 We need to make best use of our open spaces to promote healthy recreation, community safety, accessibility, 
urban regeneration and adaptation to climate change.
7.30 The 2006 Parks and Open Spaces Strategy specifies that the focus for the future will be to improve the quality and value of existing open spaces, rather than establish new ones.
POLICY EN8: Open Spaces – Enhancement, Provision and Protection
The strategic policy direction for the provision and management of the town’s open spaces is set out 
in the Parks and Open Spaces Strategy (2006). The Planning Strategy supports implementation of the Parks and Open Spaces Strategy by:
a) the progressive enhancement of existing open space provision as identified on the Local   
 Plan Policies Map  rather than the creation of new provision, with priority for sites within   
 or adjacent to the most deprived neighbourhoods.  The development process will be one   
 means of funding this enhancement through the pro-active use of planning agreements. 
  However, where major new development is proposed in areas with no access to open space,  
 the Council will ensure demand generated by the development is met through new provision.The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     71
b) the Development Management Plan will identify development sites where the provision of   
 new, or enhancement of existing open space will be required. The open space contribution   
 from ‘windfall’ development sites will be assessed in relation to need identified through   
 the open spaces audit of 2006 and its subsequent updates.  All provision will need to   
	 be	in	accordance	with	the	Council’s	Quality	Standard	for	Open	Spaces.
c) the protection and enhancement of existing open spaces that are of town wide significance  
 through the green infrastructure network (see Policy EN2).  These are: Alexandra Park,   
 BOS Field, Church Wood, Gensing Gardens, Hastings Cemetery, Hastings Country    
 Park, Old Roar Gill (part of Alexandra Park), Ponds Wood, St Leonards Gardens, St    
 Helen’s Wood, Warrior Square, West Hill, Ore Valley, Summerfields Woods, Tilekiln    
 Playing Fields, Combe Valley Countryside Park, all pedestrian-only streets,     
 the Seafront, Bexhill Road recreation ground, Horntye Park, William Parker Sports College,   
 Sandhurst Recreation Ground and the beach.
Private open spaces and allotments will be identified in the Development Management Plan as part 
of the green spaces network and will be protected from development which would lead to loss of their open character, biodiversity or accessibility.
Open space provision will be monitored in line with the Natural England Accessible Natural 
Greenspace (ANGst) standards, and results will be published in the Local Plan Monitoring Report.Chapter 7: Protecting our Environment72   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Chapter 8: Housing 
The overarching strategy for housing provision during the plan period is set out in Chapter 4: The  
Development Strategy and includes Policy DS1, which sets out the overall housing target to 2028.
The Development Management Plan will include further policies relating to housing development, 
together with site allocations.
Housing density
8.1 Density is a measure of the number of dwellings that can be accommodated on a site or in an area.  Higher residential densities are required in the interests of achieving more sustainable forms of development, and reducing the use of greenfield land.  This is especially important in Hastings where there are relatively few opportunities for identification of land for housing. 
8.2 Densities should generally be set at 30 dwellings per hectare (dph) across the town and potentially higher densities of 40dph and above in sustainable locations including Hastings Town Centre, where access to a good range of services and public transport, warrant a higher density development.  It is recognised however, that there may be instances where particular environmental or historic issues may justify a lower density.  
POLICY H1: Housing Density
Residential developments should make full and effective use of land by achieving the following 
densities:
a) at least 40 dwellings per hectare in sustainable locations close to a good range of existing or 
potential services and facilities and where there is, or there is potential for good public transport.   This includes Hastings and St Leonards town centres, and the district centres of Silverhill and Ore
b) at least 30 dwellings per hectare in all other locations unless there are special local circumstances that require a different treatment  
Different densities may be justified where there are particular site circumstances which require consideration.  Further individual site assessment work to be carried out through the Development Management Plan, will explore in more detail where it will be appropriate to vary minimum density requirements.   
Housing mix
8.3 The Hastings & Rother Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) shows that Hastings has a significantly higher proportion of smaller dwellings and flats/maisonettes when compared to the profile of the stock in the South East as a whole.  
8.4 Addressing imbalances in the housing stock is important both in terms of improving housing choice, and in terms of the contribution it can make to delivering long term policy objectives around economic regeneration.  New housing can help to change the image of an area and the perceived quality of life to help foster in-migration of skilled workers.  The cumulative impact of new housing development over the lifetime of the Plan will be significant in terms of influencing the make-up of the housing stock.  
8.5 Influencing the mix of dwellings will be important where there are gaps in the choice of dwellings available to local residents within the broader housing market area, or where there are problems with particular neighbourhoods, which might be tackled through changes to the types of dwellings available.
8.6 Some areas of the town have large concentrations of one type of tenure. Central St Leonards for example, has a concentration of poor quality private rented sector accommodation which has encouraged a transient population.  Similarly, the Ore Valley has high concentrations of social rented housing which has contributed to similar issues associated with deprivation.
The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     73
8.7 The Council wishes to encourage a greater variety of provision in terms of dwelling types and sizes.  In 
particular, the development of larger homes (3 or more bedrooms) given the bias in the stock towards smaller dwellings and flats, will be encouraged.  It is likely that developments within the existing suburban areas will provide the best opportunities to deliver larger homes where relatively lower density development will be appropriate.
8.8 The policy will be delivered through more detailed site level planning regarding dwelling types and densities within the Development Management Plan and through the assessment of planning applications.  The Development Management Plan offers an opportunity to examine more detailed area based approaches where the predominance of one particular type or tenure exists.  
POLICY H2: Housing Mix
Planning permission will be granted for residential development that delivers a balanced mix of 
housing both within each site, and across Hastings as a whole.  The Council will seek to ensure a genuine mix of housing types within existing and future communities by encouraging proposals for housing development in terms of the extent to which they:
a) contribute to a well integrated mix of housing types and tenures to support a range of household 
sizes, ages and incomes to meet both current and projected housing needs
b) address local tenure mix and whether there is a concentration of a particular tenure of housing that would benefit from diversification or greater choice
c) take account of existing local household characteristics and whether there is a bias towards younger or older households, families or sharers and how the new development will fit into this context
d) provide a proportion of homes to Lifetime Homes Standard 
e) in suitable and accessible locations, residential schemes of 50 or more dwellings will need to include at least 2% fully adapted dwellings for wheelchair users
Affordable housing
8.9 Affordable housing is defined as housing available to those who are unable to access accommodation suitable for their families’ needs, at a price that they can reasonably afford on the open market, whether for rent or home ownership.  It should be available at a cost low enough to be afforded by eligible households, and is determined with regard to local incomes and house prices.  Affordable housing is usually subsidised in some way to make it affordable through private sector contributions via the planning system, and not public funding.  However, in certain circumstances public funding may be available.  
8.10 There are a number of different types of affordable housing, including social and affordable rented housing.  Low cost market housing is not included.
8.11 Demand for suitable and affordable housing in Hastings far outweighs supply. In 2005, research showed that there was a shortfall of 596 affordable homes per annum, which significantly exceeds what has been delivered in previous years. Many people are living in unsuitable accommodation, such as properties which are overcrowded or in a state of disrepair. Although house prices in Hastings are lower than many areas within the South East region, the affordability of housing is about the relationship between income and house prices. In Hastings this ratio is on a par with many areas in the South East because of our low wage economy.
8.12 Taking these issues into account, we will consider the characteristics of the neighbourhood in determining whether as part of new development, affordable housing provision should be made on site, or a commuted payment made to permit off-site provision elsewhere in the town.  In addition, the size and form of affordable housing provided in connection with new development will take account of:
•	 analysis	of	the	characteristics	of	those	households	in	housing	need;
•	 include	those	that	the	local	authority	has	a	duty	to	house;	and	
•	 the	existing	pattern	of	re-letsChapter 8: Housing74   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
8.13 These factors will be regularly monitored and the implications fed into discussions with developers and housing 
associations. The proportion of affordable housing will, where appropriate, be indicated for each housing site proposed in the Development Management Plan.
8.14 With regard to affordable housing tenure, our evidence strongly supports a policy that plans for a continuing high level of demand for rented housing
24.  Demand for other forms of affordable housing, such as shared 
ownership, has grown in recent years as the gap between local incomes and house prices has widened.  However, affordable housing tenure mix should be related to evidenced needs, and site specific circumstances.
8.15 The main opportunity to deliver affordable housing numbers is through open market schemes delivering a proportion of affordable housing.  Provision of affordable housing will be primarily through Registered Providers.
8.16 Detailed implementation will be through site specific negotiations, taking account of needs evidence, and deliverability aspects.  The level of affordable housing contributions will be tested by economic viability analysis provided by the developer and assessed by the Council or an independent surveyor.  The developer will be responsible for all reasonable costs associated with its production.  The Council will co-ordinate the approach through its housing and planning functions, and through partnership working.  Detailed guidance will be set out in a Supplementary Planning Document (SPD).
POLICY H3: Provision of Affordable Housing
a) Housing developments on Previously Developed Land (Brownfield) will be expected to make the 
following provision for affordable housing:
Site size range (number of net  dwellings)Percentage requirementOn-site provision required? 
Yes/NoOr, financial 
contribution in lieu of on-site provision? 
Yes/No
1-4 10% financial 
contributionNo Yes
5-14 20% Yes Yes
15+ or 0.5 ha or more in size (irrespective of the number of dwellings)25% Yes No
        Table 6: Provision for affordable housing on Previously Developed Land
b) Housing developments on Greenfield land will be expected to make the following provision for 
affordable housing:
Site size range (number of net  dwellings)Percentage requirementOn-site provision required? 
Yes/NoOr, financial 
contribution in lieu of on-site provision? 
Yes/No
1-4 20% financial 
contributionNo Yes
5-9 20% Yes Yes
10-14 40% Yes Yes
15+ 40% Yes No
        Table 7: Provision for affordable housing on Greenfield Land
24 Housing Needs Survey 2005  www.hastings.gov.uk/environment_planning/planning/localplan/evidence_base/   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     75
c) Affordable housing will be provided on the application site, except where the development 
involves 4 or less units, where a financial contribution will be required.  However, where the Council determines that off-site provision can provide an equivalent or better housing solution, off-site provision or a financial contribution in lieu of on-site provision (of at least equivalent 
 value) may be invited.  This will only be done where the agreed approach contributes to the creation of mixed communities elsewhere in Hastings.  This may be particularly relevant in situations referred to in paragraph (d) where a better tenure or housing mix can be achieved.
d) The type and level of provision on individual sites will be determined through negotiations – taking into account market conditions. The Council’s preferred approach is for the greater part of affordable housing to be for affordable rent, although other forms may be acceptable where they would complement wider strategic priorities for tenure diversification.  Schemes should enable the provision of different forms of affordable housing where necessary, avoiding the over concentration of any one tenure. 
e) The Council will work with the private sector and registered social providers to achieve the required level of affordable housing.  If it can be demonstrated, by transparent financial evidence, that the full affordable housing contribution makes a site unviable, developers and the Council will work through a cascade
25 approach until a site is made viable, whilst still retaining an element 
of affordable housing.
f) Due to the on-going level of need in the Borough, affordable housing will normally take 
precedence over other types of planning contributions. 
g) If an allocated site comes forward as two or more separate development schemes, the Council will 
seek a level of affordable housing on each part to match, in total, the provision that would have been required for the site as a whole.
h) Affordable homes must be well integrated within the development scheme and be indistinguishable from other tenures in terms of style, location and build quality, small clusters of affordable housing would be preferred.
i) Homes should remain at an affordable price for future eligible households, or if these restrictions are lifted, for the development subsidy to be recycled for alternative affordable housing provision.  
j) Reflecting the targets in a) and b) as a guide, the proportion of affordable housing will, where appropriate, be indicated for each housing site proposed in the Development Management Plan. 
k) Windfall sites
26 will also be subject to this policy, as will planning applications for conversions and/
or change of use which result in additional units of accommodation.
This policy will be supported by a Supplementary Planning Document giving further information together with details of Section 106 requirements.
Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMOs)
8.17 National planning policy guidance provides the context for ensuring that future housing delivery leads to the creation of sustainable, inclusive and mixed communities and to avoid situations where existing neighbourhoods become dominated by a particular housing type, such as shared houses (HMOs).  Policy H4 provides guidance for developers and landlords regarding future schemes for HMOs.
What is a HMO?
8.18 There are already high numbers of HMOs in the town, and whilst we recognise that shared housing is important in meeting the needs of certain residents, including those on low incomes and young people starting out on their careers, we also recognise the negative effects that high concentrations of this type of housing may have on local communities.
25 Through reductions in other planning contributions, changes to the mix, tenure or number of affordable dwellings or by the payment of 
commuted sums in lieu of provision, the site becomes viable. 
26 Windfall sites are those that have not previously been identified as available for development. Chapter 8: Housing76   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
8.19 It is likely that the number of HMOs in the town as a whole will increase, driven by increasing student numbers 
as a result of the new University campus, changes to housing benefit and the increasing need for smaller affordable units of accommodation.  If we are to continue to accommodate the need and demand for HMOs, we need to ensure that local communities are mixed and balanced in terms of both housing tenure, and the people that live there.
8.20 The National HMO lobby has identified a ‘tipping point’ in respect of concentrations of HMOs. This tipping point is described as a threshold beyond which a deviation departs so far from the ‘norm’ that a community can ‘tip’ from balance to un-balance.  The HMO tipping point, largely based on the impacts of associated demographic change, is considered to occur when HMOs exceed 10% of properties.
8.21 Planning Use Class C4 (Houses in Multiple Occupation) covers small shared houses or flats occupied by between three and six unrelated individuals who share basic amenities such as a bathroom and/or kitchen.  Larger shared properties occupied by 7 or more unrelated people are unclassified by the Use Classes Order and are therefore considered to be “sui-generis”.
POLICY H4: Houses in Multiple Occupation
In order to support mixed and balanced communities and maintain an appropriate housing mix 
within the Borough, applications for changes of use from:
i)	 a	Class	C3	(dwelling	house)	to	a	Class	C4	(House	in	Multiple	Occupation),	or;
ii) a Class C3 (dwelling house) to a House in Multiple Occupation in a sui generis use (more than six 
people sharing)
will not be permitted where more than 10% of the total numbers of properties
27 within a 100m radius 
of the application property are already in use as either Class C4, or other types of HMO in a sui generis use.
This policy will not apply to social housing, care homes, children’s homes, bail hostels and properties 
occupied by students which are managed by an educational establishment
28.
This policy will not apply to households who have foreign students staying as guests for a set period of time.
Accommodation for travelling communities
8.22 Increasingly, as traditional seasonal work has declined, gypsies and travellers have adapted to permanent residential sites where they can more easily access health care, schools and other services and employment while maintaining the cultural traditions of being a gypsy or traveller. Permanent authorised pitches can also help to promote integration and social inclusion with settled communities.
8.23 Although there is an increasing need for permanent pitches, the Government also recognises the need to provide transit sites to facilitate the travel undertaken by these groups to maintain their traditional way of life.  National planning guidance states that Local Planning Authorities should set pitch and plot targets that address the likely permanent and transit site accommodation needs of travellers in the light of historic demand and through consultation with travellers and their representative bodies. We will allocate sites to meet the identified need through the Development Management Plan.
8.24 Policy H5 will be used to assess any proposals for residential developments for gypsies, travellers and travelling showpeople.
27 Defined as self contained accommodation with its own separate address
28 Communities & Local Government Circular 08/2010: These uses are excluded from the definition of C4.  Some of these 
uses will be C3, others will be in other use classes or fall to be treated as sui generis.The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     77
POLICY H5: Accommodation for Travelling Communities
In assessing the suitability of sites for allocation for permanent residential sites for gypsies and 
travellers, and for the purposes of considering planning applications for sites for gypsies, travellers and travelling showpeople, proposals will be supported where the following criteria are met, the site should:
a) respect areas of high conservation or ecological value
b) be acceptable in respect of vehicular access and parking
c) achieve a reasonable level of visual and acoustic privacy for both people living on the site and  
 for those living nearby
d) avoid locations where there is a risk of flooding
In the case of sites for travelling showpeople, site suitability assessment will also take account of the 
nature and scale of the showpeople’s business in terms of the land required for storage and/or the exercising of animals.
 
Chapter 8: Housing78   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Chapter 9: The Local Economy
The overarching strategy for employment during the Plan period is set out Chapter 4: Development 
Strategy and includes Policy DS2: Employment Growth, which sets out the overall employment floorspace target for the period to 2028
The Development Management Plan will include further policies relating to employment 
development, together with site allocations.
i) Employment
Effective use of existing employment areas
9.1 There are five established industrial estates in Hastings the Castleham, Churchfields, Ponswood, Ivyhouse Lane and West Ridge/Ashdown estates. New floorspace has also recently been developed along the Queensway Employment Corridor with more planned.  
9.2 Office accommodation is set to grow in Hastings Town Centre, with new floorspace already successfully let in the Priory Quarter area – in One Priory Square and Lacuna Place. There are smaller concentrations of floorspace in employment related uses, located outside of the main five estates and Hastings Town  Centre, throughout the town. All of these areas play an important role in providing business locations and employment opportunities for local firms and are sustainable in overall terms, being within the built up area, and by offering the opportunity for local people to work close to where they live.  Our strategy is to maintain and where possible, grow these areas as locations for new businesses and those needing to expand. However, as explained in the Development Strategy chapter, there will be a need for more employment space beyond this, which will be met through the planned development outside the borough boundary at North East Bexhill.
9.3 Within Hastings, allocated sites in the main employment areas (primarily at Churchfields) have the scope to add	some	17,500m²	of	new	floorspace	up	to	2028.		This	could	accommodate	higher	quality	unit	development,	ranging from small start-up to larger units.  We envisage that these sites will be brought forward by the private sector over the lifetime of the plan.   
9.4 There is also scope to provide new floorspace through the redevelopment of outdated industrial premises.  To encourage renewal and attract commercial investment (with better returns), a higher density of development (intensification) in employment areas (e.g. 2 or 3 storey buildings) will be encouraged.  Where the continued use of sites/premises solely for employment (planning use class B)
29 purposes is demonstrated to be unviable, 
the Council will expect mixed use enabling schemes to be considered as a way of maximising the employment potential of the site or premises.  
9.5 In the absence of a demonstrably viable mixed use approach, incorporating employment space, the extent to which any alternative use proposed can generate employment will be a consideration.  The forthcoming Development Management Plan will explore these options and, if appropriate, identify locations where this approach will be suitable.
9.6 With changing work and lifestyle patterns, home-based working is increasing. Generally, this does not involve the need for planning permission but if proposals such as live/work units as part of a residential development are put forward, they will be supported wherever possible.
29 Business uses are those essentially within Class B of the Use Classes Order, including offices, research and development 
uses, light manufacturing, general industry, warehousing/storage and similar Sui Generis uses.The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     79
POLICY E1: Existing Employment Land and Premises
Effective use of employment land and premises will be secured by the following:
a) land and premises currently, or last used for employment purposes – including B1, B2 & B8 or 
any of a use of a similar character not falling within a specified use class, will be retained in such use unless it is demonstrated that there is no reasonable prospect of its continued use for employment	purposes	or	it	would	cause	serious	harm	to	local	amenities;
b) where continued employment use of a site/premises is demonstrated to be unviable permitting a mixed	use	enabling	development	which	incorporates	employment	space	will	be	considered	first;	if a mixed use scheme is not viable the extent to which any proposed new use generates new employment will be taken into account.
c) permitting intensification, conversion, redevelopment and/or extension having regard to other policies	of	the	Plan;
The Employment Land Retention Supplementary Planning Document gives further details of how parts a) and b) of the policy will be implemented.
Proposals for development of live/work units will be supported subject to normal planning 
considerations.
Skills and access to jobs
Educational attainment
9.7 A key part of the intense regeneration activity in Hastings over the last few years has been directed towards enhancing the ability of local people to engage in economic activity and take up any jobs that have been introduced to the area. It was recognised that local educational performance needed to be raised significantly both to encourage inward investment and to reduce social exclusion with its consequent problems of poverty and reliance on benefits.
9.8 The public investment has resulted in:
•	 The	establishment	of	higher	education	in	Hastings	town	centre	with	the	University	Centre	first	phase	
(now: University of Brighton in Hastings) in 2003 and the second phase opening in 2012.  There were 
originally 700 students rising to well over 1,000 with the second phase. The courses are commercially focused, designed in partnership with local employers to cover subjects from computing to business management, accounting, broadcast media and a range of adult education and Open University programmes.
•	 A	£105m	complete	overhaul	of	further	and	sixth	form	education	in	Hastings	with	the	new	Sussex	Coast	
College on its two campuses at Station Plaza in the town centre and at Parker Road. The college provides a range of academic and vocational courses for 2,500 students to help to bring about education-led social and economic regeneration by improving skills levels, addressing inequalities and encouraging partnership working. It is engaged with over 700 local businesses that either receive training or feed their ideas and experience into curriculum development, and is working with industry to extend its current range of relevant and effective training provision.
•	 Major	improvements	are	underway	in	secondary	education,	firstly	through	progress	by	the	local	
education authority in uplifting GCSE performance, and secondly, through the establishment of two new academies in the town.
9.9 Although the major investment needed to improve education provision has already been made or committed, it is expected that further related investment will continue; for example, in provision of student accommodation. Where proposals of this kind come forward for planning permission, they will be supported subject to other policies in the Plan.Chapter 9: Local Economy80   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Access to jobs
9.10 Skills development is not something that only happens between the ages of 14 and 21.  In addition to formal 
educational institutions, skills development also takes place at home and in the community 
9.11 The development of industrial, office, retail, leisure and even residential space will be important in the future not only in terms of creating new employment opportunities and construction jobs, but also for the opportunities that will arise for training, apprenticeships and work placements.  
9.12 There are a range of measures which can enhance ‘access’ to jobs.  These include life-long learning; apprenticeships; advice to help apply for jobs; guaranteed interviews; transport arrangements; childcare provision; training/work experience placements; and financial contributions towards such measures.  The Council will work with developers, businesses, skilled trades people and new generations of trainees to ensure local people and firms benefit from the increase in training and employment opportunities future development will bring.  Measures will be “tailor made” to be appropriate to specific development and will take the form of a training and employment plan, which could be included within a planning (s106) agreement.
POLICY E2: Skills and Access to Jobs
Proposals directly or indirectly related to the enhancement of higher further or secondary education, 
especially in Hastings town centre, will be supported subject to other policies in the Plan.
Measures will be sought from major employment generating development to promote access to the 
jobs it creates amongst those residents of Hastings who can have difficulty entering or returning to the labour market. 
Major employment generating developments includes industrial, office, retail, leisure and any other 
development likely to generate 50 full time equivalent jobs or more.  The policy will also apply to construction jobs related to such major developments and to major residential developments.
ii) Town, District and Local Centres
The overarching strategy for shopping during the Plan period is set out in Chapter 4: Development Strategy, and includes Policy DS3: Location of Retail Development, which sets out the targets for further retail development up to 2028.
The Development Management Plan will include further policies relating to shopping and 
development, together with site allocations.
9.13 The town, district and local centres are a core part of the local economy. As well as places for shopping, they offer a sustainable location for employment and other activities including leisure, education and community activities. Hastings Town Centre is by far the most important and also the most accessible being served by all rail services and virtually all bus routes. In recent years, Hastings Town Centre has been the focus for regeneration investment with a new station, construction of the university centre and further education college, and establishment of the new Priory Quarter business area. It will continue to be the focus for economic development.
9.14 The established district and local centres perform an essential complimentary function which will continue to be protected and supported.
9.15 Maintaining and enhancing the vitality and viability of existing centres in the town is therefore a key part of our planning strategy. The hierarchy of centres in Hastings is set out in Policy E3 below.
The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     81
Chapter 9: Local Economy
POLICY E3: Town, District and Local Centres
The hierarchy of town, district and local centres in Hastings is:
Town Centre: Hastings (the principal centre in the town)
District Centre30: The Old Town, St Leonards centre, Ore Village, Silverhill
Local Centre31: Bohemia
Development proposals for town centre uses will be focused within the town and district centres.  
The scale and type of development will reflect the centre’s existing and proposed function and its capacity for new development.  A proposal for a town centre use will be required to follow the assessment approach set out in national planning policy in terms of need, scale, sequential approach to site selection, impact on other centres, including those beyond the Borough boundary, and accessibility. 
The vitality and viability of the town and district centres will be maintained and, where appropriate, 
enhanced.  Measures will include:
a)	 safeguarding	the	retail	character	and	function	of	the	centre;
b)	 enhancing	the	appearance,	safety	and	environmental	quality	of	the	centre;
c) Encouraging diversity of uses within the centre and the provision of a wide range of retail, leisure, 
social,	education,	arts,	cultural,	office,	residential	and	commercial	uses;
d)	 Promoting	the	reuse	of	vacant	buildings;	and
e) Maintaining and enhancing access to the centre by sustainable modes of transport, and 
encouraging multi-purpose trips.
In partnership with other agencies, the Council will protect and enhance local centres to better service the local community as far as possible.  If a local centre or part of it ceases to function, the Council will consider rationalisation of its role as a centre, or promotion of other uses.
Neighbourhood shops located outside the Hastings’ town, district and local centres will be protected 
where they are important to the day-to-day needs of local communities.
iii) Tourism and Visitors
Types of visitor 
9.16 The tourism industry is vital to the economy of Hastings, and is key to meeting our overall regeneration objectives.  It contributes £211m to the local economy, and supports an estimated 4,850 jobs (3,550 FTE). This is divided between:
•	 Summer	day	visitors	-	An	estimated	2.6m	day	visitors	spend	around	£82m	in	total,	or	just	£31.70	per	
head.  However, spend per head is low compared with some of our south coast competitors.  
•	 Staying	visitors	-	who	spend	much	more	per	head	during	their	break.	426,000	staying	visitors,	spending	
an estimated £167 per visitor.
9.17 Language schools also play a major role in the local economy, with an annual visitor spend of £35m, from 
approximately 35,000 students, mostly staying for short periods with local host families thus putting money very directly into the local economy. We need to consider the potential for future language schools in the town.  Language schools generally need large buildings to operate and changes of use away from these limits the potential for future schools to locate here.
30 Groups of shops often containing at least a supermarket and a range of non-retail services such as banks, building societies, restaurants, as well 
as public facilities such as a library.
31 A range of small shops of a local nature, serving a small catchment – could include a small supermarket, a newsagent, sub post office, launderette 
etc.82   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Tourism based employment
9.18 Although the tourism sector remains extremely important to the economy of Hastings, it has not grown 
in recent times and remains concentrated on the summer and bank holiday periods. It therefore provides employment that is seasonal in nature. The Councils efforts have been directed towards extending the visitor seasons by supporting events such as Jack-in-the-Green (Mayday), the seafood and wine festival (September), and Hastings Day (October).    
9.19 Tourism provides a range of ‘entry-level jobs’ such as cook, chamber maid, and shop and attraction staff, which are often seasonal, supported by a smaller number of professionals, which will remain important to the local economy. However, it must be recognised that it is unlikely to generate enough of the higher value-added jobs that, combined with a higher skilled workforce, will bring about sustainable regeneration on its own.  
Visitor accommodation
9.20 One problem is a lack of quality visitor accommodation. In 2011 the town had 1,000 serviced visitor bed spaces, which are not all good quality, compared to a total of 8,000 in 1951 (excluding camping and caravans). However, some very good quality boutique hotels have developed in the past 5 years, a number of which have been pump primed through the “Space To Stay Scheme”, and investment from the private sector. Visitor accommodation at the top end of the market is doing very well, whereas poorer quality accommodation is not as popular. Planning policy will continue to protect visitor accommodation wherever it is viable.
9.21 The efforts to establish a more thriving business sector in the town are seen as helpful in this respect as “business tourism” (visitors staying in the town for business purposes) is an all year round activity and provides custom for hotels outside the normal holiday season.
9.22 Self-catering accommodation, mainly caravans and camping, actually provides more spaces than the traditional hotels and guest houses. Most is located on several large sites including the Combe Haven and Shearbarn.  There has been no recent evidence of demand for further caravan and camping accommodation in the town.  However, maintaining and where possible improving, the quality of what is there is important. Therefore, any proposals to upgrade the facilities will be supported wherever possible – in order to support jobs growth and encourage continued visitor spend.
Visitor attractions
9.23 Visitor attractions take many forms and do not need to be in any particular location so any proposals which come forward will be looked on positively wherever they happen to be. However, whereas, in the heyday of English seaside holidays, the active resort extended along the whole length of the Hastings & St Leonards seafront, the core of activity is now concentrated in the Stade/Old Town area and beaches nearby. The recent major investment in the Jerwood Gallery and related facilities is serving to consolidate the tourist role of the area and broaden its appeal to a different sector of the visitor market.
9.24 The pier itself is now some way to the west of the main tourist area. However, with positive actions underway to renovate the pier following the fire, the White Rock Hotel and the Theatre nearby, and the opportunity offered by the former White Rock Baths, the planning strategy looks to support opportunities for tourist activity along all parts of the seafront.
Priorities for tourism 
•	 Working	towards	an	all	year	round	tourist	season	is	a	key	aim	for	the	town.
•	 We	need	to	encourage	more	short-stay	visitors	with	a	higher	spending	power,	
•	 We	need	to	retain	and	support	improved	accommodation
•	 Key	to	this	is	the	need	to	retain	and	improve	visitor	attractions,	whenever	opportunities	occur	but	
particularly along the seafront.
•	 Continue	to	recognize	the	economic	importance	of	language	schools	to	the	town.The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     83
Chapter 9: Local Economy
9.25 This will lead towards the provision of more permanent good quality jobs in the tourism sector.  
POLICY E4: Tourism and Visitors
The Council will work to promote and secure sustainable tourism development in the town.  A more 
diverse and high quality tourism offer will be encouraged that seeks to lengthen the tourism season, increase the number of visitors, provide job opportunities and sustain the tourism economy.  
Visitor Attractions:
New visitor attractions will be encouraged and those that already exist will be protected, unless it can be demonstrated they are no longer economically viable either in existing or adapted form. The upgrading of provision will be encouraged where it increases the range and/or quality of tourist facilities.  
Proposals for new visitor attractions will be considered sympathetically anywhere within the Borough 
subject to other policies.  The seafront is seen as the core resort area and particular support will be given to measures and proposals which are well related to the seafront.  
Visitor Accommodation:
New visitor accommodation will be directed to the Seafront, the main arterial routes, and close to other generators of demand.  Extension to existing visitor accommodation will also be supported, subject to design and location policies.
The priority areas for retention of serviced visitor accommodation are the Seafront (including 
Warrior Square), the Old Town and the Town Centre. In these areas, there will be a presumption against a change of use away from existing facilities unless the facility is no longer viable or is incapable of improvement to a good standard. Outside these areas, change of use away from visitor accommodation (including camping, caravan and chalet sites) will be resisted, unless the criteria of the Visitor Accommodation Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) are adhered to, and the unviable nature of the business can be demonstrated.  The SPD contains guidance in support of this policy approach. 
Language Schools:
In recognition of their importance to the local economy, the Council will also support proposals that improve, protect or make new provision for language schools in suitable locations.  Proposals for changes of use of language schools to other uses will be resisted unless it can be demonstrated that the use is no longer economically viable.
 84   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Chapter 10: Community Infrastructure
10.1 The health and social well being of the town’s residents and their educational attainment levels are vitally 
important to the regeneration of the town. Spatial planning policies need to reflect the complementary role of planning in supporting other strategies and initiatives that seek to provide essential services and facilities in the town, and ensure that new developments provide the infrastructure necessary to meet local community needs they generated as a result.
10.2 Hastings must be a town for everyone and it is important that everyone feels they are included and can access the opportunities the town has to offer.
10.3 We are required to take account of all community requirements, particularly those relating to age, sex, ethnic background, religion, disability and income.
Infrastructure delivery
10.4 An Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) has been prepared in consultation with service providers responsible for infrastructure in Hastings, which will be reviewed as and when appropriate.  The IDP will help ensure that the right infrastructure is in place at the right time to provide additional capacity required to support development proposed by this Strategy, and also to enable the determination and co-ordination of investment plans.  It will do this by identifying:
•	 the	infrastructure	needed	to	support	planned	development
•	 the	lead	agencies	responsible	for	providing	it
•	 timescales	for	delivery
10.5 Future contributions towards the infrastructure required to support development proposed by this Strategy 
could be made through the introduction of an area-wide Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) and/or appropriate Section 106 contributions for site specific needs. Until such time as an area-wide CIL is introduced all contributions will be made through Section 106 in line with current legislation and national policy, including the pooling of contributions.
10.6 The IDP and associated Schedule showing the infrastructure schemes required to support this Strategy,  is available to view or download from our website at 
 www.hastings.gov.uk/environment_planning/planning/localplan/documents.  Where appropriate, sites to accommodate identified infrastructure needs will be identified in the Development Management Plan.
Development contributions
10.7 Community facilities and essential infrastructure can be  provided as a result of the Council seeking to enter into legal agreements with developers  under Section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1991 (planning obligations) to meet the needs arising from their development. 
10.8 One of the problems Hastings faces is that land values are relatively low and the amount that individual developments can contribute is low compared with other parts of the South East, particularly when the need to provide affordable housing is taken into account.  Our adopted Supplementary Planning Guidance note (SPG) sets out a priority order for contributions:
1. Essential on-site infrastructure
2. Essential off-site infrastructure or mitigation
3. Sustainable transport
4. Education5. Off-site community facilities, youth, public art, libraries, social services, waste, countryside management 
and economic developmentThe Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     85
Chapter 10: Community Infrastructure
10.9 A potential tariff approach to infrastructure provision will be explored as part of the Development 
Management Plan, in consultation with East Sussex County Council.  The existing Developer Contributions Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) will be updated or superseded as necessary, once a decision has been made about whether to seek development contributions through CIL.
POLICY CI1: Infrastructure and Development Contributions
The Council will seek to ensure that the right infrastructure is in place at the right time to provide 
the additional infrastructure capacity required to support new development.  This will be achieved through the following:
a) Preparing, regularly updating and facilitating the implementation of an Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan, setting out the infrastructure to be provided by the Council, other public sector bodies and the utility companies to support new development and meet future needs.
b) Mitigating inadequacies in infrastructure arising from proposed development through appropriate provision or development contributions, either a Section 106 contribution or an area wide Community Infrastructure Levy or any other appropriate mechanisms that will provide towards sufficient and appropriate improvement through upgrade, enhancement or new infrastructure.
Sports and leisure facilities 
10.10 Inclusive sport and leisure facilities play an important role in addressing inequalities, improving quality of life and enhancing community interaction. We recognise that it is essential for all residents to have access to a range of leisure opportunities and the importance of maintaining a geographical distribution of facilities to meet local community needs. The Hastings & Rother Leisure Facilities Strategy 2009-2020 provides a current and projected level of supply and demand for sports facilities in Hastings which will help inform any future developments.   Non traditional sporting partners will also be encouraged to be involved in future developments, helping to widen access and increase participation in physical activity.
10.11 The programme of refurbishment to Summerfields Leisure Centre and Falaise Fitness Centre has been completed, giving these facilities an additional 15 year life span.  Freedom Leisure currently manages these facilities, although the situation will be reviewed in 2016 when the contract expires.  There is a clear aspiration to build a new leisure centre but no funding has been identified at present.  We also anticipate further changes to the leisure facilities at White Rock Gardens up to 2015, including an expansion of the Skate Park.  We recognise the need for a reassessment of the range and standard of facilities in the area and will be undertaking this during the Planning Strategy period.
10.12 Protecting the existing stock of playing fields and sports pitches is also important to maintain the health and well being of local people, and in light of increasing pressures for development.  We therefore seek to protect the existing provision, and encourage the development of new facilities in central locations.
86   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
POLICY CI2: Sports and Leisure Facilities
Major sports and leisure facilities should be centrally located, or easily accessible to all of the 
community.  Provision for casual recreation, such as multi-use games areas should be locally based within communities and where possible, built in school partnership developments, which can maximise daytime use as well as community use outside school hours.
Playing fields and sports pitches will be identified as part of the green infrastructure network (see 
Policy EN2), and planning permission for the reduction in size or number of playing fields or sports pitches will only be granted where:
a)	 existing	facilities	are	of	a	poor	and	unsustainable	quality	and	surplus	to	requirements;	or
b)	 the	proposal	would	serve	to	upgrade	the	sports	facilities,	or	reinstate	them	elsewhere	on	the	site;	
or
c) the proposed development is necessary to meet an important national, regional or local need and 
alternative	provision	is	made	that	enhances,	or	is	equivalent	to,	existing	recreational	facilities;	or
d) in the case of an operating school site, the proposal is for educational purposes that are essential and cannot be satisfactorily accommodated elsewhere.
Children’s play provision
10.13 Play is vital to a child’s healthy development and the Council recognises that it is essential for every child to have access to quality play spaces. Formal equipped play areas offer essential play opportunities, but it is important to recognise the value of informal play opportunities in the shared public domain also. This relies on sensitive design in areas such as landscaping, public art and street design.
10.14 The Parks and Open Spaces Audit, undertaken in 2006, found that the Council’s policy to provide fully equipped formal children’s play areas was not working as well as it should, and that play areas were often underused and expensive to maintain and manage. Local or wider neighbourhood provision, with a range of equipment, proved more popular even if located a bit further away.
10.15 As the principle providers of publicly accessibly equipped play sites in Hastings, AmicusHorizon Ltd and Hastings Borough Council worked  together to prepare a Play Space Strategy (August 2011) for future play space provision. The Play Space Strategy identifies and maps the coverage provided by existing good quality, good value play spaces, using national guidance encouraging provision of neighbourhood playgrounds within 600 metres of housing.  This provision map also highlights the areas where play provision either would benefit from improvement or does not exist within an acceptable distance.
10.16 Our Play Strategy favours the improvement of existing play facilities in the local area of any new development using off-site developer contributions, complemented by informal play space at the site.  However, if the area surrounding a new development does not contain a neighbourhood playground within our distance guidelines, we will require equipped play facilities within the development.
POLICY CI3: Children’s Play Provision
The Council will require developers to design housing environments in which children have space 
to play informally and safely and where they have priority over vehicles, and where such spaces contribute to the provision of open space.  Developer contributions will be sought to improve existing equipped play provision in proximity to the proposed development. Where no good neighbourhood playgrounds exist within 600 metres or a 15-20 minute walking distance, new play facilities will be required.
In some neighbourhoods where it is not appropriate or viable to provide further equipped play areas, 
developers may be required to enhance community green spaces as an alternative.The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     87
Chapter 11: Transport & Accessibility
 Chapter 11: Transport & Accessibility
11.1 With Hastings being located on the periphery of the South East region and having limited strategic transport 
infrastructure, connectivity is a key issue.  This combined with local accessibility issues to services including healthcare, education and jobs is a key contributory factor in hampering economic recovery and contributes to the level of deprivation that is experienced in the town.
11.2 The transport priority is to improve strategic access by road and rail to reduce the town’s relative isolation and open up areas for housing and business development.  This needs to be complemented with measures that efficiently manage movement within the town as well as supporting local access by walking, cycling and public transport, to move Hastings towards a more sustainable transport future.
11.3 The East Sussex Local Transport Plan (LTP3) 2011-2026 forms the transport policy framework for Hastings and the other districts and boroughs in East Sussex.  It identifies Hastings and Bexhill together as a priority area, recognising that greater investment is needed for transport measures to support regeneration and further development.  
11.4 The high level objectives of the Local Transport Plan are to:
•	 improve	economic	competitiveness	and	growth
•	 improve	safety,	health	and	security•	 tackle	climate	change
•	 improve	accessibility	and	enhance	social	inclusion
•	 improve	quality	of	life
Strategic Road and Rail Schemes
11.5 There are a number of road and rail improvement schemes that are essential to improve accessibility to and 
from Hastings.  
Strategic road schemes
11.6 The main priority for the town is the delivery of the Bexhill - Hastings Link Road. This is a central part of the strategy in order to achieve successful local regeneration and growth in Hastings and Bexhill. Planning permission was approved for The Link Road in 2009, and a public inquiry into the compulsory purchase order was held towards the end of the same year. With the Secretary of State’s announcement in March 2012, which confirmed provisional funding approval, the last major remaining hurdle to be overcome before construction could go ahead was passed. Construction commenced in January 2013 and is expected to be completed by December 2014.
11.7 The other strategic priority for road improvement is the A21 trunk road – it being the direct link between Hastings and London/M25. Trunk roads are the responsibility of the Highways Agency. It has been acknowledged by previous strategic studies that a material reduction in the journey time between Hastings and the M25 would contribute significantly to the economic well-being of the town.
11.8 Following the Government Spending Review in 2010, opportunities for improving the A21 are more limited than before.  The A21 Tonbridge to Pembury scheme has been retained and is currently expected to be constructed in the post 2015 period although Kent and East Sussex partners are working with the Government to see if it can be delivered to an earlier timescale.88   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Rail Schemes
11.9 The East Sussex LTP3 acknowledges the existing shortcomings in the rail network between Hastings and 
London, as well as the opportunity to improve rail links between Hastings and Ashford.  As a result of its own studies Network Rail, supported by East Sussex County Council and Kent County Council, has concluded that a series of line speed improvements are possible which will be introduced during the next few years. These are expected to reduce journey times to Ashford and offer more flexibility in timetabling which can be important in, for example, harmonising connections with the High Speed One services to London.
11.10 As identified in the East Sussex LTP3, the following rail schemes and improvements to a number of rail services are required to support development in the town up to 2028.
Schemes:
•	 Upgrading	of	Ore	Station
•	 Hastings	to	Tonbridge	capacity	and	power	supply	improvements	
Services:
•	 Retention	of	the	Hastings	to	City	of	London	services	–	direct	trains	from	Hastings	to	Cannon	Street
•	 Improvements	to	services	from	Ashford	International	rail	station	to	the	continent.
11.11 Whilst there is no certainty of delivery of these at this stage we will continue to lobby and influence Network 
Rail and train operating companies, in partnership with East Sussex County Council, to maintain and enhance rail capacity and services to accommodate growth.  
 
POLICY T1: Strategic Road and Rail Schemes
The Council will seek the earliest possible implementation of the following road and rail schemes 
that will reduce peripheriality, and support the regeneration of Hastings:
•	 Bexhill	-	Hastings	Link	Road•	 Wider	improvements	to	the	A21	and	A259	corridor
•	 Ashford	to	Hastings	line	–	capacity	and	journey	time	improvements
•	 Hastings	to	Tonbridge	line	capacity	and	power	supply	improvements
Local road improvements
11.12 Within Hastings itself the priority is to make efficient and effective use of the existing road network – through 
traffic management and through encouraging the optimum use of the roads.  However, there is some scope for limited local improvements as well.
11.13 East Sussex County Council has undertaken an initial assessment of proposed locations for development in Hastings and their potential impact on the highway network.  Further assessment is being undertaken in order to assist in identifying appropriate highway improvements to mitigate potential capacity problems at a number of locations on the network.  Developers will be expected to contribute towards these improvements in order to facilitate the development of housing and employment growth.
11.14 The Bexhill - Hastings Link Road will also require a number of complementary measures to support its introduction.  These include:
•	 The	Ridge	junction	improvements
•	 A259	Bexhill	Road	Bus	CorridorThe Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     89
Chapter 11: Transport & Accessibility
POLICY T2: Local Road Improvements
The Council will safeguard land required for highway improvements, in particular:
• any	land	requir
ed	to	implement 	complement
ary	measures 	for	the	Bexhill	-	Hastings 	Link	Road
•
any	land	requir
ed	to	implement 	highw
ay	impro
vements	requir
ed	as	a	result	of	the	proposals 	in
the Planning Strategy.
The C
ouncil’s role in both strategic and local road improvements is to work with partners, particularly 
the Highways Agency and East Sussex County Council to secure the timely delivery of these schemes.
Sustainable transport
11.15  Making the most of the existing transport network r equires a number of measures to encourage sustainable 
travel. To support this, the delivery of complementary sustainable transport infrastructure improvements, 
including improvements to public transport, walking and cycling routes will be required. Consideration will be given to a sustainable transport link along the seafront.  We recognise the impact that this could have in the town by offering more travel choices for local people to access the services that the town provides.
Quality	Bus	Partnership
11.16  Delivering increased bus use by maintaining and improving the quality of commercial services will be achieved through the Quality Bus P 
artnership in Hastings.  This is a partnership between East Sussex County Council, 
Hastings Borough Council and Stagecoach, which aims to deliver better bus services and facilities in the town, through the Quality Bus Partnership Action Plan
32.  This focuses on improving services and infrastructure to 
deliver improved punctuality on a number of key bus corridors that provide access to key services including the Conquest Hospital and Sussex Coast College.  Improvements could potentially include the implementation of bus priority and/or bus lanes on these key corridors along with ‘Real Time Passenger Information’, but considerable investment in appropriate infrastructure to support the delivery of this would be required.
11.17
 New developmen
t will be required to provide a transport contribution to help support this infrastructure, 
providing local transport improvements aimed at supporting access to development by sustainable modes of travel.  The level of contribution is determined by development type its location and existing accessibility levels.
Strategic network of cycle routes
11.18  A strategic network of cycle routes has been identified that will link local communities with key services in the town, including emplo 
yment, healthcare and education, together with green spaces.  This will be achieved in 
the plan period by a combination of development contributions being secured and public investment through the delivery of East Sussex County Council’s LTP3 to support the delivery of access to existing services and new development by walking and cycling.  
11.19
 We hav
e been working with partners to help extend the existing National Cycleway Network along the 
Seafront, which now forms part of this strategic network. SUSTRANS and East Sussex County Council worked to bring forward the section between Bulverhythe and Glyne Gap; with Hastings Borough Council bringing forward the section between Robertson Street and the Old Town. These were opened in 2012.
32  www.hastings.gov.uk/decisions_democracy/our_partners/quality_bus_partnership90   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
POLICY T3: Sustainable Transport
The Council will work with East Sussex County Council using the Local Transport Plan 3 policy 
framework and other partners to achieve a more sustainable transport future for Hastings.  Particular priority will be given to: 
•	 improving	bus	routes,	through	support	for	the	provision	and	improvement	of	bus	priority	lanes	
and junction approaches, services and passenger facilities,
•	 supporting	the	provision	of	new	and	enhanced	cycle	routes	in	the	town,	and	in	particular,	
supporting the implementation of the strategic cycle network as identified on the key diagram 
and the Policies Map,
•	 improving	walking	routes	for	pedestrians,
•	 ensuring	that	new	development	is	located	close	to	existing	public	transport	provision	where	
possible,
•	 requiring	developers	to	consider	the	needs	of	pedestrians	and	cyclists	in	developments	and	deliver	
appropriate measures,
•	 improving	the	safety	of	the	highway	network,•	 improving	air	quality	and	the	environment	generally,
•	 examining	the	potential	for	adopting	other	“smarter	choices”	measures,	including	workplace	and	
school	travel	plans;	travel	awareness	campaigns,	car	clubs/car	sharing	schemes,	teleworking	and	
home shopping
Transport Assessments maybe required for development schemes depending on the potential impact on the road network.
Travel plans
11.20 Major developments and those generating significant amounts of traffic will need to be located in areas that are accessible to a range of sustainable travel options in order to reduce car dependency.  In support of this, developments will be required to produce travel plans, which provide a framework for the development and delivery of targeted travel information and initiatives.
POLICY T4: Travel Plans
Major developments
33 will be required to produce a travel plan, in line with guidance from East 
Sussex County Council, and will be expected to contribute to improved transport infrastructure, 
particularly for pedestrians, cyclists and public transport. 
Car parking 
11.21 Regeneration of the town centre is a key focus area of the strategy and this can, alongside other measures, be achieved by ensuring local people and tourists can access the services and attractions that the town provides.
11.22 Taxing private parking space in the town centre, or road charging, is not considered to be appropriate for Hastings at this time.  We do however, recognise the importance of striking a balance between providing car parking provision in the town centre, alongside the provision of sustainable transport options.
11.23 Where appropriate the provision of sustainable transport infrastructure will be fully exploited before consideration is given to limit any car parking.  This will ensure that the economic regeneration of Hastings is not prejudiced, and it will place the town in a prime position to compete with other South Coast centres.
33 Major development is that which falls within the thresholds set out in the East Sussex County Council ‘Guidance on Travel Plans for New 
developments (2008)’. http://www.eastsussex.gov.uk/environment/planning/applications/developmentcontrol/guidance.htm   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     91
11.24 East Sussex County Council as the highways authority, advises Hastings Borough Council on the matters of 
off street parking provision (amongst other things) when it is required within new development. Guidance is produced and reviewed in partnership between East Sussex County Council and The District and Borough Councils across East Sussex. The Development Management Plan will include a provision that supports the application of these standards for new developments.
Park and Ride
11.25 To be successful, Park and Ride schemes need to be able to generate a significant cost and/or time advantage to users and generally work well where there is limited town centre parking and where car parking pricing discourages accessing town centres by car.  
11.26 We do not consider these criteria to apply in the case of Hastings and are keen to ensure effective management of car parking in the first instance. However if circumstances changed during the lifetime of the Local Plan and it was proved there was an identified need, it was financially viable, and a suitable site was available, then proposals for Park and Ride could be considered.  Any future proposals would be dependent on:
•	 the	capacity	and	use	of	parking	in	the	town	centre
•	 the	cost	of	parking	in	the	town	centre
•	 site	location
•	 whether	setting	up	a	Park	and	Ride	would	be	financially	viable
•	 an	assessment	on	the	capacity	of	the	road	network
•	 demand	management
11.27  It will be important to weigh the wider environmental benefits of such a scheme against the potential loss of 
amenity caused by the impact of a large car park.Chapter 11: Transport & Accessibility92   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     93
Part Five – Key Diagram
 
The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011- 2028, adopted February 2014      9394   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
A259
Rye,Folkestone &
DoverA28
AshfordA21Tonbridge &London
A259
Eastbourne,
BrightonA21
A259
A21A259A2101A2100Battle
NorthBexhillDevelopment
Proposed
Link
Road
KEY DIAGRAMBorough Boundary
Main Roads
Railways
Cycle Network
AONB & Significant Open Spaces
Existing Urban AreaAreas liable to flooding
Combe Valley Countryside ParkTown CentreDistrict Centres
Local CentresMain Employment Areas
Potential Area of search for Renewable Energy
Areas of Change in Rother D.C.
Academies
not to scaleR
0
T
H
E
R
D
I
S
T
R
ICT
© Crown Copyright and database right [2013].
Ordnance Survey [100021328].Battle &
London
Eastbourne,
Brighton &
LondonRye &
AshfordInternational
HastingsOre
Old Town
St.LeonardsSilverhill
Bohemia
HASTINGS
BEXHILLThe Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     95
Part Six – Monitoring & Implementation
  
The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011- 2028, adopted February 2014      9596   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Monitoring & Implementation
12.1 Preparation of any plan should never be seen as a once and for all activity. It is essential to check that the plan 
is being implemented correctly, assess the outcomes that result, and check if these still remain as intended,  and as currently desired. This requires a process of continual monitoring, and the potential to review the plan’s policies and proposals as and when necessary.
12.2 The Planning Strategy must respond to changing needs and circumstances, nationally, regionally and at the local level. Monitoring will assess the effectiveness in delivering the vision and spatial objectives, and in implementing the Planning Strategy.
12.3 Continuing monitoring will be essential if the policies of the Local Plan are to be effective and its proposals delivered in a timely manner.  Frequent re-assessment of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan and its Schedule will take place, and will assist in securing these objectives.  The Council will establish a working group to monitor the progress of the Local Plan, working with infrastructure providers and developers as appropriate. This working relationship will thereby ensure that the Local Plan keeps on target, and its progress is reported through regular Local Plan Monitoring Reports. Recommendations will be made where necessary to the Council’s Cabinet should there be any significant failures in performance and/or delivery.
12.4 These arrangements demonstrate the Council’s commitment to the delivery of infrastructure at such time as is practicable in current circumstances.  Some infrastructure will continue to be provided by developers through, for example, S106 Agreements, in accordance with the NPPF, and the working group will also want to be assured that developers (of major schemes) adhere to S106 Agreements and planning conditions.  
12.5   In these ways, the Council will continue to co-operate with its partners and the private sector in ensuring that 
the Local Plan is effective, and that the development which it promotes is carried out as agreed.
12.6 Each year, as part of the Local Plan process, the Council prepares a Local Plan Monitoring Report.  The principal function of the Local Plan Monitoring Report is to monitor policies and report on their respective performances. It reports progress on the policies and related targets in the Planning Strategy and includes progress against any relevant national and regional targets, and highlights any unintended significant effects of the implementation of the policies on social, environmental and economic objectives. Should annual monitoring reveal any significant failure(s) to meet targets, the Council will take action to rectify the situation as soon as possible
12.7 This monitoring framework has been prepared to assess the performance of the Planning Strategy over its course up to 2028, and will be used in the preparation of the Local Plan Monitoring Report. It will provide the key mechanism for ensuring that the Council’s Vision, Strategic Objectives and Policies are successfully delivered. The monitoring framework sets out a series of key indicators, which will be used to measure the Planning Strategies performance. These comprise a series of indicators set by the Council. They have related targets in order to assess whether policies are working effectively or whether they need to be reviewed or replaced. Where it becomes evident that policies are not performing as initially envisaged or intended, the  Local Plan Monitoring Report  will suggest the actions that need to be taken to address the issues.
12.8 Not all the indicators will be influenced solely by the implementation of the Planning Strategy and some will also depend on external events. However, given the sustainable development principles embodied in the vision and objectives for the Borough, the indicators provide the basis for identifying where the Planning Strategy needs to be strengthened, maintained or changed in some way.
12.9 The following table sets out the monitoring framework for the Hastings Planning Strategy.The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     97
Monitoring & Implementation
Strategic 
ObjectivePlanning Strategy PoliciesTarget Indicator Source
1 Objective1 – Achieve and sustain a thriving economyDS2; DS3; FA1; FA2; FA3; FA4; FA5; FA6; SC1(e); E1; E2, E3 and T3To provide up to 70,000sq.m net of employ-ment floorspace from 2008-2028 with an indicative distribution as set out in the Spatial Areas:West – 36,700m
2 
East – area quantum to be determined through the Development Management PlanTown Centre – 21,700m
2Total amount of net additional  employment floorspace (m
2) by type: 
B1(a); (b) and (c)B1 Mixed B2B8Local Plan Moni-toring Report
2 To retain employment land and premises for employment usesAmount of employment space (any B use class) lost to other develop-ment (m
2)Local Plan Moni-toring Report
4 Provide 20,500m
2 of comparison retail floor-
space within the Town Centre (preferred loca-tion) over the plan periodTotal amount of compari-son retail floorspace (m
2) 
developedLocal Plan Moni-toring Report
5 Achieve an increase in job density within the Borough over the plan periodJob density ratio in rela-tion to the South East, East Sussex and other Lo-cal Authorities averagesThe Office for NationalStatistics (ONS)
6 Over the lifetime of the Plan reduce the unem-ployment rate in the BoroughUnemployment rate in HastingsThe Office for NationalStatistics (ONS)
7 Increase the % of the local population who are employedEmployment rate by place of residenceThe Office for NationalStatistics (ONS)
8 Employment rate by workplaceThe Office for NationalStatistics (ONS)
9 To continue to improve telecommunications technology in the Borough and ensure the ap-propriate locating of equipmentTelecommunications technology growth in HastingsMobile Operators Rollout Plans98   The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Strategic 
ObjectivePlanning Strategy PoliciesTarget Indicator Source
10 Objective 2 - Ensure everyone has theoppor-tunity to live in a decent home, which they can afford, in a com-munity in which they want to liveDS1; FA1; FA2; FA3; FA4; FA5; SC1; SC3; H1; H2; H3; H4; H5Maintain a rolling five year housing land sup-ply in accordance with the Planning Strategy requirementsAnnual update of hous-ing trajectoryLocal Plan Moni-toring Report
11 To provide 3,400 net new dwellings across the Borough over the plan periodNet additional dwellings completed per annumLocal Plan Moni-toring Report
12 To provide the following net additional dwell-ings within the Spatial Areas as set out in the Planning StrategyWest – 1,100-1,290Central –  1,220–1,500East –  740–920Net additional dwellings completed per annumLocal Plan Moni-toring Report
13 To provide at least 2% of housing on residen-tial schemes of 50+ dwellings as fully adapted for wheelchair use and those occupants with restricted mobilityNet additional dwell-ings completed with full wheelchair accessibilityLocal Plan Moni-toring Report
14 To deliver a range of dwellings sizes (bed spac-es) and types (flats and houses) over the Plan period to help meet differing housing needsNet additional dwellings completed per annum by bed space and typeLocal Plan Moni-toring Report
15 To provide for permanent residential sites for  gypsies, travellers and  travelling  showpeople in appropriate locations, in accordance with future identified requirementsNet additional pitches/plots for gypsies [Insert], travellers and travel-ling showpeople in the BoroughLocal Plan Moni-toring Report
16 To provide affordable housing in accordance with Policy H3 of the Planning Strategy
1Affordable Housing completions per annum by size and typeLocal Plan Moni-toring Report
17 Average house prices to average earningsEast Sussex in Figures (ESiF) / Land Registry
18 To avoid the over concentration of HMOs in line with Policy H4Provision and location of HMOsLocal Plan Moni-toring Report
1 This target and indicator also refers to objective 5The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     99
Monitoring & Implementation
2 This target and indicator also refers to Objective 4 
3 This target and indicator also refers to Objective 4
4 This target and indicator also refers to Objective 4Strategic 
ObjectivePlanning Strategy PoliciesTarget Indicator Source
19 Objective 3– Safe-guard and improve the town’s environ-mentFA1; FA2; FA3; FA4; FA5; FA6; SC1; SC2; SC3; SC4; SC6; EN1; EN2; EN3; EN4; EN5; T3; T4; CI3 To protect existing open spaces of town wide significance and where new development requires it, the enhancement of existing open space or new provision of open space. 
All SSSIs in Council management  to achieve 
‘favourable condition’ in accordance with Natural England guidance
2To monitor developments which contribute to the enhancement or creation of open space   
Condition of designated 
SSSI’sLocal Plan Moni-toring Report
Natural England 
/ Local Plan Mon-itoring Report 
21 Maintain areas of biodiversity importance (ha) (designated sites including local wildlife sites) in the Borough
3Change in areas of biodi-versity importance (ha)Local Plan Moni-toring Report
22 Maintain and enhance the number of open spaces managed to Green Flag Award stand-ards
4Number of open spaces awarded Green Flag Status over the period of the planLocal Plan Moni-toring Report
23 Seek to reduce the number of Listed Buildings at risk within the BoroughNo of Listed Buildings at Risk (%)English Heritage
24 To achieve a more sustainable transport future for Hastings.Monitoring informa-tion will be provided from the review of East Sussex County Council’s Local Transport Plan - Implementation Plan, undertaken over a five year period. This includes a review of transport scheme delivery priori-tised through the Inte-grated Transport Capital Programme and those schemes funded from developer contributions. Additional information will be provided from data from ESCC cycle counters in Hastings, traf-fic data and potentially bus patronage figuresEast SussexCountyCouncil
20100    The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
5 This target and indicator also refers to Objective 5Strategic 
ObjectivePlanning Strategy PoliciesTarget Indicator Source
25 Objective 4– Address-ingthe im-pactsof climatechangeFA1; FA2; FA5; SC1; SC2; SC3;SC4; SC5; SC6;SC7; EN2; EN3;EN4 and EN5Reduce CO2 emissions per capita in the  Bor-oughPer capita reduction in CO2  emissions in theBoroughEast Sussex in Figures (ESiF)
26 To comply with the Governments timetable to deliver zero carbon homesNumber of developments incorporating combined heat and power systems or District Heating Net-worksLocal Plan Moni-toring Report
27 All developments to be designed with climate change mitigation and adaptation measuresNumber of developments incorporating climate change and mitigation measures (green roofs/walls, PV Cells and/or recycling facilities)Local Plan Moni-toring Report
28 Number of developments incorporating sustainable drainage systems (SuDS)Local Plan Moni-toring Report
29 Increase the % of the populationwith reasonable access to town,district and local centres by publictransport, walking and cycling(within 15-30 mins travel time)
5% of population withreasonable access totown centres by publictransport, walking andcyclingAnnualRelease EastSussex inFigures (ESiF)The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     101
Monitoring & Implementation
6 This target and indicator also refers to Objective 1
7 A household is said to be in fuel poverty if it needs to spend more than 10% of its income on fuel to maintain a satisfactory heating regime
8 This target and indicator also refers to Objective 1
9 mean earnings, based on where the employee lives
10 mean earnings, based on where the employee worksStrategic 
ObjectivePlanning Strategy PoliciesTarget Indicator Source
30 Objective 5– Support-ingSustain-ableCommuni-tiesDS1; FA2; FA3;FA4; FA5; SC1;SC2; SC3; SC4;SC5; SC6; EN2;EN5: EN1; H2; H1; H5: H3; H4; E2; E3; CI1; CI2; CI3; T1; T2; T3 and T4Improve the position of Hastings within the Indices of Multiple Deprivation listings
6Position within the Indi-ces of Multiple Depriva-tionIndices of Multi-ple deprivation (IMD)
31 Reduce the % of children under 16 living in poverty within HastingsNumber and % of chil-dren under 16 living in povertyEast Sussex in Figures (ESiF)– Annual Child Poverty Statistics
32 Reduce the % of households in fuel poverty
7Number and % of house-holds in fuel povertyEast Sussex in Figures (ESiF)
33 Improve the mean household income within the Borough relative to other towns within the East Sussex and the South East average
8Average (mean) earnings, residence- based
9East Sussex in Figures (ESiF)
34 Average (mean) earnings, workplace- based
10East Sussex in Figures (ESiF)
35 Increase % of 15 year olds achieving 5 or more GCSEs, including English and Maths, at Grades A*-C relative to the regional average at suitable points during the plan period% of Pupils achieving 5+ GCSEsEast Sussex in Figures (ESiF)
36 Increase % of students 16+ in full time educa-tion% of students 16+ in full time educationEast Sussex in Figures (ESiF)
37 Reduce the % of the working population with no qualifications% of the working popula-tion with no qualifica-tionsEast Sussex in Figures (ESiF)
38 Increase the % of the working population with NVQ Levels 3 and 4% of working age popu-lation with NVQ Level 3 and/or 4East Sussex in Figures (ESiF)
39 Deliver sport and recreation facilities in accord-ance with the Leisure Facilities StrategyNet completions of a) Community facilities or b) Sport/recreation facili-tiesLocal Plan Moni-toring Report102    The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Strategic 
ObjectivePlanning Strategy PoliciesTarget Indicator Source
40 Objective 6 – Provi-sion of an efficient and ef-fective transport systemFA1; FA2; FA; FA3; FA4; CI1; T1; T2; T3; T4Support delivery of the Bexhill - Hastings Link RoadDeveloping the Bexhill  - Hastings Link Road: key dates and targetsEast Sussex County Council
41 Promote the development of travel plans with submissions for new development in accord-ance with the targets of the LTP3
11 LTP3 targets / approach-esEast Sussex County Council/ESiF
42 Improve and enhance pedestrian and cycle routes within the Borough
12LTP3 targets / approach-esEast Sussex County Council/ESiF
43 To work at the local, county and national level to secure improvements to rail linksLTP3 targets / approach-esEast Sussex County Council/ESiF
44 Increase bus usage within the town in accord-ance with LTP3 targetsLTP3 targets / approach-esEast Sussex County Council/ESiF
45 Increase the % of the working age population with access to employment, education facili-ties, GP services and a major retail centre by public transport, cycling or walking
13LTP3 targets / approach-esEast Sussex County Council/ESiF
46 Improve traffic management and reduce con-gestion on roads within the BoroughLTP3 targets / approach-esEast Sussex County Council/ESiF
47 Objective 7 – Mak-ing the best use of theseafront and promoting tourismFA6; SC1; SC3; EN1; EN3; EN4;E4 and CI1Increase the number of tourist accommoda-tion establishments that are accredited nation-ally  to raise the standard ofaccommodation on offer within the BoroughNumber and % of Hotels, B&Bs and other tourist accommodation which have national quality ac-creditationSouth East England Tourist Board (SEETB) 
48 Increase tourist accommodation within the Borough, particularly along the seafrontNet additional comple-tions of a) visitor accom-modation or b) caravan/camping/chalet sitesLocal Plan Moni-toring Report
49 Minimise the loss of tourist accommodation within the Borough, particularly along the seafrontNet completions of a) visitor accommodation or b) caravan/camping/chalet sites to other usesLocal Plan Moni-toring Report
50 Support developments to extend the tourist season within the Borough and strengthen the visitor attraction offer in accordance with Policy E4Net additional visitor at-tractions in the Borough with particular focus along the seafrontLocal Plan Moni-toring Report
11 This target and indicator also refers to Objective 4
12 This target and indicator also refers to Objective 4
13 This target and indicator also refers to Objective 5        Table 8: Monitoring and Implementation FrameworkThe Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     103
Part Seven – Appendices
Appendix 1: Superseded Policies
Appendix 2: Housing Trajectory 
 
The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011- 2028, adopted February 2014      103104    The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Appendix 1: Superseded Policies
Hastings Local Plan 2004 policies to be 
superseded
The following table explains how the existing policies of the Local Plan (2004) will be superseded by the Planning 
Strategy.  In some places the detailed parts of the policies that relate to specific sites or aspects of potential planning applications will eventually be superseded by the emerging Development Management Plan (DMP) and details of this will be given along with that document at the appropriate time.
Local Plan 2004 page numberLocal Plan 2004 ChapterLocal Plan 2004 Policy referenceLocal Plan 2004 Policy name How the policy will be superseded
29 Employment E1 Sites for Employment Development
Allocates sites at Broomgrove, 
west of Queensway and Ivyhouse Lane specifically for employment use.Planning Strategy – DS2 (Employment Growth) and E1 (Existing Employment Land and Premises)
Development 
Management Plan
31 Employment E2 Industrial Development – Established Estates
Defines the main established 
industrial estates & seek to encourage the location of B1-B8 uses within these locations whilst resisting retail development at these locationsPlanning Strategy – E1 (Existing Employment Land and Premises)
31 Employment E3 Ivyhouse Lane – Land at Burgess Road
Site specific policy to enable road 
connection to Hayward WayDevelopment Management Plan
32 Employment E4 Retaining Employment Uses
Safeguards development of 
existing employment land from non “B” usesPlanning Strategy – E1 (Existing Employment Land and Premises) and E2 (Skills and Access to Jobs) 
Development 
Management Plan
32 Employment E5 Relocation of Non-Conforming Uses
Provides exception to E4 by 
accepting relocation of business uses that are detrimental to surrounding areaPlanning Strategy – E1 (Existing Employment Land and Premises) 
Development 
Management Plan
33 Employment E6 Small Industrial Firms
Criteria based policy allowing 
small firms in the built up areaDevelopment Management PlanProposed Submission Planning Strategy for Hastings 2012     105Local Plan 2004 
page numberLocal Plan 2004 ChapterLocal Plan 2004 Policy referenceLocal Plan 2004 Policy name How the policy will be superseded
34 Employment E7 Class B1(a) Office Development
Defines broad locations suitable 
for B1(a) usePlanning Strategy – DS2 (Employment Growth)
Development 
Management Plan
34 Employment E8 Location of Business Uses
Provides criteria for regulating 
new business development in residential areasDevelopment Management Plan
35 Employment E9 Locating Employment Sustainably
Criteria based policy to ensure 
employment development minimises traffic, has appropriate parking levels, improves public transport access and makes provision for cyclingPlanning Strategy – SC1 (Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way)
Development 
Management Plan
41 Tourism T1 New Tourist Attractions
Criteria based policy regulating 
approval of planning permissions for new tourist attractionsPlanning Strategy – E4 (Tourism and Visitors)
Development 
Management Plan
41 Tourism T2 Amusements
Designates areas suitable for 
amusementsPlanning Strategy – E4 (Tourism and Visitors)
Development 
Management Plan
42 Tourism T3 Hotels and Guest Houses – Serviced Accommodation
Allows serviced accommodation 
on the seafrontPlanning Strategy – E4 (Tourism and Visitors)
43 Tourism T4 Change of Use of Hotels and Guest Houses
Restricts change of use from the 
above unless it is demonstrated that use is no longer viable or needs major upgrading of structural conditionPlanning Strategy – E4 (Tourism and Visitors)
44 Tourism T6 Caravan and Camping Sites
Criteria based policy to control the 
growth or expansion of existing sitesPlanning Strategy – E4 (Tourism and Visitors)
Development 
Management Plan
44 Tourism T7 Development within Caravan Sites
Criteria based policy for the 
enhancement of facilities at existing sitesPlanning Strategy – E4 (Tourism and Visitors)
Development 
Management Plan
45 Tourism T8 Language Schools
Supports new language schools 
in the town subject to certain criteriaPlanning Strategy – E4 (Tourism and Visitors)Appendix 1: Superseded Policies106    The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Local Plan 2004 
page numberLocal Plan 2004 ChapterLocal Plan 2004 Policy referenceLocal Plan 2004 Policy name How the policy will be superseded
45 Tourism T9 Retention of Language Schools
Restricts change of use of existing 
language schools to other usesPlanning Strategy – E4 (Tourism and Visitors)
47 Tourism T12 Enhancement of Hastings Pier
Supports the refurbishment and 
enhancement of the pierPlanning Strategy – FA6 (Strategic Policy for The Seafront) and E4 (Tourism and Visitors) 
53 Shopping S1 Town Centre Retail Proposals
Allocates areas specifically for 
retail use in the town centrePlanning Strategy – E3 (Town, District and Local Centres)
Development 
Management Plan
54 Shopping S2 District and Local Centres Protects key retail frontages identified on the Policies Map for predominantly A1 usesPlanning Strategy – E3 (Town, District and Local Centres)
Development 
Management Plan
55 Shopping S3 Bohemia Road Core Shopping Area
Aims to retain ground floor 
of properties in defined core  shopping area on the Policies Map for A1-A3 usesPlanning Strategy – E3 (Town, District and Local Centres)
Development 
Management Plan
57 Shopping S4 Retail and Leisure Proposals Outside Existing Centres 
Criteria based policy resisting 
retail/leisure proposals in out of town locations subject to satisfying criteria.Planning Strategy – E3 (Town, District and Local Centres)
58 Shopping S5 Major Shopping Proposals Outside Existing Centres
Criteria based policy requiring 
retail proposals over 1000m
2 
to provide retail impact assessments.Planning Strategy – E3 (Town, District and Local Centres)
64 Transport TR1 Road Improvements
Safeguards land between Wishing 
Tree Road and Sedlescombe Road South for Spur Road Phase 2 schemePlanning Strategy – T1 (Strategic Road and Rail Schemes) and T2 (Local Road Improvements)
66 Transport TR3 Station at Wilting
Safeguards land for possibility of 
a new Station at Wilting until a review of feasibility is undertakenPlanning Strategy – T1 (Strategic Road and Rail Schemes)
68 Transport TR4 South Coast Cycle Route
Safeguards land for cycle route 
between West Marina and the western boundary towards Bexhill, and between Barley Lane and eastern boundary at FairlightPlanning Strategy – EN2 (Green Infrastructure Network) and T3 (Sustainable Transport)The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     107
Local Plan 2004 
page numberLocal Plan 2004 ChapterLocal Plan 2004 Policy referenceLocal Plan 2004 Policy name How the policy will be superseded
69 Transport TR5 Cycling Facilities in New Developments
Requires developers to provide 
cycle facilities in accordance with adopted standardsPlanning Strategy – T3 (Sustainable Transport)
Development 
Management Plan
69 Transport TR6 Location of New Development
Requires retail, industrial, 
commercial and community development to be located close to public transport, and/or to be accessible by walking and cycling. Planning Strategy - SC1 (Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way), T3 (Sustainable Transport) and T4 (Travel Plans)
Development 
Management Plan
70 Transport TR7 Accessibility
Requires all major new 
development to make provision for pedestrians, cyclists and public transport and provide mitigation where necessaryPlanning Strategy - SC1 (Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way), T3 (Sustainable Transport) and T4 (Travel Plans)
Development 
Management Plan
70 Transport TR8 Reduced Parking Provision in New Development
Sets out that reduced parking 
standards will be applied in areas where public transport, pedestrian and cycling accessibility is goodPlanning Strategy – T3 (Sustainable Transport) and T4 (Travel Plans)
Development 
Management Plan
East Sussex County 
Council SPD
71 Transport TR9 Development Infrastructure
Requires developers to satisfy 
the Local Planning Authority that appropriate highway or other transport capital works have or will be provided.  Sets out specific improvements to Frederick Road.Planning Strategy – CI1 (Infrastructure and Development Contributions)
71 Transport TR10 Development in Un-Metalled Streets
Refuses developments that 
will generate additional traffic in streets that do not have adequately metalled carriagewaysDevelopment Management PlanAppendix 1: Superseded Policies108    The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Local Plan 2004 
page numberLocal Plan 2004 ChapterLocal Plan 2004 Policy referenceLocal Plan 2004 Policy name How the policy will be superseded
82 Housing H1 Housing Sites
Lists all sites allocated for housing 
in the period up to 2011Planning Strategy – DS1- New Housing Development and FA1, FA2, FA3, FA4, FA5, FA6 – The focus area policies set out the principles for the spread of new housing sites and the numbers of new dwellings in each area 
Development 
Management Plan
85 Housing H2 Mixed Use Areas
Allocates areas suitable for 
mixed-use developments.  Applies a flexible approach to off street parking requirements in those areasPlanning Strategy – FA1, FA2, FA3, FA4, FA5, FA6 – The focus area policies set out the principles for the spread of new housing sites and the numbers of new dwellings in each area
Development 
Management Plan
87 Housing H4 Housing Conversions
Criteria based policy to control 
conversions to flats, safeguarding unnecessary conversions of family dwellingsDevelopment Management Plan
89 Housing H6 Social Rented Housing
Provides for a proportion of social 
rented housing in all suitable residential developments of 15 or more dwellings (or .5ha), a minimum of 25% social housing will be sought.  And identifies allocated housing sites (H1) as being suitable for an element of social rented housingPlanning Strategy – H3 (Provision of Affordable Housing)
Development 
Management Plan
99 Community NeedsCN1 Access for People with Disabilities
Requires new development to 
provide adequate access and facilities for people with restricted mobility and/or other disabilitiesDevelopment Management PlanThe Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     109
Local Plan 2004 
page numberLocal Plan 2004 ChapterLocal Plan 2004 Policy referenceLocal Plan 2004 Policy name How the policy will be superseded
100 Community NeedsCN3 Housing for Persons with Restricted Mobility
Requires residential schemes of 50 
or more dwellings to provide 2% to be designed for persons with restricted mobilityPlanning Strategy - H2 (Housing Mix)
102 Community NeedsCN6 The University Centre
Supports the creation of the 
University Centre in HastingsPlanning Strategy – E2 (Skills and Access to Jobs)
103 Community NeedsCN7 Premises for Early Years Education
Criteria based policy to control 
potential impacts of premises used for early years education. Development Management Plan
105 Community NeedsCN9 Nursing Homes, Rest Homes and Hostels
Criteria based policy to control 
potential impacts of extensions, change of use or new premises.  Also requires new developments to comply with standards of access for people with disabilities.Development Management Plan
107 Community NeedsCN12 Gypsies and Travelling Show People
Sets criteria to control the impact 
of new sites.Planning Strategy – H5 (Accommodation for Travelling Communities) 
113 Nature ConservationNC1 Hastings Cliff Special Area of Conservation
Provides for the protection of this 
internationally important site. Development proposals likely to have a significant effects will be subject to rigorous assessment.  Exceptions to policy must meet the policy criteria.Planning Strategy – EN3 (Nature Conservation and Improvement of Biodiversity)
Development 
Management Plan
114 Nature ConservationNC2 Sites of Special Scientific Interest
Provides for the retention and  
protection of Sites of Special Scientific Interest only allowing development subject to meeting 
Policy criteria and providing 
adequate mitigationPlanning Strategy – EN3 (Nature Conservation and Improvement of Biodiversity)
Development 
Management Plan
116 Nature 
ConservationNC3 Local Nature Reserves
Provides for the retention and 
protection of Local Nature Reserves (designated and proposed) only allowing development subject to meeting policy criteria and providing adequate mitigationPlanning Strategy – EN3 (Nature Conservation and Improvement of Biodiversity) and EN5 (Local Nature Reserves)
Development 
Management PlanAppendix 1: Superseded Policies110    The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Local Plan 2004 
page numberLocal Plan 2004 ChapterLocal Plan 2004 Policy referenceLocal Plan 2004 Policy name How the policy will be superseded
116 Nature ConservationNC4 Extension to Marline Valley Local Nature Reserve
Allocates land at Marline Valley 
and Hoads Wood as an extension to the existing Local Nature Reserve. Planning Strategy – EN3 (Nature Conservation and Improvement of Biodiversity) and EN5 (Local Nature Reserves)
(Completed)
117 Nature 
ConservationNC5 Local Nature Reserve Allocations
Allocates land at 5 locations as 
Local Nature Reserves. Planning Strategy – EN3 (Nature Conservation and Improvement of Biodiversity) and EN5 (Local Nature Reserves)
Development 
Management Plan
119 Nature ConservationNC6 Sites of Nature Conservation Importance
Provides for the protection of 
Sites of Nature Conservation Importance (local level designation) subject to demonstrating a local need outweighing the nature conservation interest of the site and the provision of adequate mitigationPlanning Strategy – EN3 (Nature Conservation and Improvement of Biodiversity) and EN6 (Local Wildlife Sites)
Development 
Management Plan
120 Nature ConservationNC7 The Green Network
Seeks to protect the Green 
Network from development that would sever, intrude or otherwise cause harm to its nature or purpose.Planning Strategy – EN2 (Green Infrastructure Network)
Development 
Management Plan
122 Nature ConservationNC8 General Planning Requirements
Seeks to ensure that development 
minimises damage to wildlife & habitats, ensuring losses are minimised and adequately compensated for.  Also seeks to ensure well-planned development that contributes towards a net gain in biodiversity & opportunities to enhance the local environment from both a nature conservation & amenity perspective.Development Management Plan
124 Nature ConservationNC9 Information to Accompany Planning Applications
Seeks to ensure that developers 
provide sufficient ecological assessment of a site in support of a planning applicationDevelopment Management PlanThe Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     111
Local Plan 2004 
page numberLocal Plan 2004 ChapterLocal Plan 2004 Policy referenceLocal Plan 2004 Policy name How the policy will be superseded
125 Nature ConservationNC10 Ancient Woodland
Provides for the protection of 
ancient woodland through planning conditions or legal agreementPlanning Strategy – EN3 (Nature Conservation and Improvement of Biodiversity) and EN4 (Ancient Woodland)
Development 
Management Plan
125 Nature ConservationNC11 Preserved Woodland
Provides for the protection of 
preserved woodland of more than 0.4ha in area within 20m of the development.Planning Strategy – EN3 (Nature Conservation and Improvement of Biodiversity)
Development 
Management Plan
126 Nature ConservationNC12 St Helens Wood - Protection
Protects St Helens Wood from any 
further development, controlling any development on the periphery of woodland in terms of tree retention and visual quality of the valley.Planning Strategy – EN3 (Nature Conservation and Improvement of Biodiversity)
Development 
Management Plan
129 Landscape L1 Landscape Character
Seeks to prevent development 
that would substantially compromise the landscape setting of the town.Planning Strategy - EN7 (Conservation and Enhancement of Landscape)
Development 
Management Plan
130 Landscape L2 High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty
Seeks to resist development 
which would have an adverse affect on the natural beauty of the Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty.  Major development will not be permitted unless it can be demonstrated to be in the public interest.Planning Strategy – EN7 (Conservation and Enhancement of Landscape)
Development 
Management Plan
131 Landscape L3 Development Outside the Built-Up Area
Seeks to prevent development 
outside of the defined built-up area.  Exceptions to policy maybe allowed subject to meeting 1 of 2 criteria.Planning Strategy – EN3 (Nature Conservation and Improvement of Biodiversity) and EN7 (Conservation and Enhancement of Landscape)
Development 
Management Plan
131 Landscape L4 Strategic Gap
The Policy prevents development 
in the strategic gap between the built-up edge of St Leonards and the western boundary of the Borough.Planning Strategy - EN3 (Nature Conservation and Improvement of Biodiversity) and EN7 (Conservation and Enhancement of Landscape)Appendix 1: Superseded Policies112    The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Local Plan 2004 
page numberLocal Plan 2004 ChapterLocal Plan 2004 Policy referenceLocal Plan 2004 Policy name How the policy will be superseded
133 Landscape L6 Historic Parks and Gardens
The Policy seeks to prevent 
development that would harm the historic significance, character, appearance and setting of identified historic parks and gardens.Planning Strategy – EN1 (Built and Historic Environment)
Development 
Management Plan
134 Landscape L7 The Undeveloped Coast
Seeks to preserve the landscape 
character & nature conservation interest of the coast, only allowing development subject to meeting Policy criteriaPlanning Strategy - EN7 (Conservation and Enhancement of Landscape)
138 Development GuidelinesDG1 Development Form
General design criteria applicable 
to all new development requiring the developer to address details relating to density; characteristics of the surrounding area; landscaping within the site; public and private open space; safety & security; amenity issues; impact of the development and highway safety.Planning Strategy – SC1, SC2, SC3, SC4 and SC7 – the sustainable community policies set out the principles for development guidance
Development 
Management Plan
139 Development GuidelinesDG2 Access and Parking
Criteria based policy requiring all 
new development to satisfactorily meet the access needs of all users and balanced transport provisionPlanning Strategy – SC1 (Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way) and SC2 (Design and Access Statements)
Development 
Management Plan
139 Development GuidelinesDG3 Sunlight and Daylight
Requires adequate natural light 
within new buildings & prevents the unacceptable loss of natural light or outlook to neighbouring properties arising from developmentPlanning Strategy – SC1 (Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way) 
Development 
Management Plan
140 Development GuidelinesDG4 Noisy Activities
Seeks to prevent development 
likely to result in unacceptable levels of noise and provides measures to attenuate noise levelsPlanning Strategy – SC1 (Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way)
Development 
Management PlanThe Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     113
Local Plan 2004 
page numberLocal Plan 2004 ChapterLocal Plan 2004 Policy referenceLocal Plan 2004 Policy name How the policy will be superseded
140 Development GuidelinesDG5 Noise Sensitive Development
Seeks to prevent the provision 
of housing, hospitals, schools, nursing homes and other ‘noise sensitive development’, in areas which are or are likely to be subject to unacceptably high levels of noise unless satisfactory attenuation measures can be achieved.Planning Strategy – SC1 (Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way) and SC2 (Design and Access Statements)
Development 
Management Plan
141 Development GuidelinesDG6 External Lighting
Criteria based policy seeking 
to ensure that external lighting schemes are well designed, appropriate to the surroundings and do not cause a hazard for road usersPlanning Strategy – SC1 (Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way)
Development 
Management Plan
141 Development GuidelinesDG7 High or Visually Prominent Buildings
Criteria based policy seeking 
to ensure that development maintains or enhances the surrounding area, has regard to conservation areas or areas of landscape importance and does not result in unacceptable overshadowing of neighbouring properties.Planning Strategy – SC1 (Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way)
Development 
Management Plan
142 Development GuidelinesDG8 Protection of Views
Criteria based policy providing for 
the protection of public viewsPlanning Strategy – SC1 (Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way)
Development 
Management Plan
143 Development GuidelinesDG9 Traffic Calming
Provides for traffic calming 
measures in new development and supports the introduction of traffic calming measures in nearby streets as part of the developmentPlanning Strategy – SC1 (Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way) and SC2 (Design and Access Statements)
Development 
Management Plan
144 Development GuidelinesDG11 Gardens
Requires private amenity space 
for dwellings intended for family usePlanning Strategy – SC1 (Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way)
Development 
Management PlanAppendix 1: Superseded Policies114    The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Local Plan 2004 
page numberLocal Plan 2004 ChapterLocal Plan 2004 Policy referenceLocal Plan 2004 Policy name How the policy will be superseded
145 Development GuidelinesDG12 Two Storey Side Extensions to Residential Properties
Criteria based policy aimed to 
prevent the unacceptable impact of 2-storey side extensions in terms of design and their impact on the street scene.Planning Strategy – SC1 (Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way) and SC2 (Design and Access Statements)
Development 
Management Plan
146 Development GuidelinesDG13 Provision of Children’s Playspace
Provides for the provision of onsite 
play space within residential schemes including 25 or more family dwellings, or via Section 106 agreement for off-site provision or improvement of nearby existing play space.Planning Strategy – CI3 (Children’s Play Provision)
146 Development GuidelinesDG14 Shopfronts
Criteria based policy providing for 
new shopfronts or alterations to existing shopfrontsPlanning Strategy – SC1 (Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way)
Development 
Management Plan
147 Development GuidelinesDG15 Security Shutters
Criteria based policy ensuring 
acceptable design and preventing their unnecessary usePlanning Strategy – SC1 (Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way)
Development 
Management Plan
148 Development GuidelinesDG16 Outdoor Advertisements and Signs
Criteria based policy seeking to 
ensure adverts and signs are not detrimental to the appearance of a building(s) affected and/or the surrounding area, or a danger to the public highway.Planning Strategy – SC1 (Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way)
Development 
Management Plan
148 Development GuidelinesDG17 Licensed Premises
Relates to the location of large 
drinking establishments and seeks to prevent new uses out of character with the area, or the over concentration of A3 uses in town, district or local centresDevelopment Management Plan
149 Development GuidelinesDG18 Hot Food Take-Aways
Provides for hot food takeaways 
subject to criteria based policyDevelopment Management PlanThe Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     115
Local Plan 2004 
page numberLocal Plan 2004 ChapterLocal Plan 2004 Policy referenceLocal Plan 2004 Policy name How the policy will be superseded
149 Development GuidelinesDG19 Commercial Development – Traffic
Seeks to ensure that traffic 
generation from commercial development affecting residential areas is attenuated by legal agreements and/or planning conditionsDevelopment Management Plan
150 Development GuidelinesDG20 Public Art
Requires the provision of public 
art in major development schemesPlanning Strategy – SC1 (Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way)
Development 
Management Plan
151 Development GuidelinesDG21 Development on Unstable Land
On land potentially subject to 
instability, planning permission will only be granted subject to convincing supporting evidence from the applicant that actual/potential instability can be overcomePlanning Strategy – SC1 Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way), 
Development 
Management Plan
151 Development GuidelinesDG22 Satellite Dishes
Provides for satellite dishes 
to domestic premises where planning permission is required and seeks to prevent insensitive positioning of dishesDevelopment Management Plan
153 Development GuidelinesDG23 Renewable Energy Schemes
Criteria based policy providing for 
the development of renewable energy schemes providing that it can be adequately shown that development will not harm interests of acknowledged importance in the local environmentPlanning Strategy  – SC6 (Renewable Energy Developments) 
154 Development GuidelinesDG24 Energy Efficient Development
The Policy requires that new 
development be energy efficient in terms of layout & design and also supports the incorporation of energy-efficient and renewable energy technology.Planning Strategy – SC1 (Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way), SC2 (Design and Access Statements), SC3 (Promoting Sustainable and Green Design), SC4 (Working Towards Zero Carbon Development) and SC5 (District Heating Networks and Combined Heat and Power Systems) Appendix 1: Superseded Policies116    The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Local Plan 2004 
page numberLocal Plan 2004 ChapterLocal Plan 2004 Policy referenceLocal Plan 2004 Policy name How the policy will be superseded
156 Development GuidelinesDG25 Development Infrastructure
Seeks to ensure that where new 
development generates a need for new or improved infrastructure, the developer should provide or fund the necessary works & measures.Planning Strategy – CI1 (Infrastructure and Developer Contributions)
158 Development GuidelinesDG26 Flood Risk
Aims to prevent development 
within areas at risk of river and coastal flooding.  Also seeks to prevent development which would be detrimental to or impede access to existing sea, tidal or fluvial defences or river channels.Planning Strategy – SC7 (Flood Risk)
159 Development GuidelinesDG27 Surface Water
Provides for development which 
could increase the risk of flooding as a result of surface water run-off, subject to agreeing all alleviation & mitigation works, including Sustainable Drainage Systems, and their design, construction and long term management, prior to the start of developmentPlanning Strategy – SC7 (Flood Risk)
160 Development GuidelinesDG28 Telecommunications Installations
Criteria based policy relating to 
the siting and appearance of masts and larger antennae.Planning Strategy – SC1 (Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way)
Development 
Management Plan
160 Development GuidelinesDG29 High Pressure Gas Main
No new building will be permitted 
within 14m of the existing high pressure gas main which extends from the junction of Battle Rd & The Ridge West to Watergates WoodPlanning Strategy – SC1 (Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way)
Development 
Management Plan
161 Development GuidelinesDG30 Overhead Power Lines - Safety
Requires new development to 
take account of the electricity supplier’s requirements from a safety standpoint.Planning Strategy – SC1 (Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way)
Development 
Management Plan
161 Development GuidelinesDG31 New Overhead Power Lines
Requires/encourages lines being 
placed underground in visually 
sensitive locationsPlanning Strategy – SC1 (Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way)
Development 
Management PlanThe Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     117
Local Plan 2004 
page numberLocal Plan 2004 ChapterLocal Plan 2004 Policy referenceLocal Plan 2004 Policy name How the policy will be superseded
162 Development GuidelinesDG33 Environmental Pollution
Seeks to prevent development 
which is likely to cause unacceptable pollution of air, water or land.   Planning Strategy – SC1 (Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way)
Development 
Management Plan
163 Development GuidelinesDG34 Contaminated Land
Requires the developer to 
carry out site investigations of potential hazards & propose the necessary remedial measures required to deal with the hazard on sites with known or suspected contamination.Planning Strategy – SC1 (Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way)
Development 
Management Plan
171 Historic EnvironmentC1 Development within Conservation Areas
Criteria based policy providing for 
development within conservation areas seeking to ensure that proposals have due regard to the character & appearance of the area. Planning Strategy - EN1 (Built and Historic Environment)
Development 
Management Plan
173 Historic EnvironmentC2 Demolition in a Conservation Area
Criteria based policy providing 
for the demolition of unlisted buildings subject to the prior approval of the re-use of the sitePlanning Strategy - EN1 (Built and Historic Environment)
Development 
Management Plan
174 Historic EnvironmentC3 Development Involving Listed Buildings
Criteria based policy providing for 
the extension or alteration of a listed building.Planning Strategy - EN1 (Built and Historic Environment) 
Development 
Management Plan
175 Historic EnvironmentC4 Demolition of Listed Buildings
Criteria based policy providing 
for development that would follow the demolition of a listed building.Planning Strategy - EN1 (Built and Historic Environment) 
Development 
Management PlanAppendix 1: Superseded Policies118    The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Local Plan 2004 
page numberLocal Plan 2004 ChapterLocal Plan 2004 Policy referenceLocal Plan 2004 Policy name How the policy will be superseded
175 Historic EnvironmentC5 Winch Huts
Provides for new winch huts 
designed to have a traditional appearance suited their function.Planning Strategy - EN1 (Built and Historic Environment) 
Development 
Management Plan
176 Historic EnvironmentC6 Archaeological Sites and Ancient Monuments
Policy resists development 
that would adversely affect an archaeological site or ancient monument, or other nationally important archaeological site or monumentPlanning Strategy - EN1 (Built and Historic Environment) 
Development 
Management Plan
177 Historic EnvironmentC7 Replacement Doors and Windows in Listed Buildings
Within listed buildings, provides 
only for exact replicas or doors and windows of an appropriate design and materials.Planning Strategy - EN1 (Built and Historic Environment)
Development 
Management Plan
177 Historic EnvironmentC8 Replacement Doors and Windows in Conservation Areas
Provides for exact replicas or doors 
and windows of an appropriate design and materials. Planning Strategy - EN1 (Built and Historic Environment)
Development 
Management Plan
178 Historic EnvironmentC9 Roof Materials for Listed Buildings
Provides for replacement roofs 
only where the covering is an exact replica or is of appropriate material.Planning Strategy - EN1 (Built and Historic Environment) 
Development 
Management Plan
178 Historic EnvironmentC10 Roof Materials for Conservation Areas
Provides for replacement roofs 
only where the covering is an exact replica or is of appropriate material.Planning Strategy - EN1 (Built and Historic Environment) 
Development 
Management PlanThe Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     119
Local Plan 2004 
page numberLocal Plan 2004 ChapterLocal Plan 2004 Policy referenceLocal Plan 2004 Policy name How the policy will be superseded
186 Sports and RecreationSP1 Playing Fields and Sports Pitches
Seeks to prevent the loss of 
playing fields and sports pitches unless the proposal meets 1 of 4 criteriaPlanning Strategy - EN8 (Open Spaces; Enhancement, Provision and Protection); CI2 (Sports and Leisure Facilities) and CI3 (Children’s Play Provision)
Development 
Management Plan
186 Sports and RecreationSP2 Sports and Recreational Facilities
Criteria based policy providing for 
formal sports or recreation usesPlanning Strategy - EN8 (Open Spaces; Enhancement, Provision and Protection); CI2 (Sports and Leisure Facilities) and CI3 (Children’s Play Provision)
Development 
Management Plan
187 Sports and RecreationSP3 Location of Major New Sports and Recreational Facilities
‘Sequential test’ policy relating to 
the location of major sports and recreation facilities.Planning Strategy - EN8 (Open Spaces; Enhancement, Provision and Protection); CI2 (Sports and Leisure Facilities) and CI3 (Children’s Play Provision)
Development 
Management Plan
187 Sports and RecreationSP4 White Rock Area
Criteria based policy providing 
for proposals which enhance the range & quality of sports, play and similar leisure provision within White Rock area west of Falaise Road.Planning Strategy - EN8 (Open Spaces; Enhancement, Provision and Protection); CI2 (Sports and Leisure Facilities) and CI3 (Children’s Play Provision)
Development 
Management Plan
193 Open Space OS1 Protection of Open Space
The policy seeks to protect 
identified open spaces from development which would lead to a loss of their open character.Planning Strategy - EN8 (Open Spaces; Enhancement, Provision and Protection); CI2 (Sports and Leisure Facilities) and CI3 (Children’s Play Provision)
Development 
Management PlanAppendix 1: Superseded Policies120    The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Local Plan 2004 
page numberLocal Plan 2004 ChapterLocal Plan 2004 Policy referenceLocal Plan 2004 Policy name How the policy will be superseded
194 Open Space OS2 Areas Deficient in Open Space
The policy seeks to retain open 
spaces and undeveloped land in those areas of the Borough deemed to be deficient in open space.  In appropriate cases a legal agreement will be sort to provide open space within new developments.Planning Strategy - EN8 (Open Spaces; Enhancement, Provision and Protection)
Development 
Management Plan
194 Open Space OS3 Private Open Space
The policy seeks to resist the 
substantial loss of identified private open space.Planning Strategy - EN8 (Open Spaces; Enhancement, Provision and Protection)
Development 
Management Plan
195 Open Space OS4 Allotments
The policy seeks to protect 
allotments from development.Planning Strategy - EN8 (Open Spaces; Enhancement, Provision and Protection)
Development 
Management Plan
195 Open Space OS5 Amenity Footpath Network
Seeks to safe guard the 
amenity footpath network from development. Planning Strategy - EN8 (Open Spaces; Enhancement, Provision and Protection)
Development 
Management Plan
200 Hastings Town CentreTC1 Hastings Station Yard
Allocates land at this location 
for a mixed use scheme likely to include educational, business, residential and retail uses. Planning Strategy  - FA3 (Strategic Policy for Hastings Town Centre)
Development 
Management Plan (residual part of Station Plaza not yet developed)The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     121
Local Plan 2004 
page numberLocal Plan 2004 ChapterLocal Plan 2004 Policy referenceLocal Plan 2004 Policy name How the policy will be superseded
201 Hastings Town CentreTC3 Queens Road Conversions
Provides for the conversion of 
properties between 94-168 Queens Road from retail to residential or other suitable uses.Planning Strategy - FA3 (Strategic Policy for Hastings Town Centre)
Development 
Management Plan
202 Hastings Town CentreTC4 Site of Sussex Chambers
Allocates land within the Town 
Centre Conservation Area at Havelock Road and Priory Road, for mixed use development.Planning Strategy - FA3 (Strategic Policy for Hastings Town Centre)
(Site completed)
202 Hastings Town 
CentreTC5 The Observer Building
Allocates the building within the 
Town Centre Conservation Area, for a mix of uses including higher and further education, residential, offices and ‘live-work’ units.Planning Strategy - FA3 (Strategic Policy for Hastings Town Centre)
Development 
Management Plan
204 Hastings Town CentreTC7 Greenway
Safeguard land for a greenway as 
set out on the Policies Map.Planning Strategy - FA3 (Strategic Policy for Hastings Town Centre) EN2 (Green Infrastructure Network)and T3 (Sustainable Transport)Development Management Plan
205 Hastings Town CentreTC8 Memorial Replacement Safeguards the location shown on the Policies Map, for a replacement to the original Memorial.Planning Strategy - FA3 (Strategic Policy for Hastings Town Centre
Development 
Management Plan
211 Central St LeonardsSL1 Taxi Office/BR Social Club Site
Allocates the site for a mixed use 
development with compatible commercial uses serving the local area on the ground floor and residential above.Planning Strategy - FA4 (Strategic Policy for Central St Leonards)
Development 
Management Plan
212 Central St LeonardsSL2 Problem Buildings
Provides for a flexible approach in 
the future use of buildings in need of repair in Central St Leonards if this assists in securing their future viabilityPlanning Strategy - FA4 (Policy for Central St Leonards)
Development 
Management Plan
212 Central St LeonardsSL3 Western Road/Cross Street Area
Provides for development and 
refurbishment of the areaPlanning Strategy - FA4 (Strategic Policy for Central St Leonards)
Development 
Management PlanAppendix 1: Superseded Policies122    The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Local Plan 2004 
page numberLocal Plan 2004 ChapterLocal Plan 2004 Policy referenceLocal Plan 2004 Policy name How the policy will be superseded
224 West St LeonardsWSL1 Land at Seaside Road – Developments
Allocates the site for mixed use 
development based on water and beach related commercial tourism and leisure facilities together with associated services, recreational activities, including a public slipway and housing. Planning Strategy - FA1 (Strategic Policy for Western Area)
Development 
Management Plan
225 West St LeonardsWSL2 Land at Seaside Road – Seafront Walk/Cycle Path
Requires the provision for 
the extension of the seafront promenade and a properly made-up cycle path from Grosvenor Gardens to Cinque Ports Way.  Planning Strategy - FA1 (Strategic Policy for Western Area)
(Completed)
226 West St 
LeonardsWSL3 Land at Bexhill Road – Development
Allocates the site for housing, 
a replacement community centre and open space.  The development must include adequate measures for flood protection and the safeguarding of the Site of Nature Conservation Importance.Planning Strategy - FA1 (Strategic Policy for the Western Area)
Development 
Management Plan
231 Broomgrove B1 Broomgrove Regeneration
Allocates the area for mixed use 
development to include housing, local employment uses, local retail and community facilities and open space.Planning Strategy - FA5 (Strategic Policy for the Eastern Area)
(Site completed)
233 Broomgrove B3 Facilities at Ore StationProvides for the area around 
Ore Station to become a hub for neighbourhood facilities, together with the upgrading of the station itself. Planning Strategy - FA5 (Strategic Policy for Eastern Area)
233 Broomgrove B4 Local Park
Allocates land to the south-east of 
Chiltern Drive as a local park to be providedPlanning Strategy - FA5 (Strategic Policy for Eastern Area)
Development 
Management Plan
235 Broomgrove B5 Broomgrove – Highway Improvements/ Traffic Management
Provides for highway 
improvements and traffic 
management measures required 
if the mixed use development at Broomgrove is to be permitted.Planning Strategy - FA5 (Strategic Policy for Eastern Area), EN3 (Nature Conservation and Improvement of Biodiversity) and EN6 (Local Wildlife Sites)The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     123
Local Plan 2004 
page numberLocal Plan 2004 ChapterLocal Plan 2004 Policy referenceLocal Plan 2004 Policy name How the policy will be superseded
235 Broomgrove B6 The Former Stills Factory Site, Fellows Road
Allocates the site for mixed use 
to include housing and local employment uses (Class B1)Planning Strategy - FA5 (Strategic Policy for Eastern Area)
Development 
Management Plan
240 Holmhurst St MaryHSM1 Holmhurst St Mary – Development
Allocates land for housing 
including the provision of open space.Planning Strategy - FA1 (Strategic Policy for Western Area)
Development 
Management Plan
242 Holmhurst St MaryHSM2 Holmhurst St Mary – Highway Access
Provides for access improvements 
required if the housing development is to be permitted.Planning Strategy - FA1 (Strategic Policy for Western Area)
Development 
Management Plan
246 Seafront StrategySS1 The Stade Maritime Heritage Area
Criteria based policy providing 
for the development of tourist facilities at this location.Planning Strategy - FA6 (Strategic Policy for the Seafront)
Development 
Management Plan
247 Seafront StrategySS2 The Stade/Old Town Seafront
Seek to ensure that any new 
development within this area respects the open aspect and accessibility of the area and the strong visual and historic link with the Old Town.Planning Strategy - FA6 (Strategic Policy for the Seafront)
Development 
Management Plan
Hastings Local Plan 2004 - Expired Policies
As from 27th September 2007, a number of policies in the Hastings Local Plan 2004 expired and are therefore have not since been used in consideration of planning applications.These policies were no longer required as in some cases they duplicated other Local Plan policies or National Planning Policy and in other cases the development they referred to has been completed. 
Expired policies included:
•	 B2	-	Broomgrove	Housing	Sites	
•	 CN2	-	Parking	for	People	With	Disabilities	
•	 CN4	-	Hastings	College	
•	 CN5	-	Hastings	College	-	Relocation	•	 CN8	-	Community	Facilities	
•	 CN10	-	Library	Facilities	
•	 CN11	-	Hastings	Museum	and	Art	Gallery	
•	 DG10	-	Retention	of	Car	Parking	
•	 DG32	-	Development	Adjoining	Railways	
•	 H3	-	Lower	Density	Areas	
•	 H5	-	Change	of	Use	•	 L5	-	Farm	Diversification	
•	 OT1	-	Old	Town	Protection	Area	
•	 S6	-	Land	Allocated	for	Non-Retail	Uses	
•	 SP5	-	Football	-	Pilot	Field	
•	 T10	-	Conference	Facilities	•	 T11	-	Water	Based	Recreation	
•	 T5	-	Self-Catering	Accommodation	
•	 TC2	-	The	Queens	Hotel	
•	 TC6	-	The	BT	Building,	Havelock	Road	
•	 TR2	-	Defined	Road	Hierarchy	
 Appendix 1: Superseded Policies
        Table 9: Superseded Policies124    The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Appendix 2: Housing Trajectory 
Hastings Borough Council Housing Trajectory2011 - 2028
Figure 11: Housing trajectory graph
Housing Trajectory
The housing trajectory 2011 to 2028 shows past annual dwelling completions and projected annual completions in Hastings against a housing requirement of 3,400 dwellings. It examines, on an annual basis, how many additional dwellings will be needed at any one point in time to meet the housing requirements remaining over the period of the Plan. The trajectory represents the housing land supply position as at 2013/14. Subsequent updates of the housing trajectory and housing land supply information will be published annually in the Local Plan Monitoring Report, available at www.hastings.gov.uk/environment_planning/planning/localplan/monitoring
The forward looking element of the graph, takes account of the potential supply of housing arising from sites where 
construction activity is on-going, those with a current planning permission, sites that are allocated in the adopted Hastings Local Plan 2004 and unallocated sites that have the potential to contribute to housing delivery.
The data that underpins the trajectory is based on the Strategic housing Land Availability Assessment, and also 
reflects the latest information gathered from housing developers and land owners regarding build rates and disposal plans.
Local Planning Authorities (LPAs) have to ensure they have a continuous five year supply of deliverable sites available 
for housing development. National guidance requires that the 5-year supply should include an additional allowance of plus 20%. The five year period starts after the current monitoring year and should include the net additional dwellings expected to come forward from ready to develop sites.193
99207
181223245251
242 243270
250260
209
202
148195260
050100150200250300
2011/12
2012/13
2013/14
2014/15
2015/16
2016/17
2017/18
2018/19
2019/20
2020/21
2021/22
2022/23
2023/24
2024/25
2025/26
2026/27
2027/28Current Year 
Projected potential annual completions
5 Year Supply 
Actual housing completions
target figure annualised
Annual requirement taking account of past/projected completionsThe Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     125
Critically, in order for sites to be considered deliverable and included in the 5 year supply, sites should be:  
•	 Available	–	the	site	is	available	for	development	now
•	 Suitable	-	the	site	offers	a	suitable	location	for	development	and	would	contribute	to	the	creation	of	
sustainable, mixed communities
•	 Achievable	-	there	is	a	reasonable	prospect	that	housing	will	be	delivered	on	the	site	within	5	years
In compiling the 5-year supply figure, all sites have been assessed against these three factors. 
The table below shows how the 5-year supply is calculated
Housing Target 3,400
Residual target (after deducting 545 completions in 2011/12 & 2013/14*) 2,855
Annual residual target (residual divided by 14 years 2014/15 – 2027/28 204
5-year target (annual residual x 5 years + 20%) 1,224
5-year housing land supply 2014/15 – 2018/19 1,232
5-year supply of housing expressed as a % 100.6%
Table 10: Calculating 5-year housing land supply
*Completions for 2013/14 are estimates.The current assessment of sites shows that in terms of a five year supply, there is the potential for some 1,232 
dwellings to come forward in this period. This is in excess of the five year supply target number 1,224.Appendix 2: Housing Trajectory126    The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     127
Part Eight – Glossary
The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011- 2028, adopted February 2014      127128    The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Glossary
Accessible Natural Green Space Standards (ANGst)
Provided by Natural England and provide a set of benchmarks for ensuring access to places near to where people live.
Affordable housing
Affordable housing includes social rented, affordable rented and intermediate housing, and is provided to eligible 
households whose needs are not met by the market. Affordable housing should:
•	 Meet	the	needs	of	eligible	households	including	availability	at	a	cost	low	enough	for	them	to	afford,	
determined with regard to local incomes and local house prices.
•	 Include	provision	for	the	home	to	remain	at	an	affordable	price	for	future	eligible	households	or,	if	these	
restrictions are lifted, for the subsidy to be recycled for alternative affordable housing provision.
Agri-environment schemes
A term used to describe national (or local) schemes that pay farmers to farm in an environmentally sensitive way. These schemes were, up until 2005, targeted at specific areas throughout the country that are considered to have high conservation value. In 2005 with the introduction of the Environmental Stewardship (ES) scheme, all farmers in England are eligible.
Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB)
Areas of high visual quality designated by the Countryside Commission as being of national importance. The High Weald AONB extends to the northern and eastern edges of the Borough.
Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP)
A strategy prepared for a local area aimed at conserving and enhancing biological diversity.
Biodiversity
The whole variety of life encompassing all generics, species and ecosystem variations, including plants and animals.
Brownfield sites/previously developed land)
Land which is or was occupied by a permanent structure, including the curtilage of the developed land and any associated fixed surface infrastructure.’ The definition includes defence buildings, but excludes:
•	 Land	that	is	or	has	been	occupied	by	agricultural	or	forestry	buildings.
•	 Land	that	has	been	developed	for	minerals	extraction	or	waste	disposal	by	landfill	purposes	where	
provision for restoration has been made through development control procedures.
•	 Land	in	built-up	areas	such	as	private	residential	gardens,	parks,	recreation	grounds	and	allotments,	
which, although it may feature paths, pavilions and other buildings, has not been previously developed.
•	 Land	that	was	previously-developed	but	where	the	remains	of	the	permanent	structure	or	fixed	surface	
structure have blended into the landscape in the process of time (to the extent that it can reasonably be 
considered as part of the natural surroundings).
Climate change
Long-term changes in temperature, precipitation, wind and all other aspects of the Earth’s climate often regarded as 
a result of human activity and fossil fuel consumption.
Code for Sustainable Homes 
A national standard for sustainable design and construction of new homes launched in December 2006
Combined Heat and Power (CHP)
The combined production of heat, usually in the form of steam, and power, usually in the form of electricity
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL)
A new levy that local authorities can choose to charge on new developments in their area.  The money can be used to support development by funding infrastructure that the Council, local community and neighbourhoods require.The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     129
Community Strategy
A strategy produced in partnership with various organisations working together to achieve a ten-year vision to 
improve Hastings & St Leonards.
Comparison goods retailers
Shops that sell items where some comparison is likely to be made before purchasing goods (e.g. clothing, carpets, electrical goods).
Compulsory Purchase Order
A legal function that allows certain bodies which need to obtain land, or property, to do so without the consent of the owner. It may be enforced if a proposed development is considered one for public betterment, for example.
Convenience retailers
Convenience retailing is the provision of everyday essential items, including food, drinks, newspapers/magazines and confectionery
Hastings Planning Strategy
The overall strategy setting out how the town will develop up to 2028.  It includes strategic policies to guide development, and includes a local housing target and retail and employment floorspace requirements.  Formerly called Core Strategy.
Development Management Plan
Forms part of Hastings Local Plan. The Development Management Plan is designed to be consistent with, but not repeat, the Planning Strategy and sets development management policy guidance for use in the determination of planning applications and provides site allocations for residential and employment development up to 2028.
Development Plan Documents
Statutory planning documents, produced by the planning authority, that form part of the Local Plan, including the Hastings Planning Strategy, Development Management Plan and where necessary, Area Action Plans.
District centre
Usually comprises of groups of shops often containing at least one supermarket and a range of non-retail services such as banks, building societies, restaurants, as well as local public facilities such as a library. In the retail hierarchy of Hastings Borough, the district centres are St Leonards Town Centre and Ore Village. 
East Sussex County Council (ESCC)
County Authority for East Sussex 
Economically active Population
The economically active population are those people in employment plus the unemployed, (those who are available for and actively seeking work). 
Economic activity rate
An indication of the actual and potential labour supply within an area. The Economic Activity Rate measures the number of people who are in employment or unemployed expressed as a percentage of the working age population.
Ecosystems
Environments consisting of all living things in a particular area and the non-living things with which they interact such as soil, air, water and sunlight.
Employment floorspace/buildings/development/uses
Activities or uses that generate employment, including offices, industry, warehousing, showrooms, hotels, retail, entertainment, educational, health and leisure uses (regardless of whether the end occupier is private, public or charity sector).
Equipped Play Area
A local play area that is fenced and contains a mix of play equipment such as slides, swings, tunnels or climbing features.Glossary130    The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Examination in Public (EIP) 
An examination chaired by an independent inspector into objections to the Local Plan Documents and the overall 
“soundness” of the Local Plan Documents
General Certificate of Secondary Education (GCSE)
Certificate of qualification 
Greenfield sites
Sites that have never been developed or used for an urban use, or are on land that has been brought into active or beneficial use for agriculture or forestry i.e. fully restored derelict land.
Green infrastructure
A network of connected, high quality, multi-functional open spaces, corridors and the links in between, that provide multiple benefits for people and wildlife.
Green roofs
Vegetated layers that sit on top of the conventional roof surfaces of a building, which can support a wide range of plant life. Green roofs can create, or improve, biodiversity, contribute to minimising flood risk, improve thermal efficiency and improve the microclimate.
Habitats Directive
European legislation (1992/43/EC) that aims to protect the wild plants, animals and habitats that make up the natural environment. In the UK, the Habitats Directive is implemented by the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2010 (SI no. 2010/490), more commonly known as the Habitats Regulations.
Housing Needs Survey (HNS)
A study examining housing requirement needs aspirations and demands of the community and households of the Borough.
Information Communication Technology (ICT)
The use of hardware, software, data and communications technology.
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP)
Sets out the key critical infrastructure that is required to support the objectives, policies and spatial strategy set out in the Planning Strategy and details how, when and where this will be delivered.
Index of Multiple Deprivation (IMD)
The Index of Multiple Deprivation (IMD) combines information relating to income, employment, education, health, skills and training, barriers to housing and services, and crime into an overall measure of deprivation.
Job density
The ratio of the number of jobs in an area to the resident working age population within that area.
Lifetime homes
A home built with design features that create a flexible blueprint for accessible and adaptable housing in any setting.  Designs incorporate features that allow for flexible living over the lifetime of the occupants and the property.  For example in addition to the normal ground and first floors, a house could be provided with full basement, and accessible useable roof space.  These areas of the house may be fully furnished and divided or left to be fitted out as and when needed or finances arise.
Localism Act
The Localism Act gives effect to the Government’s ambitions to shift power away from Whitehall and back into the hands of local councils, communities and individuals to act on local priorities.
Local centre 
Usually comprises of a small range of shops of a local nature, serving a small catchment – could include one small supermarket, a newsagents, a sub-post office, launderette etc). In the retail hierarchy of Hastings Borough, the local centres are the Old Town, Silverhill, and Bohemia.The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     131
Local Plan
The collective name given to all policies and documents forming the planning framework for the town. 
Local Plan Monitoring Report 
A report to show progress made in the preparing the Local Plan and the effectiveness of its policies. 
Local Development Scheme (LDS) 
A project management document setting out what the Local Plan will contain, a timetable for its production, 
proposals for monitoring and review. 
Local Nature Reserves (LNR)
Non-statutory habitats of local significance designated by Local Authorities where protection and public understanding of nature conservation is encouraged. 
Mega Watt (MW)
One Million Watts of electrical energy. Most large scale wind turbines are rated by their peak output in mega watts.
Mixed use
Provision ofa mix of complementary uses such as residential, community and leisure uses on a single site or within a particular area.
National Official Labour Market Statistics (NOMIS)
A web-based database of labour market statistics including information on employment, unemployment, earnings, Labour Force Survey and Jobcentre Plus vacancies.
Neighbourhood Planning
The opportunity for local people to be directly involved in preparing a Local Plan for their area. Forms part of the wider Local Plan process.
Neighbourhood Play Area
A large, equipped and accessible play area at a key location within the Borough.  The lower Alexandra Park play area is a good example.
Office of National Statistics (ONS)
Body responsible for producing a wide range of economic and social statistics.
Open space
All space of public value, including public landscaped areas, parks and playing fields, and also including, not just land, but also areas of water such as rivers, lakes and reservoirs, which can offer opportunities for sport and recreation or can also act as a visual amenity and a haven for wildlife
Principal centre
In the retail hierarchy of Hastings Borough, the Town Centre area is the Principal Centre
Policies Map 
A map showing site allocations and geographical areas where policies apply.
Renewable energy
Energy flows that occur naturally and repeatedly in the environment, for example from the wind, water flow, tides or the sun.
Regeneration
The economic, social and environmental renewal and improvement of rural and urban areasGlossary132    The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Registered Social Landlord (RSL)
Government funded not-for-profit organisations that provide affordable housing.  They work with local authorities to 
provide homes for people meeting the affordable homes criteria.
Section 106/Planning Obligations
Planning obligations, also known as section 106 agreements, are legally binding agreements typically negotiated between local authorities and developers in the context of planning applications. They are a mechanism by which measures are secured to make acceptable development which would otherwise be unacceptable in planning terms
South East Plan
The South East Plan sets out a vision for the future of the South East region to 2026, outlining how challenges facing the region such as housing, the economy, and transport and protecting the environment should be responded to. The South East Plan is still part of the Statutory Development Plan until provisions in the Localism Act come into force that will result its revocation.  
Spatial planning
Spatial planning goes beyond traditional land use planning of considering individual pieces of land.  It seeks to bring together land-use policies with other policies, programmes and strategies (e.g. the Hastings & St Leonards Community Strategy) which can influence the nature of places and how they function.  
Spatial policies
These focus on a specific part, or parts, of the town.
Special Area of Conservation (SAC)
Areas that have been given special protection under the European Union’s Habitats Directive. They provide increased protection to a variety of wild animals, plants and habitats.
Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)
A site identified under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 as amended by the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 as an area of special interest by reason of any of its flora, fauna, geological or physiographical features.
Strategic policies
These policies apply to the whole town.
Statement of Community Involvement (SCI) 
This document sets out how Hastings Borough Council will involve the community in the preparation, alteration and review of the Hastings Local Plan and in the consideration of planning applications. 
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) 
Environmental assessment of policies, plans and programmes required under the European SEA Directive 2001/42/EC. 
Sustainable	Drainage	Systems	(SUDs)
SUDs are designed to control the quantity of runoff from a development, to improve the quality of the runoff and to enhance the nature conservation, landscape and amenity value of the site’s surroundings. 
Super Output Areas (SOAs)
Geographical areas developed following the 2001 Census that produce a set of areas of consistent size, whose boundaries would not change (unlike electoral wards), suitable for the publication of data such as the Indices of Deprivation.
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) 
Provide supplementary information to support the policies in Development Plan Documents.The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     133
Sustainable communities
Places where people want to live and work, now and in the future. They meet the needs of existing and future 
residents, are sensitive to their environment, and contribute to a high quality of life. They are safe and inclusive, well planned, built and run, and offer equality of opportunity and good services for all.
Sustainable development
Development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.  
Sustainable travel/sustainable transport
Often meaning walking, cycling and use of public transport (and in some circumstances “car sharing”), which is considered to be less damaging to the environment and which contributes less to traffic congestion than one-person car journeys.
Sustainability Appraisal (SA) 
Assessment of the social, economic, and environmental impacts of polices and proposals contained within the Local Plan.
Use	Classes	Order	(UCO)
Puts uses of land and buildings into various categories.  Also identifies the changes between these classes that would, or would not require planning permission.
Windfall sites
A site that is not specifically allocated for development in a Development Plan, but which unexpectedly becomes available for development during the lifetime of a plan.Glossary134    The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014     135
Part Nine – Index of Policies 136    The Hastings Planning Strategy 2011 - 2028, adopted February 2014 
Chapter Policy Description Page
Chapter 4: 
The Development 
StrategyDS1 New Housing Development 34
DS2 Employment Growth 37
DS3 Location of Retail Development 39
Chapter 5: 
Spatial AreasFA1 Strategic Policy for Western Area 44
FA2 Strategic Policy for Central Area 48
FA3 Strategy for Hastings Town Centre 49
FA4 Strategy for Central St Leonards 50
FA5 Strategic Policy for Eastern Area 53
FA6 Strategic Policy for The Seafront 56
Chapter 6: Developing Sustainable 
CommunitiesSC1 Overall Strategy for Managing Change in a Sustainable Way 58
SC2 Design and Access Statements 59
SC3 Promoting Sustainable and Green Design 60
SC4 Working Towards Zero Carbon Development 60
SC5 District Heating and Combined Heat and Power Systems 61
SC6 Renewable Energy Developments 62
SC7 Flood Risk 62
Chapter 7: 
Protecting our 
EnvironmentEN1 Built and Historic Environment 64
EN2 Green Infrastructure Network 66
EN3 Nature Conservation and Improvement of Biodiversity 67
EN4 Ancient Woodland 68
EN5 Local Nature Reserves (LNR) 69
EN6 Local Wildlife Sites (LWR) 69
EN7 Conservation and Enhancement of Landscape 70
EN8 Open Spaces – Enhancement, Provision and Protection 70
Chapter 8: 
HousingH1 Housing Density 72
H2 Housing Mix 73
H3 Provision of Affordable Housing 74
H4 Houses in Multiple Occupation 76
H5 Accommodation for Travelling Communities 77
Chapter 9: The Local EconomyE1 Existing Employment Land and Premises 79
E2 Skills and Access to Jobs 80
E3 Town, District and Local Centres 81
E4 Tourism and Visitors 83
Chapter 10: Community InfrastructureCI1 Infrastructure and Development Contributions 85
CI2 Sports and Leisure Facilities 86
CI3 Children’s Play Provision 86
Chapter 11: Transport & AccessibilityT1 Strategic Road and Rail Schemes 88
T2 Local Road Improvements 89
T3 Sustainable Transport 90
T4 Travel Plans 90List of Policies
        Table 11: Index of Policies