Havant Borough Core Strategy March 2011 
ii Havant Borough Core Strategy March 2011 
iii 
Havant Borough Core Strategy 
Foreword   
The Havant Borough Core Strategy is a very important document. It sets the plannin g 
framework for our communities until 2026. In preparing this strategy the council has sought to 
address local needs, especially for housing and economic development, with an emphasis on 
high quality design and stewardship of the borough’s high quality natural and built environment.  
The Core Strategy has been prepared working closely with partner organisations, including the 
Havant Local Strategic Partnership, the Partnership for Urban South Hampshire (PUSH), local 
communities and agencies. There have been three major public consultations – Issues and 
Options consultation in 2006, the Preferred Options consultation in 2008  and consultation on 
the Draft Core Strategy in 2009. The Submitted Core Strategy was then subject to a Public 
Examination in September 2010. 
The council would like to thank all those who have responded to these consultations, giving 
their ideas and opinions which have helped the council in shaping the Core Strategy.  
Planning often presents a difficult balance between national and regional policy and local need 
and aspirations. We trust that local residents, employees and employers will find that we are 
fulfilling our task of setting out a vision for the future of our borough with policies that reflect their 
own aspirations whilst delivering on national and regional requirements. 
Councillor David Guest 
Havant Borough Council Deputy Leader and 
Planning and Development Portfolio Holder  
Adopted by  
Havant Borough Council  
1 March 2011  Havant Borough Core Strategy March 2011 
iv Havant Borough Core Strategy March 2011 
v Havant Borough Core Strategy 
Contents  
Foreword 
Chapter Page  
1. Introduction and Vision  1 
2. Health and Wellbeing 23 
3. Promotin g Havant Borough’s Economy 32 
4. Regeneration and Community Support 48 
5. Community Safety 54 
6. Housing 56 
7. Caring for our Borough 65 
8. Spatial Distribution and Strategic Sites 86 
9. Infrastructure, Implementation and Monitoring  106 
10. Development Management Polici es  122 
Appendices 
1. Evidence Based Studies  149 
2. Housing Trajectory (2009)  151 
3. Havant Borough Nature Designations – Policy CS11  153 
4. Havant Borough Flood Risk Projections for 2115 – Policy CS15  154 
5. Non Residential Parking Standards – Policy DM4  155 
6. List of Saved Local Plan Policies that are Superseded by the
Core Strategy  168 
Glossary  171 
This document is available in many other formats such as Braille, large print and on CD 
or tape. Other languages are also available. To request any of these formats please 
contact 023 9244 6609 . Havant Borough Core Strategy March 2011 
vi 
Index of Strategic Core Strategy Policies
Page 
CS1 Health and Wellbeing  24 
CS2  Employment  33 
CS3 Skills and Employability 39 
CS4  Town, District and Local Centres 41 
CS5  Tourism 45 
CS6  Regeneration of the Borough  49 
CS7  Community Support and Inclusion 52 
CS8  Commu nity Safety  54 
CS9  Housing  57 
CS10 Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  64 
CS11  Protecting and Enhancing the Special Environment and Heritage 
 of Havant Borough 66 
CS12  Chichester Harbour Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB)  69 
CS13  Green Infrastructure 72 
CS14  Efficient Use of Resources 74 
CS15  Flood and Erosion Risk 77 
CS16  High Quality Design  80 
CS17  Concentration and Distribution of Development within the Urban Areas 86 
CS18  Strategic Site Delivery  87 
CS19  Effective Provision of Infrastructure    108 
CS20  Transport and Access Strategy  109 
CS21  Developer Requirement s   113 
Signposting 
The Local Development Framework relies on the principle that national, regional 
and other strategies and plans are not repeated. To help readers find their way to 
the relevant national, regional and other local documents hyper links have been 
provided throughout the document. The links are grouped together around the 
‘signpost’ symbol.   These links were correct at the date of publication, but may 
be subject to change by individual organisations. 
Strategic Sites 
Information regarding the strategic sites, Policy CS18, can be found on the following pages: 
Page  
1.Havant Public Service Village   89 
2.Havant Thicket Reservoir   92 
3.Dunsbury Hill Farm   95 
4.Major Development Area and Waterlooville Town Centre Integration   99 
5.Woodcroft Farm 104 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 vii Index of Development Management Policies  
           Page  
Health and Wellbeing - Community Facilities, Recreation and Open Space  
DM1  Recreation and Open Space         122  
DM2  Protection of Existing Community Facil ities and Shops     123 
 
Promoting Havant  Borough ’s Economy  
DM3  Protection of Existing Employment and Tourism Sites    125 
DM4  Static Holiday Caravan Development        127 
DM5  Control of Class A3, A4 and A5 Food, Drink and Entertainment Uses   128 
DM6  Coordi nation of Development         129 
 
Housing  
DM7  Elderly and Specialist Housing Provision       130 
Caring for Our Borough   
DM8  Conservation, Protection and Enhancement of Existing Natural Features   134 
DM9  Development in the Coastal Zone        135 
DM10  Pollut ion          137  
 
Infrastructure - Transport  
DM1 1 Planning for More Sustainable Travel       145 
DM12  Mitigating the Impacts of Travel        145 
DM1 3 Car and Cycle Parking  on Residential  Development      146 
DM14  Car and Cycle Parking on Development (exclud ing residential)    146 
DM15  Safeguarding  Transport Infrastructure       146 
DM16  Freight  Transport          146 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please contact the Planning Policy Team about the Core Strategy and other LDF queries at : 
Havant Borough Council  
Civic Offices  
Havant  
Hampshire  
PO9 2AX  
 
Email:  policy.design@havant.gov.uk  
Telephone:  023 92446539  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 viii  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 1 
1.    Introduction and Vision  
 
What is the Core Strategy?  
1.01 Havant Borough Council is working with the local commu nity and its partners to produce the 
Havant Borough Local Development Framework  (HBLDF ). The HBLDF will guide the future 
development of the borough up to 2026. This will affect everyone who lives, works or visits the 
borough.  
 
1.02 The Havant Borough Core Strategy is one of the documents within the HBLDF.  The HBLDF is 
made up of a collection of planning documents  and the Core Strategy is the principal document 
setting  out the broad detail and direction of development in the borough.  
 
1.03 The Core Strategy will be followed by a Development Delivery (Allocations)  Plan that will detail  
where d evelopment will occur . In addition, a number of supplementary planning documents  will 
provide more information  on how policy is to be applied in particular circumstances or on 
particular  issues/ sites. However, the Core Strategy itself, taken as a whole, is the over -arching 
document which sets the overall policy framework for all other local development documents. All 
other local development documents must be consistent wit h the Core Strategy . 
 
What the Core Strategy Seeks to Achieve  
1.04 The Core Strategy describes the council ’s long term vision and objectives for what the b orough  
will be like as a place in  2026.  It closely aligns with  the Sustainable Community Strategy , 
Forward Together , produced by the Havant Local Strategic Partnership.  
 
1.05 The Core Strategy sets out how the council  believes  the borough  should develop . The Core 
Strategy identifies  the strategic s ites that are considered fundamental to achieving the over all 
vision and further detail s on these sites are provided in the document . The Core Strategy also 
identifies the required physical and  social infrastructure  (including green infrastructure)  
necessary to support new development and meet future needs.  
 
1.06 The document contains strategic policies and some  detailed development  management policies 
against which individual planning applications will be assessed.  When considering planning 
applications the council will consider all the policies contained in the  Core Strategy that are 
relevant to the proposal. It is therefore essential that the Core Strategy is always read as a 
whole.  
 
1.07 Where possible the Core Strategy has been designed to address risks and allow for flexibility in 
order to ensure the vision and objectives are met. Regular monitoring will be undertaken as part 
of the  council’s  Annual Monitoring Report and if appropriate , a review or partial review of the 
document will be undertaken to ensure it is responsive to any changes in circumstances.  
 
 The Statutory Requirement  of the Core Strategy  
1.08 Government guidance identifies a number of principles that must be adhered to so that core 
strategies and other development plan documents can be considered legally compliant and 
sound.  
1.09 Legal Compli ance  – the document must have been prepared in accordance with the Local 
Development Scheme ; have regard to the Sustainable Community Strategy , Forward Together ; 
be compliant with the Statement of Community Involvement;  be subject to a sustainability 
appraisal; have regard to national policy and associated regulations relating to publication, 
advertisement and consultation.  
1.10 Soundness  – a Core Strategy must be justified, effective and have regard to  national policy.   Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 2 1.11 To be ‘justified ’ it must be fo unded on a robust and credible evidence base  that has includ ed 
participation of the local community and others that have a stake in the area and  evidence  that 
research is robust so that any choices in the plan are backed up by facts.  It must also be 
eviden t that it is the most appropriate strategy when considered against reasonable alternatives.   
A continuous Sustainability Appraisal of the Core Strategy has been undertaken that tested its 
overall sustainability , resulting in improvements to the submission document.  
1.12 ‘Effective ’ means that the Core Strategy should be deliverable.  It must include sound 
infrastructure delivery planning; have no regulatory or national planning barriers to delivery; 
have signed up delivery partners; be coherent with the stra tegies of neighbouring authorities; be 
flexible and be able to be monitored.  
1.13 Finally, core strategies must have regard to  national policy.  Where there is departure , clear and 
convincing reasoning must be given to justify the approach.  
National and Re gional Policy Context  
1.14 So far within this document it has been  established 
that the Core Strategy is a tool for achieving the 
overall vision of what  the b orough will be like in 
2026. In order to successfully achieve this vision the 
Core Strategy must have regard to national 
planning policies and conform generally to the 
proposals within the regional spatial strategy , the 
South East Plan .  
 
National Planning Policy  
1.15 National Planning Statements, Planning Policy 
Statements (PPS s) and Plan ning Policy Guidance 
Notes (PPG s) explain statutory provisions and 
provide national guidance for produc ing planning 
documents.  The Havant Borough  Core Strategy 
does not repeat national planning policy. The Core 
Strategy explains the way in which  national policy 
will be applied to the borough.  
 
Regional Spatial Strategy  
1.16 The Core Strategy has been drawn up to conform to 
the South East Plan. The Core Strategy adds local 
detail to regional policy rather than repeating it. The 
work of PUSH complements the South East P lan by 
adding a sub -regional policy context. Again this is 
used in the development of the Core Strategy but 
not repeated.   
 
1.17 The South East Plan and a ll the policies of the Core Strategy (including the Proposals Map and 
Saved Policies ) will form a majo r part of the Statutory Development Plan.  The council ’s 
development management officers,  development management committee and if necessary the 
Planning Inspectorate will use the Statutory Development Plan, with government guidance and 
policy, to determine  all planning applications.   
 
 
 
 
Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 3 
Emsworth harbour popular with  
visitors, sailors and locals  
A27 trunk route  
through the borough  Characteristics of Havant Borough  
1.18 The Borough of Havant  provides a unique setting in urban 
South Hampshire, located on the coastal plain between the 
South Downs and the sea. The coastal location has played a 
major p art in the history of the area and continues to be at 
the heart of the important tourism industry and recreational 
activity, particularly in Emsworth and Hayling Island. The 
borough has many rural and green areas that retain mature 
trees from the time when  the area was part of the Ancient 
Forest of Bere. The borough’s high  quality environment 
benefits from a range of protective international and national 
designations. The high  quality environment is the borough’s unique feature and the foundation 
for ensuri ng the borough will be a good place to live and learn ; a good place to work and play;  a 
good place to belong and share . 
 
1.19 The town of Havant is at th e historic heart of the borough,  with its historic streets, fresh water 
springs, civic and cultural fun ctions and new shopping facilities. Waterlooville lies on the west of 
the borough and is a thriving modern area of housing, shops and employment. Waterlooville will 
experience more changes as a large new settlement of at least 2,000 new homes is planned on  
the western edge of the town.  To the north of Havant,  Leigh Park was developed for 
Portsmouth’s expanding population after the Sec ond World War. Portsmouth City C ouncil 
remains a major landowner and the impact of the city’s economy is significan t to the w hole of 
the borough.  
 
1.20 The b orough has excellent communications for a rapidly 
modernising local economy at the hub of road, rail and sea 
transport networks. The M27/A27 coastal trunk route and the 
A3(M) London route meet in Havant  and link the south c oast 
towns and their expanding ports with London and the rest of 
the south east. Further west the M3 motorway links to the 
Midlands  and the South W est. The rail network provides fast 
coastal and London -bound trains , including direct links to 
Gatwick airpor t.  The major international cargo and 
passenger port at Portsmouth is literally minutes away. 
Southampton’s port, one of the UK’s premier freight  and cruise  terminals, is within 
approximately 40  minutes drive time. Southampton International Airport is just  30 minutes drive 
time away and provides daily flights to regional and  European destinations. London Heathrow 
and Gatwick Airports are about 75 minutes drive away.   
 
1.21 The local economy has traditionally been manufacturing -based and there is a high 
conc entration of advanced manufacturing and marine businesses in the borough. It is well 
placed to attract new businesses with its superb natural coastline and high accessibility by both 
road and rail.  
 
1.22 A decline in the traditional employment base for the  borough has resulted in a number of 
problems including unemployment  and out -commuting . The unemployment rate in the b orough 
has historically been higher than the rest of Hampshire . Unemployment rates rose significantly 
in the b orough during 2008 reaching 3.9% in 2009 . This is double the 2007 rate and the highest 
rate in Hampshire excluding Portsmouth and Southampton.  There are high levels of commuting 
in and out of the borough with lower skilled residents commuting out and higher skilled people 
commuting i n. The 2001 Census showed that overall  significantly  more people travel out of than 
into the borough to work.   
  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 4 1.23 In 2006 the borough had an estimated population of 115,907. This is less than the 1991 census 
figure of 119,849. The population is project ed to rise to 119,558 by 2026, therefore returning  
close to the 1991 level.  
 
1.24 As elsewhere in the UK , the borough  has an ageing population with the majority of the 
population aged 40 years or older.  By 2026 just over a quarter of the borough’s populati on will 
be aged 65 and over and there will be a large increase in the oldest age group of people aged 
85 plus, particularly in the borough’s coastal locations.  There will be a corresponding drop in the 
number of people of working age in the borough , theref ore increasing the economic age 
dependency ratio.  These are fundamental issues that the Core Strategy policies, together with 
the actions of a variety of partners , will address.   
 
Figure 1.1:  Borough Population Profile  
Borough Population Profile - 2006
010002000300040005000600070008000
0-5 yrs6-12yrs13-19yrs 20-29yrs 30-39yrs 40-49yrs 50-59yrs 60-69yrs 70-79yrs80+
Age Group PopulationEmsworth
Hayling Island
Havant
Leigh Park
Waterlooville
 
 
1.25 The people of the borough li ve in 49,401 households, which mean s that there is an average of 
2.3 people per household. Nationally and locally the way households are formed is changing. 
These changes will increase single person households, through the ageing population, 
continuin g div orce and  an increasing number of cou ples who retain two homes. The average 
household size is projected to drop to 2.1 persons by 2026. This means more homes are 
needed to meet the needs of newly -forming households in the borough.  
 
1.26 A major issue for th ese new households both locally and nationally will be affordability.  Owner -
occupation remains out of reach for many , therefore a range of homes and tenures must be 
provided to meet the different needs.  Mixed tenure development is important in order to ens ure 
mixed communities are created. This includes ensuring there is an appropriate proportion of 
private market housing in communities where there is already a large presence of affordable 
housing.  
 
1.27  A unique issue for the borough relates to its housin g tenure. Overall the tenure of homes in the 
borough is 7 4% owner occupied , the same as the south east region. However , in Leigh Park, 
which makes up  21% of all the households in the borough , the owner occupied tenure is only 
50% (ONS 2001). The majority o f the homes that are not owner occupied are owned by the 
neighbo uring authority , Portsmouth City Council. This unique relationship creates a number of 
challenges for improved partnership working to deliver the regeneration that some parts of 
Leigh Park nee d.  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 5 1.28 The other major issue for the borough is to address the areas most in need of regeneration . The 
Index of Multiple Deprivation (IMD  2007 ) provides detailed information on deprivation on a 
range of economic, social and housing issues . The b orough  is ranked  the 142nd most deprived 
local authority out of the 354 local authorities  in England, (IMD, 2007) ; overall , therefore , the 
borough is above average . The IMD provides very detailed information on Lower Super Output 
Areas (LSOA)  of which there are 78  in the borough . In 2007 there were 18 LSOAs  in the 
borough  within the 20% most deprived areas in England . Four of those 18 LSOAs were within 
the 10% most deprived areas in England. The  18 areas were in Leigh Park, Wecock and the 
Beachlands area of Hayling  Island . At the other end of the scale there were  14 LSOAs  in the 
20% least deprived areas with three in the 10% least deprived. The 14 areas were spread 
throughout the borough, with the three  least deprived  in Hart Plain, Emsworth and Cowplain. 
This shows  some stark contrasts of deprivation and wealth in the borough . Some of these 
contrasting areas are next to each other e.g. Wecock and Hart Plain, Beachlands  and Sinah, 
Hayling Island . 
 
1.29 The indicators of this deprivation show that the re are parts of t he borough with relatively high 
levels of violent crime . In terms of health the borough has above average life expectancy 
(ranked 112 out of 354) and overall is considered healthy. There are issues with higher levels of 
teenage pregnancy, heart disease (ra nked 239 out of 354),  people diagnosed with diabetes , 
obesity (ranked 254 out of 354) and  relatively low levels of p articipation in sport (ranked 300 out 
of 354) . Unemployment is the highest in Hampshire with 2 ,633 people jobless ( October  2009) . 
9.2% of 16 -18 year olds are not in employment, education or training . 18% of the population 
have no qualifications and this figure rises to 40% in Leigh Park.  
 
1.30 Many of the issues facing the borough cannot  be solved at the local level. The c ouncil must 
work with  partners whose influence goes beyond the borough boundaries to shape our future. 
The Havant Local Strategic Partnership has produced  the Sustainable Community Strategy , 
Forward Together for the borough.  Havant  Borough Council  has a shared chief executive with 
our neighbo urs in East Hampshire and is working with other neighbo uring councils on cross 
boundary research and site allocations.   
 
1.31 Havant  Borough Council has taken a leading role in the sub -regional partnership,  Partnership 
for Urban South Hamp shire (PUSH). PUSH is a voluntary partnership of eleven local authorities 
in South Hampshire:  Eastleigh, Fareham, Gos port, Havant, Portsmouth, Southampton and parts 
of East Hampshire, New Forest, Test Valley and Winchester Districts and Hampshire County 
Council.  Figure 1.2  is a map of the South Hampshire Sub-region  and shows the extent of 
PUSH.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 6 Figure 1.2: The South Hampshire Sub-region  
 
 
1.32 The c ouncil believes that the achievement of the Core Strategy vision will be depend ent on 
worki ng with  a range of  partners in cluding  the Havant Local Strategic Partnership , PUSH , 
Portsmouth City Council, local community organisations and developers . 
 
1.33 In creating the Core Strategy vision consideration has been given to both the overall issues 
facing the boro ugh within the national and sub -regional context as well as those facing the 
different parts of the borough. The next section identifies the characteristics, key issues and 
challenges that face  and are particular to  the constituent parts of the borough.  
 
1.34 The borough is made up of  five distinct areas : 
 Emsworth  
 Havant (including Bedhampton, Denvilles, Havant  Town , Langstone and Warblington)  
 Hayling Island  
 Leigh Park  (principally the four electoral wards of Barncroft, Battins, Bondfields and 
Warren Park ) 
 Waterlooville (including Cowplain, Purbrook, Waterlooville , Wecock  and Widley)  
 
1.35 Identifying the key issues in each area provides a clearer focus for the vision.  
 
1.36 The characteristics, issues and challenges have been identified throug h various evidence base 
documents and through workshops and public consultatio n. 
 
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 7 
St Peter’s Square, Emsworth  
Mill Pond, Emsworth   Emsworth  
 
Emsworth is located on the east side of  the b orough. 
The eastern edge of Emsworth adjoins the county 
boundary with West Sussex and Chichester District 
Council.  Chichester Harbour Area of Outstanding 
Natural Beauty  (AONB)  lies to the south of Emsworth  
and the relationship with the h arbour has resulted in a 
strong maritime history. Sailing and maritime activities 
remain an intrinsic part of the area today, particu larly for 
leisure and recreation.  
 
The urban area of Emsworth extends northwards from 
the historical centre at the harbour’s edge. There are 
expanses of woodland to  the north of Emsworth and the 
River Ems flows down the eastern side of Emsworth.  
 
Populatio n 
Emsworth has a population of approximately 8,6281. Of 
this population 27% is over the age of 65. 
 
Economy  
The economy of Emsworth is focused around the district centre which lies to the south of the 
town. Independent retail uses dominate the centre and t here is also a strong presence of public 
houses  and small independent restaurants. In the north of the district centre there are a small 
number of industrial/warehouse units supporting small scale manufacturing, office and 
distribution businesses.  
 
Other c haracteristics  
Part of the AONB falls within the area and m uch of the 
southern end of Emsworth , centred on the distr ict centre , is 
designated as a conservation a rea. 
 
Challenges and Opportunities  
There is an opportunity to further support and improve the  
visitor offering at Emsworth and enhance existing community 
facilities. Emsworth is an attractive destination for visitors and 
this supports the tourism and day visitor economy of the 
borough as well as local businesses.  
 
Access between the south and nort h of Emsworth is 
restricted by two bridges serving the railway and A27. The 
road under the rail bridge is very narrow and this has been 
identified as an area of concern by residents, particularly with 
the pavement being inadequate at this point. The local 
community would also like to see improvem ents to Emsworth 
train station.  
 
How will these be addressed?  
This Core Strategy include s tourism policies and also policies that support community functions 
and buildings. It is recognised that improvements to the  ‘pinch -point’ at the railway bridge in 
North Street would be beneficial, particularly for pedestrians and cyclists. Partnership working 
with Network Rail  and Hampshire County Council will con tinue to investigate opportunities for 
                                            
1 Hampshire County Council Small Area Population Forecasts 2008 . Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 8 improvement and if possib le this could be partly funded from developments taking place 
elsewhere in Emsworth or linked with a potential skills site adjacent to the station.  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 9 
The Spring, East Street  
Regeneration of old parchment  
making buildings, Havant  Havant  
 
Havant Town originally developed owing to the 
freshwater springs. It has a strong history of  high 
quality  parchment makin g and it is believed  that the 
parchment used for the Treaty of Ve rsailles  came from 
Havant.  
 
The wider Havant area includes Bedhampton, 
Langstone and Havant. To the south are Langstone 
and Chichester Harbours. The remaining area i s 
largely urban  in character with a number of 
conservation a reas.  
 
Population  
The population of Havant is approximately 16,3792 
with a relatively mixed age structure.  
 
 
Economy  
The strength of Havant’s economy is centred on Havant Town Centre and the indus trial and 
business areas to the south west and north east of the town. This includes Langstone 
Technology Park, Broadmarsh Innovation Centre and New Lane. Despite the decline in 
manufacturing these employment areas have remained relatively healthy and they  continue to 
attract new employers.  
 
Havant  Town Centre saw significant edge of centre retail development between 2007  and 2009 
and this has extended the retail offer for the town.  
 
Langstone provides an important sailing and recreation function.  
 
Other characteristics  
Internationally important nature designations apply to 
Langstone  and Chichester  Harbour s and Brent Geese use 
much of the land near to the coast  for winter feeding . 
 
Havant College , recognised as a Centre of Excellence, 
provides a successful  further education facility for the 
borough and its surrounding area. This includes providing 
adult education opportunities.  
 
Challenges and Opportunities  
Some areas of Havant would benefit from small scale 
regeneration of redundant brownfield sites. The  mainline 
train station and bus station mean that Havant Town 
Centre is a highly accessible location for development.  
 
There is potential for a Public Service  Village on land at 
Civic Centre Road , to the north of the train station. 
Consequently there is al so a recognised need to improve 
the links b etween the town centre and the site for the 
Public Service V illage . 
 
                                            
2 Hampshire County Council Small Area Population Forecasts  2008. Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 10 How will these be addressed?  
This Core Strategy includes policies supporting the regeneration and redevelopment of sites. 
Maximising the use of  land in accessible locations is encouraged in national planning policy and 
also detailed at local level within this Co re Strategy. The Public Service  Village Site has been 
identified as being of strategic importance and details relating to the type of red evelopment are 
outlined in Chapter  8. The approach and aspirations for Havant Town Centre are identified in 
the Havant Town Centre Urban Design Framework Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) 
which also identifies town centre sites with development opportu nity. 
 
, Havant.  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 11 
Hayling Island and bri dge Hayling Island  
 
Hayling Island is separated from the mainland and the 
remainder of the b orough by Chichester and Langstone 
Harbours. It is surrounded by a variety of nature 
designations including some of national and international 
importance. The majority of the i sland is open 
countryside and farmland with a concentration of urban 
development to the south. The coastline and harbours 
are attractive features but they also present unique 
challenges for the future of this part of Havant Borough.  
 
Population  
Hayling Island has a population of approximately 16,7883 
of which approximately 25% are over the age of 65. The 
proportion of elderly people is expected to rise as the 
existing population ages and more people move to the 
island4 owing to its attr action as a retirement destination. 
This age structure presents unique challenges for 
Hayling Island in terms of the housing requirements and 
also health infrastructure.  
 
Economy  
There is a strong marine related employment base on the i sland. Tourism and t he day visitor 
economy are also important. Mengham/Gable Head District Centre provides a modest but 
successful retail centre. Overall e mployment opportunities on the i sland are limited a nd many 
people commute off the i sland to work.  
 
Other characteristics  
A significant proportion of Hayling Island is considered to be at risk from coastal flooding, 
particularly when the expected implications of climate change are taken into account. This 
presents a challenge in balancing the risks from flooding whilst  seeki ng to maintain and improve 
the tourism economy and safeguard the protected habitats.  
 
Challenges and Opportunities  
The tourism economy of Hayling Island is very seasonal but 
it is also provide s over one tenth of the borough’s jobs.  
 
Access on and off the  island presents a challenge and this 
has been highlighted by the residents of Hayling Island. For 
this reason (although tourism is promoted on Hayling Island 
as one of the key objectives specific to that area) tourism 
provision will not be concentrated so lely on Hayling Island , 
with further opportunities for tourism available elsewhere in 
the borough .  
 
How will these be addressed?  
This Core Strategy include s policies that support the retention and enhancement of tourism and 
tourist facilities. The importa nce of tourism on Hayling Island is further supported t hrough the 
identification of south Hayling Island  as an area for focused regeneration. Further information 
about this is detailed in Chapter 4,  Regeneration and Community Support . 
                                            
3 Hampshire County Council Small Area Population Forecasts 2008.  
4 Hampshire County Council Small Area Population Forecasts 2008.  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 12 
Hayling Island Seafront  Redevelopment and re generation here will update tourism 
facilities and improve the tourism offer while remaining 
sympathetic to the character of Hayling Island.  
 
The limitations of the road access on and off the island are 
recognised and together with nature constraints and  the 
potential impacts of flooding have  led to a lower distribution 
of housing and employment uses on Hayling Island than may 
have otherwise been expected. Employment distribution and 
housing are identified in Chapter s 3 and 6 of this Core 
Strategy.  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 13 
Hermitage Stream, Leigh Park  
Greywell, Leigh Park  Leigh Park  
 
Leigh Park is located in the north central area of 
Havant Borough. Leigh Park was constructed as a 
post-war development to accommodate overspill 
population from nearby Portsmouth. Originally a 
country estate , the land was purchased by Portsmouth 
City Council and a large scale house building 
programme continued through the 1950s and early 
1960s. To this day much of the land within Leigh Park 
is still in Portsmouth City Council’s ownership.  This 
creates a unique situation where a significant number 
(5,000) of the borough’s homes are t he property  of a 
neighbouring council.  
 
The urba n landscape is dominated by two -storey brick 
built terraces and an extension to the estate in the 
1970s , Warren Park , introduced largely flat roofed 
properties.  
 
Staunton Country Park, with remnants of the original 
country estate , provides a significant asset for Leigh 
Park. The Leigh Park area also contains many 
attractive mature trees and copses with the Hermitage 
Stream running through the area.  
 
Population  
The populatio n of Leigh Park is approximately 26,7305 with a relatively young age structure.  
 
Economy  
Leigh Park District Centre is located to the eastern side of 
Leigh Park. There are over 80 retail units. However, this 
centre has a particularly high vacancy rate and  rent values 
are low in comparison with the rest of the borough. Other 
shopping needs are met through smaller local centres and 
shops elsewhere in Leigh Park .  There is also a large Asda -
Walmart store on the western edge of Leigh Park that 
attracts a signi ficant amount of local retail spending.  
 
Manufacturing activities were once present in Leigh Park but many of these companies have 
now left as part of wider manufacturing migration abroad. Although there are some smaller 
businesses there remains a signifi cant skills gap between the skills of the local population and 
the jobs available in the sub -region.  
 
Other characteristics  
The Indices of Multiple Deprivation show that Leigh Park has 
some of the most deprived wards in England.  The tenure of 
the housing in Leigh Park is approximately 50% owner 
occupied and 50% social rented. This compares with 79% 
owner occupied in the borough as a whole.  
 
 
 
                                            
5 Hampshire County Council Small Area Population Forecasts 2008.  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 14 Challenges and Opportunities  
The key opportunity for Leigh Park is to deliver regeneration. This needs to be parti cularly 
focused on social and economic issues but physical regeneration is also required in places like 
Leigh Park District Centre. Addressing the skills gap is also a key challenge for the area.  
 
How will these be addressed?  
This Core Strategy include s regeneration policies that will encourage schemes that support 
wider positive impacts. In particular this will focus on Leigh Park District Centre . The housing 
tenure mix will be addressed through housing policies that require a balanced community.  
 
Address ing the skills gap is a complex challenge and the provision of new employment facilities 
near to the area will be critical. Skills centres will also continue t o be encouraged as part of the 
development m anagement process and this includes supporting existi ng facilities such as the 
Skills Centre in Leigh Park.  
 
Two strategic s ites are identified in Leigh Park , at Havant Thicket R eservoir and Dunsbury Hill 
Farm employment site . Together these sites will help to improve recreation and employment 
opportunities for the Leigh Park community.  
 
Further information on strategic s ites can be found in Chapter 8 . 
 
 
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 15 
London Road, Waterlooville  Waterlooville (west of A3(M))  
 
The wider Waterlooville area cont ains all those areas 
of the b orough to the west of the A3(M). This includes 
Cowplain, Lov edean, Waterlooville, Purbrook and 
Widley. The area contains a wide variety of house 
types, employment opport unities and Waterlooville 
Town C entre. The area grew rapidly after the World 
War II expanding the Portsmouth conurbation along 
the A3. Further loca l centres are also located in the 
area and Cowplain has a small district centre.  Good 
public transport link s to Portsmouth exist via the A3 
ZIP Bus Priority Corridor.  
 
A Major Development Area is planned directly to the 
West of Waterlooville and the majori ty of this 
development is within the administrative boundaries of 
Winchester City Council. The Major Development Area 
will provide a minimum of 2,000 new homes as well as 
employment space. Only approximately 600 of these 
new homes will be in Havant Borough ’s admini strative 
boundaries , although the impact of al l this 
development will be focu sed on Havant Borough . The c ouncil is working in partnership with 
Winchester City Council and Hampshire County Council to ensure the planned delivery of the 
Major Develop ment Area  and the infrastructure to support it . 
 
Population  
The area to the west of the A3(M) has a population of approximately 49,7956 and the age 
structure of this area is relatively mixed.  
 
Economy  
Waterlooville T own Centre provides a wide range of ser vices and 
retail shops. The average retail rent rates in the town centre have 
increased in recent years7 and the number of vacant retail units 
remains low. This indicates that the town centre is performing 
successfully.  
 
Further employment opportunity is focused on industrial areas and 
business parks to the west of the town centre, providing traditi onal 
and high -tech manufacturing and services. South Downs College , 
which Ofsted rates as ‘outstanding’,  provides sixth form education, 
vocational courses and a dult evening classes.  
 
Other characteristics  
The Wecock  Farm estate (mainly owned by Portsmouth City Council) on the north western edge 
of the area is identified in the Indices of Multiple Deprivation (IMD 2007) as being in the 20% 
most deprived in England . This area adjoins Hart Plain which is in the 10% least deprived in 
England. This stark contrast in such close physical proximity is a major challenge for the area.  
Some areas of the wider Waterlooville area can suffer from surface water drainage issues and 
this has been highlighted through public consultation.  
 
 
                                            
6 Hampshire County Council Small Area Population Forec asts 2008 . 
7 Source: Colliers CRE 2007 (and featured as a Local Indicator in the 2007 Annual Monitoring Report).  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 16 
Brambles Industrial Estate,  
Waterlooville  Challenges and Opportunities  
The A3(M) provides a physical separation between the Waterlooville area and the rest of the 
borough. Improved public transport from east to west is an important aspi ration for the future of 
this area.  
 
The integration of the Major Development Area with Waterlooville is an important challenge for 
the future. The Major Development Area provide s opportunities for a host of community benefits 
including additional employme nt and recreation space . Most importantly it will effectively create 
a new community which must be sustainable and integrated with the existing  community . 
 
How will these be addressed?  
The Major Development  Area has been identified as a 
strategic s ite and a key objective is to ensure that appropriate 
integration occurs between the existing town centre and the 
major new housing development to the west. There is 
potential for significant redevelopment to the southern end of 
the town centre which will maxim ise the potential for 
integration between the old and new , whilst also being of 
wider benefit to the overall vitality and viability of Waterl ooville 
Town Centre. A further strategic s ite for housing is identified at 
Woodcroft Farm , near Wecock Farm. The st rategic site will 
complement the identification of Wecock  Farm area as a 
priority area for regeneration in Chapter 4  Regeneration and 
Community Support.  
 
The potential to improve accessibility , by non -car means , from the west to the east sides of the 
borou gh is currently being investigated . Key to this will be utilising development potential at 
Dunsbury Hill Farm and other development allocations in order to assist the delivery of 
improved west to east accessibility.  
 Brambles Industrial Estate, Waterlooville  Brambles I ndustrial Estate, Waterlooville  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 17 
The Vision  
 
1.37 Central government i s clear that sustainable community strateg ies should be se tting the 
direction for council s’ visions and council s should align and coordinate their core strategies with 
their sustainable community strategies.  The Havant Local Strategic Partnership  (HLSP) 
produced its Sustainable Community Strategy , Forward Together  in 2008.  It has links to the 
Hampshire Sustainable Community Strategy , Shaping Our Future Together  and the Olympic 
Vision. The HLSP  vision for the borough  involves working together to plan and man age all our 
resources and individual effort, so that individuals and the community can flourish whilst 
providing for the needs of future generations.   
 
1.38 The Core Strategy vision for the b orough is based on the  council’s corporate  vision expressed 
in Forward Together ; ‘working towards a cleaner, safer, more prosperous borough ’ and relates 
to, and builds on , the characteristics outlined in the preceding pages . The b orough clearly has 
much going for it but it also faces  many challenges . It is this combinat ion of strengths, 
challenges and opportunities that shape s the vision for  the borough . 
 
 
The Vision for Havant Borough in 2026  
In 2026 Havant Borough will be a cleaner, s afer and more 
prosperous place.  It will be a place where people of all 
ages and circ umstances wil l want to live, visit or work . It 
will be a sought after location , well known as the home of 
windsurfing and for its superb Solent coastline. It will be 
widely recognised for its sustainable, innovative and high 
quality design developments and  the stewardsh ip of its 
natural and built environment . The borough will continue to 
benefit from its excellent road and rail connections 
particularly after the opening of the A3 Hindhead Tunnel.  
 
Working with its partners in the Partnership for Urban 
South  Hampshire (PUSH) the borough will meet the 
challenges of a r apidly changing global economy.  It will 
seek to develop a dynamic, knowledge -based economy 
based  on large and small businesses.  The local skills base 
will rise so that local people can access loc al skilled jobs.  
The council  will plan for and adapt to the challenges of 
climate change, particularly  flooding and coastal erosion. 
Areas in need of regeneration will benefit from the 
opportunities arising from new d evelopmen t. 
 
The b orough ’s residents e xpect high quality public services 
and the vision includes an aspiration to provide better 
coord inated and joined up services. The council 
recognises its leadership role and with its partners is 
seeking to prov ide a Public Services Village. Indeed one of 
the strategic s ites promoted in this Core Strategy will bring 
a number of  major public services to a single locatio n close 
to Havant Town Centre. Through partnership the council 
has also embraced Local Area Agreement (LAA) targets to 
reduce crime and anti social behaviour; address health 
inequalities; increase housing supply, including affordable 
homes; support business growth; increase employment  
opportunities; improve  skills and qualifications; support Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 18 
engagement in the arts; reduce CO2 emissions and adapt to climate change; protect and 
enhance biodiversity and increase recycling.  
 
Havant will be the focus of ch ange in the east of the borough. At least 1, 900 new homes could  
be built  here, and there will be major business investment in existing and new knowl edge -based 
businesses.  In the west of the borough two strategic sites will deliver regeneration and the 
integration of a new community with Waterlooville T own Centre.  At least 2,000 new homes and 
major new areas of employment will be built on the edge of Waterlooville, which will continue to 
be attractive to high tech businesses. Improving transport links between Havant and 
Waterlooville will increase everyone’s accessibility to a wider range of services and 
opportunities, particularly the excellent educat ion facilities of the borough’s colleges.  
 
Two major developments at strategic s ites in and a round  Leigh Park will help to regenerate this 
area by 2026.  These developments include a spacious high quality business p ark and a large 
reservoir important for b oth water supply and leisure. Further regeneration opportunity will be 
explored and progressed.  Maritime activities will continue to flourish in Emsworth together with 
its renowned independent retailers and restaurants. Tourism and marine businesses will 
continue to develop in and around Hayling Island in an environmentally sensitive way.  
 
 
A Sustainable Borough  - Delivering  the Vision  
1.39 The delivery of the vision will only happen by working together with partners, developers and 
the whole community. Wit hin the partnership working the council has a community leadership 
role to deliver this vision. The council will  focus  its resources  on: 
 
 The provision of high quality, affordable and accessible public services to its customers in 
the borough  
 The stewardsh ip of the borough for future generations in terms of the physical environment 
and for the people and communities across the borough.  
 
1.40 The council will work with its many partners to co -deliver this vision through sustainable means.  
It will seek an ap propriate balance between protecting the natural and built  environment ; 
delivering new economic growth and community regeneration; meeting the social needs of our 
communities and the prudent use of natural resources.   
 
 Where else to look:  
 
 
Hampshire Sustainable Community Strategy : Sets out how Hampshire County 
Council and its partners will achieve the vision that , ‘Hampshire continues to 
prosper, providing greater opportunity for all without risking the environment. ’ 
 
Forward Together 2008 -2012:  A Sustainable Community Strategy for Havant 
Borough : Is produced by Havant Local Strategic Partnership and is the  
document that the Core Strategy seeks to implement.  
 
Havant Corporate Strategy : Sets out the council's role and details how the  
council is  working towards ‘a cleaner, safer, more prosperous borough’ . 
 
Havant Borough Local Development Framework : Provides up to date information on all the 
LDF documents including the Core Strategy.  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 19 1.41 The Core Strategy vision will be delivered through  the Core Strateg y policies that are set out 
under the themes  listed below;  these broadly  follow  the key priorities of  the Sustainable 
Community Strategy , Forward Together:  
1. Health and Wellbeing  
2. Promoting Havant  Borough ’s Economy  
3. Regeneration and Community Support  
4. Community  Safety  
5. Housing  
6. Caring for Our Borough  
7. Infrastructure, Implementation and Monitoring  
 
1.42  Table 1.1  overleaf  sets out the Forward Together  and the Core Strategy themes together with 
their respective Core Strategy objectives , supplemented  with a brief int roductory description of 
each of the themes.  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 20 Table 1.1 - Forward Together  aligned with the Core Strategy  Forward Together 
Priorities/ Core 
Strategy Themes  
Core Strategy Objectives  Core Strategy Theme Description  1: Health and 
Wellbeing   To encourage heal thier lifestyles 
that will improve wellbeing across 
the borough  
 To promote the borough as an 
attractive destination for recreation, 
leisure and culture  
 Encourag ing healthier lifestyles by working with 
other organisations to deliver better facilities for 
health, recreation, leisure and culture to improve 
wellbeing across the borough.  This is fundamental 
to creating a place where people want to live, visit 
or work.   2: Promoting Havant  Borough ’s Economy   Achieve Gross Value Added (GVA) 
growth of 3.5% per a nnum by 2026 
bringing economic performance 
into line with the south east 
regional average  
 Promote  and protect a dynamic, 
diver se and knowledge -based 
economy to meet the challenges of 
a rapidly changing global economy  
 Raise the skill levels and 
employabilit y of the borough’s 
current and potential workforce  
 Promote and protect t he vitality and 
viability of the borough’s town, 
district and local centres  
 Encourage t ourism and the visitor 
economy without compromising  
sensitive environmental assets  
 Revitalising the economy of Havant Borough is 
fundamental to  generate wealth and raise living 
standards  for everyone . This will be achieved by 
providing high quality land and buildings for 
employment development and by promoting 
development that will help to raise skil l levels and 
employment opportunities. Regenerating the 
borough’s town, district and local centres through 
high quality buildings and public areas will be key in 
this respect, as will the focus on strategic sites.  
Supporting advanced manufacturing  will be  a 
priority for the future of the local economy and it is 
also proposed to encourage the marine based and 
tourism sectors.  3: Regeneration and 
Community Support   Ensure all new development 
maximises economic, social and 
environmental regeneration for the 
whole borough, with priority given 
to developments focused on the 
places and people that need it 
most  
 Deliver ing economic, social and physical 
regeneration to th e whole borough, particularly in  
areas of the borough that need it most. The 
requirement to add ress the needs of the ageing 
population, support and improve youth facilities and 
focus resources toward vulnerable groups and 
individuals is also considered a priority. It will 
ensure that regeneration and other developments 
contribute to increased opport unity to prosper, to 
improve skills and educational qualifications and to 
enjoy living, working and playing in the borough.   4: Community  
Safety   Reduce crime and antisocial 
behaviour to make the borough a 
safer place for  people to live, work 
and visit  
 The council has a leadership role to make the 
borough a safer place for people to live, work and 
visit. The aim is to reduce crime and the negative 
impact of antisocial behaviour on residents, 
businesses and visitors.  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 21  5 (and 7): Housing and Infrastructure  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Infrastructure   Identify  sufficient space for 6,300 
new homes  in order to meet the 
requirements of the South East 
Plan  
 Distribute the new homes across 
the five main areas of the borough 
taking into account sustainability,  
suitability and land availa bility  
 Ensure a mix of dwelling types is 
provided, in the right places at the 
appropriate times, and that an 
appropriate level of affordable 
housing provision is achieved  
 Ensure the housing needs of older 
people are met  
 Ensure the  requirements for 
Gypsies , Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople are taken into 
account  
 It will be necessary to find room to provide 6,300 
new homes  in order to meet the requirements of 
the South East Plan . New housing development is 
expected in all areas of the borough and indica tive 
numbers have been provided in the Housing 
Chapter of this Core Strategy. Some of the housing 
provisi on will be at strategic sites (t he West of 
Waterlooville Major Development Area and 
Woodcroft Farm). It will be necessary to ensure an 
appropriate mix of development, including the 
correct level of affordable housing , to make a 
balanced community particularly in Leigh Park , and 
that the homes are accompanied by all the 
necessary facilities such as health care, open 
space etc. In addition, the council has  a statutory 
duty to ensure that the accommodation needs of 
Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople are 
taken into account.  
 Deliver the full range of 
infrastructure that is necessary to 
support the housing, retail and 
employment development identif ied 
in the Core Strategy   
 Establish processes to monitor and 
review the effectiveness of the 
plan’s policies up to 2026 to ensure 
the objectives are achieved  
 In Forward Together  infrastructure is dealt with 
under Housing.  However infrastructure affects 
everything we do in life, therefore it is dealt with 
separately in the Core Strategy.  Infrastructure 
includes roads, rail, footpaths, flood defences, 
health, education and recreation facilities. 
Partnership working with a wide range of providers 
is essentia l to ensure the different types of 
infrastructure are provided in the right place at the 
right time.  
 6: Caring for Our Borough   Ensure all new development is built 
to a high quality sustainable design 
that is inspired by the character 
and setting of the l ocal area  
 Deliver the effective stewardship of 
the unique qualities of the 
borough’s built and historic 
heritage and natural environment  
 Adapt to, and where appropriate 
mitigate against , the impacts of 
climate change  
 The environment enjoyed in the b orough is very 
special and through effective stewardship the 
council aims to make sure that it continues to be 
so. This will be achieved by making sure that the 
needs of the natural environment and our heritage 
are respected in the Core Strategy policies and 
strategic site proposals. Growth must adapt to 
climate change and be located and constructed in a 
sustainable way, with regard to high quality design, 
energy, pollution, flood risk, waste and the 
consumption of natural resources.  
 
1.43 In addition to the seven Core Strategy  themes and the policies within them , the Core Strategy 
has two more important chapters  critical to delivering the vision ; Spatial Distribution and 
Strategic Sites and Development Management Policies.  The strategic sites have been alloca ted 
because they are strategically important in relation to the majority of the seven key priorities of 
the Core Strategy. As such they are critical to achieving the borough’s vision.  The sites are 
detailed in Chapter 8  of the Core Strategy.  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 22 1.44 The development management policies provide compl ementary detail to the strategic policies. 
They also address local detail that is not covered in the strategic policies or in national and 
regional guidance. These policies together with all the other policies in th e Statutory 
Development Plan (paragraph 1.17) will be considered when determining planning applications.  
It is essential that the Core Strategy is read as a whole when considering any planning 
application.  
 
Preparation of the Core Strategy  
1.45 The Core St rategy was prepared in line with the timetable set out in the Havant Local 
Development Scheme,  October  2009.   This is illustrated in the timetable shown below.  
 
1.46 The preparation of the Core Strategy started in the summer of 2006  when the initial Issues  and 
Options D ocument was published. The issues and options facing the borough were explored 
further in workshops and stakeholder events before a Preferred Option Document was 
published in March 200 8. The Core Strategy Preferred Options  had an overall 55% level of 
support  from respondents . Alongside the Core Strategy the c ouncil also consulted on the issues 
and options for the Development Delivery (Allocations) Plan and th is raised many  detailed 
issues about specific sites .  
 
1.47 In June 2008 the guidan ce governing the production of local d evelopment frameworks (Planning 
Policy Statement 12) changed . This affected  the way that core s trategies should be produced. 
The focus shifted to the delivery of sites and the inclusion of more detail to supplement the 
vision and strategy. As a result of this the council  reviewed the previous work on the Core 
Strategy and proposed  a new draft version  (Regulation 25)  that took on board the previous 
consultation r esponses, new evidence and the g overnment’s latest advice.  The Draft  Core 
Strategy strengthened its links with the Sustainable Community Strategy , Forward Together , 
identified strategic s ites that were  critical to the delivery of the overall vision and included both 
strategic and detailed development management policies to guide development up to 2026.  
 
1.48 An Examination in Public into the soundness of the Core Strategy was held in 2010 with  hearing 
sessions in September.  The independent Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State found 
the Core Strategy sound su bject t o a limited number of changes. These changes were 
incorporated into the final Core Strategy.  
 
1.49 Core Strategy Process Timeline  
 
 
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 23 
2.    Health and Wellbeing  
Objectives  
 To encourage healthier lifestyles that will improve wellbeing across the borough  
 To promote the borough as an attractive destination for recreation, leisure and culture  
 
Delivery Strategy  
2.01 The delivery of health and wellbeing involves working in partnership with a number of agencies 
including the National Health Service, P ortsmouth Water, Hampshire County Council, Sport 
England, Play England, the private sector, voluntary organisations involved in community 
support  and sport, cycling , walking  and local residents groups. The council will take steps to 
promote increased parti cipation in the culture and sport agenda by working with various 
organ isations and local groups to  deliver the facilities and initiatives that are needed. The 
borough will also work with all the relevant partners to use the Culture and Sport Planning 
Toolk it, produced by ‘Living Places’, and engage with other initiatives for delivering culture and 
sport developments and events such as the Playshaper Programme.   
 
2.02 The council has already been successful in developing a range of health facilities around Oak 
Park, West Leigh and at Havant Health Centre.  A further hospital is planned at Oak Park during 
the lifetime of this document.  
 
2.03 Portsmouth City Council is a major partner in delivering better open spaces, cycle routes and 
footpaths effectively thr oughout the borough and particularly in Leigh Park.  Spatial  Planning  
and the Provision of Cultural and Sporting Infrastructure in the PUSH area (PUSH Draft 2009)  
propose  various ways for delivering recreation and leisure potential. For example, the study 
identifies the need to ascertain strategic sports needs in South Hampshire, some of which can 
be accommodated in the borough. This report refers to the importance of co -location to enable 
provision for health and wellbeing to make the most effective use of  available sites and thereby 
facilitate delivery at accessible locations.  
 
2.04  Schools occupy  accessible locations in communities where more intensive , sustainable use can 
be justified. This potential forms an important part of the  Extended Services con cept and the 
Building Schools for the Future (BSF) Initiative.   BSF has been introduced by the current 
government to transform secondary education by funding the rebuilding or remodelling of 
secondary schools. Havant and Horndean  are the priority for Hamps hire and  will benefit from 
substantial investment. In or der to qualify for funding the county c ouncil must reduce the 
percentage of surplus places in secondary schools in Havant and Horndean . In this respect the 
BSF will ensure the more effective use of th e schools and the release of space for alternative 
community uses. For example, health and fitness provision could be combined with 
improvements to schools on suitable sites to deliver innovative and distinctive developments . 
 
2.05 A wide variety of resear ch delivery projects have been undertaken and are planned by the 
different part s of the council and other organisations in the borough. It is essential that all these 
streams of work are coordinated and monitored to ensure that they deliver effective value  for 
money.  These studies provide essential evidence to justify the policies of the Havant Borough 
Local Development Framework, especially the Develo pment Delivery (Allocations) Plan  that will 
implement Policy C S1 by allocating specific sites that benefit  the health and wellbeing of the 
borough.   
 
2.06 Partnership working is critical to identify and coordinate funding opportunities. Funding for all 
types of provision will be from a mix of public and private sources including contributions as a 
result of ho using and other developments and is essential for delivering  Policy CS1. Many 
funding streams are relatively short term and acquired through bidding, this can be an issue for 
delivering long term change to an area. Nevertheless the council will explore all  funding stream Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 24 opportunities to maximise the delivery of projects that will benefit the health and wellbeing of 
people in the borough.  
 
2.07 The development of strategic sites is critical for the delivery of health and wellbeing, especially 
at Havant Thi cket Reservoir  and as part of the Havant Public Service Villag e. Strategic Site 
Profiles (1and 2) are set out in Chapter 8. The borough is working closely with Portsmouth 
Water to realise a host of green infrastructure  and recreation  benefits throughout th e Havant 
Thicket site.  
 
Policy CS1 Health and Wellbeing  
 
Planning permission will be granted for development which:  
 
1.    Retains open spaces, including children’s play space, which are valued by local  
 communities unless a superior alternative can be provided. In particular it is 
 important to safeguard the following strategic open spaces:  
 a.  Emsworth Recreation Ground  
 b.  Havant Park  
 c. Hayling Park  
 d.  Hayling Beach  
 e.  Staunton Country Park  
 f.  Waterlooville Recreation Park  
 g.  Purbrook  Heath. 
 
2.  Improves  existing open spaces by  incorporating high quality  features,  accessibility 
 and appearance  and where appropriate achieves a national standard e.g. a Green 
 Flag Award.  
 
3.  Creates, where necessary,  new open spaces  that are located  withi n or close to 
 housing developments , that is  safe and accessible for children to play  and 
 contributes to the borough’s green infrastructure . 
 
4.  Ensures that sports facilities  which are considered to be of a good quality by Sport 
 England and other speci alist stakeholders are retained unless superior new 
 provision is made available.  
 
5.  Support the leisure c entre s at Havant and Waterlooville  as the main provision 
supplemented by  more local provision  of indoor sports facilities, including Building 
School s for the  Future . 
 
6.  Provides indoor sports  and leisure  facilities that would meet strategic needs for the 
 whole borough and where appropriate local provision .  
 
7.  Contribute s effectively to the opportunities for increasing cycl ing for all types of 
 trips, creating and improving linkage s within the borough, particularly  along the  
 stream corridors  and along the  coast between Emsworth, Havant and the borough 
 boundary near Broadmarsh  in accordance with the council’s Walking and Cycling 
 Strategy .  
 
8.   Supports the increased footpath and cycle use through the design of development, 
 linkage and signage.  
 
9.  Provides a building for use as a cinema, theatrical productions and  concerts in the 
proposals for the Public Service Village.  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 25 
Regeneration opportunity  
Westbrook Park play area  10.  Protect s and c ontributes to the availability of community facilitie s through 
refurbishment or new  provision which can be justified by needs which are evident 
in the local district.  
 
11.  Contributes towards the doubling of existing allotment spaces by working with the 
council to retain provision and include  proposals  for new plots and/or community 
gardens  in housing developments where appropriate throughout the borough but 
especially in Hayling Island and north of Waterlooville.  
 
12. In Chichester Harbour , Langstone Harb our and along the Hayling Waterfront 
involves the modification of exi sting moorings and berths. New additional moorings 
and berths will not be permitted. New jetties and slipways will only be permitted 
where it can be demonstrated that they are for essenti al public use.  
 
13.  Supports the improvement of existing cultural assets  with r egard to the arts, sport, 
 heritage, museums, and creative activities, particular ly the Old Town Hall, Havant.  
 
14.  Supports improving the educational and life chances for you ng adults especially by 
 facilitating access into employment.  
 
2.08 The first priority in the Sustainable Community Strategy Forward Together  refers to Health and 
Wellbeing as improving health and access to services includin g improving physical activity. The 
Core Strategy can contribute significantly to achieving this priority by planning for recreation, 
leisure and culture especially by improving the opportunities for exercise for all age groups 
including children’s play, walking, cycling and sport, both o rganised and informal.   
 
2.09 Key health issues are summarised in the Health Profile 2009, 
which is produced by the Association  of Public Health 
Observatories. Death rates from all causes combined and of 
early death from heart disease and strokes have ge nerally 
decreased since the end of the 1990 s and are below the 
average for England .  However, Havant Borough Council  is 
one of the three local authorities in H ampshire with the 
highest level  of mortality from heart disease and cancers 
according to the Hamp shire Joint Strategic Needs 
Assessment (2008) , produced by the Primary Care Trust and 
Hampshire County Council. Rates of violent crime and also 
people diagnosed with diabetes are high in comparison with 
the average for England.  
 
2.10 However, life expectan cy for men and women is better than the average for England. In contrast  
areas  where deprivation is an issue, such as Leigh Park, life expectancy for men is seven  years 
lower than for those living in the least deprived a reas. Deprivation  also has a major i mpact on 
young people;  nearly 5,000 children are living in poverty  in the borough . The Local Index of 
Child Wellbeing 2009 ranks the borough as the lowest in Hampshire and 271st out of 354 in 
England, clearly indicating a significant challenge for the futu re. 
 
2.11 According to the Health Profile 2009  the proportion of 
children who are physically active is higher than the England 
average. However, approximately 9 % of reception year 
children can be classified as obese. Child obesity clearly 
shows that the C ore Strategy needs to ensure that there are 
opportunities for healthy exercise throughout the borough by 
ensuring the availability of good quality play spaces which 
are safe, accessible and which children want to use. This Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 26 
Waterlooville Golf Course  need for open space is reinforced  by information relating to the relatively low levels of 
participation in sport. The most recent edition of the Quality of Life in Hampshire 2008  report 
points out that in all the local authority areas, except  the Borough  of Havant , at least one in four 
of 16 to 34 year olds play sport. The participation in sporting activities by people age d 55 and 
above is low throughout Hampshire; t he percentage in the borough  is amongst the lowe st 
(11.5%). The Core Strategy can make a significant contribution to increasi ng the level of 
participation in a range of physical activities by planning for safe, accessible and attractive 
provision for informal recreation and sports for all age groups.   
 
2.12 A sense of wellbeing complements physical heath and depends on opportuni ties for personal 
development and for improving the quality of life through living in a safe borough with a high 
quality public realm with accessible countryside and coasts and strong communities. One 
definition of culture is very diverse and includes libr aries, museums, archives, crafts and art.   
Heritage and archaeology, for example, are also essential aspects of culture and are 
considered further in the Caring for the Borough Chapter.  
 
2.13 Wellbeing can complement a healthy borough if activities 
and e vents are available which people experience as 
inspiring and pleasurable and which bring them together. 
People also value living and working in healthy environments 
and places which have a strong identity with a reputation for 
high quality recreation, leis ure and culture.  
  
2.14 Policy  CS1 supports g overnment initiatives, for example by 
providing improved play space and new provision (see 
‘Where else to look’).   
 
2.15 Similarly, Policy CS1 supplements the South East Plan Policy CC5: Supporting an Ageing  
Population by helping older people to maintain healthy lifestyles. By focusing on health and 
wellbeing CS1 also contributes to implementing the Hampshire County Council’s Local Area 
Agreement (2008 -2011) and the Hampshire Sustainable Community Strategy. The Hampshire 
Local Area Agreement has prioritised tackling mortality rates and problems such as obesity 
which can benefit from improved recreation provision.  
Where else to look:  
 
 
Havant Health Profile : Produced by the Association of Public Health 
Observatories.  
 
The Hampshire Public Health Annual Report : NHS Hampshire 2009    
 
Every Child Matters : A radical approach to joini ng up government and support 
structures for the 0 -19 year olds.  
 
Children’s Plan 2007 : Produced by the Department for Children, Schools and 
Families  
 
The Havant Borough Council Cycling Strategy : (1996 under review)   
 
Department for Children, Schools and Families  and Department for Culture , Media and Sport  
 
Healthy Lives, Brighter Futures: The Strategy for Children and Young People’s Health :  
Produced by the Department o f Health 2009  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 27 
Greenspace  
2.16 The borough has a variety of open spaces including playing space of different types for use by 
children and adults. A priority is making the most effective use of  existing space s as well as 
creating new provision where po ssible. This sustainable approach also applies to other leisure, 
community, cultural and health facilities  which effectively complement the provision of open 
spaces of different types .  
 
2.17 Evidence for the need for upgrading and increasing provision is provided by the Open Space 
Audit which informed the Havant Open Spaces Plan and PPG17 Assessment (2006). This, for 
example, refers to an estimate of only 44 % of residents in the borough who have access to 
high quality, high value multifuncti onal greenspac e within about a five  minute walk. For this 
reason it is important for the Core Strategy to contribute where possible to increasing the 
availability of accessible high quality greenspace.  The Havant Open Spaces Plan and PPG17 
Assessment recommend  that a n etwork of strategic open  spaces should be designated.   
 
2.18 The Core Strategy Policy CS1 confirms that there should be at least one strategically significant 
greenspace or sports facility in each of the Community Board areas.  Where improvements are 
requi red it is important that multi -functional greenspaces take account of the Green Flag Award 
Standard.  
 
2.19 A Green Infrastructure Strategy is currently being developed jointly by local authorities in South 
Hampshire as part of the PUSH  initiative. Health a nd wellbeing can benefit from this strategy  
because of the borough’s network of greenspaces  inland and along the coast.   The Local Index of Child Well being : Represents the first attempt to create a small area index 
exclusively for children in England.  
 
PPG17: Planning for Open Space, Sport and Recreation   
 
The South East Plan (2009)  
 
Hampshire Joint Strategic Needs Assessment   
 
Havant Borough Council Town Centres , Retail and Leisure Study (2009)   
 
The Culture and Sport Planning Toolkit  (2009 ): Produc ed by Living Places  which  is a 
programme based on the agreement between five of the country’s leading cultural agencies  
 
Forward Together 2008 -2012:  A Sustainable Community Strategy for  Havant Borough  
 
Where else to look:  
 
Hampshire Quality of Life Report (2008) 
 
PUSH Green Infrastructure Strategy  
 
Havant B orough Council Open Spaces Plan and PPG1 7 Assessment 2006 : 
This rates all the open spaces in the borough and identifies the strategic open 
spaces  
 
Havant Borough Sports Facility Report 2008  
 
Leigh Park Strategic Framework 2006  ‘From Housing Estate to Sustainable                       
Community’  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 28 
Keeping fit at  
Havant Leisure Centre  
Chichester Harbour  
Footpath, Warblington  2.20 New open spaces , for example in the West of Waterlooville Major Development Area  (see 
Strategic  Site Profile 4 in Chapter 8)  and improvements to existing provision can make a 
significant contribution to the regeneration and reputation of the borough as a leisure provider.  
The proposed cemetery in the West of Waterlooville development, and existing c emeteries, are 
important  places for memories  and life histories . Like other greenspaces they are also important 
for nature conservation.  
 
2.21 Other housing developments can contribute to health and wellbeing by making space available 
for active recreatio n and/or quiet leisure.  The  Strategic Framework for Leigh Park , From 
Housing Estate to Sustainable Community  identifies parks and opportunities for sport in 
association with housing development  and improvements along the stream corridors . The 
strategic va lue of the Hermitage Stream, for example, has recently been recognised as a ‘sub -
regional sca le blue corridor’ in the Green Infrastructure Strategy published for the PUSH 
authorities.  Other actions are also identified for leisure and open space which will  contribute to 
health and wellbeing in Leigh Park.  
 
2.22 The Havant Borough Sports Facility Report (2008)  points out 
the importance of  improving the quality and value of existing 
sports facilities. For example, it may be possible  to convert 
some tennis an d other courts for multi -sport provision. This 
could provide young  people in particular with a network of 
ball courts. The requirement for several  types of additional 
provision is  identified in Purbrook, Havant, Hayling Island, 
Cowplain, Leigh Park, Waterl ooville and Emsworth.  
 
Indoor Sports Provision  
2.23 The Sports Facility Report  refers to Havant Leisure Centre becoming a hub supplemented by 
other local provision. Additional indoor swimming pools cannot be justified unless the population 
increases by a significant amount. The Sports Facility Report  also points out that the current 
population of the borough is too low to support an indoor tennis centre. However, it may be 
possible for a commercial operator to develop a centre offering indoor courts to ser ve the 
borough and further afield.  The Town Centres, Retail and Leisure Study (2009) identifies only 
27% of respondents who visit health and fitness clubs, including a significant number outside 
the borough.  More intensive use of schools may be possible for some types of indoor sports 
thereby increasing local provision in relation to the Building Schools for the Future Initiative.  
 
Harbours  
2.24 Langst one and Chichester Harbours have special qualities 
which are central to health and wellbeing by providi ng space 
for active recreation and quiet leisure.  It is essential, 
however, for recreation to take ac count of the importance of 
the h arbours for nature conservation and their landscape 
quality (see information in Chapter 7 on national and 
international de signations). For these reasons it is not 
acceptable to increa se the number of berths in the h arbours 
or for additional ancillary infrastructure.    
 
Walking and Cycling  
2.25 Despite the nearness of countryside and the harbours , the 
use of footpaths and b ridleways has declined over four 
consecutive years up to 2007  as indicated in the Quality of 
Life in Hampshire 2008 report . The c ouncil is concerned that 
this trend does not continue as it is the only council  in 
Hampshire where such a significant problem has occurred . 
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 29 
Emsworth allotments  2.26 The extension of the popular Hayling Billy Trail through the eastern side of Hayling Island and 
along the Solent, where possible, would be an attractive amenity for both local residents and 
visitors . This path, especially if a continuous  route could be achieved, would complement the 
established Solent Way long distance path  and the Wayfarers’ Walk,  for which the b orough is 
well known.  However, it would be essential to take biodiversity fully into account and by working 
in partnership with  stakeholders including voluntary groups and landowners.  
 
2.27 Improvement to the cycle route network has been identified as a strategic infrastructure project 
which will be implemented with the involvement of partners such as SUSTRANS (the National 
Cycli ng Charity and Consultancy) and Hampshire  County Council  based on the current Cycling 
Strategy  (and its successors) . The network , part of which forms sections of the National Cycle 
Network,  will not only provide opportunities for recreation but also an alt ernative to using cars . 
Information in the 2001 Census shows that only 3.8 % of journeys were made by cycle. With 
safer routes an increase in cycling can have substantial benefits for health  and reducing 
congestion . However, the number of accidents needs to  be reduced significantly. For example, 
between 2003 and 2006 there were three fatal and 21 serious accidents with a further 200 
resulting in minor injuries.  A substantial number of accidents involve d children.   
 
2.28 Improvements to cycle and pedestrian  routes along the stream corridors are important for 
strengthen ing the strategic links with the Solent , Staunton Country Park and Havant Thicket . A 
route could be considered along Riders Lane Stream to connect the Hermitage Stream with the 
proposed Havant Thicket Reservoir Strategic Site. The route along the Hermitage Stream also 
connects the proposed Dunsbury Hill employment development (see Strategic Site Profile 3 in 
Chapter 8) with the central area of Havant.  The inclusion of cycle routes and footpaths  in 
housing developments where possible can improve linkage with local destinations.  Good 
design can ensure these links are attractive and safe to use.  
 
2.29 In the longer term the development of a reservoir at Havant Thicket adjoining Staunton  Country 
Park will enable the extension of a network of paths for cycling (and walking) to be provided. 
More information is contained in the Strategic Site Profile in Chapter 8 including the proposal for 
water -based recreation. The Havant Thicket proposal can contrib ute to reducing pressure on 
sensitive landscapes and areas of nature conservation importance along the coast.  
 
Allotments   
2.30 Allotments combine opportunities for growing healthy food 
and exercise for people who do not want to play sport. 
They are bec oming more relevant because of the trend 
towards higher density housing with relatively small 
gardens. More allotments would make a significant 
contribution to the coordinated programme of education for 
healthy lifestyle s identified in  Forward Together . 
 
2.31 There are 650 plots throughout the borough (2009). The 
doubling of this number by providing additional plots and 
community gardens can be justified to enable the borough 
to fulfil its statutory obligations. Although there is a need to 
retain allotments  in all parts of the borough it is particularly 
important to increase accessible provision in Hayling Island 
and to the north of Waterlooville, especially in Cowplain.  
 
Libraries  
2.32 Libraries are key cultural assets which contribute to the viability of  the centres of Havant, 
Waterlooville, Leigh Park, Hayling Island and Emsworth . A significant investment of £1.4 million 
is being made at the Waterlooville, Havant, Hayling Island and Leigh Park libraries. These 
improvements are supported by information in  the Quality of Life in Hampshire 2008 report  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 30 which shows that the use of libraries fell in the borough from 63% of households in 2004 -2005 
to only 37% in 2006 -2007.  
 
Other Cultural Assets   
2.33 More needs to be done to promote existing cultural assets. T hese include Havant’s water and 
parchment heritage,  Roman connections,  historical marine industries  and Waterlooville’s 
association with the battle of Waterloo. Emsworth and Hayling Island are connected with 
authors P.G. Wodehouse and Nevil Shute  and The M ill House in Bedhampton has an 
association with the poet John Keats. There is scope for expanding these literary connections.   
 
Cinemas and Theatres  
2.34 All age groups would benefit from having a cinema in the borough for recreational and cultural 
reason s. Films are shown in the theatres at Havant , Hayling Island  and Emsworth Community 
Centre , otherwise filmgoers travel to Portsmouth or Chichester. More local provision would 
provide the community with somewhere to go in the evenings without having to trav el out of the 
borough.  
 
2.35 There is a small theatre in South Hayling but this is not a central location. The Havant Public 
Service Village which is proposed to the north of Havant Town Centre, centred around the 
current civic offices offers the potentia l for a theatre;  cinema and  a range of other recreational 
and cultural activities at an accessible location (see Strategic Site Profile 1 in Chapter 8).  
 
2.36 It is important to retain the Old Town Hall  (The Spring)  for recreational and cultural uses sinc e it 
also occupies a central location in East Street, Havant. However, this building is being used to 
capacity, hence the justification for recreation and leisure provision in the Public Service Village.    
 
2.37 It is expected that this development will a ttract people who do not currently participate in leisure 
and cultural activities. According to the Town Centres, Retail and Leisure Study (2009)  the level 
of participation is low. For example, only approximately 50 % of respondents to the study visited 
a cinema or theatre. Since most people travel outside the borough for theatre visits it is a 
sustainable aspiration to improve the theatre facilities at a central location  like the  Havant Public 
Service Village.  
 
Cultural Centre  
2.38 A  new cultural centre to complement the Public Service Village should be easily accessible  and 
have wide appeal especially for children and young adults. The priorities in the Hampshire 
County Council’s Local Area Agreement (2008 -2011)  include children and young people. Key 
targets relate to improving educational achievements and especially the life chances of 
vulnerable young people. Cultural activities can help young people into lifelong learning and 
provide pathways into employment.  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 31 
Leigh Park Community Centre  
 
 
Community Facilities   
2.39 Community facilities, such as crèches, churches and 
community centres  are significant local resources  for local 
people. W here essential and effective these facilitie s need to 
be safeguarded  through partnership initiatives . Where there 
is a need for space to provide community events or to 
refurbish a rundown or outmoded building t here is the 
possibility of  funding resulting from the development of 
residential sites. However, the priority is to use what we 
have better. The Development Management Policy DM2 
provides further detail on the protection of community 
facilities.  Where else to look:  
 
 
Hampshire Local Area Agreement : Sets priorities and targets for the whole of 
Hampshire.  
 
Town Centres, Retail and Leisure Study : Nathaniel Litchfield and Partners 
(February 2009).  
 
Havant Borough Council’s Arts Development Service   
 
Leigh Park Strategic Framework  ‘From Housing Estate to Sustainable 
Community’ 2006  
 
Building Schools for the Future  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 32 
3.    Promoting Havant Borough’s Economy  
 
Objectives  
 Achieve Gross Value Added (GVA) growth of 3.5% per annum by 2026 bringing economic 
performance into line with the south east regional average  
 Promote  and protect a dynamic, diver se and knowledge -based economy to meet the 
challenges of a  rapidly changing global economy  
 Raise the skill levels and employability of the borough’s current and potential workforce   
 Promote and protect t he vitality and viability of the borough’s town, district and local 
centres  
 Encourage t ourism and the visitor e conomy without compromising sensitive environmental 
assets  
 
Delivery Strategy  
3.01 The c ouncil will work with its local and sub -regional partners to create jobs and increase 
productivity in order to achieve its aspirational growth target of 3.5% GVA by 202 6.  South 
Hampshire is supported by its designation as a growth point in the South East Plan and as a 
‘Diamond for Investment and Growth’ in the Regional Economic Strategy  with an accompanying 
phased allocation of funds for key projects.  
 
3.02 Local jobs a nd increased productivity will be delivered through business development on new 
employment land . A substantial amount of the new employment  floorspace will be provided at 
the strategic employment site of Dunsbury Hill Farm.  Further sites distributed aroun d the 
borough will be allocated for new employment floorspace  in the Develo pment Delivery 
(Allocations) Plan .  The approximate phasing is set out in Table 3.1 and the broad distribution of 
these allocations is set out in  Table 3.2.  Investment in business clusters , which have the most 
potential for growth, will be an important delivery vehicle to drive forward the local economy.   
 
3.03 Improved skill levels and employability will be delivered by the Havant Skills and Employability 
Partnership.  This is a p ublic, private and voluntary sector partnership with an action plan that 
lists a number of key priorities , such as increasing the number of apprenticeships , so that local 
people can access new jobs in the dynamic knowledge -based economy.  Sites to accommod ate 
skills provision will be identified in the Develo pment Delivery (Allocations) Plan . 
 
3.04 Vibrant and viable town, district and local centres will be promoted by delivering the 
development of town centre uses within their boundaries.  Key challenges an d opportunities are 
set out for each of the town and district centres in the supporting text.  The council will work in 
partnership with local business associations to promote small, independent businesses 
operating in the centres.  
 
3.05 An enhanced touris m offer will be delivered across the borough with the council working in 
partnership with leisure operators and tourism enterprises.  Sites for new hotels will be identified 
in the Development Delivery (Allocations) Plan . 
 
3.06 Four strategic  policies will form the basis for the management of development in the borough 
with regard to employment, skills  and employability , town, district and local centres and tourism. 
A number of detailed policies set out in Chapter 10  of this  Core Strategy will also be appli ed 
through the development management process  in order to promote the b orough ’s economy.   
Policy CS1 8 sets out the delivery strategy and development requirements for the strategic sites 
of Dunsbury Hill Farm and the Havant Public Service Village.  
 
  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 33 
Formaplex,  
manufacturing in Havant  
  
Policy CS2 Employment  
 
The council will to seek to a ccommodate flexibly a net total of 162,000 square metres of 
new employment  floorspace between 2006 and 2026 as follows:  
 75,000 square metres of B1 offices  
  45,500 square metres of B2 manufacturing  
  41,500 sq uare metres of B8 warehousing . 
 
Planning permission will be granted for development proposals that:  
1. Prioritise the use of previously developed land for the provision of new employment 
floorspace . 
2. Favour town centre locations for the provision of B1a office s and other town centre 
uses.  
3. Promote local employment and training initiatives on new employment sites 
particularly with regard to construction skills.  
4. Promote existing and potential business clusters and sectors particularly advanced 
manufacturing and ma rine businesses.  
5. Safeguard existing employment sites and allocations that are fit for purpose from 
development proposals for non -employment uses.  
6. Provide jobs, generate wealth or produce an economic output on existing 
employment sites that are not fit for current purpose . 
7. Protect marine businesses located on waterfront locations from non -marine related 
employment and other uses.  
8. Encourage smart economic growth and promote advances in information and 
communications technologies.  
 
3.07 The employment floorsp ace requirements set out in Policy 
CS2 accord with the South East Plan,  which requires 
sufficient land to be provided in South Hampshire to 
accommodate two million square metres of new employment 
floorspace  between 2006 and 2026. This in turn has been 
appo rtioned to individual authorities in the PUSH Employment 
Floorspace Policy Framework .  This sets Havant Borough  the 
target of providing sufficient land to accommodate a total of 
162,000 square metres of new employment floorspace.  The 
apportionment reflect ed the economy -led strategy for the sub -
region while taking into account the existing distribution of employment land, commitments in 
the planning pipeline, market demand and economic aspirations of individual authorities. A 
distribution and logistics study thoroughly tested the demand and supply of B8 storage and 
distribution floorspace in the sub -region prior to the apportionment process. The requirement s 
for B1b research and development and B1c light industry ha ve largely been considered within 
the B2 (g eneral industry) supply  as they have broadly similar business needs .  Reference to B1 
employment floorspace refer s in the main to B1a offices.  
 
3.08 It is important to recognise that significant numbers of jobs are provided by use classes other 
than the tr aditional B1, B2 and B8 uses.  Government policy set out in PPS4 : Planning for 
Sustainable Economic Growth  states that economic development should achieve at least one of 
the following outcomes:  provide jobs, generate wealth or produce an economic output.   The 
floorspace figures set out in Policy CS2 refer only to the B class uses namely offices, 
manufacturing and warehousing.  The figures exclude leisure, retail, tourism and other 
commercial uses, which although forecast to grow significantly over the pla n period will not 
require the type of space required by Policy CS2.  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 34 
3.09 Table 3.1 sets out a detailed division of the new employment floorspace into the three major 
business types phased into five year periods from 2006 to 2026 in the b orough .  This 
breakdown has been taken from the PUSH Employment Floorspace Policy Framework.   The 
target of providing 75,000 square metres of new office floorspace during the plan period reflects 
the council’s aspirations for a knowledge -based economy.  The strategic employ ment site  of 
Dunsbury Hill Farm will play a critical role in delivering this step -change in office development.    
 
Table 3.1: Employment  Floorspace Requirements in Havant Borough  2006 –2026  
 (square metres)  
 B1: Offices  B2: Manufacturing  B8: Warehousing  
2006-11 28,000  10,000  18,500  
2011 -16 17,000  12,000  10,000  
2016 -21 15,000  12,000    6,500  
2021 -26 15,000  11,500    6,500  
Total  75,000  45,500  41,500  
 
3.10 Policy CS2 takes a  flexible approach to  the allocation  and approval of land for employment, and 
the co uncil will avoid designating sites for restrictive use classes wherever possible.  This is in 
line with government policy set out in PPS4 .  Inevitably, some variation to the phasing set out in 
Table 3.1 can be expected, reflecting changes in the global and  national economy.  Commercial 
development rarely comes forward as a continuous stream and more normally occurs in less 
frequent but larger amounts.  Performance at delivering the floorspace targets set out in the 
PUSH policy framework will be assessed at the sub -regional level rather than for individual 
authorities.  Therefore shortfalls affecting one local authority could be counterbalanced by a 
surplus in another authority.  This will need to be monitored robustly at a sub -regional level.  
 
3.11 The South  East England Partnership Board published Interim Job Numbers (IJN) for Havant 
and the rest of the South East in 2009.  It forecast that a total of 3,776 new jobs would be 
created in the borough between 2006 and 2016.  The Partnership Board advised that th e IJNs 
were indicative and aspirational rather than targets.  The figures refer to all jobs and not just 
those in B use classes.  It will be important to monitor job creation as well as the delivery of new 
employment floorspace  in the borough over the plan  period.  This will be reported in the Annual 
Monitoring Report (AMR).   
 
3.12 The Employment Land Review (ELR) is the main evidence  based study of employment land in 
the borough.  This was comprehensively reviewed and updated in 20 10 to provide a robust and 
realistic portfolio of 77 existing, proposed and potential employment sites  using a base date of 
April 2009.  So that the council can take an informed plan, monitor, manage approach to 
employment land , the ELR portfolio  will be reviewed and updated annuall y and key findings 
reported in the  AMR .   Where else to look:  
 
 
Economic Development Strategy  PUSH (2006)  
 
Employment Floorspace Policy Framework  PUSH (2008)  
 
Economic Drivers and Growth  DTZ for PUSH (2007) 
 
Property Requirements for Distribution and Logistics  Roger Tym and Partners 
for PUSH (2008)  
 
Havant Borough Employment Land Review 2010  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 35 
Dunsbury Hill Farm  
adjacent to Leigh Park  
 
Enterprise Centr e, Broadmarsh   
3.13 The spatial distribution of new employment floorspace has been informed by the updated and 
revised ELR. Table 3.2 sets out the distribution of 165,572 square  metres of new employment 
floorspace between the fi ve areas of the borough , comfortably meet ing the requirement s for the 
borough set out in Policy CS2 .  These figures are also shown in  the Spatial Distribution Map  
which forms Figure 8.1 in Chapter 8  of this document.  The spatial distribution reflects the i ssues 
and challenges for business development in the five areas of the  borough set out in Chapter 1 
of this Core Strategy.  However, these figures are intended to be indicative and will not be used 
prescriptively to prevent further employment opportunities  coming forward on suitable locations.  
 
3.14 A total of 165,572 square metres of new employment floorspace has been identified on sites 
across the borough  from four principle sources of supply and is set out in Table 3.2 .  Sites with 
extant planning permis sion, strategic sites allocated in the Core Strategy and potential sites that 
may be allocated in the Development Delivery (Allocations) Plan make up three of the four main 
sources of suppl y of new employment floorspace.  It is unlikely that  all of these permissions and 
allocations will be implement ed in full over the plan period;  it is therefore  prudent to apply a 10% 
non-implementation discount to the se categories.  
 
3.15 A total of  34,091  square metres of new employment floorspace was completed between Apr il 
2006 and March 20 10.  After applying the non -implementation discount t here was extant 
planning permission for a total of 23,428  square metres of new employment floorspace at  
 1 April 20 10. Approximately 56,753  square metres of new employment floorspace  could  be 
provided at the Dunsbury Hill Farm strategic employment 
site. Finally, approximately 51,300  square metres of new 
employment floorspace may be provided on sites identified in 
the Development Delivery (Allocations)  Plan.  This four -
staged process i s in keeping with the PUSH apportionment 
process as it takes into account commitments in the planning 
pipeline, market demand and the aspiration to create a 
dynamic knowledge -based economy in the b orough.  This 
provides a robust total employment floorspace  figure of  
165,572 square metres that takes into account 
contingencies.    
 
3.16 Table 3.2 shows that 91% of the new employment 
floorspace will be located in Havant and Leigh Park. This is 
because the strategic employment site of Dunsbury Hill 
Farm is loca ted on the edge of Leigh Park.  Also a number 
of sites have been completed or granted planning 
permission within existing industrial areas such as New 
Lane. The Spatial Distribution Table below  indicates that 
only a small proportion of the new employment f loorspace 
will be located in Waterlooville. However, a significant 
amount of new employment floorspace  will be provided just 
across the borough boundary in Winchester  City Council ’s 
administrative area  at the West of Waterlooville Major 
Development Area (M DA) and will provide jobs for the 
borough  residents.  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 36 
Offices, Leigh Park District Centre  Table 3.2:  Spatial distribution of new employment floorspace across Havant Borough 
2006 -2026 (square metres)  
 
Area  Completions 
2006 -10 Extant 
permissions 
2010  Strategic 
Sites  Potential 
sites  Totals  Proportions  
Waterlooville  2,484  540 1,152  4,320  8,496  5% 
Havant  16,303  16,438  - 43,380  76,121  46% 
Leigh Park  13,693  4,925  55,601  - 74,219  45% 
Emsworth  0 1,995  - - 1,995  1% 
Hayling 
Island  1,611  -470 - 3,600  4,741  3% 
Totals  34,091  23,428  56,753  51,300  165,572  100%  
 
3.17 Priority will be given to the use of previously developed land (PDL) within the urban area  for the 
provision of new employment floorspace  in line with PPS4.  The updated and revised ELR 
identified a number of existing employment sites in the borough where intensification could 
provide additional employment floorspace , for example, through a more efficient provision of car 
parking.  However, the use of PDL alone will not be sufficient to meet the employment 
floorspace  requirements  set out i n the South East Plan . The development of greenfield land at 
Dunsbury Hill Farm and a number of other sites identified in the Development Delivery 
(Allocations) Plan will therefore be necessary.  
 
3.18 Offices are defined as a main town centre use in  PPS4: 
Planning for Sustainable Economic Growth . Office uses 
encompass both B1a office units and A2 financial and 
professional service units. The South East Plan and PPS4 
both stress the importance of locating new office 
developments in town centre or edge -of-centre locations. 
The ELR identified existing, permitted and potential office 
sites in all the borough’s town and district centres.  The 
Town Centre, Retail and Leisure Study  published in 2008 
also considered that there was scope for the development of 
new t own centre office floorspace.  There is an identified demand for small offices which would 
suit small scale town centre schemes with active ground floor frontages and o ffice uses above 
as set out in Policy CS4  on designated centres. Town and district centr e locations will be 
favoured for the provision of B1a offices and other town centre uses  in order to promote their 
vitality and viability whilst recognising that market demand will influence office location. 
Proposals to develop B1a office floorspace outsi de town centres will need to include  a thorough 
sequential test to ensure there are no suitable sites in the centres identified in Policy CS4 on 
town, district and local centres.  
 
Where else to look:  
 
 
PPS4: Planning for Sustainable Economic Growth   
 
Town Centres, Retail and Leisure Study : Nathaniel Lichfield and Partners for 
Havant Borough Council (2009)  
  
Havant Borough Employment Land Review 2010  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 37 
Marina working yard  
(courtesy of Northney Marina)  
 
Local employment at  
 Dunsbury Park  3.19 A substantial amount of new office floorspace has been allocated outside the town centres at 
the strategic employme nt sit e of Dunsbury Hill Farm. The council took a sequential approach to 
the selection of this site in accordance with  PPS4 :  Planning for Sustainable Economic Growth .  
Although there were a number of small sites within and on the edge of Havant and Waterloovill e 
Town Centres these were considered to be of an insufficient scale to accommodate the office 
requirements set out in P olicy CS2 and thus achieve the council’s aspirations for a knowledge -
based economy.  Although Dunsbury Hill Farm is an out -of-centre site  the proposed cross -
borough transport route will link it with other strategic sites and Havant Town Centre.  A key 
development objective of Dunsbury Hill Farm is that it will provide a range of locally -based 
accessible jobs in close proximity to Leigh Park  where there are pockets of high unemployment 
and acute deprivation.  
 
3.20 The employment of local residents on new employment 
sites would help to address problems of out -commuting 
and unemployment. It is vital to raise local skill levels so 
that local pe ople can access local jobs.  The council  will 
promote employment and training initiatives on new 
employment sites including Dunsbury Hill Farm and this 
will be implemented through Section 106 legal 
agreements.  
 
3.21 The b orough will build upon its economic strengths and assets by promoting its existing and 
potential sp ecialised sectors and clusters.  These are advanced manufacturing and marine 
businesses.  Almost half of all organisations contacted for the Business Needs Survey for the 
Property Market Review operated in the manufacturing sector and over a quarter associated 
strongly with the marine sector. Two studies carried out in South Hampshire on sectors and 
clusters have confirmed that clusters create the best possible business environment in which 
firms  can be created, survive and thrive.  The revised and updated ELR looked at the specialist 
requirements for all existing, permitted and potential employment sites for advanced 
manufa cturing and marine businesses. These evidence  based studies show that manuf acturing 
growth in the b orough diff ers from the national picture. This may  be due to the borough’s good 
logistical connections. This will be further enhanced with the opening of the Hindhead Tunnel in 
2011.  
 
3.22 The b orough is located close to the Solent , which is world 
famous for it s diverse maritime industries. The Solent 
Waterfront Strategy states that the marine sector 
generates a GDP of £5.5 billion, which  represents 27% of 
the total value of the Solent economy. The marine sector is 
characterised by high productivity levels and provides high 
value jobs. This is in keeping with the Havant Borough and 
PUSH strategies of developing a dynamic, diverse and 
knowledge -based economy . Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 38 
Enterprise Centre, Broadmarsh  
 
3.23 The employment  floorspace requirements set out in Policy CS2  are net figures. Any loss of 
existing employment floorspace  to other land uses, such as residential, wil l necessitate an 
increase in the amount of new floorspace built in the borough over the plan period. This could 
include greenfield land. It is therefore particularly important 
to safeguard existing employment sites that are fit for 
purpose. All existing, p roposed and potential employment 
sites are the subject of a robust assessment in the ELR.  
The site scoring criteria applied in the ELR report will be 
used to guide decisions as to whether sites should be 
retained for em ployment purposes or released. The EL R 
will be regularly updated and key findings reported in the 
Annual Monitoring Report (AMR).   
 
3.24 However, the council  recognises the need for flexibility in the supply of employment land in 
order to respond to changing business requirements. Any proposa l to redevelop an existing 
employment site for non -employment uses must provide robust and credible evidence on 
viability and marketing that the site is no longer fit for purpose as an employment site.   Policy 
CS2 only safeguards existing employment premis es and land within the traditional B uses 
namely offices, manufacturing and warehousing.   The Development Management Policy DM3  
contained in Chapter 10  of this Core Strategy deals with the protectio n of existing employment 
sites.  All applications that woul d result in the loss of employment floorspace must comply with 
all aspects of this policy and thus prove through an active and exhaustive marketing exercise 
that the site is no longer fit for purpose as an employment site.   
 
3.25 Once it has been establish ed that an existing employment site is not fit for purpose other types 
of economic development should be considered. These uses must provide jobs, generate 
wealth or produce an economic output. Housing is not a type of economic development. In 
order to add ress the borough’s historically high unemployment rate and the low job density the 
council will take a pragmatic approach to redevelopment proposals in order to maximise the 
number of jobs retained and created in the borough.  Proposals for town centre use s must 
comply with Policy CS4 on town, district and local centres and government policy set out in 
PPS4.  Further details on redevelopment proposals are provided in Policy DM3.  
 
3.26 The marine industry is very diverse and the different sub -sectors have sp ecific physical 
requirements. The marine sector is made up of three distinct sub -sections: ports and shipping 
activities, naval and defence activities and marine leisure activities. Marine leisure activities are 
particularly important in the b orough , while  many  residents commute out to work in Portsmouth 
Naval Base . Direct waterfront access is critical for some marine businesses while others have 
less specific requirements and can operate from non -waterfront locations. Benefits also accrue 
when specialised marine businesses are located in close proximi ty to each other in a cluster. Where else to look:  
 
  
Identifying Clusters of Potential in South Hampshire : University of Portsmouth 
(2008)  
 
Businesses in Growth Sectors in South Hampshire : TBR (2008)   
 
Solent Waterfront Strategy : SEEDA (2007)  
 
Property Market Review : Vail Williams for HBC (2007)   Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 39 
Havant College  
Skilled workforce, Havant  The revised and updated ELR identified a number of waterfront mar ine businesses in the 
borough. These sites were evaluated with specialised criteria such as depth of water access.   
Existing marine -based businesses on suitable waterfront sites will be safeguarded from non -
marine -related employment  and other  uses . These sites will be identified in the Development 
Delivery (Allocations) Plan. 
 
3.27 The council will encourage smart gro wth so that businesses can wo rk as efficiently as possible. 
This is a way to increase prosperity whilst reducing the borough’s ecological footprint.  
Investment in digital infrastructure through the provision of high -speed broadband  will facilitate 
smart g rowth. Smarter working and new technologies may prompt demand for different types of 
premises such as live -work units and telecottages. The council will take a positive approach to 
proposals that facilitate smarter  working in suitable locations.  Smart grow th will be championed 
at the Havant Public Service Village, which will become an integrated hub of public and 
community service and has been allocated as  a strategic site in P olicy CS1 8. 
 
 
Skills and Employability  
 
Policy CS3 Skills and Employability  
 
Plan ning permission will be granted for development proposals that:  
 
1. Raise skill levels and increase employability.  
2. Tackle  skill shortages in existing and potential business clusters and sectors 
particularly advanced manufacturing and marine businesses . 
3. Promot e skills provision in emerging growth sectors such as sustainable 
construction methods.  
4. Promote skills provision on strategic sites particularly with regard to construction 
skills.  
5. Address barriers to employment for economically inactive people.  
6. Provide childcare facilities within or in close proximity to employment sites.  
 
3.28 Poor skills and qualifications act as barriers to people 
accessing work. Raising the skills levels of the existing and 
potential workforce of the borough is a key economic driver 
for promoting Havant Borough’s economy. The low resident 
skills base is one of the greatest challe nges facing the 
borough.  The Office of National Statistics Annual Population 
Survey found that 18% of the resident population in the 
borough did not have any qualifications. This is the highest 
rate in Hampshire and is considerably higher than the 
regional and national averages. Furthermore, there are 
intense pockets of skills deprivation within the borough. Over 
40% of the working age population of Leigh Park wards do 
not have any qualifications.  
  
3.29 This issue will increase in importance as the local and wider 
economy restructures with an increasing need for people 
with high skill levels to work in knowledge -based and value -
added businesses. This is particu larly relevant in times of 
recession when people who are made redundant need to 
retrain to access new jobs. Furthermore, the old age 
dependency ratio will increase as the population profile of 
the borough changes with a larger proportion of elderly Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 40 
people.  This further necessitates the need for a skilled productive workforce that can support 
the aging population.  
 
3.30 The PUSH Economic Development Strategy  stresses the importance of skills and the labour 
market. It states that developing the workforce is vital to underpinning sub -regional growth 
aspirations whilst improving the quality of life for all residents. It identifies multiple barriers to 
accessing work such as poor health, low skills and family responsibilities. The strategy stresses 
the need for a multi -agency approach to address these issues.  The South East Plan states that 
regional and local agencies need to work together to maximise the number of people ready for 
employment at all skill levels, and it calls for a significant improvement in skil ls delivery.  
 
 
3.31 The council is a member of t he Havant Skills and  Employability P artnership .  The council’s 
membership of the partnership is in keeping with the South East Plan,  which requires local 
authorities to work jointly with business sectors and training providers. The council recognises 
that the re are a number of other partnerships doing valuable work to reduce barriers to work 
such as the Learning and Skills Council and the Education Business Partnership. The council 
will work with and support these agencies over the plan period.     
 
3.32 A key  priority for the Havant Skills and Employability Partnership is to reduce the number of 
young people who are not in education, employment or training  (NEET) .  9.2% of resident 16 to 
18 year olds in the borough were classified as NEETs in 2007, which is al most double the 
average figure for the South East Region.  The council will support proposals that raise the skill 
levels and employability of young people and help them into work, education or training.   
 
3.33 There is a need to provide a greater flow of people with appropriate skills into a number of key 
sectors and clusters. The b orough has the highest proportion per capita of jobs in advanced 
manufacturing in the South East of England (Havant Skills and Employability Partnership, 
2008). Skilled people c ommute into the b orough to fill these jobs. It is essential to prioritise the 
local skills shortage in advanced manufacturing so that local people can access these well paid 
local jobs. Modern apprenticeships and other forms of workplace learning have a vi tal role to 
play in this area.  
 
3.34 Marine businesses provide a large number of skilled and high value jobs.  The Solent Marine 
Strategy highlights a marine skills base shortage, which is becoming increasingly acute as older 
skilled workers retire. The Ma nufacturing, Engineering and Marine Skills Partnership is a 
stakeholder alliance that is working in the sub -region to address skills shortages. The council 
will prioritise tackling skills shortages in the marine sector.  
 
3.35 Skills provision should also be forward looking. The importance of high standards of sustainable 
design is recognised both locally and sub -regionally. It will be necessary for the construction Where else to look:  
 
 
Economic Development Strategy : PUSH (2006)  
 
The South East Plan  (2009 ): Particularly chapters 6, 15 and 16     
 
www.connexions.gov.uk : Offers information and advice for 13 -19 year olds to 
make life decisions  
 
Prosperity Through Skills and Employability: An Action Plan for the Borough of 
Havant 2008 -2012 : Havant Skills and Employability Partnership  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 41 
Converted farm buildings,  
Wren Centre, Emsworth  
Sustainable construction  workers of the future to build new homes, workplaces and 
community facilities using sustain able construction methods. 
The council will therefore promote skills provision in this 
respect .   
 
3.36 The development of all the strategic sites listed in P olicy 
CS18 offer opportunities for training initiatives and local 
employment, particularly the st rategic employment site of 
Dunsbury  Hill Farm. The council will work in partnership with 
developers, land owners and the Havant Learning and Skills 
Partnership to promote local employment and training 
initiatives on the strategic sites particularly  with regard to 
construction skills.  This will be implemented through S106 
legal agreements.  
 
3.37 The issues of worklessness and employability are 
inextricably linked. Estimates of worklessness are based on 
the number of people receiving the main out-of-work benefits 
(MOWB) including Job Seekers’ Allowance, Incapacity 
Benefit and Income Support. The MOWB rate in the b orough was 13% in May 2009, which is 
almost double the Hampshire figure of 7.9% (Hampshire Labour Market Bulletin, January 2009).   
Many people face multiple barriers to accessing employment opportunities. These include  low 
skills, transport, childcare, poor health and family responsibilities. These issues are addressed 
through a number of strategic  and development management  policies in this  Core Stra tegy. The 
council will support partnership working to tackle a combination of issues, which could lead to 
personal support pa ckages to get people into work particularly the long term unemployed.  
 
3.38 A lack of accessible and affordable childcare often act s as a significant barrier to work 
particularly for women and lone parents. The council will consider favourably the provision of 
childcare facilities within and in close proximity to new and existing employment sites.  
 
Town, District and Local Centres  
 
Policy CS4 Town, District and Local Centres  
 
The council will seek to a ccommodate  approximately  13,000 square metres (net) of new 
comparison goods retail floorspace within town and district centres up to 2016.  
 
Planning permission will be granted for approp riate town centre development proposals 
that:  
1. Promote and enhance the following hierarchy of identified centres  as shown on the  
Proposals Map : 
 Town Centres - Havant and Waterlooville   
 District Centres - Cowplain, Emsworth, Leigh Park and  Mengham/Gable He ad  
 Local Centres - Bedhampton, Crookhorn, Grassmere Way, Hambledon Parade, 
 Middle Park Way, Milton Road, Purbrook, Rails Lane, West Town and Widley . 
2.    Enhance the evening economy of the town and district centres.  
3.    Retain and enhance local marke ts. 
4.   Support small and independent businesses.  
5.    Encourage high quality, mixed -use development in designated centres that retain 
active ground floor frontages.  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 42 
Havant Town Centre  3.39 The town, district and local centres of the b orough lie at the 
heart of its local  communiti es. The development of accessible, 
attractive and vibrant centres is central to the achievement of 
sustainable development in the borough.  Policy CS4 seeks to 
promote the vitality and viability of the identified centres in line 
with government policy set out in PPS4:  Planning for 
Sustainable Economic Growth . The council will seek to 
promote and enhance its town, district and local centres by 
focusing development of a scale and of a kind that 
acknowledges the different roles each centre performs within 
the hierarchy.  The main town centre uses are retail, leisure, 
offices, arts, culture and tourism.  All applications for the 
development of town centre uses and in particular new retail floorspace outside designated 
centres will need to demonstrate in a robust and transparent manner the application of the 
sequential approach to site selection , an impact assessment and all other relevant tests set out 
in current government policies .    
  
3.40 The Town Centres, Retail and Leisure Study produced by Nath aniel Lichfield and Partners for 
the council in 2009 is the main evidence  based study on town, district and local centres for the 
HBLDF .  It assessed the different roles and functions of the identified centres in the borough.  
The main findings are set out  overleaf  for the town and district centres along with an 
assessment of whether anything needs to change in order for them to fulfil these roles over the 
plan period.  The boundaries for all t he designated centres named in P olicy CS4  (as shown on 
the Propo sals Map)  will be identified in the Development Delivery (Allocations) Plan along with 
the primary shopping areas  and primary and secondary frontages.  Applications for changes of 
use in primary and secondary frontages will need to comply with saved Lo cal P lan policies TC6 
and TC7. These will be replaced in due course by new policies in the Development Delivery 
(Allocations) Plan.  
 
3.41 Havant Town Centre is the heart of the former market town 
built up around the cross roads of North, South, East and 
West S treets.  The primary shopping area is located on the 
pedestrianised section of West Street and the Meridian 
Shopping Centre.  Its key roles include convenience and 
comparison shopping, services including a good range of 
high street banks, community uses in cluding a library and 
limited entertainment venues.  Havant Town Centre serves 
the eastern side of the borough including Hayling Island 
and the West Sussex parishes of Westbourne and Southbourne.  A key challenge for the town 
centre is to improve the linka ges with the edge -of-centre Solent and Central Retail Parks and 
Tesco.  Market Parade provides an opportunity site for town centre regeneration forming the 
gateway into the town centre from Havant railway station.  These areas are identified in P olicy 
CS6.  
 
3.42 Waterlooville Town Centre developed to support expanding post -war residential areas west of 
the A3(M).  It contains two small pedestrian precincts and Dukes Walk Shopping Centre.  Its key 
roles are similar to those of Havant Town Centre.  Waterloovill e serves the western side of the 
borough including the villages of Denmead and Horndean located in neighbouring local 
authorities.  The public realm has been significantly enhanced with a number of town centre 
improvement schemes.  Key challenges for the t own centre are integration with the Major 
Development Area (MDA), which is identified as a strategic  site and improved connectivity with 
Wellington Retail Park . Thes e challenges are identified in P olicy CS6 .  
 
Lidl, Leigh Park District Centre  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 43 
Edge of centre stores,  
Solent Retail Park, Havant  
 
Emsworth District Centre  3.43 Cowplain District Centre is a shopping p arade located on London Road in Cowplain, which 
developed to serve the post -war residential areas in the north of the borough.  Although it is a 
relatively small centre it does perform the function of a district centre with a range of 
convenience shops inc luding two supermarkets, some 
comparison shops and a range of non -retail services such 
as a gym, church and restaurant.   
 
3.44 Emsworth District Centre is the heart of  the historic fishing 
village. The primary shopping area is located on the High 
Street s pread ing down to St Peter’s Square. The centre’s 
retail offer is dominated by local independent businesses 
providing comparison and convenience goods as we ll as 
important local services.  Emsworth has a good range of 
restaurants and public houses ensur ing a  vibrant evening 
economy. Future opportunities that could enhance this historic centre are the redevelopment of 
the Emsworth Centre to provide a greater range of community services and the sympathetic 
infill development of gap sites on South Street and Nil e Street.   
 
3.45 Leigh Park District Centre is a purpose -built 1950s shopping precinct built to serv e the 
community of Leigh Park. The centre’s retail offer is orientated towards meeting the day -to-day 
shopping needs of the immediate catchment population for convenience and some comparison 
goods.  It is a vulnerable centre in need of regeneration with a high vacancy rate, which has 
become a less attractive place for people to vis it and businesses to invest in.  The regeneration 
of this district centre needs  to improve the quality of commercial uses combined with public 
realm and highway improv ements.  Leigh Park District Centre is identified in P olicy CS6 . 
 
3.46 The twinned district centre of Mengham and Gable Head forms the principle shopping area on 
Hayling  Island . The centre serves the needs of local residents many of whom have limited 
opportunities to  travel off the island to shop.  It also accommodates tourist tr ade in the peak 
holiday season.  The centre’s retail outlets are predominantly independent trade rs offering a 
range of compar ison and convenience shopping. The vitality and viability of the centre could be 
enhanced through environmental impr ovements to the public realm.  
 
3.47 There is also a network of ten local centres distributed around the boroug h, which include a 
range of small convenience shops and some commu nity facilities.  The local centres play an 
important role in meeting local day -to-day needs particularly for the elderly and other vulnerable 
groups.  
 
3.48 The Town Centres, Retail and Leisure Study published in 
2009 drew heavily on the results of a household survey, which 
tracked existing shopping and leisure habits of the residents 
living within the borough’s catchment area.  The study 
assessed the need for new floorspace for retail and 
commerci al leisure uses taking into account quantitative and 
qualitative considerations. For comparison floorspace the 
assessment indi cated that commitments should absorb short 
term capacity up to 2011.  In the medium to long term the 
assessment found scope for 13, 288 square metres (net) of 
new comparison floorspace up to 2 016. Longer term forecasts beyond 2016 are susceptible to 
change due to unforeseen circumstances and should be considered with caution. The study found 
that there is limited  capacity for additiona l convenience floorspace in the borough  for the 
foreseeable future, allowing for existing commitments . The borough is well served by a choice of 
food stores at the current time.   
 
Where else to look:  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 44 
Market day, Waterlooville   
3.49 The spatial distribution of this new retail floorspace is shown in Figure 8.1 with approximately 
4,000 square metres of new comparison floorspace located in the west of the borough and 
approximately 9,000 square metres located in the e ast.  Sites will be identified in the 
Development Delivery (Allocations) Plan to meet these projections.  These sites will be located 
within the town and district centres identified in P olicy CS4 and will be consistent with the scale 
and character of the c entre in which the development is provided.  The development will 
strengthen the vitality and viability of the designated centres and enhance consumer choice in 
the borough.  
 
3.50 The provision of leisure, entertainment and cultural facilities within the b orough is limited 
reflecting the size of the catchment and good access to facilities in neighbouring  local 
authorities such as Portsmouth and Chichester . The study suggested potential scope for a small 
cinema, a bingo club and  health and fitness facilities . The 2008 household survey showed that 
most residents travel outside the borough for theatre  and cinema  visits. Whilst the Old Town 
Hall (The Spring)  provides cultural and cinema facilities it would be a sustainable and realistic 
aspiration to provide a n ew and improved  cultural facility at a central location within the borough  
such as t he Havant Public Service Village .  
 
3.51 All the town and district centres, with the exception of Emsworth, have weak evening economies 
with very fe w restaurants and public  houses . Policy CS4 seeks to encourage a range of 
complementary evening economy uses to appeal to a wide ra nge of ages and social groups. 
Planning proposals that promote evening economy activities will need to front -load the 
consideration of community safe ty and take into account a range of issues including antisocial 
behaviour and l ate-night transport provision. Applications will need to accord with the council’s 
licensing policy. Applications for food, drink and entertainment uses will also need to comply  
with the Development Management Policy DM5 . 
 
3.52 Street markets operate twice a week in Havant Town Centre 
and once a wee k in Waterlooville Town Centre.  Market days 
are the busiest days of the week for retailers with significant 
increases in footfall.  A successful farmers’ market is also held 
four times a year  in Emsworth District Centre. The council 
recognises the valuable contribution markets make to the 
vitality and viability of its centres. Policy CS4 seeks to retain 
and where possible enhance local  markets, for example, 
through the provision of local electricity hook -ups for stalls.  
 
3.53 Smaller shops and businesses can significantly enhance the character and vibrancy of a town, 
district or local centre w hile enhancing consumer choice.  Emsworth has  a wide range of 
successful independent retailers and has retained its local identity, which is popular wit h 
residents and visitors alike.  Policy CS4 seeks to support small and independent businesses that 
operate in designated centres across the borough.   
 
PPS4: Planning for Sustainable Economic Growth  
 
Town Centres, Retail and Leisure Study : Nathaniel Lichfield and Partners for 
HBC  (2009)  
 
 
 
 
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 45 
Broadmarsh  
-ideal location for visitor centre  
  
3.54 Well-designed and inclusive mixed -use developments in identified centres can play an 
important role in promoting  their vitality and viability. The use of upper floors for offices can 
provide local employment opportun ities in accessible locations. Residential development on 
upper floors can make an efficient use of town centre land while adding to the mix of dwelling 
types and tenures available in the borough. Policy CS4 seeks to encourage high quality mixed -
use development in designated centres with of fices or new homes located on upper floors 
above town centre uses with active ground floor frontages. The loss of ground floor town centre 
uses to residential d evelopment will be resisted.  All employment floorspace in identifie d centres 
will be protected b y Policy CS2 and will need to comply with all aspects of Development 
Management Policy DM3 . 
 
Policy CS5 Tourism  
 
Planning permission will be granted for appropriate development proposals around the 
borough that:  
1. Provide sustainable and small  scale recreati onal opportunities.  
2. Provide hotel and other types of tourist accommodation.  
3. Safeguard existing tourist facilities, hotels, holiday centres and caravan parks.  
4. Improve existing tourist facilities, hotels, holiday centres and caravan parks.  
 
 
3.55 The b orough  is situated on the south coast of England with views across the Solent to the Isle 
of Wight.  Hayling Island provides a traditional seaside offer with Blue Flag beaches and is 
officially recognised as the birthplace of windsurfing.  Other attractions for tourists and day 
visitors are situated around the borough such as Staunton Country Park and the historic villages 
of Emsworth and Langstone.  Tourism and leisure was identified as a significant growth cluster 
in the 2008 University of Portsmouth Cluster Study generating significant employment and 
income for the borough.  Policy CS5  supports the dispersal of tourism development around the 
borough.  This approach was informed by the Sustainability Appraisal and the Screening Report 
for the Habitats Regulation  Assessment (HRA)  and took into account the limited accessibility of 
Hayling Island and the impact of tourism on the international  nature conservation sites.  
 
3.56 Policy CS5  encourages the pro vision of sustainable and small scale recreational opportuniti es 
for tourists and day visitors.  These will be focused on the natural environment, the seafront and 
wind surfing heritage.  The schemes would promote passive recreation without damaging or 
disturbing designated nature conservation sites and wil l need to comply with Policy CS1 1 
Protecting and Enhancing the Special Environment and Heritage of Havant Borough .  Mitigation 
schemes will be put in place as necessary, for example, information boards to help visitors 
understand the local area and its wildlife.  
 
3.57 A number of small scale improvements have been undertaken on Hayling Island Seafront since 
2006. The Hayling Seafront Masterplan produced in 2008 proposed some mixed development 
to help deliver a number of small scale recreational 
opportunities such as  the provision of a beach boardwalk, 
which would improve access for all along the seafront.  
The provision of new extreme and watersport facilities 
would enhance the island’s attraction to windsurfers.   
 
3.58 There are a nu mber of opportunities for small scale 
recreational schemes around the borough.  Broadmarsh 
would provide an ideal location for a visitors’  centre,  which 
could be used to promote  and manage  the area ’s 
environmental assets.    The inclusion of leisure and 
recreation facilities at Havant Thi cket, in conjunction with Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 46 
the new reservoir, is a major opportunity which will be given policy support. Its development as 
a sustainable alternative natural greenspace would help reduce pressure on the protected 
harbours.  Emsworth village centre and its ha rbour are distinctive tourism location s and 
initiatives to enhance the quality and range of the visitor offer will be supported.  
 
3.59 The Havant Hotel Futures  report forms the main evidence  based study o n hotel accommodation 
in the borough.  It identified  a strong demand for budget hotel accommodation in the Havant 
area.  The report also highlighted the potential for significant future growth in midweek demand 
from the corporate and contractors’ markets given the planned development of business parks 
in the area and the level of construction work planned.  It stated that there was possible scope 
for a small boutique hotel development as part of the regeneration of Hayling Island Seafront.  A 
PUSH wide hotel  study  was published in July 2010.   
 
3.60 Hotels are  defined as a main town centre use in PPS4: Planning for Sustainable Economic 
Growth . Town centre locations will be favoured for new hotels in order to promote their vitality 
and viability whilst recognising that market demand will influence hotel location . Proposals to 
develop a hotel outside a designated centre will need to carry out a thorough sequential test to 
ensure there are no suitable sites in the centres identified in Policy CS4 on town, district and 
local centres.  
 
3.61 Subject to the sequential test there will be policy support for a hotel with conference facilities at 
Dunsbury Hill Farm to cater for business tourism associated with the strategic site employment 
allocation.   The development requirements for this strategic business location are se t out in 
Policy CS1 8.  Further sites for hotels and other types of tourist accommodation will be set out in 
the Development Delivery (Allocations) Plan. 
 
3.62 Bed and breakfast s provide short -stay accommodation for both holiday and business purposes. 
Proposals for bed and breakfast uses are often made in locations which are primarily residentia l 
in character and the amenity  of nearby residen ts must be carefully  considered.  Applications for 
new bed and breakfasts will need to comply with Policy CS1 6, High Quality Design,  and should 
not cause unacceptable har m to the amenity of neighbours.  Where the impact of the use is 
uncertain, the council will consider granting temporary permission to enable the proposal to be 
fully assessed.   Bed and breakfast accommodation will be en couraged throughout the borough.  
 
3.63 Static caravans offer affordable holiday accommodation and widen the tourist offer av ailable in 
the borough.  Development Management Policy DM4  sets out detailed development 
requirements for static holiday caravan development.  
 
3.64 It is important to safeguard existing tourist facilities and all types of tourist accommodation as 
well as p rovide new premises.  Policy CS5  will protect all existing tourist facilities and Where else to look:  
 
 
www.visithavant.co.uk  
 
Havant Borough -wide Tourism and  Leisure Plan : Havant Borough Council 
(2008)  
 
Hayling Seafront Masterplan : Havant Boroug h Council (2008)  
 
Havant Hotel Futures : Hotel Solutions for Havant Borough Council (2008)  
 
PUSH Hotel Fu tures Study  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 47 accommodation that are fit for purpose.  However, the council recognises the need for flexibility 
in order to respond to an evolving tou rist and day visitor market. The Develo pment Management 
Policy DM3  deals with the prote ction of existing tourism  sites. All applications that would result 
in the loss of land or premises used for tourism  must comply with all aspects of this policy and 
thus prove through an active and exhaustive  marketing exercise that the site is no longer fit for 
purpose.   
 
3.65 Finally, Policy CS5  encourages the improvement of existing facilities and all types of 
accommodation for tourists and day visitors. Appropriate improvements would improve the 
quality of  the tourist offer in the borough.  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 48 
Leigh Park Centre in need  
of regeneration  
 4.    Regeneration and Community Support  
Objective  
 Ensure all new development maximises economic, social and environmental regeneration 
for the whole borough, with priority given to developments focused on the places an d 
people that need it most  
 
Delivery Strategy  
4.01  The regeneration and community support theme is fundamental to creating a borough where 
people want to live, work and play, a sustainable borough that achieves the council’s vision. 
Every part of the boro ugh needs regeneration and community support to some extent. The 
strategic site allocations and the policies of the Core Strategy will contribute to the physical 
regeneration of some parts of the borough and support local comm unities. The policies  (as 
show n on the Proposals Map)  in this chapter of the Core Strategy therefore focus on where 
regeneration actions should be prioritised to add the most v alue in shaping the borough.  
 
4.02 The areas of the borough that have been identified as a priority for regen eration are Leigh Park, 
Wecock  Farm , South Hayling Island  and Havant and Waterlooville  Town Centres. As some of 
these areas are identified on national deprivation indicators, central and regional government 
bodies, such as South East England Economic Devel opment Agency (SEEDA) have provided 
regeneration funds to the borough. In Leigh Park £10.6  million was invested from government 
grants between 1999 and 2008. The key agenc y in these areas is Hampshire County Council,  
providing  a variety of services includi ng children’s and adult services, business support, 
policing, care facilities and many more. Hampshire County Council and Portsmouth City Council 
are major landowners in both Leigh Park and Wecock. Havant Borough Council  is a landowner 
in Havant and Waterl ooville  Town Centres and in South Hayling Island, although the majority of 
land is owned by a wide variety of individual and commercial interests.  The council will continue 
to take a leading role in existing and new partnerships to ensure that the plans a nd programmes 
of all the organisations involved in these areas align to reduce the health and wealth disparities 
across the borough.  The continuing development of the Local Strategic Partnership will be the 
critical focus for partnership and innovation to  successfully deliver the regeneration of the 
borough. The Local Strategic Partnership has a significant role in identifying the opportunities 
for multifunctional uses of facilities and the co -location of services that can bring more effective 
use of resou rces, delivering the regeneration sustainably.  
 
4.03 The fact that some parts of the borough are highlighted as having multiple deprivation issues 
has enabled regional and local public and community organisations to get grant funding for a 
variety of init iatives. These have ranged from £3.5 million for Liveability  schemes throughout the 
borough to £500 Leigh Park Community Chest grants. The Building Schools for the Future 
(BSF) programme  within Hampshire is focu sed on the b orough resulting in up to £80 million 
investment in new secondary schools. The council will continue to submit and support funding 
bids for regeneration schemes which are most likely to be successful in the priority areas. It will 
be essential that the community is involved in the submiss ion of the bids; only with community 
support will bids be successfully implemented.  
 
4.04  The Core Strategy allocates strategic sites that have a 
focus in Leigh Park and adjacent to Wecock Farm with the 
specific aim of achieving physical regeneration an d 
improving viability and vitality of the local communities. The 
Core Strategy contains policies that will deliver new 
employment and skills opportunities, protection of the town 
centres, healthy activities, new homes that are needed, 
safer well lit places , a high quality environment and the 
physical and  social  infrastru cture that the community Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 49 needs.  The Core Strategy is therefore a key part of the delivery of the regeneration of the 
borough and the priority areas.  
 
4.05 The council has a critical role as a co-deliverer of regeneration through its influence at the 
planning and construction stages of development proposals, together with an ongoing role 
supporting the occupants and users of the developments. Wherever new development takes 
place the council wi ll work with the developer to manage the scheme to ensure that viable 
development schemes are delivered that take account of all the policies of the HBLDF creating 
quality places that benefit the whole borough.  
 
Policy CS6 Regeneration of the Borough  
 
Planning permission will be granted for development which positively contributes by 
type of use and design and by its comprehensive approach to the social, economic 
and/or physical regeneration of the whole borough ; particularly when it is focus ed in the 
following places  as shown on the Proposals Map : 
 
1. Havant Town Centre , with particular focus on:  
a. Market Parade .  
b. Havant Railway Station . 
c. Connectivity with the Public Service Village . 
d. Connectivity between Solent Road and West Street . 
 
2. Waterlooville Town Centre , with particular focus on:  
a. London Road public realm . 
b. Integration of Major Development Area . 
c. Connectivity with Wellington Retail Park .  
d. Improved car and cycle p arking, public realm  and a  sustainable  mix of uses .  
 
3. Leigh Park  with par ticular focus on:  
a. Leigh Park Centre , improved  car and cycle parking, public realm and a   
     sustainable mix of uses . 
b. A balanced housing  market . 
c. Supporting healthy lifestyles . 
d. Community safety . 
e. Connectivity with the rest of the borough . 
f. Training and employment opportunities . 
 
4. South Hayling Island , with particular focus on:  
a. Seafront boardwalk . 
b. Flood and erosion management measures . 
c. Water related sports facilities . 
d. Beach Hut and beach user facilities and educational informatio n. 
e. Small scale tourist facilities . 
 
5. Wecock Farm  with particular focus on:  
a. Community support – Community Centre .  
b. Transport connectivity . 
c. Green Infrastructure . 
d. Community safety . 
e. Training and employment opportunities .  
 
All development prop osals made under this policy must ensure that they benefit the 
borough socially, environmentally and economically.  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 50 
Hermitage Stream   4.06 The borough’s main town centres of Havant and Waterlooville have a crucial role in supporting 
large parts of the community. They provid e a good range of shops, jobs, leisure and services 
that are accessible to the whole community. That role should not be diminished, with their roles 
as community hubs being developed as a focus for the regeneration of the borough as a whole.  
 
4.07 The opp ortunities at Waterlooville Town Centre have been explored in the Waterlooville Town 
Centre Urban Design Framework (2004) and are taken forward in the  strategic site allocation. 
The integration of the town centre with the Major Development Area directly to  the west has the 
potential to effectively deliver a new sustainable community. The shopping areas are dissected 
by roads, so it is essential that the links between existing and new town centre uses are 
improved. Cars are a dominant feature of Waterloovill e as parking is at a premium and must be 
addressed as part of regenerative development, such as the opportunities for redevelopment of 
rundown or derelict sites in London Road.  
 
4.08  Havant Town Centre continues to change with large new retail developmen ts shifting the focus 
of activity from North and East Streets. These changes create opportunities to regenerate 
rundown sites and buildings in Havant town centre which will improve the vitality and viability of 
the town. The Havant Town Centre Urban Design  Framework Supplementary Planning 
Document (SPD) identifies this potential.  The area around the railway station, North Street and 
Market Parade is an important entrance to the town yet most notably in need of physical 
regeneration. The allocation of the strategic site at the Havant Public Service Village will provide 
a wide range of facilities and services in one accessible location with improved pedestrian links 
to the town centre over a new railway bridge. This development will be a catalyst for 
regenerat ion of the Market Parade area.  
 
4.09 Regeneration is essential to achieving the overall vision for 
the whole borough. Within the borough the  2007  Indices of 
Multiple Deprivation (IMD)  identifies pockets of high 
deprivation within Warren Park, Bondfields and Battins in 
Leigh Park. Other pockets are found in Wecock  Farm  and 
South Hayling.  In contrast there are also areas of wealth 
and affluence; these disparities are for a variety of social, 
economic and physical reasons. Policies, projects and 
proposals ca n all contribute to the improvement of a small, 
and potentially a wider area that can help reduce these 
disparities. The Core Strategy supports proposals that contribute to regeneration and secure 
and encourage regeneration proposals throughout the whole b orough with a focus in those 
areas that need it most.  
 
4.10 The identification of strategic sites in the Core Strategy places emphasis on Leigh Park. The 
Havant Thicket Reservoir will provide a range of benefits including recreation, learning and a 
new location  adjacent to Leigh Park, offering opportunities for an improved quality of life and 
links through the area along improved stream corridor paths. The strategic employment site at 
Dunsbury Hill Farm will provide employment opportunities, public transpor t links and a high 
quality business environment.  
 
4.11 Leigh Park Centre is a major community hub; the centre provides a variety of different types and 
sizes of homes, there is a n adequate range of shops, leisure, employment and other community 
support se rvices all within walking distance. However, shops are vacant, the public realm is 
unwelcoming, there are safety concerns and there is a lack of coherence to the variety of uses 
in the area. Leigh Park Centre will therefore be a focus for physical regenera tion and support. In 
order to achieve this it is essential to harness the fact that Leigh Park has a strong sense of 
community with many residents having lived in the area for many years. There are a range of 
organisations already working together to deliv er the support the area needs. The Leigh Park 
Task Force is a partnership whose aim is to champion and drive strategic and operational Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 51 
projects, to coordinate and advance the delivery of services, investment, enterprise , learning 
and skills in  Leigh Park. In support of the task force the council has produced a supplementary 
planning document and invested Liveability funds in environmental enhancements to the centre 
and surrounding parking areas. Continuing r egeneration investment in Leigh Park  will be a 
priority and the council will be a co -deliverer of action to tackle the issues of education and 
health that are highlighted in the IMD as being essential to support the community.  
 
4.12 On Hayling Island some areas along the south coast are identified in the lower 20% of the 
Indices of Multiple Deprivation (2007).  The council has been working with Tourism South East, 
developers and the local community on master planning ideas to focus change at the seafront. 
They aim to achieve regeneration of tourism and recr eation facilities and consider their 
relationship with existing and future flood issues and the protected beach and coastal habitats. 
The council is confident that a mix of regeneration proposals will act as a catalyst for further 
positive physical change to some of the nearby rundown privately owned buildings. It would also 
provide sustainable and less seasonal -based employment opportunities which will reduce the 
need for locals to travel off the island and support the wider tourism function of Hayling Isl and.  
 
4.13 The other area of the borough in the lower 20% o f the IMD is Wecock Farm which is a large 
housing estate in the north west of the borough. Its location gives it access to Waterlooville and 
Portsmouth; however, it is not well linked with the res t of the borough. Recent housing 
redevelopment has delivered some community benefit, including playspace and a community 
centre. Portsmouth City Council is a major landlord and landowner in the area and the council 
will work positively with the city counci l to develop and support community cohesion. A strategic 
housing site is allocated nearby at Woodcroft Farm that will create an opportunity to deliver 
some of the small scale regeneration projects in conjunction with the strategic site.  
 Where else to look:  
 
 
Indices of Deprivation : Information is available at the Communities and local 
government website  
 
Leigh Park Task Force : Is a partnership of service providers and business 
whose aim is to regenerate Leigh Park.  
 
Leigh Park Strategic Framework  ‘From Housing Estate to Sustainable 
Community’ 2 006 
 
Waterlooville Town Centre Urban Design Framework  (2004) : Is Supplementary Planning 
Guidance that considers the  opportunities for regeneration  
 
The Havant Town Centre Urban Design Framework Supplementary Planning Document  
(2006) :  Sets out a spatial vision for the town centre, including design principles and 
guidance on the development of key sites  
 
Hayling Seafront Masterplan : Consultants developed an illustrative masterplan to create 
ideas for the future of this seafront area in need of regeneration  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 52 
 
CS7 Community Support and Inclusion  
 
Planning permission will be granted for development that:  
 
1.  Has been informed and shaped by community and local stakeholder involvement in   
     accordance with the Statement of Community Involvement .  
2.  Provides e ducational and training improvements including Building Schools for the  
     Future . 
3.  Provides service s for older people  and other vulnerable groups, including Extra 
Care Facilities . 
 
4.14  In addition to the regeneration of specific areas of the borough there is also the need to address 
the specific needs of our community, in particular those of the young and old.  
 
4.15 The projected population figures for the b orough indicate that the over 60 age group is expected 
to grow disproportionate ly within the overall population until 2026. This presents specific 
challenges in relation to housin g, health and care needs.  
 
4.16 Statistics relating to young people in the b orough indicate several key issues. Youth crime, 
which includes antisocial behaviour, is high in terms of young people as offenders and as 
victims of crime. There are also issues of alc ohol and substances misuse and teenage 
pregnancy. Educational support and creating places where people feel safe is crucial to 
changing the future of communities.  
 
4.17 The special housing needs of older people are dealt with under separate policies in the Housing  
and development management chapters  of this Core Strategy, for example , encouraging 
flexible housing for older people’s needs. Other policies that will assist older people, whilst not 
excluding other groups from our community, are identi fied elsewhere in this document;  i n Where else to look:  
 
 
Havant Borough Pl ace Survey (March 2009 ): And other information on the 
council’s performance.  
 
Every Child Matters : A radical approach to joining u p government and support 
structures for the 0 -19 year olds .  
 
Extended Schools; Building on Experience  2007 : Part of the Every Child 
Matters W ebsite , also provides valuable insight into the extended schools 
initiative  
 
Housing Provision for Older People in Hampshire  2009 : Hamp shire County Council   
  
The Building Schools for the Future  (BSF) Programme : Will see every state secondary 
school in England, around 3,500 in total, rebuilt or remodelled.   
 
Ham pshire Council for Voluntary Service : Is an organisation that coordinates and 
supports voluntary groups across the county and the borough providing a bridge between 
volunteers and statutory agencies.  
 
Havant Statement of Community Involvement : Sets out how the council will engage with 
the community in the planning process.  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 53 particular  policies to encourage and protect community buildings and encourage physical 
activities for all , which are dealt with under Health and Wellbeing.  Hampshire County Council is 
the main provider of older person support, together with the NHS and private prov iders. Within 
the borough 3.2% of all homes are specialist units for older people. The borough currently has 
the second largest number of over 60s in Hampshire (28,000 in 2007) or 20% of the population; 
this is projected to rise to 27% by 2026. As the popu lation profile of the borough is aging there 
will be a focus on maintaining people’s health to help them live in their own homes longer, whilst 
also increasing the proportion of specialist housing and a full range of support services.   
 
4.18  In terms of children and young people aged from birth to 19 the government has taken a radical 
approach to join up the various agencies involved. The Every Child Matters agenda is based 
around the five objectives of Staying Safe; Healthy Living; Achievement and Enjoym ent; 
Positively  contributing to society; and Economic Wellbeing: ‘ SHAPE ’. These objectives are 
found throughout this Core Strategy and are part of a sustainable community. A significant 
physical regeneration project that falls outside the direct influence of this Core Strategy is the 
Building Schools for the Future (BSF) Programme. This national programme is aimed at 
transforming secondary education. At the county level there is a major focus on the borough 
owing to the relatively low levels of educational achievement. BSF is proposed to deliver the 
rebuilding or major improvement of the borough’s secondary schools. BSF will have a major 
impact on our community and it is essential that the HBLDF policies and proposals complement 
the programme. BSF is not jus t about buildings it aims to create learning environments which 
inspire all young people to unlock hidden talents and reach their full potential; provide teachers 
with 21st  century work places; and provide access to facilities which can be used by all 
memb ers of the local community. Havant Borough is the focus for BSF investment in 
Hampshire, creating an opportunity that will regenerate and support the whole community.  
 
4.19 Regeneration and community support will only succeed where the community is involve d, where 
the physical buildings are of high quality to create places where people feel safe. The services 
that organisations provide must be driven by community needs therefore the council will work to 
engage with our community. The HBLDF includes the Stat ement of Community Involvement 
which sets out how and when the council will engage with the community. The council will 
engage with statutory bodies , individuals, hard to reach groups, local voluntary organisations 
and local groups to ensure that the servi ces we deliver are effective in supporting those in need.  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 54 
Community policing,  
Leigh Park Centre  
 
New gates and paving, Havant  5    Community Safety  
Objective  
 Reduce crime and antisocial behaviour to make the borough a safer place for people to 
live, work and visit  
 
Delivery Strategy  
5.01 Community safety is the abilit y of a community to live without 
a fear of crime or disorder.  This key priority will be delivered 
through the involvement of the Safer Havant Partnership 
throughout  the planning process.  The Safer Havant 
Partnership brings together a number of organisatio ns, such 
as Hampshire Constabulary and the council, who are working 
together to make the b orough a safer place.  Work to reduce 
crime and antisocial behaviour will continue throughout the 
plan period and beyond.  This work will be future -proofed by 
reviewi ng and updating local priorities and priority areas, 
which will be published in yearly strategic assessments.  The local priorities identified in 2009 
were antisocial behaviour, violent crime, reducing the negative impact of alcohol and community 
engagemen t.  The priority areas identified in 2009 were Leigh Park, Stakes Ward, Wecock, 
Havant Town Centre and the Beachlands area of Hayling Island.  
 
5.02 Policy CS8 forms the basis for managing development 
throughout the borough with regard to community saf ety.  
Policy CS1 6 on design and P olicy CS6 on regeneration are 
also directly linked to th e delivery of community safety.  A 
number of detailed policies set out in Chapter  10 of this Core 
Strategy will be applied through the development 
management process in ord er to promote community safety.  
Community safety will be considered integral to the 
development of all the strategic sites.  
 
Policy CS8 Community Safety  
 
Planning permission will be granted for development proposals that:  
1. Engrain community safety into t he development process from the beginning.  
2. Provide well -lit footpaths, cycle ways and roads providing that this does not 
adversely affect designated habitats  or the landscape . 
3. Maximise opportunities for natural surveillance through good design.  
4. Maximise th e amount of ‘defensible space’ that is controlled or perceived to be 
controlled by residents.  
 
5.03 It is important that community safety is embedded from the beginning of the development 
process.  This is because the opportunity for incorporating crime pr evention methods can be 
lost once a development is completed.  Intelligence -led deployment of CCTV coverage plays its 
part in a fully integrated community safety system.  An example of this is the incorporation of 
external power sources on selected lamp po sts on development sites with the potential for 
redeployable CCTV.  
 
5.04 Government policy set out in PPS1:  Delivering Sustainable Development  states that planning 
authorities should promote communities that are safe and crime -free in the preparation of 
development plans.  The government has produced the document Safer Places: the Planning 
System and Crime Prevention  to act as a guide on the principles of crime prevention and the Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 55 
New off road parking,  
Leigh Par k 
 
Alleyway, Leigh Park  attributes of safer places.  It states that the thorough consideration of de sign principles can 
improve an area’s security, for both people and property, and enhance the quality of the local 
environment.  
 
5.05 A safe movement framework is made up of footpaths, cycle 
ways and roads that ar e well lit and overlooked. Excessively 
long paths between buildings, especially where the path 
cannot be viewed along its length from either end, should be 
avoided. Alleyways and short -cuts can become vulnerable to 
and facilitate both crime and antisocial behaviour. 
Consideration also needs to be given to whether lighting 
would adversely affect designated habitats.  
 
5.06 Places are safer if they are overlooked. Natural surveillance discourages wrong -doing by the 
presence of passers -by or the ability of people to be seen out of surrounding windows. Places 
such as shopping centres that could be vulnerable to crime and antisocial behaviour should be 
overlooked by buildings and facilities that are busy at all times.  
 
5.07 Encouraging residents and users of places to feel a sense 
of ownership and respon sibility for their surroundings can 
make a place safer by creating more ‘defensible space.’ A 
clear distinction between public, communal and private 
space can be made with a variety of physical barriers such 
as gates, fences, walls and hedges, which can al so form 
attractive features and add value to the public realm.  
 
 
 
 Where else to look:  
 
 
www.saferhavant.co.uk  
 
Havant Combined Partnership Assessment Summary  2009 : Safer Havant 
Partnership  
 
PPS1: Delivering Sustainable Development  
 
Safer Places: The Planning System and Crime Prevention : ODPM and the 
Home Office (2004)  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 56 
6.    Housing  
Objectives  
 Identify  sufficient space for 6,300 new homes   
 Distribute the new homes across the five main areas of the borough taking into account 
sustainability,  suitability and land availability  
 Ensure a mix of dwelling types is provided, in the right places at the appropriate times, and 
that an appropriate level of afford able housing provision is achieved  
 Ensure the housing needs of older people  are met  
 Ensure  the requirements for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople are taken into 
account  
 
Delivery Strategy  
6.01 The housing objectives will be delivered by a vari ety of means. Local Development Framework 
(LDF) policies and Supplementary Planning Documents (SPDs) will be formulated to 
successfully achieve the objectives and guide decisions made by the council  when determining 
planning applications. Sites will be ide ntified and allocated to meet the housing requirement and 
the requirements for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople.  
 
6.02 The majority of housing sites will be identified through the Development Delivery (Allocations) 
Plan. The allocation of site s will be strongly informed by the evidence base provided through the 
sustainability  appraisals of the individual sites, the Strategic Housing Market Assessment 
(SHMA) and the Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA). Crucially the council 
will only seek to allocate sites that are deliverable or developable and this will involve 
communication and working with relevant landowners and agents.  
 
6.03 Regular monitoring of the SHLAA and housing delivery through the Annual Monitoring Report 
(AMR) wi ll be undertaken to ensure the effective delivery of housing. In addition to this the 
council will actively work with significant landowners to progress suitable potential housing sites. 
This includes Portsmouth City Council (who is a significant landowner  in the b orough) and to aid 
this, an officer joint working group exists between the two councils  to discuss issues and initiate 
progress.  
 
6.04 In relation to affordable housing provision this will typically be provided by a range of Affordable 
Housing Pro viders (AHPs) that operate in the area. Regular liaison occurs between the c ounci l’s 
housing department and the main providers. In addition to this an Affordable Housing SPD will 
be produced to provide more detail and guidance to supplement the affordable housing 
requirement and provide clear advice to developers, AHPs and the public.  
 
6.05 Hampshire County Council Strategic Planning and Adult Care Unit have produced a variety of 
useful information about ageing and elderly care. This information will be ut ilised and work will 
be undertaken with Hampshire County Council to ensure effective and appropriate housing for 
older people is developed. If appropriate, sites will be allocated specific ally for this purpose in 
order to assist delivery and consultation w ill be undertaken with Hampshire County Council on 
relevant proposals.  
 
6.06 To deliver appropriate provision of sites for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople the 
requirements set by the Partial Review of the South East Plan will be taken forwar d. Sites will 
be established as part of the Development Delivery (Allocations) Plan. This will involve 
consultation with the public, relevant landowners and the appropriate representative local 
authorities of the end user groups.   Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 57 
 
 
Policy CS9  Housing  
 
Planning permission will be granted for housing proposals that will : - 
 
1. Contribute to achieving a net total of 6,300 new dwellings between  2006 and 2026.  
2. Deliver on average 30-40% affordable housing on sites of 15 dwellings (gross) or 
more and secure a suitable contribution, or on -site provision, equivalent to on 
average 30-40% on smaller housing developments between 5 and 14 dwellings 
(gros s), unless a lesser requirement has been transparently justified on viability 
grounds.  
3. Ensure mixed communities are created through the planned distribution and 
avoidance of a concentration of affordable housing.  
4. Achieve a suitable density of development for the location, taking into account 
accessibility to public transport and proximity to employment, shops and services 
in addition to respecting the surrounding landscape , character and built form.  
5. Provide a mix of dwelling types, sizes and tenures which help meet identified local 
housing need and contribute to the development of mixed and sustainable 
communities.  
6. Provide accommodation for the ageing population in sustainable locations, taking 
account of the need to provide for a variety of care needs and flexibility to 
accommodate differing requirements of ageing care.  
7. Contribute to achieving 450 extra -care dwellings between 2006 and 2026.  
8. Ensure housing development is delivered in a phased manner with an appropriate 
proportion of previously developed land  so as to avoid unnecessary development 
on greenfield urban extension sites.  
 
Housing Distribution  
 
6.07 The Development Delivery (Allocations ) Plan DPD  will take into account a range of alternative  
distributions within the borough and will  distribute thi s allocation in a way that avoids  adversely 
affecting the integrity of international  sites.  
 
6.08 Housing development will be dispersed through the borough. The Sustainability  Appraisals have 
shown the benefits of this approach as existing infrastructure c an then be harnessed.  Table 6.1 
sets out an indicative/approximate  distribution of the housing between five areas of the borough. 
This table is based on potential supply as identified in evidence base work. The Development 
Delivery (Allocations) Plan will detail those sites to be allocated for development. This is likely to 
see the numbers reduce slightly so that the overall supply figure is closer to the 6,300 Where else to look:  
 
 
The Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) : Is an 
evidence  based document.  
 
The SHLAA is updated annually in the Annual Monitoring Report  
 
PPS3: Housing  paragraphs 10, 52 and 60 require a flexible supply of housing 
land. 
 
Sustainability of construction and design is another i mportant aspect in 
housing delivery. This is dealt with in Chapter 7: Caring for our Borough . 
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 58 
New homes -Major Development Area, 
West of Waterlooville  requirement. Further supply in addition to that outlined in the ‘Projected Supply’ column will 
potentially occur through unidentified (windfall) sites  within the urban area.  
 
Table 6.1: Housing Distribution – Potential Supply  
 No. of dwellings (net additions)  
No. completed 
between  
1 April 2006 – 
31 March 2009  Projected Supply  
(potential)  
1 April 2 009 – 31 
March 2026  Total Potential 
Supply  
2006 -2026  Proportion  
of borough total  
(approx)  
Emsworth  74 752 826 12% 
Havant  119 1825  1944  28% 
Hayling 
Island  130 597 727 10% 
Leigh Park  330 1021  1351  19% 
Waterlooville  225 1901  2126  31% 
Borough 
Total   
878  
6096   
6974   
100%  
 
6.09 The figures provided for Waterlooville include an allowance 
for those dwellings expected to be delivered at the West of 
Waterlooville Major Development Area (MDA) that fall within 
the administrative boundar y of Havant Borough. This is 
likely to deliver approximately 600 homes towards the 
borough ’s housing target. The overall MDA will deliver 
approximately 2,000 new homes in total (approximately 600 
in the b orough and 1 ,400 in Winchester City Council’s 
administrative area). Howev er, it is important to clarify that 
the city c ouncil is currently considering an extension to this 
site for approximately 1,000 further homes as part of their emerging LDF. The two councils  will 
continue to work together to ensure appropriate development o f this site.  
 
Phased Delivery of Dwellings  
6.10 The SHLAA evidence base has shown a potential peak in delivery in the period 2012 -2017 as 
illustrated in the housing trajectory contained in Appendix 2 . 
 
6.11  It is considered appropriate that a phasing poli cy be applied as part of formulating the 
Development Delivery (Allocations) Plan in order to ensure that a realistic delivery is achieved 
whilst not stifling the ability of deliverable sites (in particular those on PDL) coming forward. A 
phasing policy sho uld take into account the following factors:  
 
 The wider context of housing delivery in the sub -region  
 The 60% national target for development on PDL included in PPS3  
 Ensuring more sustainable sites are prioritised and that less sustainable greenfield sites  
are not unnecessarily developed  
 That PPS3 supports flexibility in housing supply and paragraph 72 of PPS3 states that 
applications should not be refused solely on the grounds of prematurity  
 That some sites on PDL in the urban area are not currently avai lable or deliverable for 
housing development but are expected to be available in the latter period of the plan , 
therefore  it cannot simply be a case of PDL land first and greenfield sites later.  
 
6.12 In the interest of securing an appropriate and realisti c delivery of housing sites , taking into 
account the above factors , a phasing policy will be introduced. This will be established 
alongside the selection of preferred housing sites in the Development Delivery (Allocations) 
Plan. It will ensure that PDL and  more sustainable sites are the priority and that the delivery is Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 59 
Previously developed land,  
Leigh Park  
 realistic and appropriate taking into account sub -regional housing delivery. It will also ensure 
that delivery is not adversely held back and that sites from latter phase periods can be brou ght 
forward in the event that housing delivery falls behind expectations.  
 
Previously Developed Land (PDL)  
6.13 Extracting detail from the available housing sites identified in 
the 2009 SHLAA shows that across the plan period (2006 -
2026) approximately 51 % of development is likely to take 
place on PDL. This is on the assumption that the 6,300 new 
dwelling requirement is met and that additional greenfield 
sites are not unnecessarily developed. In the event that all 
available sites were taken forward then on ly approximately 
42% of development across the plan period will be on PDL. 
Windfall development (which is not included in the initial 10 
year period of housing supply , in accordance with PPS3 
guidance) could be greater than anticipated and this may improve  the percentage of 
development on PDL. The 60% national target of development on PDL is unlikely to be met at 
the local level. The council will work with PUSH to ensure monitoring takes place and that sub -
regionally a higher percentage of PDL is achieved.  
 
6.14 Appendix 2 (2009 Housing Trajectory) shows the expected amount of  development taking place 
on previously developed land. This information will be monitored and updated annually through 
the Annual Monitoring Report.  
 
Affordable Housing  
6.15 The South East Plan  has identified that 35% of housing on new development should be 
affordable. The South Hampshire sub -regional policy states that on average 30 -40% of new 
housing development should be affordable.  
 
6.16 PPS3 (paragraph 29) requires local authorities to set targets for the amount of affordable 
housing to be provided but it also states that these targets should reflect an assessment of  the 
likely viability of land for housing within the area. Work produced for PUSH suggests that a 30 -
40% target should be sought but inevitably land values and likely property values vary 
significantly within the sub -region.  
 
6.17 The Havant Viability Asse ssment  produced for Havant Borough Council by DTZ suggests that a 
30% affordable housing requirement across the borough is achievable. Further viability work will 
be undertaken as appropriate to ensure this approach is monitored and where appropriate a 
higher level of affordable housing will be sought. This will help ensure that overall the 30 -40% 
target is achieved. The policy also allows for flexibility which is likely to be necessary in a poor 
housing market.  Where there is a need to validate the viabil ity of developments to provide the Where else to look:  
 
Detailed in formation on expected levels of development on previously 
developed (i.e. brownfield) land is contained in the housing trajectory figures in 
the Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA)  and the Annual 
Monitoring Report (AMR)  
 
This information is updated annually in the Annual Monitoring Report  (AMR) :  
To reflect actual delivery and projected delivery in relation to development on 
previou sly developed land. The AMR will therefore provide the most up -to-date 
situation  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 60 
Affordable homes, Leigh Park  
necessary levels of affordable housing, independent third party valuation expertise will be 
requested at the developer ’s cost.  
 
 
6.18 The maximum proportion of affordable housing on larger housing schemes is an important 
factor. Large developments (e.g. schemes of 50 dwellings or more) of entirely affordable 
housing could potentially  lead to community cohesion issues with the surrounding area and also 
fail to contribute to mixed communities. Locally this is a particular issue for the b orough which 
already has some large areas where affordable housing occupation is higher than the national 
average . Planning Policy Statement 1 (PPS1) and Planning Policy Statement 3 (PPS3) seek  to 
ensure that mixed communities and so cial cohesion are incorporated. This will be explained and 
detailed further at the local level as par t of the Affordable Housing SPD to be produced.  
 
6.19 The location of affordable housing within a development is also important to ensure that it is not 
concentrated within one area of the development site. This approach is sometimes referred to 
as ‘pepper -potting’.  This ensures affordable housing is provided in small groups spread 
throughout the development.  
 
6.20 In relation to the tenure split of affordable housing 65-70% of 
affordable homes should be social rented with the remaining 
30-35% for afforda ble home ownership (often referred to as 
intermediate housing). However, it is important to allow for 
flexibility as increasing intermediate housing can slightly 
improve viability on marginal schemes. However, demand for 
intermediate housing (such as share d ownership) can vary 
with market sentiment and as a result there may be occasions 
where an increased proportion of social rented housing will be 
acceptable . Flexibility is therefore important  to address 
housing need whilst ensuring mixed communities are created. 
These matters will be detailed further along as part of the 
Affordable Housing SPD.  Where else to look:  
 
Evidence  based information to assess the viability of affordable housi ng 
requirements is set out in Havant Viability Assessment,  a report produced by 
DTZ on behalf of the council . 
 
This work follows on from the PUSH Housing Market Assessment HMA  
(2005 and 2006) which is updated in the PUSH Annual Market Monitoring 
Report  (2008) . 
 
 
 
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 61  
 
 
Housing Density  and Type  
6.21 The density of new housing will depend on its design and appropriateness to its location. As a 
guide the following minimum  density thresholds have been developed using the Havant 
Borough Townscape, Landscape and Seascape Character Assessment and the levels of 
accessibility to a range of facilities:  
High Density   – Minimum of 60 dwellings per hectare  
Medium Density   – Minimum of 45 dwellings per hectare   
Low Density   – Up to 45  dwellings per hectare  
 
6.22 Where the quality of design justifies it, much higher densities could be achievable. This is likely 
to be more appropriate in town centres or highly accessible locations. Seek ing higher density in 
such locations will reduce the requirement for greenfield land release and ensure that more 
people have excellent access to jobs, public transport, shops and services.  
 
6.23 It is not intended that density requirements should be too p rescriptive as it is often a difficult 
balance between maximising the use of the land and reflecting surrounding built character and 
the amenity of neighbouring residents. This is therefore best assessed through individual 
planning proposals through the development management process. However, it will always be 
important to maximise the use of PDL in accordance with PPS3.  
 
6.24 In terms of house type and size , a mix of dwelling types is sought from one and two bedroom 
flats to terraces and larger detached h ouses. The type of affordable housing provided should be 
informed by up -to-date housing need. Private market housing is likely to be led by market 
demand. Annual monitoring through the AMR will be critical to ensure an appropriate balance of 
house types is  being provided taking into account the SHMA, existing housing stock and 
housing need.  For e xample:  
A scheme for 100 new homes is approved and the minimum requirement for affordable 
housing on that site has been determined at 30%.  
 
Therefore of th e 100 new ho mes the following would apply:  
 
 A minimum of 30 new homes should be affordable  
 Of the 30 affordable units 20 or 21 units (65 -70% of the 30 affordable units) would 
be provid ed for social rented occupation  
 Of the 30 affordable units 9 or 10 units  (30-35% of the 30 affordable units) would 
be provide d for shared ownership for sale  
 The remaining homes (70 units) are likely to be provided for private house sale.  
 
However, as stated in paragraph 6.19 flexibility to accommodate market circumstances may 
be required in some instances.  
 
These matters will be detailed further in the Affordable Housing SPD.  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 62 
 
 
Internal Space Standards  
6.25 The number o f new homes being constructed that consist of small flats or houses is a concern 
in terms of lack of internal space provided for residents. Harmonisation of the English 
Partnership and Housing Corporation national internal  space standards are being develop ed by 
the Homes and Communities Agency and are scheduled to be in place during 2011.  The 
council will undertake research to establish appropriate internal space standards for the 
borough.  The space standards will be established through the Development De livery 
(Allocations) Plan and sought on all new residential developments throughout the borough.  
 
Loss of Dwellings  
6.26 The requirement to provide 6,300 new homes between 2006 and 2026 should not be offset by 
reductions in housing stock. The individual an d cumulative loss of housing stock within the 
existing urban areas is likely to increase pressure and demand for the use of greenfield sites. 
Only in instances whereby the loss of dwelling(s) will be to achieve wider benefits in accordance 
with other objec tives of this Core Strategy should proposals be considered favourably. In such 
instances written justification of the wider benefits should be submitted as part of a planning 
proposal.  
 
6.27 The conversion of two or more smaller dwellings into larger units  will be resisted as such 
proposals will negatively contribute to the objectives of this Core Strategy. In addition such 
proposals do not reflect the ongoing trend in declining household size and the need to maintain 
and provide smaller dwellings to meet t he needs of smaller households and first time buyers.  
 
Ageing Population  
6.28 The population forecasts for the b orough show an expected rise in the proportion of older 
people until 2026. The ageing population, together with retirees and older people  movin g into  
the borough, results in a specific need that must be addressed.  
 Where else to look:  
 
Further information in relation to density and how it is appropriate to seek 
higher density of development in sustainable locations is outlined in PPS1: 
Delivering Sustainable Development (2005)  and PPS3: Hou sing (2006)   
 
Local guidance about the characters of individual areas of the borough is 
available in the Havant Borough Townscape, Landscape and Seascape 
Character Assessment   
 
The PUSH Housing Market Assessment HMA  (2005 and 2006) has informed 
policies in the sub-regional strategy incorporated into the South East Plan   
 
Annual  monitoring update s to the original HMA are  provided in the PUSH Annual Market 
Monitoring Report   
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 63 Figure 6.0: Population Forecast  
Ageing Population
All Ages - Total 
Population
020,00040,00060,00080,000100,000120,000140,000
2001 2006 2011 2016 2021 2026YearPopulation
All Ages
Over 65 total
 
Source: Based on Small Area Population Forecast data produced by Hampshire County Council. Source data 
available at http://www3.hants.gov.uk/plannin g/factsandfigures/population -statistics/long -term-proj.htm  
 
6.29 Proposals for elderly or specialist forms of accommodation need to enable residents to enjoy 
open space and access shops and facilities , where relevant. Accommodation for the elderly 
also nee ds to be flexible so that it can adapt to the changing and particular needs of individual 
occupants.  
 
6.30 In addition to this, accommodation for specific groups such as people with physical disabilities, 
learning difficulties and other special needs will also be encouraged. The need to be supportive 
for accommodation and facilities for vulnerable groups is also dealt with in the Regeneration 
and Community Support Chapter  of this Core Strategy.  Lifetime Homes and Extra Care 
facilities provide flexibility a nd are able to cater for a variety of needs and individual care 
requirements. Further detail on Extra Care facilities has been produced by Hampshire County 
Council in the Partnership for Extra Care Housing in Hampshire . Work produced by Hampshire 
County Co uncil has shown that 450 extra -care units are required in the b orough between 2006 -
2026.  
 
Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
 
6.31 The housing needs of all the community including Gypsies , Traveller and Travelling  
Showpeople should be provided for with the Housing Act 2004 placing a requirement on local 
authorities to include Gypsies , Travellers and Travelling Showpeople in their accommodation 
assessments. Whilst the government have indicated that they are likely to revoke Circular 
01/2006 it cu rrently clearly establishes a duty on local authorities to make appropriate provision 
for sites where there is a known need.  
 
6.32 The Isle of Wight and Hampshire Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment  (GTAA) 
2006  and the Travelling Showpeople Acc ommodation Assessment 2008 indicated that there 
was such a need within the borough. In the absence of allocated sites, and in the light of the Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 64 
known need the council must include a clear criteria based policy against which speculative 
proposals must be ass essed.  It is the intention that the Development Delivery (Allocations) Plan 
will seek to identify and allocate sites for Gypsy , Traveller and Travelling Showpeople 
accommodation.  
 
Policy CS 10  Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
 
The council wi ll allocate sufficient sites in the Development Delivery (Allocations) 
Development Plan Document to accommodate the needs of Gypsies and Travellers and 
Travelling Showpeople based on the information contained in the Hampshire and Isle of 
Wight Gypsy and Tr aveller Accommodation Assessment updated as necessary and 
current government requirements.  
 
Criteria for the location of such sites that are likely to be a mix of temporary and 
permanent sites dependant on need must take account of the following issues to ensure 
that:  
 
1. There is no unacceptable adverse effect on the amenities of nearby residential 
and/or business uses.  
 
2. The site has a satisfactory means of access and adequate parking provision and 
turning space to accommodate the occupants.  
 
3. The traffic from  the site is not generated on a scale which is inappropriate to the 
locality and which is likely to cause a hazard to road safety.  
 
4. The site is capable of accessing utilities; and is located within a reasonable 
distance from local facilities such as school s, welfare and health services and is 
capable of being serviced by refuse collection and recycling services.  
 
5. The site is not located in an area at high risk of flooding, does not damage the 
historic environment or  nature conservation interests and suitabl e mitigation 
against any contamination can be carried out prior to occupation.  
 
 
 Where else to look:  
 
The requirements for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople are 
explained with individual district/borough requirements set in the Partial 
Review of the South East Plan  
 
Circular 01/2006 (Planning for Gypsy and Traveller Sites ): Sets out the policy 
and legislative background for making provision for Gypsies and Travellers  
 
Circular 04/07 (Planning for Travelling Showpeople) : Sets out the policy and  
legislative background for making provision for  Travelling Showpeople  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 65 
7.    Caring for our Borough  
 
Objectives  
 Ensure all new development is built  to a high quality sustainable design that is inspired by 
the character and setting of the local area  
 Deliver the effective stewardship of the unique qualities of the borough’s built and historic 
heritage and natural environment  
 Adapt to, and where appro priate mitigate against the impacts of climate change.  
 
Delivery Strategy  
7.01  Caring for our borough is fundamental to achieving the vision for the borough’s future. The 
environmental assets of the borough range from local to international significance.  Each one of 
these must be seen as an opportunity in relation to nearby development proposals to make the 
development itself more attractive as well as protecting and enhancing the environmental asset. 
The objectives will be delivered through a variety of means. All developers must consider all the 
policies of the Core Strategy. They will be required to meet all policy criteria that are relevant to 
their proposal in order to be successful in gaining planning permission. The Core Strategy 
policies are theref ore the focus for the delivery strategy.  Further policy detail is provided in the 
development management policies and new implementation guidance will be provided in two 
supplementary planning documents on Design and Sustainable Construction.  A range of 
evidence studies have and will continue to be produced to back up the plan policies.  
 
7.02  The policies set out the framework for developers to follow but do not implement the delivery. 
This can only be achieved by working with the developers, landowners and other organisations 
to coordinate plans so they focus on meeting the policy criteria. National and European 
legislation plays a major role in caring for our borough because of the number of these high 
quality designations in the area. More directly the  key organisations in the borough relating to 
the caring for our borough theme are the Partnership for Urban South Hampshire (PUSH), the 
Environment Agency, Natural England, English Heritage, Hampshire County Council (HCC), 
Royal Society for the Protection  of Birds (RSPB), Hampshire and Isle of Wight Wildlife Trust and 
Chichester Harbour Conservancy. There are many other organisations that are locally active 
that can also make a positive contribution to delivering the objectives and policy criteria by 
worki ng in partnership with the council.   The council will work with these organisations with the 
aim of focusing all the resources available to ensure the delivery of the caring for our borough 
objectives.  In order to coordinate all the various organisations and their plans the council will 
continue to take a leading role in PUSH. The council will continue to hel p fund PUSH for 
appropriate sub -regional research and most importantly take a leading role in PUSH to e nsure 
the implementation of sub -regional priori ties; including green Infrastructure and mitigation 
measures for the development impacts on important habitats and species.  
 
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 66 The Natural Environment and Our Heritage  
 
Policy CS1 1 Protecting and Enhancing the Special Environment and Heritage of 
Havant Bor ough  
 
Planning permission will be granted for development that:  
 
1. Ensures the key landscape and built form principles set out in the Havant Borough 
Townscape, Landscape and Seascape Character Assessment are protected and 
where possible  enhanced by partne rship working  with developers, groups and the 
wider community.  
2. Protects and where possible  enhances the b orough’s statutory and non -statutory 
designated landscape, habitats and features of biological, hydrological or 
geological interest . Protection and enhancement will be achieved by  appropriate 
adaptation and mitigation  measures  includ ing wardening, education and 
information  and the creation of new habitats, water bodies/courses planting of new 
trees and woodland.  
3. Has particular regard to the followi ng hierarchy of nature conservation 
designations within the borough (as identified on the Proposals Map):   
 (i) Special Protection Areas (SPA), Special Areas of Conservation (SAC) and 
Ramsar  [International ].  
 (ii) Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SS SI) and National Nature Reserves  
  [National ].  
 (iii) Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation (SINC), Local Nature Reserves 
(LNR), other Ancient Woodland not identified in (ii) above  [Local ]. 
4. Protects and where appropriate enhances the b orough’s s tatutory and non -
statutory heritage designations by appropriately managing development in or 
adjacent to conservation areas, listed buildings, scheduled ancient monuments, 
historic parks and gardens, archaeological sites, buildings of local historic or 
architectural interest . 
5. Supports an ongoing programme of survey of habitats and species and designation 
of Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation.  
6. Incorporates partnership working with conservation organisations to improve 
public understanding of b iodiversity and to manage public access to designated 
sites, particularly on the coast, to reduce harm to nature conservation interests.  
7. Incorporates partnership working with landowners and developers to ensure land 
management practices restore, enhance  and where appropriate create new valued 
landscapes, habitats and their soil structure, particularly the ancient woodland 
remnants of the Forest of Bere and coastal salt marsh.  
8. Protects  wildlife habitats and wildlife corridors to prevent the fragmentati on of 
existing habitats and to allow species, for example Brent Geese, to respond to the 
impacts of climate change by making provision for habitat adaptation e.g. coastal 
managed realignment and species migration.  
9. Maintains undeveloped gaps between the settlements of  Emsworth/Havant; 
Havant/Waterlooville; Havant/Portsmouth; Emsworth/Westbourne and Leigh 
Park/Rowlands Castle  as shown on the Proposals Map . 
10. Protects the best and most versatile agricultural land that has the greatest potential 
for local  food security.  
11. Responds to the emerging evidence from the Solent Disturbance and Mitigation 
Project, the published recommendations, and future related research . 
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 67 
Hayling Island SSSI, Fe rry Point  
Historic Forest of Bere  7.03 The b orough has a rich and varied landscape which sustains 
habitats for a wealth o f biodiversity and wildlife. This unique 
natural environment has been internationally and nationally 
designated for its importance to biodiversity (over 2 ,500 
hectares of nature designations , see map Appendix 3 ). In 
2009 the borough had 2 43 buildings  listed grade I, II* or II, a 
number of locally listed buildings , an Area of Outstanding 
Natural Beauty, 14 conservation areas and a range of 
ancient monuments and listed gardens which contribute to 
our culture and heritage.  A significant amount of new 
developm ent is planned for the borough up to 2026 and it is fundamental to the achievement of 
the council's vision that the borough’s natural and built environment assets are central to the 
delivery of this development. The council will seek ways of ensuring that new development not 
only protects the borough’s environmental assets but also uses them to generate higher quality 
development, to bring environmental enhancement benefits and put the assets at the centre of 
the regeneration of the borough. This idea is re ferred to by English Heritage as a ‘win, win, win’ 
and is strongly supported by the council.  
 
7.04 A primary objective of both the Sustainable Community Strategy Forward Together and the 
Core Strategy is the preservation and enhancement of the borough's na tural landscape, open 
space, its biodiversity and built heritage. However, the c ouncil must still seek growth and 
appropriate development in order for the borough to become a vibrant place to live providing 
opportunity and facilities for its residents. It is vital to find a balance between these objectives 
without harming the natural and built environment which forms the borough’s identity.  
 
7.05 The internationally designated habitats in the borough, the 
Special Protection Areas (SPAs); Special Areas of 
Conservation (SACs) (collectively called ‘Natura 2000’ sites) 
and Ramsar sites have high levels of protection. 
Development will not be permitted that would cause harm to 
their designated interests. Nationally designated Sites of 
Special Scientific Interest ( SSSIs) and the National Area of 
Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) designations enjoy 
protection as set out in government guidance. The 
government’s guidance on nature and heritage is contained 
in PPS1, PPS5, PPS7  and PPS9, PPG15 and PPG16 and 
other legisl ation. The South East Plan  also contains policies that add regional detail to national 
policy. The national and regional policies provide a clear framework of protection for the 
borough's environmental assets. The Core Strategy provides the next level of d etail, identifying 
what is special about the borough and how the council will protect and enhance the 
environmental assets of the borough.  
 
     
Where else to look:  
 
PPS1: Delivering Sustainable Development : Encourages sustainable 
development that seeks to protect and enhance the natural and historic 
environment, the character and quality of the countryside and existing 
communities .  
 
PPS7: Sustainable Development in Rural Areas : Sets out guidance on 
landscape designations . 
 
PPS9: Biodiversity  and Geological Conservation : Sets the requirement to Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 68 
St Faiths Conservation Area  
Park Wood SINC  
Bird watching,  
Langstone Harbour  
  
7.06 In addition to the many international and nation al nature and 
heritage designations there are a variety of local 
designations for biodiversity, heritage and landscape. These 
designations are Sites of Importance for Nature 
Conservation (SINCs), conservation areas, a local list of 
buildings of historic or  architectural interest and land 
identified as gaps between settlements that maintain their 
separate identities and the distinctive landscape character 
areas of the borough. National planning policy allows local 
designations to be made where they are regio nally and 
locally important to the character of the borough. The 
council believes that these designations are essential to 
maintaining and enhancing the natural and built heritage of 
the borough and so will be protected through the HBLDF 
policies. All the nature and heritage designations are 
important for their own sake; additionally they play a critical 
role in the wellbeing of the borough’s residents and visitors  
 
 
7.07 An importan t feature of the borough,  not specifically designated and therefore not pr otected by 
additional policy or legislation , is the Bedhampton Springs. The springs  are managed by 
Portsmouth Water and are the only source of drinking water to a significant part of the sub -
region. The protection of the Bedha mpton Springs and  associated s wallow holes from 
conta mination is critical to the sub -region and the strongest use of the policies in the HBLDF, 
the Water Framework Directive and the South East River Basin Management Plan will be used 
to ensure their protection. Other features that may not have specific designations include 
hedgerows, road verges, river corridors , farmland and gardens and open spaces that act as 
local wildlife habitats and supporting habitats to the statutory designated sites (such as Br ent 
Geese  feeding sites) forming p art of the overall wildlife diversity of the borough. The Biodiversity 
Action Plan (BAP) for Hampshire provides the basis for future action to preserve and enhance 
biodiversity and the council will produce its own BAP in 2010 which  will inform how the Core  
Strategy policies should be used to protect the biodiversity of the borough.  This will also relate 
to the Biodiversity Opportunity Areas that have been identified in the South East Region and 
identified in the  PUSH Green Infrastructure Strategy.  
 
7.08 This Core Strategy has been subject to assessment in 
relation to Regulation 85 of the Habitats Regulations to 
ensure that the proposals it contains will not lead to an 
adverse effect on the integrity of any Natura 2000 or Ramsar 
sites. This process has influe nced the Core Strategy policies, 
which mitigate recreational pressure and air quality issues on 
these designated sites, including areas outside of the 
designated site boundaries which are important feeding sites 
for Brent Geese or high tide wader roosts.  
 
7.09 The council recognises that additional growth in the borough, in combination with growth in 
neighbouring authorities, could lead to adverse effects upon the sensitive designated sites and protect international, national and local biodiversity designations . 
 
PPS5:  Planning for the Historic Environment  
 
Habitat Regulations and Appropriate Assessment   
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 69 
Shelter belts, North Hayling  
landscape character area  
 their supporting features, as a result of increased recreation al pressure. The Solent Disturbance 
and Mitigation Project, coordinated by the Solent Forum  is currently under  way to improve the 
understanding of the current and future impacts of recreational pressure on the Solent 
international  sites. The council is com mitted to working with other local authorities to develop 
and implement a strategic approach to protecting international  sites within and adjacent to the 
borough , in accordance with the recommendations of this research . 
 
7.10 It is anticipated that strateg ic mitigation/avoidance measures  will be necessary across S outh 
Hampshire, in order to prevent additional recreational pressure on the International  sites from 
the cumulative effects of increased housing and other development in the sub -region. 
Necessary m easures are likely to include access management of the international  sites (e.g. 
increased wardening), and the creation/enhancement of green infrastructure specifically 
designed to improve local access to informal open spaces in less sensitive areas, which  are 
easily accessible to the present and future populations liv ing in S outh Hampshire, and provide a 
similar quality experience to that found at the international  sites. Once established, the 
implementation and effectiveness of this strategic approach wil l be monitored and reviewed 
concurrently with reviews of the delivery of housing provision. S uch measures are likely to 
require  support from developer contributions . The necessary developer contributions may 
include a wide interpretation of the types of in frastructure set out in Table 9.1,  depending on the 
research findings and the merits of individual proposals.  
 
7.11 The council is committed to working with neighbouring authorities and relevant partners to 
enable protected coastal habitats to adapt to cli matic and sea level changes. This will be linked 
to Green Infrastructure (GI) provision being identified in the PUSH GI strategy, including the 
realignment of important habitats landward. The council considers that PUSH is ideally placed 
as a sub -regional organisation to create a framework within which the necessary mitigation 
measures can be funded and delivered.  
 
7.12 The policies of the Core Strategy are backed up by a range 
of studies that set out the key features of the borough. One 
of the most signif icant is the Havant Borough Townscape, 
Landscape and Seascape Character Assessment 2007, 
which assesses the distinctive character of the borough. The 
study brings together landscape, ecological, historical and 
cultural assessments to define 41 landscape ch aracter 
areas. The key characteristics of each area are defined in 
the study and landscape and built form guidelines are set 
out to assist in the conservation, enhancement and 
restoration of each are a. This detailed study is comple mented by more local stud ies such as the 
Village Design Statements produced by local groups in Emsworth and Northney and Tye. 
Chichester Harb our Conservancy has produced a management p lan for the Area of 
Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB), together with landscape and dwelling /exten sion design 
advice.  
 
Policy CS 12 Chichester Harbour Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB )  
 
Development will be permitted where it : 
 
1. Carefully assesses the impact of individual proposals, and their cumulative effect, 
on the Chichester Harbour AONB , and its setting . 
2.  Is appropriate to the economic, social and environmental wellbeing of the area or is 
desirable for the understanding and enjoyment of the area .  
3. Conserves and enhances the special qualities of the Chichester Harbour AONB (as 
defined  in the Chichester Harbour AONB Management Plan) .  
4. Meets the policy aims of the Chichester Harbour AONB Management Plan  and  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 70 
5. Provides mitigation of any detrimental effects including where appropriate the 
improvement of existing damaged landscapes rel ating to the proposal.   
 
7.13 National planning policy, as set out in PPS7 ‘Sustainable Development in Rural Areas’ confirms 
AONBs as having the highest status of protection in relation to landscape and scenic beauty. 
Particular reference is made to major development proposals affecting AONBs.  
 
7.14 Chichester Harbour AONB is a unique landscape comprising sheltered open water areas with 
contrasting narrow channels. The movement of the tide exposes bare mudflat and saltmarsh 
creating a wide, open and remote wilderness. The undeveloped character of the harbour is 
almost unique on the south coast and is complemented by its status as an internationally 
important area of nature conservation.  The largely flat hinterland includes highly productive 
farmland, as well  as woodlands and hedgerows that contribute to the rural character of the area. 
The flatness of the landscape makes the AONB particularly vulnerable to visual intrusion from 
inappropriate development, both within or adjacent to the boundary, which can ofte n be seen 
from significant distances across inlets, the main harbour channels, or open countryside. Havant 
Borough Council  will have particular regard to these characteristics in determining development 
proposals affecting the AONB.  
 
7.15 Chichester Harbo ur Conservancy has produced an AONB Management Plan, which is adopted 
by Havant Borough Council, Chichester District Council, West Sussex County Council and 
Hampshire County Council. The Conservancy has also produced an AONB Landscape 
Character Assessment and Design Guidelines for New Dwellings and Extensions, both of which 
have been endorsed by  Havant Borough C ouncil. The AONB Management Plan and its 
supporting documents identify the distinctive features and characteristics of the landscape and 
provide the  framework for the management and ongoing spatial planning of Chichester Harbour 
AONB. Proposed development affecting the AONB should be of the highest design quality and 
applicants are encouraged to seek pre -application advice from Chichester Harbour 
Cons ervancy.  
 
Where else to look:  
 
Details of the borough’s Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty, nature 
designations, historic parks and gardens and scheduled monuments can be 
found on the government mapping website Magic Map   
 
Natural England : Has more details on landscape and nature conservation 
designations  
 
English Heritage : Has m ore details about  listed buildings and heritage 
protection  
 
Details of the borough’s own listed buildings and conservation areas  can be found on the 
Havant Borough Council website  
 
Biodiversity Opportunity Areas : Have been identified for the South East Region and these 
have been further detailed at the Hampshire County level     
 
National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 : Provides the legislative background 
to AONB designations.  
 
Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 :  Bro ught in the requirement for local authorities to 
have a ‘duty of regard’ to the purpose of AONBs  and to produce an AONB Management 
Plan.  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 71  
7.16 Local communities and volunteer groups play an important role in protecting, maintaining and 
enhancing their local environment. The council will continue to work in partnership with these 
organisations including Th e Chichester Harbour Conservancy, Hampshire and Isle of Wight 
Wildlife Trust and local friends g roups to ensure that the development needs of the borough are 
balanced with environmental protection. The Sustainability Appraisal of the HBLDF plays an 
importa nt role in balancing the economic, social and environmental needs of the borough to 
consider how the ‘win, win, win’  concept  can best be implemented in particular cases.  
 
7.17 The HBLDF has an important role in defining the urban areas of the borough. It i s within the 
urban areas that virtually all the existing development is located and where most development 
will take  place  in the future. The definition of the urban area showing the current situation, 
together with urban extensions that are allocated as s trategic sites is shown on the Proposals 
Map and in Policy CS1 7. That definition of the urban area will change as part of the 
Development Delivery (Allocations)  Plan, which will allocate urban extensions for housing and 
employment development. Once any urb an extension is allocated in that plan it will become part 
of the urban area.  
 
7.18 The areas outside the defined urban areas are called non-urban  areas. In the non -urban areas 
there is a national presumption that land should be protected against unnecessa ry 
development. There is a similar presumption for the protection of the best and most versatile 
agricultural land, which may become more important nationally for food security. Only 
development that requires a non -urban location will normally be permitted  here. These 
considerations are set out in PPS7: Sustainable Development in Rural Areas.  
 
7.19 Parts of the non -urban areas also have a role in separating the urban areas and creating a 
distinction of place. Where this function is performed the areas are o ften referred to as ‘gaps’. 
Previous plans identified strategic gaps; however, the South East Plan  states that such 
designations are no longer to be used. The council has produced a study that shows that there 
are areas in the borough which perform a gap f unction between Emsworth/Havant , 
Havant/Waterlooville, Emsworth/Westbourne, Leigh Park/Rowlands Castle and 
Havant/Portsmouth. The land that has a gap function will be identified in the Development 
Delivery (Allocations) Plan in order that it coincides with  any necessary urban extensions.  
 PUSH has developed a policy framework for the consistent appraisal and eventual designation 
of future gaps.  
 
7.20 The majority of the borough is urban in character, in parts of the non -urban area, agriculture 
remains impo rtant. Agriculture shapes the landscape character of the non-urban  areas and 
provides land to produce food. Local food production and security were reasons why the 
planning system was set up after World War II and the principle of protecting the best and m ost 
versatile land remains important, as set out in PPS7. Government is again asking about our 
food security and is developing policy (Defra Food Security Assessment). The council will 
balance the need to allocate land for new development with the protecti on of the best and most 
versatile agricultural land.  
 
 
  
Chichester Harbour AONB  Design Gui delines  for New Dwellings and Extensions  
 
Chichester Harbour AONB Landscape Character Assessment  
 
Chiches ter Harbour AONB Management Plan  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 72 
 
Policy CS1 3 Green I nfrastructure  
 
Development will be permitted that:  
 
1. Maintains and manages the network of green infrastructure identified at the sub
 regional and local levels.  
2. Incorporates, where appropriate, improvements to existing green infrastructure
 through the rest oration, enhancement or creation of additional resources.  
3. Does not undermine the functional integrity of the green infrastructure . 
4. Creates, where appropriate, new green infrastructure  (including access  
 management measures) either through on site  provisio n or financial contributions.   
 
Development proposals that adversely affect green infrastructure  will not be permitted 
unless superior alternative provision can be provided or where it is part of a service 
provider's plans to provide improved local service s in equally accessible locations.  
 
Green infrastructure  sites will be allocated in the Development Delivery (Allocations)  
Plan . 
 
 
7.21  The South East Plan  requires councils and partners such as PUSH to plan, provide and manage 
connected and substantial n etworks of accessible multifunctional greenspace. Such networks of 
green infrastructure provide multifunctional areas that increase connectivity of open space for 
biodiversity and wildlife protection, creating places where people can enjoy a natural 
enviro nment that will benefit their health and wellbeing.  
 
7.22 Green infrastructure is essentially the green and open spaces that are found everywhere, our 
back gardens, recreation grounds, paths and streams, allotments, parks, playing fields, Where else to look:  
 
The South East River Basin Management Plan (2009) : Takes forward the 
requiremen ts of the EU Water Framework Directive and sets out action for 
improving the region ’s water. The B orough of Havant is within the East 
Hampshire Catchment .  
 
PUSH has p ublished the South Hampshire : Integrated Water Management 
Strategy  which  sets out priorities for water supply, waste water and flood risk . 
 
PUSH Policy Framework for Gaps  December 2008  
 
Havant Borough Council’s  developm ent assessments:  Strategic Housing Land Availability 
Assessment  (SHLAA) ,  Havant Borough Employment Land Review 2010 ,  Landscape 
Sensitivity Study  and Sustainability Appraisal  
 
Natural England has produced comprehensive advice on what Green Infrastructure is and its 
importance :  Green Infrastructure Guidance  2009  
  
UK Food Security Ass essment  August 2009 :  Department for Environment Food and Rural 
Affairs  
 
PPG17: Planning for Open Space, Sport and Recreation   
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 73 woodlands and the  countryside. A full definition, based on the South East Plan (May 2009) is 
shown below.  
 
What is Green Infrastructure?   
The following area s can form part of networks of green i nfrastructure:  
 Parks and gardens - including urban parks, country parks and for mal gardens  
 Natural and semi -natural greenspaces - including woodlands, forestry, scrub,  
 grasslands (e.g. downlands, commons and meadows) wetlands, open and running water,  
   wastelands and derelict open land and rock areas (e.g. cliffs, quarries and pits ) 
 Green corridors - including river and canal banks, cycleways, and rights of way  
 Outdoor sports facilities (with natural or artificial surfaces, either publicly or privately 
owned):  including tennis courts, bowling greens, sports pitches, golf courses, at hletics 
tracks,  school and other institutional playing fields, and other outdoor sports areas  
 Amenity greenspace (most commonly, but not exclusively, in housing areas) - including  
 informal recreation spaces, greenspaces in and around housing, domestic gar dens and  
 village greens  
 Provision for children and teenagers - including play areas, skateboard parks, outdoor  
 basketball hoops, and other more informal areas (e.g. hanging out areas, teenage 
shelters)  
 Allotments, community gardens, and city (urban) farm s 
 Cemeteries and churchyards  
 Accessible countryside in urban fringe areas  
 River and canal corridors  
 Green roofs and walls . 
 
7.23 The idea of green infrastructure is that rather than seeing all these areas individually, they are 
seen as a whole, as a networ k and not just within a small area but in our area at a sub -regional 
level. Looking at the strategic scale means that the multifunctional properties of green 
infrastructure are appreciated rather than just seeing the spaces as being either for recreation 
or as a habitat for example. Links are made that will add value to the individual areas so that 
they provide wider community benefits for education, improving health and wellbeing through 
opportunities for maintaining and creating a sense of place, sustaina ble transport routes, play, 
exercise and relaxation; wildlife habitats, flood management areas and local food production. 
PUSH published its Green Infrastructure Strategy in June 2010 , which identifies sub -regionally 
important areas, some of which are with in the b orough. These are North Hayling Island habitat 
creation around the coast of Northney; The Forest of Bere, which stretches from Winchester to 
Havant; Portsdown Hill; Havant Thicket Reservoir; the footpaths and cycle paths such as the 
Solent Way, Hay ling Billy Trail, Wayfarers and Pilgrims Walks and the borough's stream 
corridors.  The Core Strategy sets the principles of securing, enhancing and creating green 
infrastructure identified in the PUSH Green Infrastructure Strategy. These will be specifica lly 
allocated in the Development Delivery (Allocations) Plan where necessary and consideration 
given to producing a local and more detailed green infrastructure strategy for the borough.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 74 
 
Sustainable Construction and High Quality Design  
 
Policy CS14 Efficient Use of Resources  
 
Planning permission will be granted for development that:  
 
1. Provides adequate land or funding for waste management infrastructure.  
2. Locally contributes to the delivery of the PUSH target of 100MW of renewable 
energy by 2020 for the whole of the PUSH area. Major areas of development must 
ensure that their on -site re newable energy production is maximised and resource 
efficiency is maximised.  
3. On completion, unless proven to be financially or technically unviable, meets the 
following standards:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Allowable Solutions’ may be used to achieve higher levels of carbo n reduction 
where on -site proposals are not feasible or viable . 
 
7.24 Our climate is always changing and our use of fossil fuels creates greenhouse gas emissions 
that are contributing to the rate at which climate change will continue to occur. Planning has  an 
important role to play in reducing greenhouse gases through locating development where there 
are opportunities  to walk or cycle and by ensuring that new buildings have the highest 
standards of energy efficiency and design. Careful planning for future g enerations through 
sustainable development and design will have positive impacts on social inclusion and 
environmental benefits and in turn will have positive repercussions on economic prosperity . 
 
7.25  The government targets for reducing greenhouse gas e missions are very challenging and will 
continue to be a global issue that must be addressed. The government legislative framework for Where else to look:  
 
The South East Plan  (2009)  
 
PUSH Green Infra structure Strategy  
 
Hampshire Biodiversity Action Plan : Reviews the status of wildlife in 
Hampshire and sets out a framework for action . 
 
The Havant Borough Townscape, Landscape and Seascape Character 
Assessment : Identifies the local character of the borough . 
 
Village Design Statements : Have been published by local groups for Emsworth and Northney 
and Tye which identify local character and design guidance .  
 
Chichester Harbour Conservancy : Is the body responsible for managing the Chichester 
Harbour AONB. There are a nu mber of background documents on their website that set out 
how the AONB should be conserved and enhanced.  
Residential development – Level 3 of the Code for Sustainable 
Homes;  
Multi occupation homes and non -residential development over 
500sqm - BREEAM standard ‘very good’.  
Improvements to these standards throughout the plan period will 
be encouraged.   
Particular attention should be paid to water efficiency measures.  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 75 
the targets is based on the Climate Change Act, the Energy Act, the Planning Act and the 
Planning and Energy Act, all 2008 . These set the scene for planning to take a major role in 
making transport and buildings more sustainable as they create more than 50% of all emissions.  
 
7.26 The b orough’s location on the south coast means that the impacts of climate change will be 
more  significant than many other parts of the country in terms of sea level rise, higher 
temperature and lower rainfall, resulting in significant impact on the availability of water. The 
Core Strategy addresses the impacts of climate change, our use of natural  resources, waste 
management and non -renewable energy sources and the impact of our current lifestyles. The 
Core Strategy policies contribute to changing daily life and allow us to reconsider our 
consumption. Over time the changes that can be implemented n ow will become the norm for 
future generations.  
 
7.27 In the South East Region and particularly on the south coast the impacts of climate change will 
be felt most severely. Since the last ice age the British landmass has been tilting upwards out of 
the sea in northern Scotland and sinking into the sea on the south coast of England. The 
predictions for sea level rise of up to one metre in the next 100 years will impact significantly on 
the highl y developed Solent Coastal Plain. The area has high concentrations of internationally 
important habitats and high levels of projected housing and employment growth. The 
combination of these factors makes the Solent Coastal Plain, which is effectively the P USH 
Sub-region, relatively unique in terms of the impacts it will face from climate change. It is 
therefore critical that LDFs in the PUSH area consistently require high levels of sustainable 
construction. PUSH agreed a policy framework that sets standards  that go beyond the 
government’s own target of zero carbon homes by 2016 and zero carbon for other buildings by 
2019. The PUSH framework and the Core Strategy policy use the Code for Sustainable Homes 
for housing and a new non -residential code is being dev eloped. The code approach has been a 
significant step forward in providing a comprehensive and consistent approach for the 
development industry.  
 Where else to look:  
 
PPS1: Delivering Sustainable Development  and the PPS1: Climate Change 
Supplement  and PPS22: Renewable Energy :  Provide detailed guidance to 
ensure that local planning authorities contribute to the  delivery of sustainable 
development . 
 
Legislation relating to sustainable construction is available at the Department 
of Energy and Climate Change  website together with a range of other 
information . 
Where else to look:  
 
Further guidance can be found within the Code for Sustainable Homes ; and 
the Technical Guide  provides details of the single national standards .  
 
Non-residential buildings  are currently assessed using BREEAM   
 
Further information is also available within the PUSH Policy Framework   
 
Further advice on sustainability and planning from Homes and Communities 
Agency  and the Planning Advisory Service   
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 76 
 
7.28 The Core Strategy will cover a period up to 2026, in order to achieve the government’s targets 
of reducing greenhouse gas emissions it is fundamental that sustainable construction meth ods 
are a priority. Policies CS1 4 and CS1 6 set out the principl es that will be applied to all new 
development. All new development is defined as one dwelling or more and 500 square metres 
or more of non -residential floorspace. In order to monitor Policy CS1 4 the Code for Sustainable 
Homes requires developers to submit  an independently assessed code rating with their 
planning applications together with another on completion.  
 
7.29 Renewable energy technology is a rapidly develop ing market where new products and 
improved efficiency and reliability are continuously emerg ing, together with changing public 
perceptions. Technologies that are currently not considered viable, or are only emerging such 
as tidal power, biomass, energy and heat from waste and ground source heat will become more 
viable. The use of renewable techno logies will have an increasing role to play in energy 
production in the borough over the plan period. In any new development the priority is on 
reducing the amount of energy we use, following the principles of – Lean  – reduce energy 
consumption; Clean  – generate energy using low carbon technologies and Green  – generate 
energy using renewable sources. The council will require all major areas of development to 
produce on -site renewable energy as there are economies of scale that mean the technologies 
will be more effective. Major Development Areas are defined as 250 dwellings or more and 
5,000 square metre s of non -residential floorspace . Further information on the technologies that 
could be appropriate in the borough can be found in the Havant Energy Study (Sa vills 2005) 
and the PUSH Energy Study (Atkins 2009).  
 
7.30 Havant Borough Council is not the waste authority, although it does collect domestic and some 
commercial waste. The waste and minerals authority is Hampshire County Council. Waste is a 
major issue for our sub -region as the landfill sites are exhausted. The Waste and Resources 
Action Programme (WRAP) is the government sponsored organisation that supports 
organisations and individuals to reduce waste. It aims to halve waste to landfill. The 
constructi on industry produces 20% of all landfill. Site Waste Management Plans are now 
required to help developers reduce their waste. It is therefore important to deal with waste on 
development sites to reduce the need for landfill.  Waste management infrastructure  includes all 
physical aspects of the waste hierarchy. This ranges from adequate space within an individual 
dwelling curtilage for wheelie bins, recycling and composting bins , to the provision of a materials 
recycling centre in a major development. In orde r to meet the Code for Sustainable Homes and 
BREE AM requirements, applicants will be expected to submit a statement of how this has been 
achieved as part of their planning application.  
 
7.31 A Supplementary Planning Document will be published to provide d etailed information on what 
the council will expect in relation to sustainable construction.  
Where else to look:  
 
Overview of Sustainable Energy Opportunities : Havant Borough  Council’s 
Review of Renewable Energy Options produced by Savills in August 2005.   
 
PUSH Feasibility of an Energy and Climate Change Strategy for  Urban  South 
Hampshire : Undertaken by Ove Arup for PUSH.  Has been f inalised and 
PUSH are developing an Action Plan . 
 
Hampshire Mineral and Waste Local Development Framework : The Core 
Strategy  was adopted in 2007 and includes  Mineral Safeguarding Areas 
(identified on the Proposals Map) . 
 
WRAP : Information on  waste reduction and  Site Waste Management Plan requirements .  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 77 
High tide Emsworth  
Courtesy of  
Emsworth Residents’ Association  
 Flood and Erosion Risk  
Policy CS1 5 Flood and Coastal Erosion Risk  
 
Development in areas at risk of flooding now and in the future as identified on the latest 
Environment Agency flood risk maps and Strategic Flood Risk Assessment climate 
change maps will only be permitted where:  
 
1. It meets the sequential and exception test (where  required) in relation to PPS25 . 
2. The site is located in a low hazard area as defined in the Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment . 
3. A site -specific flood risk assessment demonstrates that the development will be safe, 
including the access, without increasing flood risk elsewhere, and, where possible, 
will reduce flood risk over all. 
4. The scheme incorporates flood protection, flood resilience and resistance measures  
appropriate to the characte r and biodiversity of the area and the sp ecific 
requirements of the site . 
5. Appropriate flood warning an d evacuation plans are in place . 
6. New site drainage systems are designed taking account of events which exceed the 
normal design standard.  
 
All development  will be required to ensure that there is no net increase in surface water 
run off. Priority should be given to incorporating Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) 
to manage surface water drainage, unless it is proven that SuDS are not appropriate. 
Where SuD s are provided arrangements must be put in place for their whole life 
management and maintenance.  
 
The council will work with partners to implement the Coastal Policy Zones in the North 
Solent Shoreline Management Plan to ensure that development avoids are as at risk from 
coastal erosion and coastal flooding and that areas required to offset coastal squeeze  
and prevent habitat fragmentation , to allow species to adapt to climate change , are 
identified and protected from development.  
 
7.32 The borough has a co astline with a total length of 48km. The entire coastline is subject to 
international and national nature conservation designation s. The impacts of climate change 
mean sea levels will rise and combining this with the natural forces of the sea, the borough’ s 
coastline will change over the life of the developments that the Core Strategy promotes. The 
borough is faced with the challenge of planning where and when the change could occur. As 
well as coastal flooding there are some areas that are subject to flood ing from the borough’s 
streams, surface water run off and rising ground water that could also be affected by climate 
change and these must be addressed. The likely impacts of flooding in 2115 are shown on the 
Flooding Map at Appendix 4.  
 
7.33 There are f ew locations where construction of significant new flood defences will be 
economically justifiable or ecologically acceptable due to the international designations all 
around the coast. Managing  the risks of flooding and adapting to the likely impacts of c limate 
change is therefore a priority.  
 
7.34 The projected impacts of climate change on the Solent 
Coastal Plain are that sea levels could rise by one metre 
over the next 100 years. The development that is planned 
in the HBLDF could last 100 years or more  and therefore it 
must be located away from areas of high flood risk. 
Planning Policy Statement 25 (PPS25) requires the council Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 78 to follow the flood risk management hierarchy. This involves assessing the risk through a 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) ; following the sequential approach to managing flood 
risk; controlling the risk through flood protection and mitigating risk through resistant and 
resilient construction. The PUSH SFRA covers in detail the whole of South Hampshire and is a 
critical tool t hat the council has used to predict the flood risks in the year 2115 as a basis for 
locating development. As a principle the HBLDF will not propose development in areas at risk 
from flood now or in the future.  
 
7.35 The Core Strategy ensures that new deve lopment is located away from areas at risk of flooding 
or coastal erosion. The rising sea levels will impact on low -lying areas of the borough and it is 
therefore important to accept that natural coastal changes will dominate the future shape of the 
coasta l zone. There is a challenge to balance the needs of both people and the environment in 
response to climate change. The borough will respond to climate change by mitigation (e.g. 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions) and adaptation. The acceptance of coastal change will 
mean that the coastal line will be moved landward (coastal realignment) in some areas; in 
others investments will be made in flood defences. The Strategic Housing Land Availability 
Assessment and the Employment Land Review have tested the optio ns for avoiding flood and 
erosion risk identified in the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment.  
 
7.36 The North Solent Shoreline Management Plan  (NSSMP) currently under preparation covers the 
coast from Hurst Spit in the west to Selsey Bill in the east and is d ue for completion in 2010. 
The NSSMP will develop the policies outlined in the first plan completed in 1997. The NSSMP is 
not a statutory plan, but sets the strategic framework for future coastal investment decisions. 
One of its outcomes will be the identi fication of policies for  future coastal defence investment  in 
individual policy units . There are four national types of policy zone: Advancement  – land 
reclamation and most unlikely in the NSSMP; Hold the Line  – investment in defences and most 
likely where  there are significant economic assets to protect; No Active Intervention  – where 
there is unlikely to be public investment in defences; and Managed Realignment  – where the 
current coastal line will be moved inland to provide new areas to absorb the rising  sea levels.  
There are many existing homes, businesses, recreation areas and shops in the borough that 
could be flooded during the HBLDF plan period. The NSSMP will be the basis for investment 
decisions as to where any protection is provided.  Costs involve d in managing the coastline are 
usually met by a variety of public bodies and private interests. Where capital investment can be 
justified the council will seek funding/grant through central government rather than from the 
council’s budget    
 
7.37 The NSSM P, together with the South East Hampshire Catchment Flood Management Plan 
(CFMP), the more detailed coastal strategies like the emerging Portchester Castle to Emsworth 
coastal flood and erosion risk management strategy and the PUSH Integrated Water 
Managem ent Strategy, will bring together a whole range of water -based strategies. These 
documents provide a comprehensive and evolving evidence base. The Core Strategy and 
development management policies will help implement many of the requirements of these 
vario us strategies and plans, for example the requirements of the Code for Sustainable Homes 
will reduce greenhouse gas emissions to mitigate climate change and include requirements for 
no net increase in surface run -off and  require the provision of multi functi onal measures such as 
SuDS, which are a flood protection and habitat creation measure.  
 
7.38 A significant issue for the borough will be coastal squeeze, this  is the loss of inter -tidal habitats 
(such as saltmarsh and mudflats) as sea levels rise , in areas  where the natural landward 
migration of such habitats under sea level rise is prevented by man -made defences or other 
coastal s tructures.  Areas of managed re alignment will be used to offset coastal squeeze and 
these , where suitable , will be identified in  the NSSMP.  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 79 
 
 Where else to look:  
 
PPS25 Development and Flood Risk : Provides the n ational policy on avoiding 
development in areas of flood risk. It also sets ou t the sequential and 
exception test that will be applied when considering development proposals in 
flood risk areas. The accompanying Practice Guide  provides a r ange of more 
detailed implementation advice.  
PPG20 Coastal Planning : Provides policies for coastal planning and details of 
relevant legislation affecting  development in the coastal zone. An update of 
this PPG will be published as a supplement to PPS25.  
Havant Borough Townscape, Landscape and Seascape Character Assessment : When 
considering proposals for development, including flood protection, reference should be made 
to this document to ensure that development is sympathetic to the appropriate character type.  
The East Solent Shoreline Management Plan (1997) : Is the current SMP and will be replaced 
by the North Solent Shoreline Management Plan  once it is finalised in 2010. An SMP  is a 
non-statutory document intended to both inform and be supported by the  statutory planning 
processes. As such it takes account of the diverse interests in the shorelin e and establishes a 
coast defenc e strategy that is technically, economically and environmentally sustainable.  
 
The g overnment has  approved The Environment Agen cy’s River Basin Management Plans  
as part of the EU Water Framework Directive. The South Ea st River Basin Management Plan  
covers the borough. The Environment Agency has a number  of emerging strategies relevant 
to the borough including the South East Hampshire Catch ment Flood Management Plan  and 
the Portchester Castle to Emsworth Coastal Flood and Erosion Risk Management Strategy . 
Once completed they will form part of th e overall evidence base for flood risk in the borough.  
 
The PUSH Integrated Water Management Strategy : Brings together, at the sub -regional 
level, all the considerations on water supply,  wastewater treatment and flood risk.  
 
The PUSH Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) : Assesses the impacts of flooding now 
and in 2115 and is an important tool in identifying flood risks related to new  development 
proposals.  
 
Havant Borough Council website has extensive information on coastal defence, land 
drainage and flooding  and links to a range of projects.  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 80 Design  
 
Policy CS1 6 High Quality Desig n 
 
Planning permission will be granted for development that is designed to a high standard, 
which helps to create places where people want to live, work and relax. All development 
should  demonstrate that its design:  
 
1. Responds to, draws inspiration from and  respects local context and:  
 a) Identifies and responds positively to existing features of natural, historic or 
  local character within or close to the proposed development site;  
 b) Integrates with existing  local  landscape features, promotes wildlife a nd 
  biodiversity and/or applies characteristics of the local area into the design of a 
  scheme wherever possible to create variety and interest ; 
 c) Uses the characteristics of the locality to help inform the design of the new 
  development including hei ghts, massing, existing buildings lines, plot widths  
  and depths , materials and proportions of windows and doors;  
 d) Is well connected to and integrates with the immediate local area and the 
   wider area by linking to existing pedestrian and cycle rout es and encouraging 
   people to use public transport where possible; and  
 e) The dev elopment does not cause unacceptable harm to the amenity of  
  neighbours through smell, the loss of privacy, outlook, noise and overlooking.  
 
2. Produces a positive relations hip between buildings, street and spaces both existing 
and proposed, where:  
 a) The layout of the development reduces opportunities for crime and antisocial 
 behaviour; contributes to improving community safety; and makes provision 
 for the management and maintenance of the development ; 
 b)      New streets are not dominated by vehicular traffic;  
 c) The layout of the development is legible, meaning it is easy to   
 orientate one self and move through . 
 
3. Contributes to the improvement of the public realm close to the development ,  
particular ly sites close to  town, district and local centres and other priority 
regeneration areas  by using high quality hard and soft landscape material and 
street  furniture; and where development is of a significant scale or promi nence 
makes provision for public art . 
 
4. Is inclusive  by consider ing the needs of those with disabilities , ensur ing safe and 
convenient access for all; and integrat ing affordable and supported housing with 
market housing through tenure blind design to minimi se social exclusion and 
promote social integration .  
 
5. Maximises opportunities for mixed use developments, particularly in town and 
district centres; a nd encourage higher densities ( 50+ dwellings per hectare) where 
appropriate . 
 
6. Mitigates negative environme ntal impacts  through sustainable design and 
construction methods, resource efficiencies , particularly water  and the provision of 
facilities for waste recycling .  
 
7. Adapts  to the changing needs of the users and the changing climate over the 
lifespan  of the building.   
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 81 
Bellinger House,  
Bedhampton  
 
Obelisk Waterlooville  
Waterlooville  
historic town centre  
 7.39 The value of goo d design is also recognised by g overnment at a 
national and regional level. Planning Policy Statement 1 Delivering 
Sustainable Development (PPS1 ) requires all local authorities to 
include policies that promote high quality  design in their Core 
Strategies. Good design is important because it helps to improve 
quality of life , by providing economic, social and environmental 
benefits. Together well designed buildings, street s and spaces help to 
create attractive appealing place s where people want to live, work 
and enjoy  themselves . Well designed places can encourage social 
integration, equal access to opportunities, services and facilities, by 
reducing opportunities for crime and promoting  management and 
maintenance of open spac es and public realm through natural 
surveillance.  
 
7.40 The b orough has a diverse townscape character and built heritage, which is linked to the 
borough ’s historic relationship to the sea, waterways, agriculture and connections to larger 
urban areas incl uding Portsmouth. The council recognises that certain places have a value that 
should be protected and enhanced and therefore th ere are a number of designated 
conservation areas; listed buildings; buildings of local interest; and historic parks and g ardens . 
However , well designed buildings , places and spaces should not just 
be things we associate with the past or pleasure s to be enjoyed by a 
few. Therefore it is important that good design is secured through all 
new developments including housing, retail, co mmunity, education, 
office or industry to ensure that every member of the community 
enjoys the benefits.  
 
7.41 Whilst it is acknowledged that many parts of the b orough are 
undoubtedly attractive, many others , particularly some of our 
suburban areas , are n ot well designed and in many cases they lack 
local identity, suffer from neglect, are vulnerable to crime and have 
poor connections to surrounding areas. The HBLDF’s planned growth 
and regeneration of the borough up to 2026 offers a unique 
opportunity to t urn this around and secure the highest design standards and quality in new 
developments to deliver attractive, inclusive, safe and sustainable communities for the future. 
The council therefore requires all new development is designed to a high quality thro ugh Policy 
CS16. 
 
7.42 In accordance with PPS1 and the South East Plan , the design of 
developments should consider and respond to local context. By 
understanding the local context it is possible to determine positive 
elements of local character that helps  to distinguish one place from 
another. This can include the materials used, typical plot widths and 
heights of buildings. In addition, development sites often have their 
own distinguishing features or character to take into account. This 
could include the  form and layout of existing buildings and/or trees, 
plants and wildlife, which could be considered an asset. It is also 
important that new development sit s well with its neighbours and does 
not have an adverse effect on their existing uses and amenity. Th ese 
elements should influence the design of new development to ensure it 
integrates with its surroundings and either enhances areas of existing 
quality or introduces a more distinctive character to areas of weaker character. This does not 
restrict the styl e of the building; innovative contemporary designs may also be acceptable 
providing they have been inspired by the local context and make a positive contribution to the 
local area.  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 82 
Havant Pa rk-a valued space  
Hermitage Stream   
7.43 When streets and spaces are w ell overlooked, well used, well 
manag ed and they are not dominated by vehicular traffic they 
are perceived as safe, secure and attractive places. This can 
be achieved by ensuring buildings, streets and spaces relate 
well to one another; spaces are well located and have a 
definite role and pur pose; streets and spaces are well 
overlooked by buildings and passing vehicular and pedestrian 
traffic; and the amount of dead frontage , such as blank gable 
walls or high rear boundary walls , is kept to a minimum. The 
layout of traditional streets and peri meter blocks produce s a 
more favourable  development pattern where properties are 
secure, the public realm is overlooked by active street 
frontages and the number  of dead facades can be kept to a 
minimum. The Urban Design Compendiums, Manual for Streets 
and By Design provide more information. The principles set out 
in Secure by Design  should also be referred to for guidance on 
how good design can help reduce opportunities for crime and 
antisocial behaviour and can help improve perceived 
community safety.  
 
7.44 The public realm includes all the public space between and around buildings. This includes 
footpaths, roads, open space, hard and soft landscape  and public art . The quality of the public 
realm helps to create a perception of a place. If the quality is p oor then people have a poor 
perception of a place, it is considered a less attractive area to live, work and enjoy and this can 
in turn result in negative economic, social and environmental effects. These negative effects are 
most apparent in places like M arket Parade, Havant and Leigh Park centre , which have been 
identified as priority regeneration areas. Wherever possible it is important to maximise any 
opportunities to invest and improve the public realm in and around development areas, 
particularly targ eting improvement for our town, district and local centres most in need.  
 
7.45 It is essential that new developments are designed to be inclusive places that can be used by 
everyone, regardless of age, gender or disability. Inclusive design considers peop le's diversity 
and breaks down unnecessary barriers and exclusions and provides solutions that enable all of 
us to participate in mainstream activities equally, independently, with choice and with dignity. 
Planning and Access for Disabled People: a Good Pr actice Guide 2003 should be referred to for 
advice on how to ensure development is designed to be inclusive. Planning Policy Statement 3 
Housing (PPS3) states that developments should promote sustainable, inclusive and mixed 
communities. Mixed communities include a variety of housing, in terms of tenure, affordability 
and a mix of different households such as families with children, single person households and 
older people. To ensure affordable housing is fully integrated with market housing to produce a 
sustainable, inclusive mixed community, the council will require residential developments to be 
tenure blind  from their external appearance; so it is not possible to tell the difference between 
social rented, intermediate and private homes . 
 
7.46 Mixed use developments help to produce sustainable patterns of living when close to transport 
hubs and town, district and local centres where services and facilities are concentrated. A range 
of uses close to each other helps to reduce the need to travel by vehicle and helps to 
encourage active streets and spaces in urban areas at all times of the day. This approach is 
supported by Planning Policy Statement 4 Planning for Sustainable Economic Growth  (PPS4) . 
 
7.47 Sustainable design is a vital tool in addressing the s ustainability and climate change agenda. It 
helps to reduce the impact of new development on the environment for us and for future 
generations by ensuring that the design of buildings takes into account the efficient use of 
resources, both during the const ruction of the building and in the future.  Developments should Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 83 also be designed to ensure buildings and spaces can be adapted in the future, if required to 
adapt to changing needs such as a person ’s changing need as they grow older or 
circumstances such as  climate change.  
 
7.48 Havant Borough Council has produced a number of documents in recent years that encourage 
and guide high quality design in the borough. These documents include the Havant Borough 
Townscape, Landscape and Seascape Character Assessment  (2007), the Public Realm Design 
Framework for Havant Borough (2005), Havant Town Centre Urban Design Framework (2006),   
and Waterlooville Urban Design Framework (2004). Other relevant documents include the 
council’s conservation area statements that revi ew the character and quality of the borough’s 
fourteen conservation areas and Chichester Harbour Conservancy documents, including the 
AONB Management Plan , AONB Landscape Character Assessment and Design Guidelines for 
New Dwellings and Extensions , which  the council has approved . In a ddition Village Design 
Statements have been produced for a number of areas of the borough including Emsworth and 
Northney and Tye. These documents identify local character and set out design guidance and 
have been produced by th eir local communities. These documents are valuable information 
sources for the Core Strategy and the design policies in particular.  
  
7.49 The council will produce the Havant Borough Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document 
(SPD) , which will supplemen t the Core Strategy policy with detailed design guidance and 
promote high quality design across the bor ough. The SPD is scheduled for adoption in summer 
2011. 
 
7.50 Building for Life  is the national standard for well  designed residential schemes run by CAB E, the 
Home Builders Federation with the Civic Trust, Design for Homes and the Homes and 
Communities Agency. Made up of twenty criteria it provides a framework for assessing the 
quality of new housing and neighbourhoods to ensure they are sustainable, attr active and fit for 
purpose. The council encourages all new residential development to achieve the Building for 
Life Standard by fulfilling at least 14 out of the 20 criteria. The council will monitor the delivery of 
well designed schemes through Building f or Life, as part of the Annual Monitoring Report.  
 
7.51 Where appropriate the council may refer significant development proposals to the regional 
design panel, called the South East Regional Design Panel, or sub -regional design panel, called 
the Portsmouth , Fareham, Gosport and Havant Architects' Panel. These panels are made up of 
independently appointed architects, designers and development professionals who provide 
unbiased design advice to the council. The council firmly believes that this process of des ign 
review can add value to important development proposals.  
 
7.52 The council will require applications for major development and development in the identified 
strategic sites to be  accompanied by an appropriate m asterplan and/or design codes. 
Masterplan ning is a positive and proactive process that enables everyone involved in major 
development to address the many issues that will make the place change successfully.  
 
7.53 The council recognises the value of partnership working and early stakeholder invol vement in 
the development of high  quality design proposals and encourages applicants to engage with the 
council, relevant stakeholder and community groups at the earliest stage. Requirements in 
relation to significant planning applications are addressed in  the Statement of Community 
Involvement;  community engagement is an essential part of masterplanning. The c ouncil will 
take a proactive role in co -delivering development that will contribute to a sustainable borough.  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 84 
 
Where else to look:  
 
PPS1: Delivering Sustainable Development  
 
Havant Borough Townscape, Landscape and Seascape Character 
Assessment  Havant Borough Council (2007)  
 
Public Realm Design Framework for Havant Borough Council  (2005)  
 
Havant Town Centre Urba n Design Framework  Havant Borough Council 
(2006)  
 
Waterlooville Town Centre Urban Design Framework  Havant Borough Council (2004)  
 
Details of the borough’s own Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas  
 
Chichester Harbour AONB  Design Guid elines  for New Dwellings and Extensions  
 
Chichester Harbour AONB Landscape Character Assessment  
 
Chichester Harbour AONB Management Plan  
 
Emsworth and Northney and Tye Village Design Statements  
 
By Design: Urban Design in the Planning System  CABE (2000)  
 
Secured by Design  is described as a police initiative (specifically the Association of Chief 
Police Officers) which has the backing of the Home Office and the Department of 
Communities and Local Government. The aim is to encourage the building industry to adopt 
crime prevention measures in  the design of developments to assist in reducing the 
opportunity for crime and the fear of crime. More information is contained on the Association 
of Chief Police Officers (ACPO) run website www.securedbydes ign.com/ . The principles of 
Secured By Design, which are commonly referred to are set out here 
www.securedbydesign.com/pdfs/SBD -principles.pdf  
 
In addition the government has produced  Safer Places: The Planning System and Crime 
Prevention  (2004). This focuses on crime prevention and ways of promoting community 
safety through good design and the planning system. This document is found on  
http://www.communities.gov.uk/publications/planningandbuilding/saferplaces  
 
Manual for Streets  Department of Transport (2007)  
 
Urban Design Compendium 1  Homes and Communities Agency (2000)  
 
Urban Design Compendium 2  Homes and Communities Agency (2007)  
 
Buildings for Life Assessments  CABE  
 
CABE Successful Masterplanning  a guide for clients  
 
Safer Places: The Planning System and Crime Prevention  DCLG (2005)  
 
Planning and access for disabled people: a good practice guide  DCLG 2003  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 85   
Hampshire and Isle of Wight Wildlife Trust – Solent Wader and Brent Goose Project  this 
details the emerging evidence on the habitats that support Brent geese and waders in the 
borough  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 86 
8.    Spatial Distribution and Strategic Sites  
 
Polic y CS17 Concentration and Distribution of Development within the  
Urban Areas  
 
Development will be permitted that makes the most effective use of land in the borough 
by granting planning permission that:  
 
1. Concentrates new housing, employment, retail, leisure an d other development within 
the five urban areas of Havant, Leigh Park, Waterlooville, Emsworth and Hayling 
Island, as shown on the  Proposals Map.  
2. Prioritises development on previously developed land, including  redundant, derelict 
or underused land and buil dings within the urban area . 
3. Broadly distributes the new housing and employment development in the five areas 
of the borough as indicated on the Spatial Distribution Map (Key Diagram) . 
 
Development in the non -urban areas will only be permitted if it is con sistent with the 
policies for the countryside set out in national policy.  
 
8.01 The overall character of the borough is largely urbanised. There are less developed parts of the 
borough on Hayling Island and between the main settlements on the mainland, som e of which 
are still actively farmed. The Core Strategy identifies the most suitable areas for growth and 
development to meet the requirements set out for the borough in t he South East Plan . The 
priority for locating new development is in the existing urba n areas where there are existing 
facilities to use and new development would have least impact on the range of highly protected 
biodiversity designations.  
 
8.02 The South East Plan  defines built up and urbanised places as the urban areas . There is a 
nation al presumption that development should be concentrated in these areas . The areas 
beyond the urban areas (previously countryside) are now defined as non -urban areas. The 
boundary definition for the urban and non -urban areas is identified on the  Proposals Ma p. 
 
8.03 The c ouncil has undertaken a number of assessments to understand and evaluate the 
development capacity of the borough’s urban areas. The assessments included the Strategic 
Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA), the Employment Land Review (E LR), the Open 
Spaces Plan, the Landscape Sensitivity Assessment and the Sustainability Appraisal. Despite 
prioritising future developments within the existing urban areas, it is clear that these areas 
cannot fully accommodate the housing and employment gro wth targets. As a result, the council 
has concluded that the urban areas must be extended in order to meet the South East Plan 
development requirements. The urban areas identified on the Proposals Map incorporate the 
strategic site urban extensions. Additi onal urban extensions will be identified in the 
Development Delivery (Allocations) Plan. The urban area will therefore be revised as part of that 
plan.  
 
8.04 The Spatial Distribution Map (Key Diagram)  Figure 8.1  shows the five areas of the borough and 
how the housing and employment development  required by the South East Plan  will be 
distributed. The housing numbers are shown as a range in order to comply with the 
requirements of PPS3 for a flexible supply of housing land and ensure that the South East Plan  
target of 6 ,300 homes is met . These potential sites have been identified in the Strategic 
Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA). The housing figures do not include windfalls.  
 
8.05 The spatial distribution has taken account of a wide variety of res earch evidence, stakeholder 
comments and the actual availability of sites. The Core Strategy sets out the overall distribution Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 87 of development. The detailed allocation of all types of sites will follow in the Development 
Delivery (Allocations) Plan.  
 
8.06 Whilst the Development Delivery (Allocations) Plan will identify the majority of the housing, 
employment and other types of development, the Core Strategy identifies five strategic sites that 
are fundamental to the delivery of the overall vision, although only providing a proportion of the 
overall housing and employment requirements.  
 
8.07 All the major sites in the borough were considered in relation to their potential to be identified as 
strategic sites. There are potential sites that are of a similar size to the strategic sites (at least 
250 dwellings or 5,000 square  metres of other uses)  that have not been identified as strategic. 
This is because strategic sites are not just about size.  They have been identified because they 
are strategically important in re lation to the majority of the seven key themes  of the Core 
Strategy. As such they are critical to achieving the borough’s vision up to 2026.  
 
Policy CS1 8 Strategic Site Delivery  
 
The strategic sites  are critical to achieving  the Core Strategy  vision. The council will 
permi t development at the following s trategic sites in accordance with the Development 
Requirements set out in the strategic site profiles : 
 
1. Havant Public Service  Village  
2. Havant Thicket Reservoir  
3. Dunsbury Hill Farm  
4. Major Development Area  and Waterlooville  Town Centre Integration  
5. Woodcroft Farm  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 88 Figure 8.1: Spatial Distribution Map (Key Diagram)  
 
Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 89 STRATEGIC SITE PROFILE  
Site Location:  
Site 1  Havant Public Service Village  
 
 
 
 
Why is this site 
critical to 
achieving the 
Core Strategy 
vision?  The area including the Civic Offices site is critical to achieving the Core 
Strategy vision because it is integral to the successful regeneration of 
Havant Town Centre and its wider surrounding area. The site is an 
important gateway site to the town and s ustainably located close to Havant 
railway and bus stations. The creation of a Public Service Village , that 
brings together all the public service offerings in a single location close to 
the town centre , is a top priority for the council. This strategic br ownfield 
site will be better utilised through intensification of uses and activities. It will 
also include significant investment in improved pedestrian links and 
improvements in the appearance of the public realm.  
Essential to the delivery of the Public Service Village and working in a more 
sustainable and energy efficient way is the principle of smarter and more 
flexible working, which is made possible through advances and 
improvements to information and communication technologies . This is Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 90 linked to Core  Strategy Policy CS2 Employment.  
Type of 
development:  
 Mixed use development to include front -line functions of public service 
providers, office, leisure uses, housing, car parking and health related 
functions. Potential for inclusion of a new cultural fa cility adjacent to the 
Civic Offices.  
Key site 
constraints:   Site is currently in active use and careful phasing will be essential to 
deal with decanting issues  
 Connections to the town centre and adjacent areas such as Havant 
College and Leigh Park are poo r and will require investment to fund 
highways and public realm improvements  
 Site forms a northern gateway and will require high quality design 
treatment to frame the approach to the town centre  
 Site accommodates significant amounts of car parking includin g public 
pay and display and council parking for staff and councillors  
 Protection of existing trees of tree preservation order quality  
 Strong partnerships with a range of public service providers will be 
needed to maximise the potential redevelopment oppor tunity and create 
an effective Public Service Village concept  
 The site lies within a Class 2 Radon Affected Area. This is currently 
considered to be a low risk and therefore no specific radon protective 
measures are considered necessary  
 Existing buildings contain asbestos, which will need to be appropriately 
treated  
 The location of existing sewers and pumping mains will need to be 
considered as part of any development  
Infrastructure:  
  The site is located within easy walking distance of Havant railway and 
bus station and local bus stops  
 Existing road and rail infrastructure give users of the site a perception of 
being cut off from the town centre and to other important sites such as 
Havant College  
Development 
requirements:   Refurbishment of existing buildin gs to allow for additional public services 
to be provided on site  
 Potential new buildings to make the most of under utilised brownfield 
land  
 Provision for improved leisure offer  
 Provision for improved healthcare facilities  
 Provision of improved pedestrian  routes across the site to increase 
connectivity to local area  
 Improved pedestrian crossings to access the site from Havant town and 
railway station, Havant College and Leigh Park on Elmleigh Road and 
Petersfield Road  
 Attractive landscape setting including  mature trees and hedgerows 
should be retained and integrated into development proposals where 
possible  
 Incorporate renewable energy technology on the site with potential to 
connect to a wider district energy scheme  
 General improvements in quality and ease  of access to public transport 
will be required along with green travel plans for all organisations on the 
site 
 Improved layout and more efficient use of car parking  
 Design out crime through the principles set out in Secure By Design  
 Refurbishment and exte nsion of existing Civic Offices to include 
improvements to exterior appearance to create a landmark feature  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 91  All buildings and access routes to and within the Public Service Village 
should aim to meet current Disability Discrimination Act requirements 
and t o be fit for purpose  
 Potential for railway footbridge to be improved in terms of appearance 
and accessibility. Opportunity for a landmark design to act as a visual 
gateway to Havant town, the Public Service Village, Havant College and 
Leigh Park  
 Opportuni ty for public art to mark the entrance to the Civic Centre and to 
act as a gateway to the town  
 All new development to use sustainable design and construction 
techniques and technologies  
 Investment in digital infrastructure through the provision of high -speed 
broadband and a Wi-Fi network will facilitate the development of 
knowledge -based businesses on the site  
 
Delivery and 
phasing:   Havant Borough Council and Hampshire County Council have secured 
£5.1 million funding from the Department for Children, Scho ols and 
Families (D fCSF) to extend and enhance the existing Civic Offices to 
provide improved facilities and additional service to the community. This 
work is scheduled to begin in 2010 and to be completed by 2011/2012  
 Her Majesty’s (HM) Court Service buil ding has been declared surplus to 
use and this building could come forward for redevelopment or a change 
of use in the next five years  
 Havant Health Centre and the NHS Care Trust are exploring options for 
their future, which includes potential modernisatio n of their facilities. This 
would take place in the next five years  
 Havant Leisure Centre will require renovations in the next ten to fifteen 
years. Havant Borough Council intends to produce a leisure strategy in 
the next five years in coordination with H orizon Leisure Trust to explore 
the options for the building ’s future   
 Further information on delivery and phasing is contained in the Havant 
Public Service Village Supplementary Planning Document (SPD), which 
was a dopted in February 2010  
Signposting:  The Havant Borough Council website provides further details on the 
Havant Public Service Villag e: www.havant.gov.uk/havant -10771  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 92  
STRATEGIC SITE PROFILE  
Site Location:  
Site 2  Havant Th icket Reservoir   
 
 
 
Why is this 
site critical to 
achieving the 
Core Strategy 
vision?  Portsmouth Water Company has identified a winter storage reservoir as a 
key infrastructure requirement to meet the demand for increased water 
supply in South Hampshire. The reservoir and adjacent greenspace also 
have major leisure and recreation potential which complements Staunton 
Country Park with significant benefits for health and wellbeing.  
 
Approximately half of the site is situated in East Hampshire District. It is  
understood that East Hampshire District Council will also designate the site 
as strategic in their forthcoming Core Strategy.  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 93  
This site is located close to Dunsbury Hill Farm strategic site. The linked 
development of all these  sites will maximise the mu ch needed regeneration 
of this area.  
Type of 
development:  Winter storage reservoir comprising recreational provision including visitor 
centre and nature conservation.  
Key site 
constraints:   An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) leading to the producti on of 
an environmental statement is required in accordance with Schedule 2 of 
the Town and Country Planning Act (Environmental Impact Assessment) 
(England and Wales) Regulation 1999  
 Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation (SINC) within or adjacent to 
the site  
 The adjacent Sir George Staunton Conservation Area, including The 
Avenue and the registered park and garden of special historic interest 
(grade II*  listed building ) 
 Areas of ancient semi -natural woodland and planted woodland  
 Great Copse (in relatio n to routeing of the pipeline).  
Infrastructure:  
  Operational infrastructure including pipelines, embankments, slipway and 
buildings  
 The enhancement of an existing forestry road off the B2149 to provide 
access to the reservoir perimeter  
 Construction of a new junction on the B2149 to provide the main access  
 Provision of 125 car parking spaces  
 A network of footpaths and cycle paths which connect to existing public 
and permissive paths in the neighbouring area  
 Renewable energy infrastructure  
Development 
requirements:   The development must be sustainable, fully -maintained and cost -effective 
and deliver environmental and community benefits  
 The use of the reservoir for recreation should complement existing 
provision in the borough and become an attraction for  local communities  
 The use of the water should be limited to supervised, water -based 
activities such as canoeing and kayaking  
 The reservoir should provide additional leisure opportunities which 
complement existing provision in the borough and help attract more day 
visitors to Staunton Country Park  
 Recreational provision should be appropriate to the countryside location 
and should not include any motorised activities  
 Green infrastructure links between  the rest of  Leigh Park  and Dunsbury 
Hill Farm will be enh anced  
 Construction traffic should be minimised in Leigh Park, Rowlands Castle 
and other residential areas  
 Public vehicular traffic should be restricted within the site and confined to 
the vicinity of the main access  
 Vehicular access is expected from the B2149 outside the borough  
 Recreation provision should include a network of paths for walking, cycling 
and horse -riding and the potential for links with the Riders Lane and 
Hermitage Stream Corridors should be considered  
 Access and the surfacing of paths sh ould take account of the needs of all  
 Natural and rural character should be conserved in particular by limiting 
impacts on biodiversity including the creation of additional habitats; 
compensating for the loss of, and effects on, sites of importance for nat ure 
conservation, the listed park and conservation area; enhancing adjacent 
sites of importance for nature conservation; ensuring that the pipeline Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 94 avoids Great Copse , which should be protected during construction; 
integrating the reservoir and the new lan dscape with the historic 
landscape of the Sir George Staunton Conservation Area and existing 
woodland; minimising  the loss of ancient woodland and trees  
 The potential impacts on the Langstone and Chichester Harbours as well 
as the Hermitage Stream should b e minimi sed in terms of ecology, water 
quality and flow effects  
 Opportunities for biodiversity enhancements associated with  the reservoir 
and the Hermitage Stream should be realised  wherever possible  
 The risk of flooding during storm events should be full y assessed in a flood 
risk assessment and mitigation put in place to minimise all risks  
 The proposal should realise the potential for renewable energy dependent 
on nature conservation and other site constraints  
 Regeneration opportunities arising from the n ew pipe works between the 
reservoir and the water works must enhance the habitats, recreation 
opportunities and cycle and pedestrian accessibility along the stream 
corridors  
Delivery and 
phasing:  The proposal will be delivered through a masterplan and a joint planning 
application submitted to Havant Borough and East Hampshire District 
Councils. The application will be supported by a full range of documents 
including a code of construction practice to mitigate impacts.  
 
Phasing  
The development of Havant Th icket Reservoir will be phased over a period of 
approximately ten years after the granting of planning permission to enable 
appropriate environmental mitigation and preparatory work to take place.  An 
indicative phasing programme for the delivery of Havant  Thicket Reservoir 
starting with the grant of planning permission is as follows:  
 Initial environmental mitigation and early preparatory work – 2 years  
 Site preparation – 3 years  
 Main construction phase – 3 years  
 Filling and commissioning – 2 to 3 years  
 
Funding  
The reservoir and related infrastructure will be funded by Portsmouth Water . 
The whole package of benefits must be enhanced by partnership working 
with a range of organisations whose own funds can b e focused on delivering 
a wide range of benefits fo r the wider community .  
Signposting:  The Havant Thicket Winter Storage Reservoir  website provides information 
on the public consultation undertaken in 2008, the Environmental Impact 
Assessment Scoping, newsletters and maps: 
www.havantthicketreservoir.co.uk/   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 95  
STRATEGIC SITE PROFILE  
Site Location:  
Site 3  Dunsbury Hill Farm  
 
 
 
Why is this 
site critical to 
achieving the 
Core Strategy 
vision?  Dunsbury Hill Farm is a key strategic employmen t site for the b orough and the 
wider sub -region, which will form a new businesses gateway to South 
Hampshire from the A3(M). The creation of a high quality business and 
technology park with excellent transport connections will deliver a large 
number of job s in close proximity to Leigh Park. It will provide new first class 
employment floorspace for start -up and growing businesses. It could provide Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 96 approximately 60,000 square metres of new employment floorspace . This is 
about a third of the total requirement for new employment in the borough up 
to 2026.  
Type of 
development:  Major new employment site focused on knowledge -based businesses and a 
quality hotel with conference facilities.  
Key site 
constraints:   Dunsbury Hill Farm is located outside the built  up ar ea between Havant 
and Waterlooville  
 The Hermitage Stream runs to the south west of the site and the adjoining 
area is located within Flood Zone 3 and is subject to fluvial flooding  
 The development should accord with the Water Framework Directive and 
not impact on surface water run -off during construction or after completion  
 Capacity has been confirmed but not reserved for foul and surface water 
sewerage and requisition for connection will be required  
 The site is located adjacent to three Sites of Importanc e to Nature 
Conservation (SINC) namely Beech Wood East, Cherry Tree Row and 
Bushy Lease  
 There are a number of trees of significant amenity value that are worthy of 
protection both within and adjacent to the strategic site  
 High voltage overhead power lines and a mains gas pipeline run through 
some of the site  
 Part of the site overlies a former landfill site containing inert construction 
waste from the A3(M) and appropriate risk assessments should be carried 
out 
Infrastructure:  
  The site is located close to junction 3 of the A3(M). Involvement with the 
Highways Agency and Hampshire County Council is ongoing with regard 
to detailed highway access and demand. Reference is made to Dunsbury 
Hill Farm in the Transport Mitigation Report produced by Havant Borough 
Council in 2009  
 The proposed cross borough transport route will link Dunsbury Hill Farm to 
other strategic sites and Havant Town Centre  
 Liaison will be required with the main utility providers, in particular 
Portsmouth Water, who will be constructing a lar ge, open storage 
reservoir at Havant Thicket during the plan period  
 Investment in digital infrastructure through the provision of high -speed 
broadband will facilitate the development of knowledge -based businesses 
on the site  
 High quality green infrastructu re benefits people working and living in the 
local area. Park Lane is a well used bridleway and the provision of other 
leisure routes would link up proposed and existing recreational areas  
Development 
requirements:  
  An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA ) leading to the production of 
an environmental statement is required in accordance with Schedule 2 of 
the Town and Country Planning Act (Environmental Impact Assessment) 
(England and Wales) Regulation 1999  
 The EIA is required to contain landscape, habitat  and aboricultural impact 
assessments, a flood risk assessment and noise and environmental health 
assessments  
 No more than 20% of the new employment floorspace will be for B8 
storage and distribution as defined in the Use Class es Order 2005  
 80% of the new employment floorspace can be split flexibly between B1 
business and B2 general industrial uses as defined in the Use Classes 
Order 2005  
 B1(a) uses will be acceptable on the site providing a sequential test has 
been carried out to ensure there are no suita ble sites in the town centres  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 97  Provision of a quality hotel with conference facilities  
 Provision of start -up and move -on accommodation and flexible space  
 Creation of an enterprise centre of at least one hectare  
 A legal agreement will be sought for a scheme to train local people as one 
component of site delivery  
 The Dunsbury Hill Farm development will be an exemplar for sustainable 
construction and design. All commercial buildings constructed on the site 
before 2012 will be required to achieve at least BREEAM  ‘very good’ 
standard and all commercial buildings constructed after 2012 will be 
required to achieve at least BREEAM ‘excellent’ standard.  
 The development will contribute to the PUSH target of delivering 100MW 
of renewable energy by 2020 by maximising on -site renewable energy 
production and resource efficiency  
 The design of the new buildings, particularly their bulk and orientation, will 
respect and enhance the character of their woodland location outside the 
built up area  
 The layout of the site will provi de an accessible, safe and permeable 
environment fully integrated with its surroundings  
 Park Lane will be enhanced as a leisure route and be provided with a 
metalled surface for use by cyclists and pedestrians  
 Green infrastructure links between Havant Thic ket Reservoir and 
Dunsbury Hill Farm will be enhanced  
 Entrance to the site from the A3(M) should incorporate a dramatic gateway 
feature  
 A long -term management plan will manage operations both within the site 
and the surrounding area  
 Provision of a minimum 150 to 180  metre wide landscaped gap between 
the A3(M) and the development  
 Provision of woodland ‘fingers’ extending eastwards into the development 
from Beech Wood  
 Enhancement of the Hermitage Stream Corridor with a natural channel 
running through a new we tland feature  
 Highway access and appropriate mitigation measures including demand 
management measures will be provided in accordance with the DfT 
Circular 02/2007  
 A Transport Impact Assessment will be required in support of the 
development for access from A3(M)  
 A dedicated public transport link is to be provided between residential 
areas to the east and west  
 A green travel plan will be required to demonstrate the measures 
undertaken to maximise the proportion of journeys to and from and within 
the site made  by public transport, cycling and walking  
 Water drainage, including a Sustainable Drainage System (SuDS) and 
flood defence, will be provided in accordance with advice from the 
Environment Agency.  
Delivery and 
phasing:  In order to advance the deliverabilit y of this major employment site a bid for 
Accelerated Development Zone (ADZ) status has been made by PUSH to the 
government.  A bid has also been made to PUSH to fund the designing of the 
highway infrastructure.  
The first phase of the development covers 1 3.2 hectares and covers 75% of 
the original masterplan for the development. It could provide 46,450 sq uare 
metres of employment floorspace and 5,574 sq uare metres of hotel 
floorspace.  The second phase of the development covers the remaining 
seven  hectares  identified in the original masterplan. This could provide an Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 98 additional 15,329 sq uare metres of new employment floorspace.  
A development partnership comprising Havant Borough Council, the 
landowner Portsmouth City Council with the support of SEEDA and th e 
University of Portsmouth, is established to bring about the development  
Signposting:  The development of Dunsbury Hill Farm should take into account the further 
details set out in Dunsbury Hill Farm Development  Brief produced in June 
2007 by Havant Borou gh Council www.havant.gov.uk/havant -8884  and 
Dunsbury Hill Farm: Siting of employment allocation in the strategic gap , 
produced in October 2004 by Rumney Environment Ltd.  
 
SEEDA Website:  www.seeda.co.uk/  
 
 
 
 
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 99 STRATEGIC SITE PROFILE  
Site Location:  
Site 4  Major Development Area (MDA) and Waterlooville Town Centre Integration  
 
Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 100  
 
Why is this site 
critical to 
achieving the 
Core Strategy 
vision?  This complex majo r development proposal is critical to the future of the 
borough because it will create a sustainable u rban extension to 
Waterlooville. I ntegrated with Waterlooville Town Centre  the MDA will form 
the fourth quadrant to the town . The creation of this sustain able community 
could  potentially deliver about 3,000 dwellings (approximately 600 in 
Havant Borough Council boundaries and the remaining 2,400 in 
Winchester City Council boundaries) with associated environmental and 
community infrastructure. The 3000 new h omes includes the R eserve 
Allocation extension , which Winchester City Council is considering 
allocating as part of their LDF. The MDA is physically connected to 
Waterlooville Town Centre , which provides an opportunity for major mixed -
use redevelopment and will effectively integrate the proposed sustainable 
urban extension into the heart of the existing town centre.  It should be 
noted however that the development of the MDA is not dependant on 
bringing forward the wider integration project but should facilit ate future 
integration with the town centre . 
Type of 
development:  
 The strategic site allocation covers two separate but physically connected  
proposals:  
 The Major  Development Area (MDA) is being  comprehensively planned 
to create a mixed use new community  comprising  approximately 3,000 
dwellings,  employment land and associated physical and community 
infrastructure  
 The critical point of the masterplan is to ensure the integration of the 
MDA with a changing  town centre that will bring forward opportunities 
for creating a place where people can live, work and play sustainably  
 The Town Centre Integration Project is subject to a masterplan jointly 
commissioned  by developers, Hampshire County Council, Winchester 
City Council and Havant Borough Council. The mast erplan promotes the 
redevelopment of the existing retail supermarket (Asda) and the 
provision of a range of new uses including retail and office units, 
residential, commercial leisure uses and the realignment of pedestrian 
connections from the town centre through the proposed redevelopment 
to the MDA  
 In addition to the Asda site the existing Wellington Retail Park  is poorly 
connected to  the town centre and proposals to improve the integration of 
this area with both the town centre and the MDA are important  to the 
place making challenge for Waterlooville  
Key site 
constraints:  The Major Development Area:  
 Adequacy of the  drainage system in the locality  
 Adequacy of the  electricity supply  
 Height  of the water table  
 Existing public footpath  and bridleway  routes  
 Parts of site in flood zones 2 and 3  
 Archaeological interest  
 Potential land contamination  
 Impact on St John’s Conservation Area  
 Impact on House at Plant Farm (grade II Listed B uilding)  
 Impact on Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation (SINC)  
 Impact on protected species.  
 Protection of groundwater sources  
 The relationship between the town centre and Maurepas Way making 
integration difficult  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 101  Important woodland areas, trees and hedgerows  
The Town Centre Integration Project:  
 The town centre does not relate well to  the MDA due to the  dual 
carriageway , town centre ring road acting as barrier to effective 
integration  
 The development opportunity requires the commitment and collaboration 
of key property interests  to ensure satisfactory integration with the MDA  
 Land assembly of a variety of small sites is necessary to make a 
comprehensive solution possible  
 Existing community uses on the site will need to be re -provided  
 Ground levels across the site pose difficult urban design and 
architectural problems  
 Existing to wn centre parking needs to be provided for during 
redevelopment  
Infrastructure:  
 The Major Development Area:  
Transport infrastructure  is subject to further  ongoing  Transport 
Assessment work  and should include:  
 Main access from the Maurepas Way/Hamble don Road enlarged 
roundabout  
 Southern access junction with A3 at Ladybridge Roundabout  
 Hambledon Road signalised junction north of Sunnymead Drive and 
Hambledon Road priority junction south of Sunnymead Drive to car 
parking only  
 Milk Lane – vehicular acces s – subject to a suitable detailed junction 
design coming forward  
 Highway improvements to Stakes Road/Stakes Hill Road/Purbrook Way 
extension/Crookhorn Lane Roundabout; College Road/Purbrook Way 
extension and Hulbert Road /Frendstaple Road/Tempest Avenue 
Roundabout for adequate access  
 Contributions to highway improvements at London Road/Hulbert Road 
roundabout and Hulbert Road/Purbrook Way/Asda roundabout  
 Highway improvements and/or contributions towards the A3(M) between 
J3 and J5  
 Toucan road crossings whe re required  
 New electricity system transformer to provide a circuit for the sustainable 
future of the development  
 Cycle route connections to local secondary schools  
The Town Centre Integration Project:  
 Radical changes to Maurepas Way, the town centre ring  road, to reduce 
traffic speed and enable safe and easy pedestrian and cycle routes 
across the road from the town centre to the MDA  
 Provision of replacement and new car parking to ensure the viability of 
the town centre , for example using basement levels b elow the proposed 
new buildings  
 Public realm improvements linked to the existing town centre  
 Provision for existing community uses on site  
Development 
requirements:  The Major Development Area  is expected to provide:  
 Social, environmental economic and phys ical integration with the 
existing community  
 Approximately 3 ,000 homes potentially including live/work units  
 A target of 40% affordable housing with a 50/50 split on rent and 
intermediate tenures  
 A mix of dwelling types and sizes that will create a mixed a nd balanced Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 102 sustainable community  
 Housing  and non -residential buildings  to be constructed to the 
appropriate levels of Code for Sustainable Homes  and BREAAM 
standards , with aspirations to include  exemplar zero carbo n schemes  
 New employment floorspace  that aims to create jobs for new and 
existing residents so that 25% to 40% of people who live within the MDA 
or within 1.5km of its boundary can work within this area and not 
commute out to work  
 A range of business premises to serve the local or neighbourhood 
market including affordable employment premises  
 A local centre, including convenience store, community building , public 
house  
 Up to two new primary schools  
 A nursery  
 A health cent re/GP facilities  
 Sports facilities and play areas within a large informal open  space  
 Changing facilities and maintenance store  
 A cemetery  
 Allotments  
 Youth facilities including skateboarding facilities  
 The i ncorporat ion of  exemplar quality design in relation to internal and 
external appearance of buildings and sustainable constructio n methods  
 Maximum  integration with the existing town centre and community  
 Integration of the site with the A3 ZIP Bus Priority Corridor  
 Mitigation consideration s in relation to protected species and habitats  
 A3(M) junction improvements triggered at the lev el agreed with the 
Highways Agency  
 Drainage systems that provide a strategy for off -site improvements, 
provision of land for the realignment of watercourses and minimisation of 
any risk of flooding; this should include sustainable urban drainage 
systems wh ere appropriate  
 Development that must protect and where possible enhance the quality 
of the River Wallington to ensure no deterioration in status, as required 
by the Water Framework Directive. Further opportunities for 
enhancement and improvement of the wa ter body should be sought  
 Sewerage capacity required to serve the development by requisitioning 
a connection to the sewerage system at the nearest point of adequate 
capacity  
 Household waste recycling centre  
 Pedestrian and cycle links  within the development  and with the existing 
community and the surrounding countryside  
 Contributions to the passenger transport network  
 Commitment to sustainability and detailed travel plan to encourage 
greener measures of travel  
 Safe routes to school  on and off site  
 Percentage  for art /public realm works  
 Employment skills contribution  
 Leisure/open space contributions  for on site provision  
 Off-site public realm improvem ents 
 The retention of important woodlands, tree belts and hedgerows  
 Mitigation measures to protect important spe cies and habitats  
The Town Centre Integration Project:  
 Provision for existing community uses on site  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 103  High quality routes for pedestrians and cyclists to be provided linking the 
town centre to the MDA  and Wellington Retail Park  
 Replacement supermarket  
 Mixtu re of complementary retail, office, leisure and residential uses 
Floorspace requirements to be agreed as part of current masterplan 
work  
 Traffic impact assessment  
Delivery and 
phasing:  Outline planning permissions were granted for the proposals in January  
2008 , together with a reserved matter approval for part of the northern area 
where development has commenced. For the southern area resubmissions 
are expected in July 2010 , which will take into account the reserve site 
within the Winchester City Council a rea. Delivery plans are in the process 
of being prepared in collaboration with the developers and Winchester City 
Council . There are two primary developers involved in the MDA.  
One Town centre integration option has been  the subject of work  on 
scoping and options  that could form part of a n urban design framework for 
Waterlooville Town Centre. A number of development opportunities in the 
town centre could provide the catalyst for the integration project to align 
with the MDA development.  
Current indicators f rom masterplanning work suggest that although Asda 
accept the principles of relocation of their store and redevelopment of their 
site, the scheme is not considered to be financially viable at present (Feb 
2010) . Concerns about viability are shared by all t he major players in the 
project but it is expected that these will be overcome in due course. The 
masterplan therefore represents a longer term aspiration and interim 
arrangements may well be needed to enable pedestrian and cycles routes 
across the site to  facilitate improved integration with the MDA in the short 
term. Asda have indicated that they are willing to consider such a scheme.  
Signposting:  The following website links through to various documents, other websites 
and committee reports associated wi th the MDA:  
www.havant.gov.uk/havant -6578   
 
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 104  
STRATEGIC SITE PROFILE  
Site Location:  
Site 5  Woodcroft Farm  
 
 
 
 
Why is this site 
critical to 
achieving the 
Core Strategy 
vision?  This site is important in or der to maximise regeneration opportunities in the 
Wecock Farm area of Waterlooville. In addition to this , the size of the site 
and the likely number of homes delivered is significant when considered 
against the overall housing target for the borough.  
Type  of 
development:  
   Residential development (approximately 340 homes)  
  A larger site has been promoted to the neighbouring authorities of 
Winchester City Council and East Hampshire District Council. It is 
therefore possible that the overall site could be la rger than just the 
component within Havant Borough Council’s administrative area. This 
will be considered as part of the individual authorities’ Local 
Development Frameworks. In total the entire site could deliver 
approximately 700 homes.  
Key site 
constra ints:   James Copse woodland adjacent to the site is a SINC  
 There are some trees on the site covered by tree preservation orders  
 The most appropriate access point will be through a school site and the 
principle for this has been established through negotiati ons with 
Hampshire County Council in relation to their partial disposal of the 
Meadowlands  School site.  
Infrastructure:  
  A bus route is adjacent to the site  Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 105  Improvements may be required to the nearby highway network.  
Development 
requirements:   An Environm ental Impact Assessment (EIA) leading to the production of 
an environmental statement is required in accordance with Schedule 2 
of the Town and Country Planning Act (Environmental Impact 
Assessment) (England and Wales) Regulation 1999  
 Development will have  regard to the adjacent SINC designation and 
include measures to prevent unnecessary or inappropriate disturbance 
that may result from residential development in this location  
 Wider regeneration benefits should be identified and delivered  
 Development will have regard to highway impacts beyond the immediate 
site 
 Suitable provision of sports facilities/play space will be provided to offset 
access arrangements through Meadowlands school site  
 Diversion of existing bridleway in order to aid management, child 
supervision and security of amended school site  
 A flood risk assessment will be required as the site is over one hectare 
in size  
 Meet relevant Code for Sustainable Home requirements and provide on 
site renewable energy provision  
 Provision of a mixed community  to include private market housing  
 Tree loss as part of development (including to provide access) will be 
minimised and replacement compensatory planting will be provided on 
the site.  
Delivery and 
phasing:  The owners of the site are keen to develop the si te for housing purposes.  
Should the only viable access be that through the school site then the 
delivery of this site will be dependent on the project being progressed by 
Hampshire County Council in relation to releasing some of the adjacent 
Meadowlands Sc hool site. Positive discussions have been made to ensure 
access is possible and therefore the delivery of the site is considered to be 
achievable.  
The delivery of the section of land in the b orough is not dependent on the 
delivery of further housing alloc ations on the potential extensions to the site 
identified in neighbouring authorities.   
 
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 106 
9.    Infrastructure, Implementation and Monitoring  
Objectives  
 Deliver the full range of infrastructure that is necessary to support the housing, retail and 
emplo yment development identified in the Core Strategy  
 Establish processes to monitor and review the effectiveness of the plan policies up to 
2026 to ensure the objectives are achieved  
 
Delivery Strategy  
9.01 The provision of adequate infrastructure is a funda mental aim of the government to support our 
communities. Having the right infrastructure is critical to making a place somewhere that people 
want to be. The government strategy is based on the principle of manage and invest. This 
means delivering efficienc y through better use of existing infrastructure; reducing demand by 
promoting behavioural change and providing additional capacity by extending or providing new 
infrastructure.  At the sub -regional level these same principles are the basis for the 
PUSH/Tra nsport for South Hampshire (TfSH) transport strategy of ‘Reduce, Manage, Invest’.  
 
9.02 The council must first understand what infrastructure it has and what scope there is for reducing 
the use of it and using it better. Significant research has taken plac e and there is some clarity 
on the choices that face the borough. It is clear that the borough does not work alone in 
delivering any type of infrastructure. All types of infrastructure cross borough boundaries. Many 
types of infrastructure are so large tha t central government will have to deliver them.  As part of 
PUSH, the council  must take advantage of the economies of scale to work in partnership 
effectively focu sing resources towards common objectives, utilising developer contributions, 
growth point fun ding and the many other resource streams that are available in partnership 
working. The Core Strategy strategic allocations and policies require specific provision of 
infrastructure that is required for the wider sub -region, the borough and specific areas.  The 
requirement on the developer to provide the infrastructure will necessitate th at they engage  with 
the range of delivery agencies to ensure compliance with the policy.  The counc il will work with 
the local community to  identify local needs and with deve lopers  and other partners  to co-deliver 
those requirements . The principle of infrastructure delivery is set out in the South East Plan, 
Policy CC7, ‘that where new development creates a need for additional infrastructure a 
programme of delivery should be a greed before development begins’.  
 
9.03 Table 9.1 sets out the different types of infra structure and by whom it is delivered . PUSH can 
bring together a wide range of these delivery bodies; the Local Strategic Partnership will be an 
important focus for coor dinating the constituent organisations plans fundamental to the spatial 
planning of the borough. The existing delivery structures at national, regional and local levels 
must be improved to ensure that existing infrastructure is used effectively and that ne w or 
improved provision is delivered when and where it is required. New methods of delivery will be 
required, for example PUSH is considering setting up an Energy Service Company (ESCO) to 
deliver renewable power and heat . The delivery of green infrastruct ure will need a new way of 
working and the council’s priority to improve the connectivity between the west and east of the 
borough by non -car means will be delivered through Hampshire County Council, Transport for 
South Hampshire, H avant Borough Council , private bus companies and developers.  
 
9.04 The funding of the infrastructure is a major issue. The South East Plan Implementation Plan , 
October 2006 estimates the overall regional infrastructure costs to be £47 billion, at least £2.224 
billion of which is  required in South Hampshire. The county c ouncil ’s Community  Infrastructure 
Study , November 2009  estimates all the non transport infrastructure cost s for South Hampshire 
at £3.65 billion . The Transpor t for South Hampshire strategy, Towards Delivery, April 2008  
estimates that £2.5 billion  is required for the necessary transport infrastructure. The overall 
picture for  South Hampshire is an overall infrastructure cost of £6.15 billion . 
 Havant Borough Core Strategy  March 2011  
 107 9.05  Monitoring the performance of the LDF policies and the effectiveness  of the partnerships 
delivering infrastructure will be undertaken through the Annual Monitoring Report and the 
national performance management system of the Comprehensive Area Assessments (CAA s), 
Local Area Agreements (LAA s) and Multi -Area Agreements (MAA s). This performance 
management system will show how well the infrastructure delivery bodies are joined up and be 
used to allocate government funding. The c ouncil will therefore prioritise its resources to 
achieving the performance management system targets  to ensure that the available funding 
streams are maximised and that the borough is a place where people want to live , work and 
play.  
 
Table 9.1 – Core Strategy Definition of Infrastructure  (from the South East Plan)   
 
Infrastructure 
Category  Infrastructur e types  Delivered by 
1. Transport  Airports, ports, road network, cycling 
and walking infrastructure, rail network  BAA, Port Authorities, Department for 
Transport, Highways Agency, Hampshire 
County Council, Transport for South Hampshire, 
SUSTRANS, Network Rail, rail companies, 
Havant Borough Council  
2. Housing  Affordable housing  Homes and Communities Agency, Portsmouth 
City Council, affordable housing providers , 
Havant Borough Council,  private developers  
3. Education  Further and higher education ,  
seconda ry and primary education , 
nursery schools , skills training  Department for Children , Schools and Families, 
Hampshire County Council, private sector, third 
sector  
4. Health  Acute care and general hospitals, 
mental hospitals ,  
health centres/primary care tru sts, 
ambulance services  NHS, Primary Care trusts, Hampshire County 
Council, third sector, private sector  
5. Social 
Infrastructure  Supported accommodation ,  
social and community facilities , 
sports centres , 
open spaces, parks and play space  Affordable housi ng providers , Hampshire 
County Council, Havant Borough Council , 
private sector  
6. Green 
Infrastructure  See definition in box following Policy 
CS13 note that this may encompass the 
management of access on new or 
existing Green Infrastructure.  Natural Engla nd, Environment Agency, 
Chichester Harbour Conservancy, SUSTRANS, 
Hampshire County Council, PUSH, Havant 
Borough Council,  third sector, utility companies, 
private sector  
7. Public 
Services  Waste management and disposal ,  
libraries , cemeteries , emergency 
services (police, fire, ambulance) , 
places of worship , prisons, drug 
treatment centres , public  toilets  Prison  Service, Hampshire County Council, faith 
groups, Havant Borough Council , private sector  
8. Utility 
Services  Gas supply , electricity supply , heat 
supply , water supply , waste water 
treatment , telecommunications 
infrastructure  (particularly high speed 
Broadband)  Utility companies, Hampshire County Council  
9. Flood 
Defences  
 Flood and erosion protection, resistance 
and resilience  Department for Envir onment, Food and Rural 
Affairs, Environment Agency, Hampshire 
County Council,  Havant Borough Council , 
private sector and individuals  
10. Public 
Realm  Public spaces between buildings – 
includes transport and green 
infrastructure features plus hard and 
soft landscape, street furniture 
(including lighting)  Hampshire County Council,  Havant Borough 
Council , private sector  Havant Borough Core Strategy March 2011  
  
 108 
 
9.06 The Core Strategy has distinct policies on transport and non -transport infrastructure. This is 
because the evidence has been collec ted separately although they are inextricably linked and 
must be delivered together.  
Policy CS1 9 Effective Provision of Infrastructure  
 
Development will be permitted where:  
 
1. It ensures that it makes the most effective use of existing infrastructure, inclu ding 
opportunities for co -location of facilities.  
2. It ensures that if there is a proven need for additional infrastructure, a programme 
of delivery has been agreed with the relevant infrastructure provider that 
coordinates contributions from the development  with other investment streams 
before development begins . 
3. A programme of delivery of improved or new infrastructure needs to be agreed ; the 
nature, scale and phasing of any infrastructure will be commensurate with the form 
of the development and its potent ial impact upon the surrounding area.  
4. A programme of delivery of improved or new infrastructure is agreed so that the 
facilities being provided are accessible by a range of transport modes and meet the 
needs of the borough’s community . 
5. It promotes the crea tive multifunctional use of existing and proposed facilities.  
6. It ensures that new infrastructure supports the local economy.  
7. It ensures that decisions on the provision of infrastructure are taken on the basis of 
whole -life costing.  
8. It safeguards the requi rements of infrastructure providers, in particular relating to 
bus corridor enhancements, telecommunications equipment  (particularly  high 
speed b roadband) , electricity power lines, high pressure gas mains, educational 
facilities , particularly those due for  improvement under Building Schools for the 
Future, health facilities at Oak Park*, flood protection measures, aquifer protection 
areas, a winter storage reservoir at Havant Thicket *, additional water treatment 
infrastructure  at Kingscroft Farm * and Bedham pton Springs * in Bedhampton and 
waste water treatment works at Budds Farm *. 
9. It does not result in the loss of flood protection, education, health, social and other 
publicly -provided community buildings, structures or services, except where it is 
part of a service provider’s plans to provide improved local services in equally 
accessible locations.  
 
 * as shown on the Proposals Map   
Where else to look:  
 
The South East Plan Implementation Plan (October 2006)  and the annexes:  
Provide an overview of what is required in terms of strategic infrastructure and 
how it might be delivered.  
 
In promoting the leve ls of growth in the PUSH area a sub-regional background 
document on infrastructure  was undertaken to show the existing capacity . 
  
Havant Borough Counci l’s Infrastructure Background Paper  (July 2007) :  
Details where there is existing capacity and specific areas where investment 
may b e required.  
 
Hampshire County Council has produced a Community Infrastructure Study :  That Havant Borough Core Strategy March 2011  
  
 109 
Bosmere Health Centre  9.07 In South Hampshire and in the borough  in particular we have good existing infrastructure 
netwo rks. The new development proposed in the Core Strategy will put increased pressure on 
those infrastructure networks, especially when combined with all the other proposals in the sub -
region. Research has shown that in general there is existing capacity in m ost infrastructures. 
The main areas of concern are water supply, waste water treatment, strategic road network 
capacity, telecommunications, cultural and community facilities and the provision of green 
infrastructure to mitigate the impact of the growth on  designated habitats.  
 
9.08 The Core Strategy addresses the infrastructure concerns most directly through the strategic site 
allocations at Havant Thicket reservoir to provide water and green infrastructure and the Public 
Service Village providing cultura l and community facilities. The strategic sites at Dunsbury Hill 
Farm and Waterlooville will provide public transport improvements to reduce vehicular traffic on 
the strategic road network, as well as jobs and green infrastructure. Waste water is mainly 
processed at Budds Farm, which has capacity for some new development;  however some 
development in Emsworth is processed at Thornham sewage treatment works where there is 
limited capacity.  
 
9.09 All the policies  of the Core Strategy contribute to the provisi on 
of infrastructure, for example requiring all types of 
development to be sustainably constructed so reducing the 
need for energy, water use and waste, supporting healthy 
lifestyles that will reduce the need for health infrastructure; 
reducing the need to  travel by car by locating development 
close to existing facilities and caring for our borough so that 
there is green infrastructure and a sense of place  and 
safeguarding infrastructure (as shown on the Proposals Map) . 
 
9.10 Details of the infrastructure t hat will be delivered over the plan period in terms of when and how 
it will be provided is set out in the Strategic Infrastructure Implementation Table  (Table 9.2  at 
the end of this chapter ). 
 
Policy CS 20 Transport and Access Strategy  
 
Development will be permitted that : 
 
1. Is consistent with and contributes to the implementation of the ‘Reduce, Manage and 
Invest’ strategy.  
2. Does not increase  congestion and promotes better use of existing transport 
networks .  
3. Improves accessibility to goods, services and emplo yment and promotes equality in 
the transport system.  
4. Provides transport management measures to ensure the safe and efficient operation 
of the strategic and local road network.  
5. Ensures that highway design responds positively to the characteristics of the ar ea 
and delivers a high quality public realm for all users.  
6. Maintains or improves the range of transport modes accessible to the users of the 
development site with specific emphasis on public transport, especially high 
quality/frequency buses and includ es walking and cycling where appropriate.  assesses the non -transport infrastructure requirements to support the proposed new 
development.  
 
The South East Regional Partnership Board  has produced a number of guides, including 
one on transport infrastructure.  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy March 2011  
  
 110 
A3(M)  
Havant rail station  7. Improves highway, cycling and pedestrian links between the western  built  up area of 
the borough (Waterlooville) and the eastern area of the borough (centred on Havant) 
to create a strong east/west communication axis th at passes through Dunsbury Hill 
Farm/Leigh Park.   
 
9.11 The growth planned for the PUSH sub -region means demand for travel in South Hampshire will 
increase, adding pressures to the existing transport networks. The new housing and 
employment planned for the  borough means that the economic vitality and growth will be 
accompanied by more travel , much of it likely to be by car , with the consequent impacts on the 
environment. At the same time, growth in levels of activity at the international gateways  at 
Southam pton International Airport and the ports of Portsmouth and Southampton, will  increase .  
The Hindhead Tunnel could also increase traffic. It is clear that transport issues will be a major 
consideration for the future and must be addressed now.  
 
9.12 Transpo rt for South Hampshire (TfSH)  undertake strategic transport planning across the sub -
region in close cooperation with the respective highways and transport authorities, notably 
Hampshire County Council through the Local Transport Plan . TfSH is a sister part nership to 
PUSH and works closely with PUSH to deliver the sub -regional transport infrastructure. The 
TfSH Strategy (Towards Delivery) sets out issues and priorities for the area in the context of 
planned growth. This is a significant challenge for transpo rt. The TfSH strategy is based on the 
concept of Reduce  (the need to travel, particularly by car) , Manage  (how and when we travel) 
and Invest  (in new ways to help us travel).  
 
9.13 The b orough plays an important role in the regional/sub -regional transport network, having high 
transport connectivity with adjoining areas. In the PUSH sub -region Portsmouth and 
Southampton are major transport hubs and Havant is a significant transport interchange. 
Vehicular transport has a major impact on climate change because  it produces significant 
amounts of greenhouse gases. The importance of the car to our society will remain strong for 
the foreseeable future and therefore measure s will be put in place to enable people to have 
more transport choice, with the aim of reducin g car use.  
 
9.14 The improved choices and mitigation measures needed to 
offset the impacts of increased car use will largely be delivered 
at a sub -regional/ county level, although developer 
contributions has a major local role, particularly in improving 
local walking and cycling facilities.  
 
9.15 The borough is in some ways dominated by the A27 and 
A3(M) (the strategic road network), supplemented by adjacent 
key routes, principally the A3, A259 and A3023; the A3(M) 
bisecting Waterlooville from the rest of  the borough and the 
A27 ( T) cutting through the coastal fringe. Together with the 
railway lines and stations in the borough the transport 
networks play a part in defining the urban areas. Good 
communications are also a feature of the borough’s relatively 
high levels of in -commuting of higher skilled workers and out -
commuting of lower skilled workers.  
 
9.16 The borough  is well served with regular high -speed train 
services to London Waterloo and Portsmouth and there are 
east-west connections on the Southamp ton-Brighton line , 
calling at Gatwick . A new bus station has been completed in 
Havant Town Centre and is one of the busiest in Hampshire. The A3 Z IP Bus Priority Corridor 
Scheme  from Horndean to Portsmouth was recently completed and has enhanced links to 
Portsmouth for residents and employers west of the A3 (M). The A3 Z IP bus provides excellent Havant Borough Core Strategy March 2011  
  
 111 
north and south bus links with Portsmouth, however, east -west links between Havant and 
Waterlooville need improving. A priority has therefore been identified to deli ver a cross -borough 
public transport route to address this.  
 
 
9.17 The borough' s dominant roads can also be a source  of noise, pollution and congestion. One 
example of this is travelling to and from South Hayling. Hayling Island is home to more than 
17,000 people, but has a limited range of facilities. This results in congestion and pollution along 
the only road onto and off the island (A3023).  There is a small passenger/cycle ferry to 
Portsmouth which could be enhanced to reduce reliance on the A3023.  Other transport  
issues are the congestion caused by the level crossings at Havant , Bedhampton and 
Warblington; the low bridges between north and south Emsworth and the links between Havant 
and Waterlooville and beyond to Queen Alexandra Hospital in Cosham.  
 
9.18 The council has a responsibility to ensure that the new development propos ed in the Core 
Strategy does not undermine the safety of the strategic road network. The council (in 
partnership with Fareham, Gosport, Hampshire County and Portsmouth Councils, Peter Brett 
Associates (PBA) and the Highways Agency)  has produced a study tha t assesses the impact of 
the new development on the strategic road network up to 2026. The study shows the traffic 
increase in the borough to be lower than those in Portsmouth and Fareham and to be within the 
capacity of the junctions.  The PBA study result s include programmed junction improvements 
and the likely benefits that will come from increased investment in buses in the borough, such 
as the premium bus network for the cross borough public transport route identified by TfSH as 
part of the sub -regional  public transport improvements. Whilst the impact of the new 
development on the strategic road network is considered to be within capacity it is essential that 
the increases in traffic that are forecast are mitigated.  The state of the strategic road networ k is 
indicative of the state of the local network that feeds into and from the strategic road network; 
therefore the mitigation measures being proposed will benefit the whole road network.  
 
9.19 In accordance with the ‘Reduce, Manage, Invest’ strategy the HBLDF seeks to reduce the need 
to travel by car by locating new developments where they complement existing uses, for 
example , homes are close to jobs , recreation and bus routes. The strategy for the b orough 
focuses on improving accessibility, addressing t he specific severance issues caused by the 
main roads and rail lines; and ensuring integration of all transport modes and locating new 
development where it can make most effective use of the transport infrastructure in a manner 
that supports and complement s the urban form.  
 Where else to look:  
 
National Policy on sustainable transport is found in a range of documents 
including ‘Delivering A Sustainable Transport System’  – Department for 
Transport (Nov 2008) , PPG13 Transport  and PPS1: Delivering Sustainable 
Development    
 
Transport for South Hampshire (TfSH) has publish ed its strategy ‘ Towards 
Delivery’  on how the transport infrastructure networks will change to meet our 
future travel demands, the levels of investment that will be require d and how 
this could be funded  
  
Harbour Authorities Transport Impact Evaluation Peter Brett Associates  August 2009 :  Sets 
out the levels of traffic growth that are predicted for the Strategic road Netwo rk in Havant, 
Gosport, Fareham and Portsmouth up to 2026 .  A Stage 2  report into the potential mitigation 
measures that could be put in place to address the predicted transport growth  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy March 2011  
  
 112 9.20 Following on from the PBA study a Stage 2 Mitigation Study sets out the range of ‘Reduce, 
Manage, Invest’ options that are being considered in South Hampshire and are considered most 
appropriate for the borough. PUSH is developing t he ‘Reduce’ and ‘Manage’ options including 
the potential for workplace parking levy, hard shoulder bus lanes on the M27 and sub -region -
wide smart traffic light systems in order to address the impact of growth on the sub -regional 
road network. The Stage 2 Mitigation Study identifies the use of the HBLDF policies to ensure  
careful design of development sites, better ways of providing car parking, requiring travel plans 
in new development and discouraging the use of cars by significant public transport 
improve ments and supporting walking and cycling. The options that are currently progressing 
are set out in the Strategic Infrastructure Implementation (Table  9.2 at the e nd of this chapter ). 
 
9.21 The Stage 2 Mitigation Study  provides a starting point from which  the council will produce a  
Sustainable Transport Strategy  to identify the  specific mitigation  opportunities to link new, 
cumulative and existing development to a range of facilities by means other than the car. The 
work will identify specific projects that  will manage the way we travel and the range of partners 
needed to implement the schemes and what funds can be invested  in accordance with PPS12 
paragraphs 4.8 - 4.12. The Sustainable Transport Strategy will be developed as part of the 
Development Delivery  (Allocations) Plan.  Where mitigation is necessary it must be agreed with 
the Highways Agency and the local highway authority.   
 
9.22 The council will work with PUSH, Hampshire County Council, the Havant Local Strategic 
Partnership, developers, infrastruct ure providers and the local community to strengthen their 
involvement in the planning process and work to deliver the infrastructure that the borough 
needs.  The involvement of all the stakeholders must ensure that the:  
 Impact of development is monitored a nd any investment requirements are taken into 
account in future reviews of the Core Strategy  
 Available infrastructure does not remain underused or becomes overloaded as a result of 
major or incremental developments  
 Plans, development proposals and investme nt in new or improved infrastructure are 
coordinated with development  
 Appropriate new sites for operational development identified by the infrastructure 
providers that fall outside the current planning system are safeguarded and where 
necessary allocated i n the Development Delivery (Allocations) Plan 
 Contingency plans are put in place where there is a risk of essential infrastructure not 
being provided.  
 
Implementation  
9.23 Throughout the Core Strategy there is an emphasis on partnership working. This is be cause 
spatial planning is about working with other organisations, companies, developers and the 
community to deliver a joined up approach to achieve the vision of making the borough  a place 
where people want to live, work and play in 2026. There is a range  of organisations with which 
the council will work in partnership . Two of the key partners are Hampshire County Council and 
Portsmouth City Council. The city council is of particular significance to the b orough owing to 
the city’s local economic impacts an d the city council’s major land  owning links. Formal 
partnerships are already in place with Hampshire and Portsmouth Councils through PUSH, 
Transport for South Hampshire , Hampshire Action Teams, Havant Local Strategic Partnership 
and others will need to be  developed with these organisations  and a range of other 
infrastructure providers and stakeholders.  
 
9.24 The council will take a proactive role in building partnerships to bring about joined up working. In 
some circumstances partnerships are not enough – there needs to be a clear policy position 
that will be implemented. The council will , where necessary , consider the use of compulsory 
purchase powers to implement critical developments. This will usually be a last resort and all 
other methods of implementa tion will be explored first.  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy March 2011  
  
 113 9.25 An important implementation policy within the Core Strategy is CS 21 as this policy confirms the 
principle that infrastructure serving the new development must either be provided on  site or that 
a financial contribution wi ll be sought to provide it nearby. It is an established principle that 
councils seek contributions from developers for infrastructure directly associated with a 
development. Some financial contributions are made directly to utility companies who provide 
connections into their systems, e.g. requisitioning of a sewer connection . Developer 
contributions will not be taken to enable developments that would be inappropriate in the first 
instance. A negotiation system, often referred to as  a Section 106  (S106)  agreement, is 
currently used to fund infrastructure improvements. Governments have tried a variety of 
different methods to make the system more consistent and certain for all concerned. The latest 
proposals are for a tariff -based system and for a Community In frastructure Levy (CIL) which 
would be used alongside S 106 agreements. The  benefit  of the C IL is that it will pool funds at a 
regional level that w ill fund larger schemes that individual authorities could n ot afford. The 
council will explore the alternativ e means of dealing with developer contributions as the 
legislation becomes clearer.  
 
Policy CS 21 Developer Requirement s  
 
Development will be permitted if on -site and/or off -site infrastructure requirements are 
met.   
 
Where new or improved infrastructure  is essential for planning permission to be granted 
the council will require the on -site or off site  provision and/or contributions through 
planning obligations, agreements or tariffs in accordance with the relevant legislation for 
off-site provision. The need for contributions will depend on information and advice from 
infrastructure providers on the expected impacts of the development on all the 
infrastructure types.  
 
Where appropriate the council will seek on -site provision or financial contributions to 
ensure the timely off -site or on -site delivery of all types of infrastructure as detailed in 
Table 9.1 under the following headings:  
 
1.  Transport  
2.  Housing  
3.  Education  
4.  Health  
5.  Social Infrastructure  
6.  Green Infrastructure  
7.  Public Service s 
8.  Utility Services  
9.  Flood Defences  
10.  Public Realm  
 
Where on -site provision or financial contributions are made, arrangements for the 
ongoing maintenance of facilities will be required.  
 
Where the necessary contributions are not agreed by the dev eloper, planning permission 
will be refused.  
 
A Supplementary Planning Document will be prepared setting out the mechanisms that 
will be used for taking development contributions together with details of the types and 
priorities of infrastructure provision . 
 
9.26 The council will prepare a Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) setting out a framework of 
mechanisms that will be used to ensure that the timing of the contributions effectively provides Havant Borough Core Strategy March 2011  
  
 114 
the necessary infrastructure when it is needed. The infrast ructure types and their general 
descriptions in Table 9.1 and Policy CS 21 will be expanded upon in the SPD. The necessary 
developer contributions may include a wide interpretation of the types of infrastructure in order 
to respond to the emerging evidence from the Solent Disturbance and Mitigation Project, the 
published recommendations, and future related research. The opportunities for multi -functional 
use of existing and proposed infrastructure must always be considered at the start of any 
development. Th e council will take a leading role in working with developers and infrastructure 
providers to deliver what is needed . The use of independent third party valuation expertise, at 
the developer ’s cost, may be required to find a negotiated solution to develope r requirements.   
 
Monitoring  
9.27 An important part of the Core Strategy is putting in place adequate processes to monitor 
implementation. It is essential to check that the Core Strategy is being implemented 
satisfactorily and to monitor whether the outcomes from its implementation are as intended. The 
main way to check and report on the implementation of the Core Strategy is through the 
production of an Annual Monitoring Report (AMR).  
 
9.28 The council has produced an AMR since 2001 relating to its Local Plans. Recent AMRs have 
included in formation relating to the Havant Borough Local Development Framework (HBLDF) 
process including reporting progress in producing Development Plan Documents (DPDs) set 
against the programme in the Local Development Scheme (LDS). As the various DPDs are 
adopte d the AMR will monitor the objectives, policies and proposals contained within them.  
 
9.29 AMRs have to include a housing trajectory which is a forecast of housing delivery set against 
requirements. Housing delivery is afforded a high priority by the gove rnment and will be a key 
component of monitoring the implementation of the HBLDF. A housing trajectory based on the 
data in the 200 9 AMR is contained in Appendix 2  to this Core Strategy. The trajectory will be 
updated annually in accordance with the update s of the Strategic Housing Land Availability 
Assessments (SHLAA)  and published in the AMR. The council produced its initial SHLAA in 
March 2008. The SHLAA will inform the choices of sites that are available to meet the housing 
target.  
 
9.30 In accordance with national guidance, monitoring will continue to assess progress in achieving 
the plan objectives. The contributions of the policies of the Core Strategy and subsequent D PDs 
in achieving these objectives will also be monitored. Where practicable, target s relating to the 
implementation of policies will be established and progress towards achieving these targets will 
be measured using local and core indicators in the AMR. Where it is shown that the HBLDF 
policies are not delivering the vision for the borou gh then they will be reviewed.  
 
9.31 Whilst the AMR monitors the HBLD F, there is a comprehensive system for monitoring the 
overall impacts of the HBLDF on the wider community objectives and ultimately the vision for 
the borough. The Comprehensive Area Asse ssment (CAA), Local Area Agreement (LAA) and Where else to look:  
 
Government policy and regulations on developer contributions  are available in 
terms of the proposed Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL)  at the government 
communities website  
 
Information on Planning Obligations and Circular 05/2005  which sets out the 
tests for seeking develo per contributions under S106 of the Planning Act  is 
available at the government communities ’ website  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy March 2011  
  
 115 the Multi -Area Agreement (MAA) are mechanisms that all link together to help partnerships to 
be focused on common area based objectives. The processes are also used by government to 
measure the improvements in p lace making of each area and as a mechanism to allocate 
funding.  
 
9.32 The new performance framework for local government has introduced the LAA as a three -year 
statutory agreement between local authorities and central government, setting out priorities fo r 
action to deliver the Sustainable Community Strategy  Forward Together . Havant Borough 
Council is a partner in the Hampshire LAA (2008 -2011). The themes of Forward Together  and 
this Core Strategy are linked to the eight themes of the Hampshire LAA. Within  the themes , 33 
national indicators plus 16 statutory education targets have been selected that will be the focus 
for action. This Core Strategy will need to focus on addressing the relevant targets and progress 
monitored through the AMR.  
 Havant Borough Core Strategy March 2011  
  
 116  
Table 9.2 - Strategic Infrastructure Implementation  
 
 
Infrastructure Type  Project  Lead Provider  Cost / Funding Source  Timing  Progress  
Health  - (Hampshire 
PCT Operational Plan 
2008/09 – approved 
27/03/08)  Bosmere GP Surgery – new 
 Hampshire PCT   2008  Complete  
Cowplai n GP  Surgery 
improvements  
 Hampshire PCT  £525,000  2008/09  Planning permission 
granted  
Havant Health Centre – 
refurbishment , eventually 
replaced in 5  -10 years  
 Hampshire PCT  £1.5m  2010/11   
Oak Park Community Hospital  Hampshire PCT  £800,000 allocated fo r 
equity and equipment.  
£3.075m allocated for 
initial capital programme  2011 
onwards?  Planning permission 
granted  
Havant War Memorial Hospital 
– closure  
 Hampshire PCT  Capital receipt from 
closure and redevelopment 
will be used to improve 
facilities on another site  2011/12  
Emsworth Cottage Hospital – 
closure  
 
 Hampshire PCT  Capital receipt from 
closure and redevelopment 
will be used to improve 
facilities on another site  2011/12  
Education  
 Havant College redevelopment 
– upgrading – 17,200  m2 new  
area Learning and Skills 
Council  £43m (funding frozen by 
government)  2011 
onwards   
Plant Farm - Waterlooville new 
primary school (1)  
 HCC and S106  £6.7m  Earliest  
2010- 2014   
HCC 2009, p .21 
 Rebuilding, remodelling and 
refurbishment.  HCC  (Building 
Schools for the Up to £80m (for Havant 
and Horndean)  Within 5 
years   Havant Borough Core Strategy March 2011  
  
 117 Infrastructure Type  Project  Lead Provider  Cost / Funding Source  Timing  Progress  
 
HCC 2009, p.39   Future programme  – 
funding frozen ) 
Recreational and learning 
facilities associated with the 
proposed Havant Thicket 
Reservoir  HCC, HBC and 
Portsmouth Water 
Company  £2m  
 Planning application 
expected during 
2010  
Community  
HCC 2009,  p.32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Community Centre, Plant 
Farm, Waterlooville  
 
  
 Developer  
 
 £560,000 (est. construction 
cost) S106 agreement with 
developer  
£1.2m    
Improvement of libraries  
Waterlooville, Hava nt, Hayling 
Island and Leigh Park (funding 
programme also includes 
Aldershot)  Lottery funding and 
HCC  The lottery grant funding 
this work across the 5 sites 
is £1,245,804  
  
The County Council is 
providing  £238,668   Work began in 
March 2009  
Water  
HCC 200 9  
 
 
 
 
 Havant Thicket Reservoir 
combined with green 
infrastructure  Portsmouth Water 
Company  £53m  Planning application 
expected prior to 
2026  
Additional water treatment 
infrastructure at Kingscroft 
Farm and Bedhampton 
Springs  Bedhampton  Portsmouth Wate r 
Company     
Waste Water  Budds Farm Sewage 
Treatment Works upgrade to 
meet the Urban Waste Water 
Treatment Directive in respect 
of nitrogen  and nitrate  levels in 
the effluent  Southern Water  Southern Water prices 
subject to OFWAT 
approval  By 201 5 Subject  to OFWAT 
approval of Southern 
Water Business Plan 
2010 - 2015  
Transport  
 
 
 A3 ZIP Bus Priority Corr idor – 
Cosham – Waterlooville – 
Horndean  HCC   2009  Completed – 
information 
enhancements to be 
provided  Havant Borough Core Strategy March 2011  
  
 118 Infrastructure Type  Project  Lead Provider  Cost / Funding Source  Timing  Progress  
 Cross -borough Premium Bus 
Network  
 HBC, HCC, TfS H, 
Bus Operators  TfSH undertaking 
Feasibility study with 
consultants Mott Gifford   Ongoing  
Improved travel/personalised 
travel information – Xephos 
powered dedicated HBC web 
portal  HBC, HCC, TfSH  Funding ongoing  Ongoing   
Havant railway station – 
replac ement pedestrian bridge  HCC  £800,000  May 201 3 In design stage  
Warblington railway station – 
pedestrian footbridge  Network Rail - HCC  Sustainable Travel 
contributions – HCC – 
Network Rail  2012/13  GRIP Stage 3 – 
agreed in principle – 
awaiting funding 
decis ion 
Encouraging walking  HBC, HCC, TfSH  LTP3, S106  2010   
ongoing  Ongoing lighting, 
surface, signage and 
educational 
improvements – 
HBC developing 
walking and cycling 
strategy  
Improvements to cycle 
network  
 HBC/HCC  HBC/HCC/HBC S106/HCC 
S106/Sustrans  2009  – 
2012 
ongoing  Ongoing HBC 
priority – specific 
schemes identified 
and being developed 
in walking and 
cycling strategy  
A3(M) Junction 3 – part 
Signalisation  HCC  Developer funded from 
West of Waterlooville MDA  2010 -2012  In design  
Workplace travel plann ing – 
Requirement of major planning 
proposals  HBC  Government grant, HCC, 
HBC  2009 - 2011  HBC co -location 
project at the Public 
Service Village 
leading project with 
25% more staff and 
less parking – Havant Borough Core Strategy March 2011  
  
 119 Infrastructure Type  Project  Lead Provider  Cost / Funding Source  Timing  Progress  
smarter working 
initiative  
A3(M) – A2030 junction 
impro vement (Rusty Cutter 
junction)  
 HCC, SEEDA  SEEDA / developer funded  2009 - 2012   
Flood and Erosion 
Risk Management  
 Coastal defences will be 
identified through the ongoing 
development of the North 
Solent Shoreline Management 
Plan (SMP) and delivered 
throug h the Coastal Flood and 
Erosion Risk Management 
Strategy (CFE RMS). 
Catchment Flood Management 
Plans (CFMP) address other 
forms of flooding, in particular 
fluvial and groundwater  
 Environment Agency 
in partnership with 
the local authorities  Cost and indicat ions of 
public funding will be set 
out in the SMP, CF ERMS 
and CFMP  SMP by 
2010  
 
CFMP – 
final draft 
awaiting 
public 
release by 
the E A  
South West Hayling Island 
Beach Management Plan  
  Havant Borough 
Council  
 Havant Revenue Budget 
with SCOPAC contribution  
 Estimated 
completion 
date: April 
2012  
 Topographic surveys 
collated, 500 tracer 
pebble trial released  
Eastoke Point Coastal 
Defences  
 Havant Borough 
Council  
 Capital Grant, Flood 
Defence Grant in Aid  
 Estimated 
design 
completion 
date: March 
2012, 
estim ated 
construction 
start date: 
Summer 
2012  Preliminary work, 
surveys and 
investigations 
completed preferred 
option to be 
designed during 
summer 2011  Havant Borough Core Strategy March 2011  
  
 120 Infrastructure Type  Project  Lead Provider  Cost / Funding Source  Timing  Progress  
 
Telecommunications  21st Century Network  BT BT  Spring 2010  Waterlooville and 
Havant telephone 
exchanges h ave 
been upgraded for 
high speed 
broadband. Hayling 
Island requires 
updating  
Gas utility Company 
(Southern Gas 
Networks)  Mains replacements  Southern Gas 
Networks  Southern Gas Networks  ongoing   
Green Infrastructure  Marine Bill Coastal Access 
Initiative - Access to the 
borough’s 48km of coast is 
acknowledged in the PUSH GI 
Strategy under both projects 
C2 and U9 in relation to the 
foot/cycle network to serve 
Portsmouth and the borough.  PUSH/HCC/HBC  TBC During the 
Plan period  Identified in the 
PUSH Green 
Infrastructure 
Strategy  
 Hayling Island, Habitat 
Creation - Areas on the north 
of the island have potential for 
intertidal habitat creation to 
offset coastal squeeze. 
Acknowledged in the PUSH GI 
Strategy under both projects 
C2 and U9  PUSH/HCC/HBC  TBC During t he 
Plan period  Identified in the 
PUSH Green 
Infrastructure 
Strategy  
The Forest of Bere (Creech 
Wood) and Links to South 
Downs is acknowledged in the 
PUSH GI Strategy (F1)  PUSH/HCC/HBC  TBC During the 
Plan period  Identified in the 
PUSH Green 
Infrastructure  
Strategy  
Portsdown Hill - acknowledged 
in the PUSH GI Strategy (F3)  PUSH/HCC/HBC  TBC During the 
Plan period  Identified in the 
PUSH Green Havant Borough Core Strategy March 2011  
  
 121 Infrastructure Type  Project  Lead Provider  Cost / Funding Source  Timing  Progress  
Infrastructure 
Strategy  
Havant Thicket Reservoir – 
Sub-regionally critical site for 
water and GI with Multiple 
benefits. The importance of 
the project is acknowledged in 
the PUSH GI Strategy (F10)  PUSH/HCC/HBC /P
WC TBC During the 
Plan period  Identified in the 
PUSH Green 
Infrastructure 
Strategy  
A3(M) Corridor - 
acknowledged in the PUSH GI 
Strategy (U13)  HA/PUSH/HCC/HB
C TBC During the 
Plan period  Identified in the 
PUSH Green 
Infrastructure 
Strategy  
Multi function stream 
enhancements - The 
importance of the project in 
terms of greening the urban 
area, as an important habitat 
and a foot/cycle route is 
acknowledged in th e PUSH GI 
Strategy (U14)  EA/PUSH/HCC/HBC
/PWC  TBC During the 
Plan period  Identified in the 
PUSH Green 
Infrastructure 
Strategy  
 
(1) Site adjacent to borough boundary in Winchester City Council area  
 
 
Reference: Hampshire County Council (2009): Hampshire Non -transport Infrastructure Study  
 
 
 
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   122 
10.    Development Management Pol icies 
 
10.01  The development management  policies must be used in conjunction with the strategic policies 
CS1 to CS21 when determining planning applications. The development management  policies 
complement the strategic  policies with locally relevant detail that is not found in national 
planning policy and regional planning policy.  Where else to  look boxes are used extensively 
throughout the chapter  to signpost users to the relevant natio nal level policy and other 
background rel evant to the particular topic. The development management policies follow the 
seven themes of the Core Strategy wherever possible.  
Health and Wellbeing - Community Facilities, Recreation and Open Space  
DM1  Recreatio n and Open Space  
Development of existing open space, including play spaces, playing fields, pitches, 
courts and allotments, for alternative uses will only be permitted where the following 
criteria can be met:  
 
1. It has been demonstrated that there is a surplus of provision according to the 
local standards set out in the council’s Open Spaces Plan  or any subsequent 
review of the plan ; and  
2. It has been demonstrated that the land cannot reasonably be converted to another 
type of open space for example green infrastructure  for which the council’s Open 
Spaces Plan  has identified a deficit.  
3. If the land has been identified within the South East Hampshire Coast Brent 
Goose Strategy (2002) as providing habitat for Brent Geese then it must be 
demonstrated tha t any impact on this habitat can be fully mitigated.  
or  
 
Where there is no identified surplus of the original type of open space, contributions to 
new provision of an equivalent or improved standard, both in terms of quality and 
quantity, will be required  in line with the council’s Open Spaces Plan and developer 
contributions policy.   
 
10.02  Where it is proposed that compensatory provision will be provided locally, it should be of the 
same type that has been lost to development or be of the same or improv ed quality and quantity 
and address an identified need. This provision should take account of local requirements 
identified in the Open Spaces Plan. When considering proposals to develop open spaces it is 
advisable that the council’s open spaces team is co nsulted at the outset regarding the re -
provision of open space. Before considering development of open spaces of any type, reference 
should be made to the Open Spaces Plan to assess the local community’s requirements in 
relation to the specific type of ope n space.   A review of the Open Spaces Plan is currently 
underway.  
 
10.03  Regarding the development proposals affecting children’s play space, assessments of surplus 
play space should be based on the catchment area of the play space proposed. Factors such 
as heavy traffic, absence of bridges and subways across roads and railways, watercourses and 
groups of large buildings will need to be taken into consideration as these barriers will restrict 
the extent of the catchment area.  
 
10.04  Golf courses are not inc luded as they are single -use recreational spaces and are all private 
except for the municipal course at Crookhorn, which is owned by Portsmouth City Council.  Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   123  
 
DM2    Protection of Existing Community Facilities  and Shops  
 
Development proposing the change of use or loss of any premises or land currently or 
last used  as community services and facilities, including local shops, will only be 
permitted where both the following criteria can be met:  
 
1. It has been demonstrated, through an active marketing process that the premises or 
land are no longer viable for their auth orised use or any other use which would 
provide a beneficial facility to the local community.  
2. The facility is no longer required for a community use or that there is an easily 
accessible existing or new facility for the community it is intended to serve .  
 Where else to look:  
 
PPG17: Planning for Open Space, Sport and Recreation :  Government 
Guidance PPG17 provides the basis for planning policy and the protection of 
open space. One of its main requirements is for each council to produce an 
audit of t he open spaces within its area to assess where there are deficiencies 
so that additional provision can be focused. The overriding principle is to retain 
open space unless an assessment has been undertaken which clearly shows 
that the open space is surplus to requirements . 
 
Havant Open Spaces Plan and PPG17 Assessment :  The Havant Open 
Spaces Plan 2006 audits and assesses the existing open space within the 
borough.  
 
School Standards and Frameworks Act 1998 (S ection 77):  School and college open spaces 
and private sports grounds are included in the Open Spaces Plan even though they may not 
be currently available for public use. However, public use could be allowed via a  Community 
Management Strategy. In accordance w ith the requirements of S 77 of the School Standards 
and Framework Act 1998, Hampshire County Council may seek the development of playing 
fields to rationalise its land holdings  as a means of financing recreational and educational 
improvements. Where such compensatory proposals come forward to offset the loss, the 
council expects the new or enhanced sports or recreational facilities to be made available for 
public use provided th is does not prejudice the educational efficiency of the school.  
 
National Playing Fields Association : An organisation dedicated to protecting and improving 
outdoor sports and play spaces.  
 
Small Holdings and Allotments Act 1908 :  Under the requirements of the Smallholdings and 
Allotments Act 1908 and the Allotments Acts 1922 –1950, when considering proposals to 
develop l and currently or last used for allotments, applicants should be aware that allotments 
carry their own statutory protection and therefore any application to dispose of allotments will 
need to demonstrate due consideration of this matter in addition to any p olicy requirements. 
The council will require matters relating to the disposal of allotments to be resolved prior to 
the submission of a planning application.  
 
The Hampshire and Isle of Wight Brent Goose Strategy:  Identifies sites within the borough 
which  provide habitats for Brent geese. These sites often comprise large areas of open space 
and the presence of Brent geese is likely to affect their potential for development.  This is 
available to from  the Solent Forum website.  
 
Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   124 10.05  Where a marketing exercise is required, planning permission will be granted where the 
applicant demonstrates that they have robustly marketed the land or building.  In the case of 
local shops within identified local centres and small local shops  meeting everyday shopping 
needs outside all identified centres, the premises must be marketed for at least six months. A 
marketing period of at least 12 months is required in the case of any other community facility or 
shop in a primary or secondary retai l frontage.  
 
10.06 It is important that the marketing of the existing land or buildings explores all alternative 
community uses; that the marketing price is realistic; the marketing has been appropriate and 
genuine; and that a record of all the marketing i s presented with the application proposal. The 
type and scale of marketing should be commensurate with the scale of the facility proposed to 
be lost. The council will expect that, for proposals on sites involving community services and 
facilities  and shops  in primary and secondary retail frontages , the marketing exercise should be 
completed for a minimum of 12 months. Local shops require a lesser period of  six months. In all 
cases the marketing process requires as a minimum:   
 
i) Confirmation by the marketi ng agent on headed company paper that the premises were 
appropriately and extensively marketed for the required length of time as set out by the 
council.  
ii) Dated photographs of marketing board/s on the premises of an appropriate quality, size, 
scale, loc ation and number during this time.  
iii) An enquiry log, how it was followed up and why it was unsuccessful.  
iv) A copy of all advert isement s in the local press and trade journals (should be at least  four 
weeks’ worth of advert isements,  spread across a six month period).  
vi)  Evidence of marketing via the internet.  
 
 10.07  The period of marketing must have ended on a date within the six months prior to the date the 
planning application was submitted. In some instances where the proposal includes the loss o f 
a significant facility, the marketing process may need to be extended; the advice of the c ouncil 
should be sought prior to the commencement of any marketing campaign to ascertain the 
period and extent of marketing required and to discuss the extent of al ternative uses that should 
be explored.    
 
10.08  Policy DM2 refers to shops located within the primary and secondary frontages of centres 
identified in policy CS4 as well as small local shops located outside these centres that meet 
everyday shopping needs .  Policy DM2 also relates to community facilities including health and 
education facilities, places of worship, community halls and public houses. These uses typically 
fall within D1 of the Use Classes Order. It is recognised that there can be potential s ocial, 
environmental and economic benefits from changing the use of land and buildings. The dynamic 
nature of our society will change how, when and where it accesses different uses. It is therefore 
important that existing uses are controlled so that commun ity and leisure uses are not lost in 
locations that the community can easily access, just because another use is more profitable in 
the short term. Such changes can be damaging to the community and the environment in the 
longer term and therefore need to b e considered in detail. When proposing the change of use or 
loss of any premises or land currently or last used as community services and facilities, 
applicants will need to demonstrate that the premises are no longer required for the current or 
previous u se and that it is not suitable for any alternative community use. In determining 
whether a community facility is required by the local community, applicants will be required to 
carry out a consultation exercise, the extent of which should be determined in consultation with 
the council’s community or development management teams.  
 
10.09 In the case of the loss of shops located outside the primary and secondary frontages it is 
recognised that a series of vacant units can be damaging to the vitality and viabil ity of an area. 
The intention is to maintain an active frontage that contributes to the surrounding local 
community. A reduced marketing period of six months is therefore required. It is considered that Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   125 
in the case of a retail unit, this will be sufficient  to ascertain whether an alternative retail use is 
viable. If the premises are no longer required for retail purposes, priority will be given to 
alternative uses which contribute to the general vitality and viability of the area. In the case of all 
other c ommunity uses, a longer marketing period is required. There are fewer buildings in 
general community use, for example public houses and village halls and once lost, will be 
harder to replace in the future.  
 
10.10 It is recognised that some community facil ities are located in areas proposed for redevelopment 
which can bring about wider community benefits. Where the loss of a facility is proposed as part 
of a wider redevelopment for which there is a recognised need, justification for the loss of the 
facility  will still be required.   
 
 
Promoting Havant  Borough ’s Economy  
 
DM3 Protection of Existing Employment and Tourism Sites  
 
1.  The change of use or developmen t of land or premises currently or last used for B 
use class employment purposes to non -B use class employment will only be 
permitted where it has been demonstrated that the land or premises are not fit for 
purpose and financially unviable for B use class purposes.   Where it is clearly 
demonstrated that the site is no longer suitable for B use class employment, other 
types of economic development should be considered in the first instance. These 
uses will be expected to provide employment opportunities of s imilar quality and 
quantity as those which previously existed.   Only if another type of economic 
development cannot be found which provides similar quality and quantity of 
employment opportunity, will other uses then be considered.  
2. The change of use or development of land or premises currently or last used for 
tourism purposes to non -tourism uses will only be permitted where it has been 
demonstrated that the land or premises are not fit for purpose and financially 
unviable for any tourism use.  
 
For both  employment and tourism sites  this shall be demonstrated through an active and 
exhaustive marketing process covering at least 18 months for a major site and 12 
months for all other sites.  
In all cases the marketing process requires as a minimum:   
i) Confir mation by the marketing agent on headed company paper that the premises 
were appropriately and extensively marketed for the required length of time as set 
out by the council.  Where else to look:  
 
PPS1: Deli vering Sustainable Development : The provision of good quality 
and easily accessible community facilities is important in creating 
sustainable communities.  
Policy CS1 encourages the effective use and enhancement of community 
centres.  
Town and Country Planning Use Classes Order 1987 ; 
Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) (Amendment) (England) Order 
2005 ; 
The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) (Amendment) (England) Order 2006  
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   126 
ii) Dated photographs of marketing board/s of an appropriate quality, size, scale , 
location and number, during this time, on the premises . 
iii) An enquiry log, how it was followed up and why it was unsuccessful.  
iv) A copy of all advertisements in the local press and trade journals (should be at least  
four weeks’ worth of advertisement s spread across a six month period).  
v) Evidence of marketing via the internet.  
 
10.11 It is important for the economy of the b orough to protect existing employment sites that are fit 
for purpose.  Polic y criteria CS2.5 and DM3.1  only safeguard   B use cla sses namely offices, 
manufacturing and warehousing.  However, the council does recognise that significant 
employment opportunities are provided by other forms of economic development.  Economic 
development must provide jobs, generate wealth or produce an e conomic output.  Therefore 
redevelopment of existing employment sites for other types of economic development will be 
considered once it has been demonstrated through a vigorous and exhaustive marketing 
exercise that the site is not fit for purpose for B u se employment purposes.  This flexible 
approach will prioritise uses which enhance the borough’s business offer or reduce barriers to 
employability such as childcare facilities.  The proposed redevelopment should provide new full 
time equivalent jobs of a similar number and quality as those existing or previously existing on 
site.   
 
10.12 Other uses that are not a type of economic development, such as housing, will only be 
considered once all forms of economic development have been duly considered.  
 
10.13 A flexible approach to complementary uses should be taken. The type and scale of marketing 
should be commensurate with the scale of the employment floorspace proposed to be lost. 
Therefore the council will require evidence that a marketing exercise has bee n carried out for at 
least 18 months for a major site and at least 12 months for other sites.  A major site is defined 
as being over one hectare in area or containing over 1000 square metres of commercial 
floorspace. Evidence is required that the marketing  price is realistic and that the marketing has 
been appropriate and genuine.  A record of all the required marketing will need to be presented 
with the application proposal. Where an existing firm is relocating elsewhere within the borough, 
maintaining or increasing employment numbers will be acceptable.   
 
10.14 The period of marketing must have ended on a date within the six months prior to the date the 
planning application was submitted. In some instances, where the proposal includes the loss of 
significa nt employment or tourism floorspace, the marketing process may need to be extended. 
The advice of the council should be sought prior to the commencement of any marketing 
campaign to ascertain the period and extent of marketing required and to discuss the e xtent of 
alternative uses that should be explored.     
 
Where else to look:  
 
Property Market Review 2007 :  Assesses the overall quality of existing 
business sites and industrial estates across the borough and finds out from 
companies based in the borough what their future accommodation needs are 
likely to be . 
 
Havant Borough Employment Land Review 2010 :   
Employment Land Reviews provide a key part of the evidence  base for Local 
Development Frameworks. The ODPM Guidance Note on Employment Land 
Reviews (2004)  confirms their centrality as one amongst a range of tools in the 
attainment of sustainable communities . 
 
PPS4: Planning for Sustainable Economic Development :  Recognises changes in working Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   127 DM4  Static Hol iday Caravan Development   
Development involving the provision, continued location or improvement of static 
holiday caravan sites will only be permitted where both of  the following criteria are met:  
 
1. The development would have a close physical relationsh ip to existing caravan 
sites.  
2. The caravan is to be used for holiday purposes only and has a limited period of 
occupancy for a maximum of ten months per calendar year.  
 
10.15 For the purpose of this policy, it is expected that a close physical relationsh ip will be defined as 
a visually continuous extension of an existing site.  
 
10.16  It is recognised that static holiday caravans are not always suitable for permanent occupation 
owing to their location away from local services or owing to their form and set ting. The council 
wishes to maintain a distinction between holiday caravans which contribute to the provision of 
visitor accommodation within the borough and are often located outside the urban area, and 
residential dwellings which should be located within  existing settlements. Applicants will be 
expected to enter into an agreement under S106 of the Town and County Planning Act 1990 to 
ensure the period of occupancy is limited to a maximum of ten months of the year and 
applicants will be required to maintai n and keep available a log of all occupiers during this 
period. Limited occupancy conditions will also be placed on new holiday accommodation to 
ensure the correct balance between encouraging tourism and other policy aims of controlling 
development outside  the built up area and achieving high quality living accommodation. Many of 
the borough’s static caravans are located at Eastoke and are adjacent to Chichester Harbour. 
This area is recognised for its wildlife interests and its susceptibility to flood risk , particularly 
during the winter months. Where a limited occupancy condition or agreement is entered into, it 
is expected that the vacant months will be during the winter (between November and February) 
when protected birds and wildlife are most susceptibl e to noise and activity. The potential 
impacts on the landscape and nature conservation designations and the flood risk areas around 
the coastal zone will be particularly important in determining proposals related to this policy.   patterns, including home working. Changes in working practices mean that it has become 
easier to set up businesses based at home. The council will encourage such uses where they 
can be accommodated without impacting upon the amenity of nearby occupants or the 
character of the locality through, for example, increased traffic, parking, deliverie s and noise. 
Each proposal should be assessed against Policy CS 16 to ensure that there is no detrimental 
loss of amenity. The sustainability benefits of home -based working are recognised with 
reductions in work -related travel supporting other policies whic h seek to reduce the need for 
travel. Policy CS2, which seeks to protect existing employment sites that are fit for purpose, 
is a key aspect to promoting the borough’s  economy.   
 
The Good Practice Guide  on Planning for Tourism :  Details the relationship between planning 
and tourism . 
 
Policy CS5 sets out the criteria for new tourism development in the borough. Tourist facilities 
make an important contribution towards t he borough’s economy and are promoted by policy 
CS5, which seeks to extend and enhance the range and quality of facilities. This should not 
be off -set by the loss of accommodation, attractions and facilities elsewhere and the council 
seeks to control the l oss of premises by requiring a thorough marketing process to 
demonstrate that the use is no longer viable. It is important that the marketing of the existing 
land or buildings explores all alternative tourism uses, that the marketing price is realistic, th at 
the marketing has been appropriate and genuine and that a record of all the marketing is 
presented with the application proposal. The type and scale of marketing should be 
commensurate with the scale of the facility proposed to be lost .  Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   128 
 
DM5  Control of Class A3, A4 and A5 Food, Drink an d Entertainment Uses   
 
Planning Permission will only be granted for the construction of new entertainment and 
hot food uses falling within Use Classes A3, A4, A5 and D2 of the Use Classes Order 
1987 (as amended) or the change of use of existing premises to  a Class A3, A4, A5 or D2 
use where it can be demonstrated that all the following criteria are met:  
 
1. Measures are incorporated, where a proposal includes the preparation of hot food, 
to mitigate the effect on nearby properties.  
2. The measures proposed in respect of criterion 1 are such that the installation does 
not materially detract from the appearance of the building itself and the wider 
locality.  
3. The measures proposed in respect of criterion 1 are suitable for the range and 
nature of hot food to be prepared on the premises.  
4. The development includes adequate provision for the disposal, storage and 
collection of refuse, including litter bins for use by customers.  
5. The development would not result in indiscriminate customer parking and/or traff ic 
movement that would be likely to create hazards for traffic or pedestrians.  
6. The development would not cause unacceptable disturbance to the occupiers of 
nearby residential property at times when activity in the immediate vicinity would 
otherwise be a t a relatively quiet level.  
7. In the case of changes of use, any marketing requirements are met.  
 
10.17 It is recognised that food, drink and entertainment uses can be important in adding to the vitality 
and viability of an area for residents and visitors . However, proposals for such outlets can 
create environmental problems such as noise, fumes and odour, litter, traffic generation and 
indiscriminate parking. Of particular concern is the effect this can have on residential amenity, 
particularly when there  is a concentration of residential accommodation nearby.  The existing 
mix of uses (including other Class A3, A4, A5 and D2 uses), the provision of public car parking 
and the existing level of late night activity means that an application for a Class A3, A4 , A5 and 
D2 use may be more acceptable in a town or district centre where there is an increased level of 
activity. It is acknowledged, however, that even in town and district centres, residents can still 
expect a certain level of amenity and this will beco me increasingly important as other policies 
seek to increase the amount of housing in built -up areas. Applications for Class A3, A4 and A5 Where else to look:  
 
The Good Practice Guide on Planning for Tourism  details the relationship 
between planning and tourism .  
 
Policy CS5 Tourism :  A large proportion of the borough ’s tourist facilities are 
located on Hayling Island in the form of static caravans. Hayling Island 
accommodates a ll licensed static holiday caravan sites in the borough.  These 
range from small back gardens of houses to large, well equipped sites with 
over 100 caravans. About half such caravans are on sites between Creek 
Road and Itchenor Road at Eastoke .  
 
 
PPS25: Development and Flood Risk  conside rs the flood risk associated with development in 
the coastal zone and ensures that flood risk is taken into account at all stages of the planning 
process .  
 
PPG20: Coastal Planning :  Considers development in the coastal zone. The document refers 
briefly to tourism . Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   129 
uses that would be detrimental to the existing level of amenity by means of increased odour 
levels, noise, activity a nd parking will normally be resisted.  
 
10.18 In considering applications for food, drink and entertainment uses, the council will take into 
account the need for conditions. Where it is considered that the requirements of all parties can 
be reconciled throu gh the imposition of conditions, appropriate conditions will be imposed   
to control the hours of opening, the type of food for sale (a sample menu may be requested) 
and the arrangements to be made for the protection of amenity. Particular regard will be ha d to 
the installation of extraction flues. Where a flue is to be installed, it should be demonstrated that 
the position and height of the flue is such that the visual impact is minimised and that there is no 
other suitable location.  
 
10.19 Outside the defi ned primary and secondary retail frontage zones where the concentration of   
residential accommodation is higher; it is acknowledged that existing levels of noise and activity 
can be lower. There is less likely to be a range of public parking facilities. I n such locations, 
applications for a change of use of an existing site or building to Class A3, A4 and A5 use 
should also be assessed against the stricter criteria marketing requirements of other relevant 
development management policies. If those requireme nts can be met, the proposal should then 
be assessed against Development Management Policy DM5.  
 
 
DM6  Coordination of Development  
 
Proposals will only be permitted where they do not undermine the future development 
potential of adjacent sites.  
  
10.20 The use of urban land should be maximised and carefully planned to ensure the development 
potential of future sites is not compromised. Proposals should not prevent future access to 
potential development sites or prejudice future schemes.  It is important that the most effective 
use is m ade of urban land and to ensure allocated sites can be delivered. Improvements and 
regeneration opportunities within urban areas will be accommodated through more efficient use 
of land.  
 
10.21 Development should not be piecemeal or prejudice the potential  for the satisfactory 
development of a larger area. Piecemeal schemes which avoid the need for developer 
contributions will be refused.  
  
 Where else to look:  
 
Chartered Institute of Environmental Health, Hampshire and Isle of Wig ht 
Branch: Planning Applications for Hot Food Premises – Guidelines for Odour 
and Environmental Control 1996 :  Food, drink and entertainment uses, as 
defined by Class A3, A4, A5 and D2 of the Town and Country Planning (Uses 
Classes) Order 1987 (as amended  by the Town and Country Planning (Use 
Classes) (Amendment) (England) Order 2005) include all proposals for the 
sale of food or drink for consumption on the premises or of hot food off the 
premises, for example, public houses, restaurants, wine bars, cafes , snack 
bars and hot food takeaways . 
 
Guidance on the control of odour and noise from c ommercial kitchen exhaust 
systems  Netcen for Defra January 2005 . 
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   130 
 
Housing  
 
DM7  Elderly an d Specialist Housing Provision  
 
Within the defined urban areas development specific to the requirements of the elderly, 
people with disabilities or other forms of specialised supported housing provision will 
only be permitted provided that the following re levant criteria are met:  
 
1. It is demonstrated that appropriate levels of on -site amenity space are accessible 
for residents’ use which provides a satisfactory outlook for all residents.  
2. A setting for the building is provided which is in keeping with t he surrounding area.  
3. Sufficient space for servicing is provided.  
4. Services that may generate noise and disturbance (such as laundry rooms, kitchens 
and refuse storage) are located and designed to avoid undue disturbance to the 
amenities of neighbourin g properties.  
5. The development would not result in a concentration of such uses in one of the five 
areas of the borough or an over -concentration within each of these areas.  
  
Outside the defined urban areas, proposals for sheltered housing, facilities fo r the active 
elderly and for people with disabilities will only be permitted where the development 
involves an extension to existing facilities.  
 
Lifetime Homes and Extra Care Housing  that will contribute to the provision of 
accommodation for the ageing po pulation will be encouraged providing they comply with 
all other relevant policies.  Where else to look:  
 
PPS1: Delivering Sustainable Development :  Promotes the efficient use of 
land to ensure sustainable development . 
 
PPS4: Planning for Sustainable Economic Dev elopment :  Promotes more 
sustainable patterns of development, ensuring that locations are fully 
exploited through high density, mixed use development and promoting 
sustainable transport choices . 
 
Havant T own Centre Urban Design Framework :  The purpose of the 
framework  is to set out design principles for the development of Havant 
Town Centre . 
 
Leigh Park Strategic Framework  ‘From Housing Estate to Sustain able Community.’  
 
Leigh Park Centre Environmental Improvements :  Havant Borough Council and Hampshire 
County Council are working in partnership on the preparation of environmental improvement 
proposals f or Leigh Park Centre, Havant . 
 
Waterlooville Town Centre Urban Design Framework   
 
Public Realm Design Framework  (PRDF) :  The f ramework looks at our st reets and open 
spaces and shows possible improvements for important areas in the borough. The PRDF  
establishes the relationship between streets and squares, town centres and parks and 
proposes common design details for key areas . 
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   131 
10.22 In this instance, amenity space is defined as landscaped spaces within the development as 
opposed to public open spaces which differ in how they are used. Proposals f or elderly or 
specialist forms of accommodation need to enable residents to enjoy amenity space within the 
grounds of the development. A satisfactory outlook consists of an area of landscaped space 
consisting of a mix of trees and planting where appropriat e. Residents should be able to enjoy 
the outlook from their individual rooms.  
 
10.23 Different types of facility have varying requirements. Proposals for rest/nursing homes and 
some facilities for people with disabilities will be expected to provide a cent ral area for bin stores 
and parking requirements may be lower. The siting of these facilities will also need to take 
account of the likelihood that residents will be less able to leave the site and therefore well  
landscaped gardens will be of significant i mportance in order to ensure residents have access 
to high quality spaces with a high visual amenity. Access to local services will be of less 
importance to this type of facility.  
 
10.24 In the case of other types of accommodation for people with disabili ties and in sheltered 
housing which can take the form of flats or individual units such as bungalows, bin stores will 
need to be provided and the parking standards for this type of facility are higher to take account 
of more mobile residents.  
 
10.25 In the  case of flats, areas of well  landscaped gardens will be important to ensure that residents 
have the opportunity to access amenity space on site. In the case of bungalows, the expectation 
will be that in -curtilage amenity space will be provided commensurat e with the size and scale of 
the individual unit.  
 
10.26 It is recognised that the occupiers of some specialist housing often require access to local 
services including shops and health facilities and public transport routes. Development for 
sheltered hou sing, facilities for the active elderly and for the disabled will be encouraged 
towards locations where these services can be accessed by non -motorised modes of transport 
so that a degree of independence can be maintained.  
 
10.27 Elderly and specialist hou sing development will be expected to comply with other housing 
policies, including those which contribute towards the provision of 6,300 new homes in the 
borough and those which seek to deliver appropriate levels of affordable housing.  
 
Where else to look:  
 
Servicing includes bin stores, parking, cycle stores and mobility vehicle stores 
where necessary. Bin stores should meet the council’s bin store requirements 
and parking should meet the council’s adopted standards which can be found 
in the Residential Car Parking  and Cycle Provision  SPD. In some facilities 
such as nursing homes, parking for visitors and commercial/delivery vehicles 
will be required . 
 
The population forecasts for the b orough show an ex pected rise in the 
proportion of elderly up until 2026. The ageing population together with in -
migration of retirees results in a specific need that must be addressed. This 
issue is most pronounced on Hayling Island but remains a borough -wide issue. Lifeti me 
Homes and Extra Care Facilities will be particularly encouraged owing to their flexibility and 
ability to provide for a variety of needs and individual care requirements. Further detail on 
Extra Care  Housing  has been produced by Hampshire County Council  in The Partnership for 
Extra Care Housing in Hampshire . 
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   132 
Affordable Housing  
 
Loss of Dwellings  Where else to look:  
 
Policy CS9  states that development should meet  a target of 30 -40% affordable 
housing and the reasoned justification to support this policy has been explained 
in Chapter 6 of the Core Strategy. Chapter 6 explains the viability issues 
surrounding affordable housing which have informed the policy approac h. 
   
PPS1: Delivering Sustainable Development  and PPS3: Housing  look at the 
issue of mixed communities .  Large developments with a large proportion of 
affordable housing are unlikely to provide a mixed community as effectively as 
those developments that incorporate a reasonable proportion of market 
housing. Thi s is particularly important in areas where there are already high 
proportions of affordable housing provision. PPS1 and PPS3 support the 
importance of creating mixed communities and ensuring community cohesion is considered. 
Mixed tenure communities are im portant in delivering this .  
 
 Similar considerations apply to how affordable housing is distributed and provided within a 
site. The concentration of the entire affordable housing provision within one or a small 
number of areas will not make a positive con tribution to a mixed community and lead to the 
actual or perceived segregation between tenure splits. An established approach is known as 
‘pepper -potting ’ the affordable housing throughout the development. For ease of 
management by affordable housing provi ders this is typically provided in small groups, 
spread throughout the development .  
Where else to look:  
 
The South East Plan: Policy H1 and Policy CS9  of the Core Strategy set s the 
target for housing provision over the plan period.  The requirement to provide 
6,300 new homes between 2006 and 2026 should not be offset by reductions in 
housing stock. Existing housing stock should be reta ined to the greatest 
possible extent since avoiding the waste of built resources is one of the 
principles of sustainable development. In addition, the individual and cumulative 
loss of housing stock within the existing urban areas is likely to increase 
pressure and demand for the use of greenfield sites  in order to meet the 
housing target set in the South East Plan . Conversions of suitable existing 
buildings make a significant contribution to urban capacity but may not be 
feasible in some cases owing to the  costs of development relative to property 
values. It is also important to make the best use of housing stock by modernisation, in 
accordance with the aim of sustainable development, but again this is not always cost 
effective. In these cases, the council may require the submission of financial details in order 
to justify the loss . 
10.65   
10.66  Policy CS9 .  The council will resist applications for the conversion of two smaller dwellings 
into a larger, single household as this will offset the requirement to provide 6,30 0 new homes. 
There is an ongoing trend in declining household size and maintaining a stock of small flats 
and houses is important to meet the needs of smaller households and first time buyers. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that there is an overriding need which will result in wider 
community benefits, proposals for the conversion of two dwellings into one will be refused . 
 
10.66  The demolition of dwellings could be justified to provide sites for other development to meet 
local community needs where other su itable locations are unavailable. In such cases, full Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   133 
 
Space Standards, Density and Range of Houses  
 
Gypsies and Travellers  
 
 
Travelling Showpeople  written justification should be provided including a justification of the need for an alternative 
use. 
Where else to look:  
 
PPS3: Housing :  Identifies the key characteristics of a mixed community 
(paragraph  20) and also looks at the effective use of land for housing 
(paragraph  40). The density and type of housing to b e provided is important in 
ensuring the e fficient use of land. Policy CS9  and housing development will be 
monitored to ensure an appropriate balance between small, medium and large 
homes is being achieved taking into account identified housing need and the  
need to develop mixed communities.  The type and tenure of housing will also 
be monitored. Should monitoring reveal an over  supply of particular house 
types or a need for smaller homes then development would be expected to 
reflect these requirements. Wher e a proposal is limited in the type of 
accommodation proposed, developers are encouraged to incorporate flexible 
and extendable housing design to adapt to changing household requirements .  
10.68  
In more sustainable and accessible areas of the borough highe r densities will be expected to 
ensure compliance with PPS1, which seeks sustainable development and PPS3, which 
seeks to maximise the use of land in appropriate locations . 
 
Where else to look:  
 
Circular 01/2006 (Planning for Gypsy and Traveller Sites ): Sets out the policy 
and legislative background for making provision for Gypsies and Travellers  
 
Policy CS10  identifies the need t o provide and protect sites for gypsies and 
travellers . 
 
Where else to look:  
 
Circular 04/07 (Planning for Travelling Showpeople) : Sets out the policy and 
legislative background for making provision for Travelling Showpeople.  
 
Policy CS10  identifies the need to provide and protect sites for travelling 
showpeople. It is recognised that the requirements of travelling showpeople 
can lead to the need for plots capable of storing large amounts of equipment 
together with caravans or mobile homes for residential purposes. In addition, 
occupiers may need to carry out maintenance and repairs on significant 
amounts of equipment. Where a site  is otherwise acceptable, it may be Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   134  
Caring For Our Borough - The Coast and Natural Environment  
 
10.28 The b orough has a rich and divers e natural environment with an extensive coastline including 
two harbours, rivers, streams, open spaces and woodlands. The council recognises  the 
importance of this unique environment and the need to protect and enhance it for both its nature 
conservation v alue and its recreation and public access opportunities.  At the same time, the 
current standard of flood protection and water quality needs to be maintained.  
 
DM8 Conservation, Protection and Enhancement of Existing Natural Features  
 
Development will only  be permitted where it protects and enhances local habitats and 
landscape distinctiveness and which addresses all of the relevant criteria as set out 
below:  
 
1. Protects natural features of nature conservation and/or amenity importance on the 
site, for examp le trees, woodlands, hedgerows, soils, streams, stream corridors, 
springs, ditches or ponds from damage, destruction and a deterioration in quality.  
2. Sympathetically incorporates existing features into the overall design of the 
scheme including measures tak en to ensure their continued survival.  
3. Provides new landscape works that integrate successfully with the local 
environment and existing natural features, using local materials and plant species 
and making provision for future maintenance of new landscape w orks associated 
with new developments.  
4. Ensures sequences of greenspaces are maintained and protects the attractiveness 
and visual amenity of all green open spaces that contribute to the identity of the 
borough.  appropriate to consider the use of further screening to reduce noise levels and the visual 
impact of stored equipment . Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   135 
 
DM9 Development in the Coastal Zone  
 
Planning Permiss ion will only be granted for development in the coastal zone which 
addresses all of the relevant criteria as set out below  as shown on the Proposals Map : 
 
1. Has no harmful effects on nature conservation within the Chichester and Langstone 
Harbour SSSI s and SPA, Solent Maritime SAC and  Ramsar site, or any SINCs and 
Local Nature Reserves.  
2. Maintains and enhances the appearance and distinctiveness of existing settlements 
and landmarks along the coast.  
3. Contributes positively to the landscape and has regard to best  practice on the 
design of new buildings in coastal locations.  
4. Upgrades existing footpaths and ensures that public access is retained and 
provided to connect existing paths along the waterfront where appropriate.  
5. Would result in improvements to or redistri bution of moorings, marine berths or 
launch on demand facilities (dry berths) in the harbours.  
6. Would not be detrimental to infrastructure for, and quality of, water -based 
recreation, or be detrimental to the safety of navigation.  
7. Provides recreational oppo rtunities that do not adversely affect the character and 
appearance of the coast.  Where else to look:  
 
Havant Borough Townscape, Landscape and Seascape Character 
Assessment :  The council requires all development proposals to include a 
landscape scheme which should be incorporated into the layout design from 
the start using th e guidance in the Havant Borough Townscape, Landscape 
and Seascape Character Assessment . 
 
The Havant Borough Council Landscape Checklist for New Development :  
Explains what is expected of developers sub mitting proposals to the council 
to meet the relevant landscaping conditions . 
 
Havant Borough Council Landscape  Assessment  Sensitivity Report :  Is an integrated 
landscape sensitivity approach used to inf orm the settlement expansion in Havant Borough . 
 
Tree preservation orders and trees within conservation areas:  Trees can define spaces, 
routes or views, screen out noise or unsightly development, provi de shelter on a site and 
improve local air quality. Existing trees, woodlands and hedgerows are significant to the 
overall landscape quality of an area, both as landscape features and as individual habitats. 
Some of these features have protection under the  Hedgerow Regulations, Tree Preservation 
Orders or by being situated in a conservation area.  The council will introduce tree 
preservation orders as necessary to protect existing trees. If the removal of one or more trees 
is permitted as part of a developm ent a condition may require that replacement trees be 
planted on or near the site. Developers will be required to protect existing trees to be retained 
during site clearance and building operations .  
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   136 
 
Where else to look:  
 
PPS9 Biodiversity and Geological Conservation :  States tha t planning 
permission should not be granted where development is likely to have an 
adverse effect on an SSSI . 
 
PPG17 Planning for Open Space, Sport and Recreation :  Provides guidance 
for planning for recreational facilities, including those which take place in the 
coastal zone . 
PPG20 Coastal Planning :  Provides policie s for coastal planning and details 
of relevant legislation affecting development in the coastal zone . 
PPS25 Development and Flood Risk :  Provides the national policy on avoiding development 
in areas of flood risk. It also sets out the sequential and exception test that will be applied 
when considering development proposals in flood risk areas. The accompanying Practice 
Guide  provides a range of more detailed implementation advice.  
Good Practice Guide on Planning for Tourism :  Does not refer specifically to tourism 
development in the coastal zone but does consider choosing the right location for tourism 
development. Given that mu ch of the borough’s tourist facilities are located on Hayling Island, 
it is appropriate to consider this document in conjunction with more specific coastal policies . 
Havant Borough Townscape, Landscape and  Seascape Character Assessment :  This study 
is part of an initiative to foster a better understanding of the variety of historic, landscape, 
ecological, social, economic and cultural factors that have created the distinctive character 
of the b orough.  Whe n considering proposals for development in the coastal zone, reference 
should be made to this document to ensure that development is sympathetic to the 
appropriate character type .  
Chichester Harbour Conservancy Design Guid elines  for New Dwellings and Extensions :    
Both Chichester and Langstone Harbours lie partly within the borough and are protected to a 
large extent by national and local designations.  Chichester Harbour  was designated as an 
AONB by the Countryside Commission in 1964 in order to conserve the natural beauty of the 
area. Any development proposals will therefore be considered against their likely effect on 
this landscape.  Despite this, pressure exists for d evelopment within the coastal zone.  The 
coast is one of the b orough's most important assets and the council is committed to 
protecting the remaining areas of undeveloped coast and improving and enhancing the 
environment of the developed areas.  Careful co nsideration should be given to providing high 
quality design along the whole coast and for Chichester Harbour; early consultation with the 
Chichester Harbour Conservancy is encouraged to ensure development accords with best 
practice design guidance.  Withi n Chichester Harbour AONB major development will only be 
permitted where there is an overriding national interest and a lack of alternative sites .  
 
Maritime recreation will be encouraged in the Chichester and Langstone Harbours although 
this should not be  at the expense of the visual attributes of the landscape or the natural 
environment, in  line with Polic ies CS1 and CS 11 of the Core Strategy.   
 
The Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2 000:  Provides the legislative background to AONB 
designations . 
 
Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009 :  Seeks to maximise  educational opportunities along 
the coast, including acce ss to the coast for the purpose of recreation. This will often be in Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   137  
DM10  Pollution  
 
Development that may cause pollution of water, air or soil or pollution through noise, 
smell, smoke, fumes, gases, steam, dust, vibration, light, heat, electromagnetic rad iation 
and other pollutants will only be permitted where all of the following relevant criteria can 
be met:  
 
1. The health and safety of existing and future users of the site, or nearby occupiers 
and residents is not put at risk.  
2. National air quality st andards or objectives would not be breached.  
3. The water environment would not be detrimentally affected.  
4. It would not lead to an unacceptable deterioration in the quality or potential yield of 
coastal, surface and ground water resources.  
5. External  lighting is of the minimum level of illumination and duration required for 
security and operational purposes.  
6. External lighting would not interfere with safe navigation in either Chichester or 
Langstone Harbours and other coastal locations.  
 
10.29 Some forms of development which can result in pollutants are necessary to the economic and 
social needs of the borough. This would include some industrial uses which, although 
necessary, may be detrimental to amenity. Only in instances where the risk is appro priately 
managed will development be permitted. Consideration will be given to any mitigating measures 
that could be implemented into development schemes to ensure its effects are sufficiently 
alleviated. It must be clearly demonstrated that any proposed m itigation measures will be 
effective and suitably reduce any harm. In some instances this may be through the provision of 
a buffer zone between conflicting land uses which can minimise harmful effects and can reduce 
the need for more stringent mitigating m easures.  conjunction with water -based recreational activities .  
Emsworth Village Design Statement :  Design statements are produced by communitie s 
to identify local  character and set out design guidance  to help guide new development . 
Northney and Tye Village Design Statement :  Design statements are produced by 
communities to  identify local  chara cter and set out design guidance  to help guide new 
development.  
East Solent Shoreline Management Plan :  Like all Shoreline Management Plans, the East 
Solent SMP is  a non -statutory document intended to b oth inform and be supported by the 
statutory planning processes. As such it takes account of the diverse interests in the 
shoreline and establishes a coast al defence strategy that is technically, economically and 
environmentally sustainable .   In due cours e, the East Solent SMP will be replaced by the 
North Solent SMP.  
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   138 
  
Where else to look:  
 
PPS23: Planning and Pollution Control : is intended to complement the pollution 
control framework under the Pollution Pr evention and Control Act (PPC) 1999 
and the PPC Regulations 2000. The council has environmental health 
responsibilities for pollution together with the Environment Agency .  
 
PPG24 Planning and Noise :  Sets out how the planning system can minimise 
the adverse effects of noise without being unduly restrictive . 
 
PPS25 Development and Flood Risk :  Provides the national policy on avoiding 
development in areas of flood risk. It also sets out the sequential and exception 
test that will be applied when considering development proposals in flood risk areas. The 
accompanying Practice Guide  provides a range of more detailed implementation advi ce. 
 
The Environment Agency :  Provides a record of pollution incidents in recent years as well as 
providing advice on land contamination and water quality.  Where development proposals 
pose a  threat to the water environment of the borough, full and thorough assessment of this 
likely risk will need to be demonstrated. Development will not be permitted where it is clear 
the proposal would have an unacceptable impact on the local water environmen t. Where the 
development has the potential to affect a watercourse the Environment Agency will be 
consulted . 
Havant Borough Council Environmental Health :  Provides specific advice and guidance on 
water qua lity, air quality, noise and pollution . 
Circular 04/00: Planning Control for Hazardous Substances :  Provides information on the 
SEVESO II directive which  requires member states to introduce controls on establishments 
where dangerous substances are present above certain quantities . 
 
Sport England :  Provides specific information on the planning and development of s ports 
facilities. External flood lighting is often necessary to facilitate the playing of sports outside of 
the hours of daylight. However, flood lighting can impact adversely on neighbouring 
residential properties or the surrounding landscape. Careful con sideration will need to be 
given to measures which mitigate these impacts. Where appropriate mitigation is not possible 
development which results in harmful light pollution will not be permitted .  The standard of 
lighting is dependent on the standard of pl ay and particular sports. It is, therefore, essential to 
determine the sports to be played at an early stage in the planning process in order that 
sufficient mitigating measures can be worked into the development proposal. It is advisable to 
contact the go verning body for the relevant sport to determine what type of lighting is 
required . 
 
See also British Standards :  
BS 4142: Method for rating industrial noise affecting mixed residential and industrial areas  
BS 5228 -1: 2009 Code of  Practice for Noise and Vibration Control on Construction and Open 
Sites: Noise  
BS 5228 -2: 2009 Code of Practice for Noise and Vibration Control on Construction and Open 
Sites: Vibration  
 
Chartered Institute of Environmental Health , Environmental Protection :  Provides information 
on environmental protection, including contaminated land, water, industrial pollution and 
noise . Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   139 
 
Flood Defence and Coast Protection Works   
 
Historic Environment  
 
10.30 The b orough has a rich and diverse historic environment, comprising over 280 listed buildings, 
14 conservation areas, almost 40 historic parks and gardens, over 80 buildings of local interest 
and archaeological sites of national and local importance.  The council has certain statutory 
duties in respect of the historic environment and even where no additional statutory controls 
exist, for example in the case of historic parks and gardens, the counci l should consider this as 
a material consideration in the determining of planning applications.  Where else to look:  
 
PPG20: Coastal Planning :  Provides policies for coastal planning and details of 
relevant legislation affecting development in the c oastal zone, including flood 
defence and coast protection works . 
Havant Borough Council Policy Statement on Flood and Coastal Defence :  
The government has directed that each operating authority publishe s a policy 
statement setting out how government policy aims and objectives on flood and 
coastal defence (sea defence and coast protection), are to be implemented in 
their area. The council has published a policy statement that fulfils this aim . 
East Solent Shoreline Management Plan : Flood defences and coast protection works, by 
their nature, alter the natural river and coastal processes. This disruption is not considered 
appropriate unless people or prop erties are at risk from flooding or erosion. Adverse effects 
may be felt at some considerable distance from the works undertaken and may impact on the 
natural or the built environment or both. These impacts should be taken into account when 
considering pro posals for flood defence and coast protection schemes. The East Solent 
Shoreline Management Plan (1997) will be superseded by the North Solent Shoreline 
Management Plan in 2010.  The Shoreline Management Plans are produced by the 
Environment Agency and set  out the policy for managing the shoreline including that for 
borough.  The Environment Agency also produces more detailed strategy plans to indicate 
how these policies will be implemented. The council will not permit flood and coast protection 
works that conflict with these policies or reduce the future options of operating authorities 
managing the shoreline . 
 
Havant Borough Townscape, Landscape and Seascape Character Assessment :  Chichester 
Harbour is an  Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty ( AONB ) and other areas of the borough 
have been identified as having particular landscape character as identified in the 
assessment.  For these reasons, flood defences and coast protection works should not be 
alien to the ir surroundings and the siting, design and materials should be appropriate to the 
locality, in accordance with Policy CS1 6 of the Core Strategy . 
 
Polic ies CS11 and CS12 :  Both Chichester and Langstone  Harbours are protected owing to 
their international nat ure conservation importance. Nature Conservation Protection Policies 
and the Habitat Regulations apply to flood and coast protection works and therefore works 
should not impact detrimentally on nature conservation interests in these areas . 
 
New flood defen ce and coastal protection works may require an Environmental Impact 
Assessment.   The Town and Country Planning (Environmental Impact Assessment) (England 
and Wales) Regulations 1999   provide the legislation for assessments . 
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   140 
 
10.31 Much of the policy background relating to the historic environment is contained within P PS5 and 
Core Strategy Policies CS1 1 and CS1 6. It is not considere d necessary to repeat this information 
in the form of development management policies.  Instead this chapter  contains a series of links 
to the relevant legislation, policies and supporting information.  
 
Listed Buildings  
 Where else to look:  
 
The Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990  provides the 
legislative background for listed buildings . 
 
English Heritage: Listed Buildings  provides extensive information on listed 
buildings, their designations and their policy background . 
 
PPS5:  P lanning for the Historic Environment  provides the legislative 
background to the listed building process. Once a building has been listed or is 
the subject of a  Building Preservation Notice, consent is normally required for 
works including demolition, alte ration or extension. The advice of the council 
should be sought prior to any works being undertaken . 
 
The Association of Local Government Archaeological Officers UK  provides information for the 
analysis and recording  for the conservation and control of works to historic buildings . 
 
Policy CS1 1 Protecting and Enhancing the Special E nvironment  and Heritage  of Havant 
Borough states that statutory and non statutory designations should be used to manage 
development in or a djacent to listed buildings . 
 
Policy CS1 6 High Quality Design  provides design criteria for new development, including that 
which affects a listed building . 
 
The Listed Buildings Statutory Register  provi des information on the council’s listed buildings. 
There are more than 280 listed buildings in the borough which all contribute significantly to 
the character of the area.  Details of each building can be obtained from the council’s 
development management  team. 
 
The Planning Application Checklist  provides guidance on what is required when submitting a 
planning application.  In additio n to these requirements, where the loss of features has been 
agreed, the council will require a scheme of recording to be agreed prior to any works being 
carried out. The recording should then be carried out in accordance with the agreed 
schedule. Applicat ions for changes of use must be accompanied by full drawings in order that 
the impact of the proposed use on the fabric of the building can be fully assessed.  
Applications for planning permission and listed building consent must include drawings and 
plans  which show the impact of the proposals on features of special interest. The council will 
normally expect an applicant to submit concurrent and related applications for planning 
permission, listed building consent and building regulations consent. The prop osed ways of 
achieving building and fire regulation requirements will also need to be made clear before an 
application can be determined . 
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   141 
Conservation Areas  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Where else to look:  
 
Section 69 Planning (Listed Building and Conservation Area) Act (1990)  
provides the legislative background which states that local authorities have  a 
duty to designate as conservation areas, any areas of special architectural or 
historic interes t the character or appearance of which it is desirable to 
preserve or enhance  
 
PPS5:  Planning for the Historic Environment  states that the council has a 
statutory duty to p reserve the character and appearance of conservation areas  
 
English Heritage: Conservation Areas  identifies key aspects of good practice 
that need to be taken into account by local planning auth orities. It also provides advice on 
how to manage change in conservation areas and notes that the designation of conservation 
areas does not prevent change. In some instances development may be beneficial, 
particularly in gap sites. The potential for devel opment should be a stimulus for high quality 
design and be seen as an opportunity for enhancement . 
 
Policy CS1 1 Protecting and Enhancing the Special E nvironment and Heritage of Havant 
Borough states that statutory and non -statutory designations must be use d to manage 
development close to conservation areas . 
 
Policy CS1 6 High Quality Design  provides design criteria for new development, including 
development in conservation areas . 
 
Conservation Areas in Hav ant lists each of the conservation areas in the borough. The 
special architectural character and historic interest of each of the borough ’s conservation 
areas is described in individual conservation area appraisals. Each proposal will need to be 
judged on  its own merits and assessed against a conservation area appraisal, whilst having 
regard to the special character of that area . 
 
The Planning Application Checklist  provides a checklist for applicants submitting planning 
applications in conservation areas.   All applications for demolition should be accompanied by 
a planning application for redevelopment and only applications for ful l planning permission 
are considered appropriate in conservation areas . 
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   142 
Historic Parks and Gardens  
 
 
Buildings of Local Interest  Where else to look:  
 
English Heritage :  The national body dealing with heritage provides info rmation 
on designations, management and policies . 
 
PPS5:  Planning for the Historic Environment  sets out the principle of 
protecting historic parks and gardens and provides information on grading  
 
Hampshire Gardens Trust . 
 
Hampshire Historic Parks and Gardens  provides information and lin ks to the 
historic parks database.  Almost 40 historic parks and gardens have been 
recorded in the borough, contributing to the attractiveness and character of the urban 
landscape and the countryside while also being of value for wildlife. Some parks have been 
largely developed such as Purbrook Park School and Stakes Hill Lodge. However, where 
open spaces still remain they provide the settings for historic buildings such as The Manor 
House, South Hayling, the park at Hollybank House and the park at Wade Cou rt which takes 
advantage of views over Chichester Harbour. Leigh Park Gardens, which form part of the 
Staunton Country Park, is the most significant designed landscape in the borough and is 
classified as Grade II* in the Register of Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest in 
England  which has been compiled by English Heritage. Where relic features remain in either 
developed or undevelope d settings, the features and their setting should not be lost or 
replaced since they add to local distinctiveness.  Where development is proposed that will 
affect the setting of a registered historic park or garden, consultation with English Heritage is 
required . 
 
Policy CS1 6 High Quality Design  provides design criteria for new development, including that 
which affects historic parks and gardens . 
 
Where else to look:  
 
List of Buildings of Local Interest :  Buildings on the local list are those which are 
not statutorily listed because they do not meet the criteria set out in the 
Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990  but which have 
historic or architectural merit and can contribute significantly to local 
distinctiveness . 
 
PPS5:  Planning for the Historic Environment  
 
Havant Borough Register of Buildings of Local Interest :  The borough has over 
80 buildings which have been identified as being of loca l interest. These are 
noted as being landmarks and buildings with architectural merit, historical or cultural 
associations, townscape quality and relevance to the historic development of the borough. 
When considering development proposals the council will discourage the demolition of these 
buildings, have regard to the preservation of their character and expect their settings to be 
safeguarded to help maintain the sense of place to which they contribute. Repair and Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   143 
 
Archaeological Sites and Monuments of National and Local Importance  
 
 restoration of the existing building will be encouraged. Details of those buildings currently on 
the list can be obtained from the council’s development management team. 
 
Where else to look:  
 
The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979  provides the 
legislative background for ancient monuments and archaeological sites . 
 
PPS5:  Planning for the Historic Environment  
 
English Heritage: Archaeology and Buildings  provides information on 
archaeological sites and their relationship with buildings . 
 
Policy CS1 1 Protecting and Enhancing the Special E nvironment  and Heritage  
of Havant Borough states that statutory and non -statutory designations should 
be used to manage development affecting scheduled ancient monuments and archaeological 
sites.  Within the borough there are a number of sites of archaeological importance including 
scheduled ancient monuments at Fort Purbrook and Warblington Church. Important sites 
which are not scheduled ancient monuments include the Wadeway which connects 
Langstone to Hayling Island and t he Roman villa at Warblington.  Where damage to the 
archaeology can be avoided by modifications to the layout of development, preservation of 
the remains in situ is preferred. The council will seek to ensure satisfactory preservation, 
protection and, where  appropriate, interpretation of the remains.  Where the loss of 
archaeological remains is justified and agreed, detailed information is required before the 
remains are lost. Although every effort should be taken to preserve features of archaeological 
interest it will not always be practical, necessary or desirable to retain all of these in situ on 
development sites. Thorough recording is therefore essential and this should be based on 
advice from professional archaeologists. Developers are expected to take the initiative in 
obtaining advice at an early stage once it is clear that preservation is not justified for 
archaeological reasons . 
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   144 
Enabling Development and the Conservation of Heritage  
 
 
Design  
 Where else to look:  
 
English Heritage  provides guidance on development which is proposed contrary 
to established planning policy in Enabling Development and the Conserva tion 
of Heritage Assets .  This policy statement clearly advocates a presumption 
against enabling development unless it meets specified criteria, the most 
important of which is that the sum of the benefits clearly outweighs the 
disbenefits. The council rec ognises that the flexible application of planning and 
transport policies may assist the retention and upkeep of the historic heritage. 
However, proposals should not be viewed by applicants as a means of 
circumventing policies which should otherwise be enfo rced. English Heritage 
has become increasingly concerned by the adverse effects of some 
developments which have been proposed as a means of benefiting heritage assets.  
Enabling development should only be considered as a last resort. Since the proposal may  
result in wider disadvantages, it needs to be scrutinised to ensure that these are reduced to a 
minimum while maximising the conservation benefits. This means evaluating options in 
relation to the  guidance provided by  English Heritage. The uses being proposed  and the 
design of the development require careful consideration and guidance should be sought from 
the development management team at the earliest opportunity . 
 
PPS5:  P lanning for the Historic Environment .  See in particular Policy HE11:  Enabling 
Development  
 
Where else to look:  
 
CABE: The Value of Public Space:  Public spaces cons ist of streets, squares, 
parks, gardens and other public spaces between and within development. It is 
important to ensure that adequate provision of public open space is provided . 
In accordance with Policy CS 21 Developer Requirements , new residential 
devel opment will be required to provide an appropriate scale of public open 
space and/or formal play space. These could include areas of landscaping, 
footpaths and cycle ways. These spaces will need to be safe places and 
considered at the outset of the developm ent process to also ensure they 
comply with the design principles of  Policy CS1 6 High Quality Design .   
 
Havant Borough Council Public Realm Design Framework :  Looks at streets and open 
spaces and shows  possible improvements for important areas in the borough . 
Havant Borough Townscape, Landscape and Seascape Character Assessment :  Integrated 
landscape character assessment of the borough . 
Havant Town Centre Urban Design Framework :  Sets out design principles for guidance of 
development in Havant Town Centre . 
Landscape Checklist for New Development :  Thi s document is produced by the Hampshire 
Local Government Landscape Group to guide submission requirements for external 
development works in Hampshire . Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   145  
Infrastructure - Transport  
 
DM11  Planning for More Sustainable Travel  
 
The council will seek to ensure that every opportunity is taken to increase i ntegration of 
sustainable travel modes and availability of non -motorised modes by appropriate 
measures including:  
 
1. Securing on -site and/or off -site interventions that promote integrated travel and 
access by non -motorised modes.  
2. Requiring safe and secure ve hicular and cycle parking and turning facilities to 
adopted standards.  
3. Securing appropriate improvements to public and community transport (including 
infrastructure requirements) in accordance with the Hampshire Local Transport 
Plan and (where applicable) the relevant sub -regional transport strategy.  
4. Proposals for reducing opportunities for informal parking in the area surrounding 
the development where this would impact on the capacity, operation and safety of 
the local highway network and/or the amenity of  the locality.  
5. Ensuring that new developments are located and designed at the outset to 
encourage lower vehicle speeds and safe, permeable, inclusive layouts that 
integrate with existing pedestrian, cycle and public transport routes. This will 
facilitate a nd encourage short distance trips by cycle and walking, including to 
public transport interchanges.  
 
  
DM12  Mitigating the Impacts of Travel  
 
New developments will be required to mitigate their travel impact, including the 
environmental impacts of travel (such as noise, air and visual pollution) and impacts on 
amenity, health and climate change by ensuring that, where relevant, the following 
criteria are met:  
 
1. Adequate provision is made for integrated and improved transport infrastructure or 
appropriate m itigation measures, through  direct improvements and S 106 
contributions in accordance with the Hampshire County Council Transport 
Contributions Policy.  
2. The submission of a t ransport assessment and travel plan alongside any planning 
application on proposals for major development or where a proposal is likely to 
have significant transport implications.  
3. The submission of a transport statement must accompany planning applications to 
explain changes to travel demand.  
4. A bond is provided which will be used to mit igate negative travel impacts of the 
development, should the travel  plan fail to achieve its targets. This bond will be held 
by the relevant local transport authority.  
5. In relation to outline planning applications, a framework for the preparation of travel 
assessments and travel plans will be submitted with the planning application 
proposals.  Waterlooville Urban Design Framework :  Provides supplementary planning guidance for new 
development in Waterlooville . 
Safer Places: The Planning System and Crime Pr evention (2004) :  Considers crime 
prevention and prompting community safety through the planning system . Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   146  
DM13  Car and Cycle Parking on Residential Development  
 
Residential development will only be permitted where it provides car parking and cycle 
storage in accordance wit h the standards set out in the Residential Car  Parking and 
Cycle Provision  Supplementary Planning Document.  
 
DM14  Car and Cycle Parking on Development (excluding residential)  
 
Development will only be permitted where it provides parking for cars, motor cyc les and 
cycles in accordance with the relevant standards. Such parking provision must be 
appropriately located in relation to the development and be practical for its intended use.  
  
10.32 The non residential car and cycle standards are currently identifie d in Appendix 5 of this  Core 
Strategy. These requirements are taken from work produced by Hampshire County Council and 
they comply with PPG13 Annexe D.  Planning Policy Statement 4 has replaced parts of PPG13 
and will be taken into account.  In due course th ese standards may be replaced by a 
supplementary planning document.  
 
10.33 For developments which would generate significant amounts of travel, a transport assessment 
and a company or site travel plan will be required (detailing the approach to minimise th e 
expected traffic impact of new development).  
 
 
DM15 Safeguarding  Transport Infrastructure  
 
Development will not be permitted where it is prejudicial to the future provision of 
strategic transport infrastructure. Land to be safeguarded will be identified  in the 
Development Delivery (Allocations) Plan or other local development d ocument as 
appropriate and agreed with the appropriate delivery body.  
 
DM16 Freight Transport  
 
Freight movements resulting from a development should not impact negatively on the 
environment or the quality of life of those who live and work nearby. Where such 
developments will have a negative impact on the capacity, operation and safety of 
transport networks, appropriate mitigation measures should form part of the application 
for con sideration by the council.  
 
1. Proposals generating significant freight or goods movements should have good 
access to transport networks. Preferred sites for such development will be those 
which have the potential for rail access. The provision of rail freigh t will be 
encouraged wherever possible. Otherwise, such development should be located 
where there is ready access to roads which are higher in the road hierarchy and 
where sensitive areas are less likely to be affected by heavy goods vehicles.  
2. Proposals sh ould make reference to and be in accordance with, the Hampshire 
Freight Strategy.  
 
  Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   147 
 Transport  
Where else to look:  
 
PPG13  Transport :   Contains information relating t o car parking and promoting 
sustainable travel choices. The location, design and layout of development can 
have a major impact on how people travel. Where the need to travel cannot be 
avoided, the promotion of sustainable modes will be encouraged with most  
importance placed on non -motorised methods such as walking and cycling. 
New development will be expected to integrate into the existing public and 
community transport network and roads should be designed to encourage the 
use of non -motorised forms of tran sport. The design and layout should also 
provide an opportunity to reduce informal, overspill parking from a 
development which can impact both on highway safety and visual amenity .   
 
Both on and off -site infrastructure improvements can help mitigate any n egative impacts of a 
development on the capacity, operation and safety of transport networks and it is expected 
that developers will bear the cost of these mitigation measures. Contributions may be used to 
fund interventions that are linked to the developm ent, although these will not always be local 
to the development . 
 
PPG13 provides specific guidance on:  
Developer contributions at para graph  83 – 86 
Transport assessments at para graph  23  
Travel plans at para graph  87 – 91 
Freight transport at para graph  45 (2) 
 
PPS3: Housing :  National Planning Policy on car parking in residential development is 
contained in PPS3 , particularly paragraphs 16 and 51 . 
 
Residential Parking and Cycle Provision SPD : The standards formulated in the Residential 
Parking and Cycle Provision SPD have involved public consultation and have taken into 
account the importance of promoting good design , the efficient use of land and actual and 
expected levels of car ownership, as advocated in PPS3. The standards also take account of 
locations where cycling and walking should and can be encouraged and in these areas, a 
lesser provision of car parking is required . 
 
 Providing a realistic car parking standard allows parking to be ‘designed -in’ to development 
and reduces the potential for future indiscriminate or inappropriate parking both on and close 
to the development site .  
 
For developments which would generate significant amounts of travel, a transport 
assessment and a company or site travel plan will be required (detailing the approach to 
minimise the expected traffic impact of new development) . 
 
The Hampshire Local Transport Plan :  Sets out the county council’s  transport strategy for 
2006 – 2011 . 
 
Policy T11 of the South East Plan :  States that the railway system should be developed to 
carry an increasing share of freight movements. The movement of freight will be considered 
as part of the planning process and any proposal which will resu lt in the movement of freight 
should be supported by a statement identifying the type of freight movements and the routes 
proposed. In the case of a negative impact being identified, mitigation measures should be 
identified.  
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   148  Developments that result in si gnificant freight movements should be located in suitable 
locations close to railways or roads capable of accommodating heavy goods vehicles without 
having an adverse impact on the character of the area, therefore minimising the potential for 
these movemen ts to impact negatively on quality of life.  
 
Policy T12 of the South East Plan :  Land which has been identified for strategi c transport 
infrastructure will be safeguarded from development which could prevent the future delivery 
of these schemes.  
 
The Plann ing Application Checklist :  Lists the documents which must be submitted to support 
a planning application. Developments will promote inclusive access and this shall be 
demonstrated through the design and access statement.   The Non Residential Parking 
Standards are cu rrently identified in Appendix 5 of this Core Strategy. These requirements 
are taken from work produced by Hampshire County Council and they comply with PPG13 
(Annexe D ). In due course these standards may be replaced by a s upplemen tary planning  
document . 
 
PPS4: Planning for Sustainable Economic Growth : Policy EC8 and EC18 both address non 
residential car parking and will be used in det ermining applications and if a supplementary 
planning d ocument is produced . 
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   149 
Appendix 1: Evidence Based Studies   
Evidence Study  Responsibility  Progress  
1. Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment  Atkins – for PUSH  Completed – March 2008  
2. Employment Land Review   
Vail Williams – Property Review – 
PP team for ELR  Completed – March 2008  
 
3. Employment Land Review   
DTZ Completed – February 2010  
4. Landscape, townscape and 
Seascape Character Assessment  Kirkham Landscape Associates  Completed – February 2007  
5. Open Sp aces Plan  Kit Campbell Associates  Completed – February 2006  
6. Landscape Sensitivity Study  Kirkham Landscape Associates  Completed – February 2007  
7. Strategic Gap Study  Kirkham Landscape Associates  Completed – March 2008  
8. Tourism Study  In house  Comple ted – August 2007  
9. Infrastructure - Stage 1  In house  Completed – July 2007  
10. Infrastructure – Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan  LSP/HCC/HBC  HCC baseline study  published 
November 2009. Delivery Plan 
ongoing  
11. Strategic Housing Land 
Availability Assessment  In house  1st Edition March 08, 2nd Edition 
December 08, 3rd Edition December 
09  
12. Housing Market Assessment  DTZ  - PUSH  Completed 2006.  Updated 
December 2008. Annual  Review  
Completed 2009.  
13. Habitats Regulations 
Assessment  UEA Screening Report completed – June 
2009. Appropriate Assessment 
ongoing  
  
14. Transport Impact Evaluation  Peter Brett Associates for Harbour 
authorities (PCC, HBC, GBC & 
FBC)  Stage 1 Report Completed June 
2009.  
Stage 2 Havant Transport Mitigation 
Study January 2010  
15. Town Centres Retail & 
Leisure Study  Nathaniel Litchfield Partners (NLP)  Final Report completed April 2009  
16. Gypsy & Travellers  David Couttie Associates – HCC – 
Gypsy & Tra veller Accommodation South East Plan Partial Review 
Examination start ed February 2010  Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   150 
Assessment (GTAA)  
17. Travelling Showpeople  HCC – Travelling Show people 
Accommodation Assessment 
(TSAA)  South East Plan Partial Review 
Examination start ed February 2010  
18. Housing Viability  DTZ February 2009  
19. Housing Viability  Assessment  DTZ August 2010  
20. Hotel Study - Borough  Hotel Solutions  Completed 20/08/08  
21. Sustainability Appraisal  ENTEC (early core strategy) & in 
house since then. UEA now 
providing cr itical friend review.  
 Completed to required stages  
22. Green Infrastructure Study  TEP & UEA on behalf of PUSH  Background (TEP) Study completed 
July 08. Phase 2 UEA final report 
June 2010  
23. North Solent Shoreline 
Management Plan  New Forest DC is the project lead.  Consultation – 9 February - end May 
2010. Further information at the New 
Forest NSSMP website  
 
24. Equalities Impact Assessment  In House  To be produced alongside each 
DPD.  
25. School Places Plan 2009  HCC  Further information at the Hampshire 
County Education website  
26. Identifying Business Clusters 
of Potential in South Hampshire  University of Portsmouth  2006  
 
 
 
 
 
 Where else to look:  
 
Havant Borough Local De velopment Framework Evidence Base Studies 
website  Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   151 
 Appendix 2: Housing T rajectory (2009)  
 
 
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   152 
Housing Trajectory (2009)
-1000-5000500100015002000
2001/2 2002/3 2003/4 2004/5 2005/6 2006/7 2007/8 2008/92009/10 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 2015/16 2016/17 2017/18 2018/19 2019/20 2020/21 2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26
YearNumber of dwellingsTotal Past Completions
Total Projected
Completions
PLAN - Strategic
Allocation (annualised)
MONITOR - No.
dwellings above or
below cumulative
allocation
MANAGE - Annual
requirement taking
account of
past/projected
completions Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   153 
Appendix 3: Policy CS11 Havant Borough Nature Designations   
 
 
 
Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   154 
Appendix 4: Policy CS15 Havant Borough Flood Risk 
Projections for 2115   
See Environm ent Agency website for current flood zones  
 
 
 
Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   155 
Appendix 5: Non Residential Parking S tandards  Policy DM14  
 
Hampshire Parking Standards (2002)          
 
Notes for applying parking standards  
 
Havant Borough  Council has adopted the Hampshire Parking Standard s 2002 subject to the following:  
(a) That for the purposes of reducing car parking provision in highly accessible locations, as outlined in Table A below, onl y those areas w ithin 
Havant and Waterlooville T own Centres ’ boundaries.  
(b) That the provision of  new public transport services be monitored and new areas where reducing car parking provision may be appropriate 
be brought forward.  
 
The parking standards are detailed in the following tables:  
 
Table number   
A Percentage of parking limit reduction by la nd use  
B Summary of thresholds for transport assessments and site travel plans  
1 Commercial development  
2 Retail  
3 Educational establishments  
4 Health establishments  
5 Care establishments  
6 Leisure facilities  
7 Miscellaneous commercial developments  
 
 
 
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   156 Car parking – How to calculate the parking allocation for a development  
 
The application of maximum parking standards conforms to the requirements of PPG 13 para. 51. Residential parking is dealt wi th separately to 
take account of more recent guidanc e provided in PPS3.  
 
The main factor will be accessibility of the site, upon completion, by non -car modes.  As a general rule, areas of high accessibility are served by 
at least six buses an hour within 500 metres and good cycling and pedestrian facilities.  Developments in such accessible locations warrant less 
car parking than is shown under the maximum parking limit.  More guidance on this can be provided on enquiry to Havant Borough  Council.  
 
Several local factors can also influence the calculation of the parking allocation.  For example:  
 
1. Area of economic regeneration or constraint.  Reduced parking will apply in constraint areas while regeneration areas may warrant a 
slight increase in parking.  
2. Zone characteristics.  Historic town centres, other environmenta lly sensitive locations, or specific locations that have particular Road 
Traffic Reduction Act targets will warrant reduced parking allocations.  
3. Self-containment.  Reduced parking may be justified in highly self -contained areas, while a reduction may be ina ppropriate where it is 
less self -contained, eg a location competing with a neighbouring area.  
4. Cycle accessibility.  Where there is high cycle accessibility planned or in use, reduced parking will apply.  
 
Other parking in the locality must also be considered .  
 
The calculation of parking spaces to be allocated for a development should take account of two further factors:  
 
1. Existing public parking stock with spare capacity within walking distance of the development site should be included in the o verall 
maximum  parking provision.  
2. Additional development on a site will mean the entire parking stock being brought into account.  
 
 
 
 
 
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   157 Levels of adjustment in the parking allocation  
 
The reduction in parking allocation varies at different rates according to land use.  
 
Table A: Percentage of parking limit reduction by land use  
 
Land use  Maximum parking limit  Reduced parking in areas of 
high accessibility  
Retail  100%  
  75% 
Education, health, care, leisure  100%  
  50% 
Employment .(inc. non -residential care staff)  
 100%  30% 
 
Where there is most accessibility (for example, close to transport interchanges), zero parking will be encouraged if local ci rcumstances permit.  
 
Parking for pedal cyclists and motorcyclists  
 
Minimum cycle parking standards are indicated on the attache d tables by land use.  It is expected that at least the specified level should be 
provided.  For more details on cycle provision, in particular short - and long -stay facilities, refer to 'Cycle Parking Standards ’. Generally, for 
motorcycles – except in reside ntial land uses – one space is to be provided for every 25 car parking spaces.  
 
Parking for people with disabilities  
 
Suitable parking spaces should be provided for people with disabilities. Generally, except for residential land uses, disable d people's ca r 
parking spaces should be counted as 5% of the total allocation. General advice is included in Parking for Disabled People  (Traffic Accident 
Leaflet 5/95) published by the DTLR and Accessible Transport Infrastructure: A Guide to Good Practice , by the DTLR . Hampshire County 
Council's Accessible Transport Strategy and the ‘Movement, Access, Streets and Spaces’ document (July 2001) should also be co nsidered.  
 
 
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   158 Heavy commercial vehicles: parking standards  
 
Where required, an operational number of spaces for H CV parking will be considered on the basis of individual application to the local planning 
authority.  
 
Design  
 
The layout and design of car parks should take account of the 'Secured by Design' initiative to reduce crime and maximise per sonal safety and 
the information contained in Manual for Streets.  
 
Thresholds for parking standards, transport assessments and site travel plans  
 
The parking standards apply to developments of all sizes. However, for larger developments a transport assessment and a compa ny or  site 
travel plan will be required.  
Table B below, based on guidance contained within PPG 13, indicates the thresholds above which a transport assessment and a c ompany or 
site travel plan is submitted. For further guidance on travel plans, refer to PPG 13 paras. 87 -91. 
 
Table B: Summary of thresholds for transport assessments and site travel plans  
 Land use  Threshold above which  transport 
assessment required  
 Residential  50 units  
 Commercial: B1 and B2  2500 sqm  
 Commercial: B8  5000 sqm  
 Retail  1000 sqm  
 Education  2500 sqm  
 Health  establishments  2500 sqm  
 Care establishments  500 sqm or 5 bedroom  
 Leisure: general  1000 sqm  
 Leisure: stadia, ice rinks  All (1500 seats)  
 Miscellaneous commercial  500 sqm  Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   159 Note: Where appropriate the local planning author ity can require a transport assessment or company/site travel plan below the thresholds specified, for 
example where there are potential cumulative effects.  
 
Definition of gross external area  
This definition of floor area is used to calculate the car park ing standards in the following tables:  
 Gross external area (GEA): The total external area of a property (including the thickness of the external wall)  
 
Table 1:  Commercial development  
Type  
  
  Car parking standard  Cycle standard (minimum)  
 
 
 
Maximum par king limit  Parking in highly 
accessible locations  
(30% of maximum 
permitted standard)   
 
 
Long stay   
 
 
Short stay  
B1(a) office  
  1 space per 30 sqm  
Refer to note 1  1 space per 100 sqm  1 stand per 150 sqm  
GEA note  1 stand per 500 sqm  
GEA  
B1 (b)(c) high tec h/light industry  
  1 space per 45 sqm  
  1 space per 167 sqm  1 stand per 250 sqm  
GEA note  1 stand per 500 sqm  
GEA  
B2 general industrial  
  1 space per 45 sqm  
  1 space per 167 sqm  1 stand per 350 sqm  
GEA note  1 stand per 500  
sqm GEA  
B8 warehouse  
  1 spac e per 90 sqm  
  1 space per 303 sqm  1 stand per 500  
GEA note  1 stand per 1000 
sqm 
GEA  
Notes  
1. Subject to a condition or legal agreement restricting consent to the specified use.  
2. Long -stay cycle parking to be at least the greater of the spaces per GEA identif ied or 1 space per 8 staff.  
3. For all major commercial developments, a transport assessment and company or site travel plan will be required (see Table B f or thresholds).  
4. Proposed standards will take account of commercial development in predominantly residen tial areas . Where demonstrable harm to local residents 
occurs, the provision of on -street parking controls will be considered.  
5. This document does not provide guidance on commercial vehicle parking standards, which will be considered by the local planni ng authority on the 
basis of individual application.  Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   160  
Table 2:  Retail development   
 
Type  
General retail  Car parking standard  Cycle standard (minimum)  
 
 
 
Maximum  parking limit  Parking in highly  
accessible locations  
(75% of maximum 
permitted standard)   
 
 
Long stay   
 
 
Short stay  
Non-food retail and general retail  
(covered retail areas)  
  
  1 space per 20 sqm  
covered  
areas  1.5 spaces per 40 sqm  Greater of 1 space  
per 6 staff or  
1 per 300 sqm GEA  
  1 stand/  
 200 sqm GEA  
  
  
Non-food retail and general retail  
(uncovered retail areas)  
  
  1 space per 30 sqm  
uncovered  
areas  
 1.5 spaces per 60 sqm  Greater of 1 space  
per 6 staff or  
1 per 300 sqm GEA  
  1 stand/  
 200 sqm GEA  
  
  
Food retail  
  
  1 space per 14 sqm  
covered  
areas  
 1.5 spaces per 28sqm  Greater of 1 spa ce 
per 6 staff or  
1 per 300 sqm GEA  
  1 stand/  
 200 sqm GEA  
  
  
Notes  
 A company or site travel plan will be required for stores over 500 sqm GFA, with the GEA including uncovered areas subject to  the discretion of the local 
planning authority in conjunct ion with the Highway Authority.  
 Petrol stations with a shop will be considered under the appropriate retail category but with petrol pump spaces counting as one space each.  
 
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   161  
Table 3:  Education establishments . 
Type  
  
  Car parking standard  Cycle stand ard (minimum)  
Maximum  parking limit  Parking in  
accessible locations  
(50% of maximum 
permitted standard)  Long stay  Short stay  
Schools  
 1.5 space per classroom  
 1.5 spaces per 2 
classrooms  
 (Note 1)  
 (Note 1)  
 
16+ Colleges and further education 
colleges  
 1 space per 2 full -time staff (Note 1)  
 
 (Note 1)  
 
 (Note 1)  
 
 
Day nurseries/playgroups (private) and 
crèches  
 1.5 space per 2 full -time 
staff 1.5 spaces per 4 full -time 
staff 
 1 stand per  
6 full -time staff  At least 2 stands  
per establishment  
Notes  
1. All new educational establishments or expansions of more than 50 sqm will require a transport appraisal and school or college tra vel plan to determine 
provision and facilities. The plan and transport appraisal or assessment is required to identify and justify any allocation to staff, students or community 
users.  
2. The parking allocation caters for staff, visitors and parents.  
3. There will be a requirement for a bus/coach loading area, provided either on - or off -site, for primary -age education and above, unless oth erwise justified.  
4. Accessibility of the catchment area will be taken into account for schools.   
  
 
 
 
 
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   162 Table 4: Health establishments  
Type  
  Car parking standard  Cycle standard (minimum)  
  
Maximum parking limit  Parking in accessible 
locations  
(50% of m aximum permitted 
standard)  Long stay  Short stay  
Private hospitals, community and general 
hospitals, including:  
inpatient, day patient, outpatient or 
accident unit ; 
locally b ased mentally handicapped units / 
psychiatric units ; 
ambulatory c are units includin g day 
surgery/assessment/ treatment and 
administration/support services.    
  
  
  
  
Refer to note 1  
  
  
  
  
Health centres  5 spaces per consulting 
room  2.5 spaces per consulting 
room or 5 spaces per 2 
consulting rooms  1 space per 2 consulting 
rooms, or  1 stand per  
consulting room  
Doctors, dentists or veterinary surgery  3 spaces per consulting 
room  1.5 spaces per consulting 
rooms  1 space per 6 staff (Note 2)  1 stand per  
consulting room  
Notes  
1. All new health establishments or major expansions of more than 2, 500 sqm will require a transport assessment and extensions of over 500 sqm wi ll 
require a site travel plan. The maximum car parking limit for staff and visitors will be based on these.  
2. Whichever is the greater of these standards.  
  
 
 
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   163 Table 5: Care establ ishments – public and private  
 
Type  
  
 Car parking standard  Cycle standard (minimum)  
 
Maximum parking limit  Parking in accessible  locations  
(50% of maximum permitted standard)   
Long stay   
Short stay  
Day centres for older people,  
adults with lear ning/  
physical disabilities  1 space per 2 staff,  
visitor: 1 space per 2 clients  
(Notes 1 & 2)  staff: 3 spaces per 10 staff   
visitor: 1 space per 4 clients  
(Notes 1 & 2)  1 space per 6 staff  
(min 1 space)  At least 2 
stands per 
establishment  
Homes for ch ildren  1 space per residential staff,  
0.5 space per non -res staff,  
visitor: 0.25 space per client  
(Note 3)  res staff: 1 space per 2 res staff,  
non-res staff: 1 space per 7 non -res 
staff 
visitor: 1 space per 8 clients  
(Note 3)  1 space per 6 staff  
(min 1 space)  At least 2 
stands per 
establishment  
Family centres  1 space per 2 staff,  
visitor : 1 space per 2 clients, 
(Note 1)  staff: 3 spaces per 10 staff   
visitor: 1 space per 4 clients  
(Note 1)  1 space per 6 staff  
 (min 1 space)  At least 2 
stands per 
establishment  
Residential units for adults with  
learning or physical disabilities  1 space per residential staff,  
0.5 space per non -res staff,  
visitor: 0.25 space per client 
(Note 3)  res staff: 1 space per 2 staff  
non-res staff: 1 space per 7 non -res 
staff 
visitor: 1 space per clients  
(Note 3)  1 space per 6 staff  1 loop/hoop 
per 2 
bedrooms  
Day nurseries/playgroups  
(private)   See Education Standards (Table 1)  
 
Hostels for the homeless  No standard set  No standard set  1 space per 6 staff  1 loop/hoop 
per 
 2 bedrooms  Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   164 Notes  
1. ‘Staff’ applies to full -time equivalent member of staff.  
2. Plus space for dropping off people.  
3. Applies to non -residential staff on duty at the busiest time.  
 
Figures are based on the maximum number of children for which the group is licen sed or the client capacity of the centre (and are rounded to the nearest whole 
number where appropriate).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   165 Table 6:  Leisure facilities and places of public assembly  
 
Type  
 
 
 Car parking standard  Cycle standard (minimum)  
Maximum p arking limit  Parking in highly 
accessible locations  
(50% of maximum 
permitted standard)  Long stay  Short stay  
Hotels/motels/guest houses/boarding 
houses  1 space per bedroom, 
(Note 1)  1 space per 2 bedrooms   1 space per 6 staff or 1 space 
per 40sqm.GEA (Not e 2) 1 stand per 10 
bedrooms  
Eating and drinking establishments  1 space per 5sqm dining 
area/bar area/dance floor 
(Note 3)  1 space per 7.5 sqm  1 space per 6 staff or 1 space 
per 40sqm.GEA (Note 2)  1 stand per 20sqm 
GEA  
Cinemas, multi -screen cinemas, 
theatres and conference facilities  1 space per 5 fixed  
seats  1 space per 7.5 seats  
  1 space per 6 staff or  
1 space per 40sqm  
(Note 2)  1 stand per 20sqm  
  
Bowling centres, bowling greens  3 space per lane  1.5 spaces per lane  1 space per 6 staff or  
1 spac e per 40sqm  
(Note 2)  1 stand per 20sqm  
Sports halls  1 space per 5 fixed seats 
and 1 space per 30sqm 
playing area  Notes 2 and 4  
 1 space per 7.5 seats/  
1 space per 45 sqm  1 space per 6 staff or  
1 space per equivalent 
badminton court  
(Notes 2 & 4)  1 stand per equivalent 
badminton court  
(Note 4)  
Swimming pools, health clubs/ 
gymnasia  1 space per 5 fixed seats 
and 1 space per 10sqm 
open hall/pool area  1 space per 7.5 seats/  
1 space per 15 sqm  1 space per 6 staff or  
1 space per 40sqm  
(Note 2)  1 stand per 2 0sqm  
Tennis courts  3 spaces per court  1.5 spaces per court  1 space per 6 staff or 1 space 
per 5 courts/pitches  
(Note 2)  1 stand per pitches or 
courts  
Squash courts  2 spaces per court  1 space per court  1 space per 6 staff or 1 space 
per 5 courts/pitches (Note 2)  1 stand per pitches or 
courts  Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   166 Playing fields  12 spaces per ha pitch 
area 6 spaces per ha pitch 
area 1 space per 6 staff or  
 1 space per 5 ha pitch area 
(Note 2)  1 stand per ha pitch 
area  
Golf courses  4 spaces per hole (Note 5)  2 spaces per hol e (Note 6)  (Note 6)  
Golf driving ranges  1.5 space per tee/bay  1.5 spaces per 2 tees/bay  (Note 6)  (Note 6)  
Marinas  1.5 space per berth  0.75 space per berth  (Note 6)  (Note 6)  
Places of worship/church halls  1 space per 5 fixed seats 
and 1 space per 10sqm of 
open hall  1 space per 7.5 seats/ 
1space per 15sqm of 
open hall  1 space per 6 staff or  
 1 space per 40sqm (Note 2)  1 stand per 20sqm  
Stadia  Refer to Note 6   1 space per 6 staff or 1 space 
per 40sqm (Note 2)  1 stand per 20sqm  
Notes  
1. Other facilities, eg e ating/drinking and entertainment, are treated separately if they are available to non -residents.  
2. Whichever is the greater provision of these standards.  
3. Where these serve HCVs, eg transport cafes, some provision will be needed for HCV parking.  
4. A badminton court area is defined as 6.1m x 13.4m.  
5. Other facilities, eg club house, are treated separately.  
6. No standards are set for this category. Each application will be considered individually as part of a transport assessment.  
 
 All new leisure establishments or m ajor expansions will require a transport assessment and company or site travel plan to determine 
provision and facilities (see Table B for thresholds).  
 Motorway service areas will be included as eating and drinking establishments with additional considerat ion for associated facilities; parking 
for HCVs and PCVs will be required.  
 
 
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   167 Table 7:  Miscellaneous commercial developments  
 
Type  
Car sales and garage forecourts  Car parking standard  Cycle standard (minimum)  
Maximum parking limit  Parking in accessible  
locations  Long stay  Short stay  
Workshops - staff 1 space per 45sqm GEA  1 space per 167sqm GEA  1 space per 8 staff or 1 space 
per 250sqm GEA (Note 1)  1 stand/500sqm GEA  
Workshops – customers  
 
  3 spaces per service bay  3 spaces per service bay  
  - 
 - 
Car sales - staff 1 space per full -time staff 
(Note 2)  1 space per 3 full -time staff  1 space per 8 staff or 1space 
per 250sqm GEA (Note 1)  1 stand/500sqm GEA  
Car sales - customers  1 space per 10 cars on 
display  
(Note 3)  1 space per 15 cars  -   - 
Notes 
1. Whichever is the greater of these standards.  
2. Full-time equivalent staff.  
3. Applies to the number of cars on sale in the open.  
 
 
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   168 
 Appendix 6: List of Saved Local Plan Policies that are Superseded by 
the Core Strategy   
 
Saved Local 
Plan policy  Policy title Core Strategy 
Policy  
UA1 Concentration of Development within the Urban Areas  CS17.1 
UA3 Leigh Park Regeneration  CS6.3  
UA4 Wecock Regeneration  CS6.5  
C3 Development in the Coastal Zone  DM9  
NC2 Sites of Special Scientific Interest  CS11.3 
NC4 Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation and Local Nature 
Reserves  CS11.3 
NC5 Other Features of Nature Conservation Interest  CS11.3 
PC1 Control of Potentially Polluting Uses  DM10  
PC3 Protection of Water Quality  DM10  
PC4 Light Pollution  DM10  
ENG1  Energy Generation from Renewable Sources  CS14.2, CS1 9.1 & 
CS19.8 
D1 High Quality Design  CS16 
D2 Co-ordination of Development  DM6  
D3 Public Spaces  CS16 
L1 Chichester Harbour Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty 
(AONB)  CS12  
L2 Landscape Character Areas  CS11.1 
L3 Portsdown Hill  CS11.1 
L4 Stream Corridors  CS11.1 
L5 Initiatives to Improve the Coastal Environment  DM9  
L6 Conservation and Protection of Existing Natural Features  CS11.2 
L7 New Landscape Works  CS16 
HE1 Development in Conservation Areas  CS11.4 
HE7 Extensions and Alterations to Listed Buildings  CS11.4 
HE9 Historic Parks and Gardens  CS11.4 
HE10  Buildings of Local Interest  CS11.4 
HE11  
 Preservation of Archaeological Sites and Monuments of 
National Importance  CS11.4 
HE12  
 Preservation of Archaeologic al Sites and Monuments of 
National Importance  CS11.4 
HE14  Archaeological Investigations  CS11.4 
HE15  Roads with Special Character  CS11.1 & DM8  
HE16  Enabling Development and the Conservation of Heritage Assets  CS11.4 
H5 Density of Housing Development  CS9.4 
H6 Range of House Types and Sizes  CS9.5  
H7 Loss of Dwellings  CS9 
H8 Affordable Housing  CS9.2  
H9  Supported Housing Provision  DM7  
H11 Sites for Gypsies and Travelling Showpeople  CS10  
EMP1.4  Land at Dunsbury Hill Farm, Park Lane, Havant/Waterloovill e CS18.3 
EMP2  
 Developer Contributions Towards the Implementation of the 
Broadmarsh Transportation Strategy  CS21 
EMP4  Industrial Improvement Areas  CS6 & DM6  
EMP5  Maximising Employment  CS2 
EMP6  Protection of Land and Premises in Employment Use  CS2.5 & D M3 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   169 EMP7  Conversion and Change of Use  DM3  
EMP8  Home Based Businesses  CS16.1e  & CS 2.8 
MDA1  Land West of London Road  (Plant Farm ) CS18.4 
MDA2  Land at Old Park Farm , Waterlooville  CS18.4 
MDA3  Land West of London Road  (Purbrook Heath ) CS18.4 
MDA4  Transpor t Matters Relating to the MDA  CS18.4 
TC9 
 Control of Class  A3, A4 and A5 F ood and Drink Uses Town 
Centres and District Centres  DM5  
TC10  
 Control of Class A3, A4 and A5 F ood and Drink Uses  Local 
Centres and Other Areas  DM5  
TC12  Other Local Shopping Facil ities – Maintenance of Shops  DM2  
TC13  Shop Premises  CS16 
TC14  Shopfronts  CS16 
TC15  Security Shutters  CS16 & CS8  
WTC7  Development Site  – Former Allotments , Maurepas Way  CS18.4 
R1 Countryside and Coastal Recreation Development  CS1 
R2 Protection of the Staunton Country Park  CS11.4 
R7 Beachlands - Recreational Development  CS6.4  
R8 Moorings in Chichester and Langstone Harbours  CS1.12  
R13 Environmental Qualities of Open Space  DM1 & CS13 
R14 Protection of Children 's Play Spaces  DM1  
R15 Protection of Pla ying Fields and Courts  DM1  
R18 Allotments  DM1  
CS1 Community Buildings  CS1.10  & DM2  
CS2 Community Health Facilities  CS19.8 
CS3 Rest and Nursing Homes  DM7  
CS4(iii)  Land at Plant Farm  CS18.4 
TO2 Protection of Tourist Accommodation and Facilities  DM3  & CS5.3 
TO4 Control of Static Holiday Caravan Development  DM4  
TO5 Static Holiday Caravan Development in the Eastoke Area  DM4  
T1 Proposals to Assist the Development of an Integrated Transport 
Network  DM11 & CS 20 
T2 Safeguarding of Land for South Hampshire Rapid Transit 
System  CS21 
T5 New Roads  CS20 
T6 Public Transport, Cycling and Walking New Development  CS20 
T7 Criteria for Access to Development  CS20 
T8 Bus Access and Provision for Cyclists and Pedestrians  CS20 
T9 
 Provision of Vehicle Parking and Tur ning Facilities  (including 
associated Appendix 1 of the HBDWLP)  DM13  
T10 Contributions to Off -site Highway Improvements  DM12 & CS 21 
T11 Developer Contributions Towards Green Transport 
Infrastructure  DM12 & CS 21 
T12 Freight  DM16  
US1 Reservoir  – Havant Thicket  CS18.2 
US2 Water Supply Industry Use  Kingscroft Farm , Havant  CS19.8 
US4 Sewers  CS19 
F1 Development in Areas at Risk from Tidal Flooding and Coastal 
Erosion  CS15 
F3 Flood Defence and Coast Protection Works  CS11, CS1 5, 
CS21 & DM9  
IMP1  Financial  Contributions  CS21 
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   170 
 Where else to look:  
 
A number of saved Local Plan policies will continue to operate simultaneously 
with Core Strategy policies until they are replaced by Development Delivery 
(Allocations) Plan policies.  Up -to-date information on a ll LDF policies will be 
provided on the council’s website at Havant Borough Local Development 
Framework  Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   171 
Glossary  
 
Access Management:  A range of measures to facilitate public access to appropriate si tes or to 
reduce visitor impact on environmentally designated sites by encouraging responsible 
behaviour, increase management effectiveness and responsiveness and awareness of 
conservation issues.  
 
Allowable Solutions:  A range of measures available for ach ieving zero carbon beyond the 
minimum carbon compliance requirements. These could include advanced building controls, 
energy efficient appliances, investing in low and zero carbon heat infrastructure and other 
emerging solutions . 
 
Affordable Homes: Housing  built (usually by a Housing Association) for sale or rent at a price 
level below market rate and kept in this use. It is provided to eligible households whose needs 
cannot be met by the market.   
 
Annual Monitoring Report:  This document is produced on an a nnual basis and it monitors 
achievements and progress against a number of indicators including housing delivery and 
progress on the HBLDF. It is usually published in December of each year.  
 
Appropriate Assessment:  The Habitats Directive 92/43/EEC Article 6(3) requires an 
assessment of whether plans have a significant impact on Natura 2000 sites. Natura 2000 sites 
are Special Areas of Conservation (SAC), Special Protection Areas (SPA) and Ramsar sites. 
The Appropriate Assessment is a process that determines  whether the plan does, or does not 
affect the integrity of the Natura 2000 sites.  
 
Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB):   Is a nationally important landscape designated 
for its outstanding landscape value, with the primary purpose of conserving and enhancing 
natural beauty. AONBs have been confirmed by the government as having the highest status of 
protection in relation to landscape and scenic beauty . 
 
Biodiversity: The whole variety of life on earth. It includes all species of plants and animals, 
their genetic variation and the ecosystems of which they are a part.  
 
Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method  (BREEAM):  Is the 
leading and most widely used environmental assessment method for buildings. It sets the 
standard for best  practice in sustainable design and has become the de facto measure used to 
describe a building's environmental performance.  
 
Buildings of Local Interest: Buildings which are regarded as being of particular local interest, 
although not of a standard to be included in the Statutory List but which have architectural merit, 
are local landmarks, have literary or historical associations, make significant contributions to the 
townscape or reflect the historical development, economic activity and civic functions o f the 
borough.  
 
Catchment Flood Management Plan (CFMP):  Describes how the risk of flooding within a 
catchment will be managed over the next 50 to 100 years. The main aims are to understand the 
factors that contribute to flood risk both now and in the futur e and to recommend the best ways 
of managing the risk of flooding within the catchment over the next 50 to 100 years  
 
Census: The census is a survey carried out by the Office for National Statistics of all people 
and households in the country. It provides essential information from national to neighbourhood 
level for government, business and the community.  
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   172 Cluster:  A collection of business activities which are related to one another in one of three 
ways.  They may be related by the product or service the y make, use similar inputs and/or be 
dependent on a small number of major customers.  
 
Coastal Squeeze:  The term ‘coastal squeeze’ is applied to the situation where coastal margin 
(such as salt marsh) is squeezed between the fixed landward boundary (such as  a sea wall) 
and the rising sea level. In such cases the coastal habitat is unable to move landward owing to 
the presence of built development and consequently over time the area of habitat is reduced as 
sea levels rise.  
 
Comparison Floorspace: The amount  of floorspace given over to the sale of Comparison 
Goods. The floorspace figure is usually provided in square metres.  
 
Comparison Goods: Goods sold by durable goods retailers which include clothing and 
footwear; household goods; DIY; recreational goods su ch as electrical and sports; and other 
goods such as pharmaceutical products and jewellery.  
Comprehensive Area Assessments  (CAA): Have been carried out and will be delivered jointly 
by the main public sector inspectorates (including The Audit Commission). They will reflect the 
new era of public sector partnership working. This new assessment framework will provide a 
snapshot of how effectively local partnerships are working together to deliver local people's 
priorities.  
Conservation area:  An area which is o f special historic or architectural character and is worthy 
of preservation designated by the Local Planning Authority under the Planning (Listed Buildings 
and Conservation Areas) Act 1990.  
 
Convenience Floorspace: The amount of floorspace given over to th e sale of Convenience 
Goods. The floorspace figure is usually provided in square metres.  
 
Convenience Goods:  Convenience goods are those consumer goods purchased on a regular 
basis, including food and groceries and cleaning materials.  
 
Core Strategy: A Dev elopment Plan Document that sets out the long -term spatial vision for the 
local planning authority area, the spatial objectives and strategic policies to deliver that vision.  
 
Department for Communities and Local Government (DCLG):  Aims to foster prosper ous 
and cohesive communities , offering a safe, healthy and sustainable environment for all. 
Information about activities and policies can be found at: www. communities .gov.uk  
 
Defensible: Public and semi -public space that is ‘defensible’ in the sense that it is surveyed, 
demarcated or maintained by somebody. Derived from Oscar Newman’s 1973 study of the 
same name, and an important concept in securing public safety in urban areas, defensible 
space is also dependen t upon the existence of escape routes and the level of anonymity which 
can be anticipated by the users of the space.  
 
Development Plan: Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act states that an 
authority’s development plan consists of the re levant Regional Spatial Strategy (or the Spatial 
Development Strategy in London) and the Development Plan Documents contained within its 
Local Development Framework.  
 
Development Plan Documents (DPD): These spatial planning documents are a key element 
of the Local Development Framework. They are subject to independent examination, and 
together with the relevant Regional Spatial Strategy, will form the development plan for a local 
authority area for the purposes of the Act. They can include a Core Strategy, Site Specific Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   173 Allocations of land and Area Action Plans (where needed). Other DPDs that include generic 
Development Control policies can be produced. They will all be shown geographically on an 
adopted Proposals Map. Individual DPDs or parts of a document can be reviewed 
independently from other DPDs. Each authority must set out the programme for preparing its 
DPDs in the Local Development Scheme.  
 
Development Delivery (Allocations) Development Plan:  A Development Plan Document that 
will detail the allocati on of land for development or land allocated for other types of uses that 
have not already featured in the more strategic Core Strategy DPD. Housing land, employment 
land and other forms of allocation will be identified.  
 
Economic development: Development  that achieves at least one of the following objectives:  
provides employment opportunities, generates wealth or generates an economic output or 
product.  
 
Employment: One type of economic development relating only to B uses as defined by the Use 
Class Orde r (UCO).  
 
Employment Land Review (ELR): This is a key part of the evidence base for the Local 
Development Framework. The ELR examines the portfolio of employment sites and applies up -
to-date and sensible criteria in terms of sustainable development and mar ket realism.  
 
Evidence Base: One of the most important aspects of the new system is the need to have 
much more evidence available to support the soundness of the proposals being made right from 
the outset. This is referred to as front loading.  
 
Examination : Intended to reduce the adversarial nature of the Public Local Inquiry of the old 
system by using more round table sessions and informal hearings. The examination deals with 
the soundness of the LDD (SPD is not subject to Examination) and will be chaired by an 
independent Planning Inspector whose findings will be binding on the Council.  
 
Fit for purpose: Appropriate and of a necessary standard for its intended use as defined by the 
Use Class Order (UCO).  
 
Footfall: A count of the number of people passing a particular point at a particular time.  
 
Greenhouse gases: Approximately 65% Carbon dioxide;  20% methane, 10% nitrous oxide and 
5% others.  
 
Green Infrastructure (GI):  Is a strategically planned and delivered network of high quality 
green spaces and other environmental features. It should be designed and managed as a 
multifunctional resource capable of delivering a wide range of environmental and quality of life 
benefits for local communities. Green infrastructure includes parks, open spaces, playing fields , 
woodlands, allotments and private gardens.  
 
Greenfield Site:  Land upon which no development has previously taken place.  
 
Gross: The total amount of new homes or floorspace completed at the end of the development. 
The gross figure is used to calculate the  net figure by subtracting the loss.  
 
Gross Value Added per capita (GVA): One of the most commonly used measures of 
economic wellbeing is GVA. This measures the contribution to the economy of each individual 
producer, industry or sector in the UK. In summa ry: GVA + taxes on products – subsidies on 
products = Gross Domestic Product (GDP).  
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   174 Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA):  The application of HRA to land use plans is a 
requirement of the Conservation (Natural Habitats) Regulations 1994 as amended. The pr ocess 
assesses the potential for a land use plan to affect the conservation objectives of any sites 
designated for their nature conservation importance as part of a system known collectively as 
the Natura 2000 network of European Sites.  
 
Hampshire Biodive rsity Action Plan (BAP): A detailed ten year programme of action for 
protecting and enriching nature in Hampshire.  
 
Hampshire Local Area Agreement: The Hampshire Local Area Agreement (LAA) 2008 -11 has 
been approved by the County Council as the responsible body and the Secretary of State for 
Communities and Local Government. This three year agreement between local partners and 
central government describes the priorities and targets for improving quality of life in Hampshire 
communities.  
 
Hate Crime:  Hatred i s a strong term that goes beyond simply causing offence or hostility. Hate 
crime is any criminal offence committed against a person or property that is motivated by an 
offender’s hatred of someone owing to their race, colour, ethnic origin, nationality or national 
origins; religion, gender or gender identity; or sexual orientation.  
 
Index of Multiple Deprivation (IMD):  The Index of Multiple Deprivation (IMD) combines a 
number of economic, social and housing issues into a single deprivation score for small a reas 
known as Lower Super Output Areas (LSOA). This allows each area to be ranked relative to 
each other according to their level of deprivation. There are also district summary scores for 
each Local Authority area. There are 354 local authorities in Engla nd with a ranking of 1 
indicating the most deprived district and 354 the least deprived district. It should be noted that 
any comparison is measuring deprivation relative to other areas.   
 
Infrastructure: The basic physical and organisational structures su ch as roads, buildings and 
power supplies that are needed for the operation of society.  
 
Knowledge -based economy:  Refers to the use of knowledge technologies (such as 
knowledge engineering and knowledge management) to produce economic benefits.  
 
Launch on Demand:  Launch on demand relates to services for boats that allow for launch 
facilities on a flexible basis rather than pre -booked or high fee marinas. They typically 
accompany facilities for dry stacking of boats.  
 
Listed building:  Is a building or other  structure officially designated by the Department for 
Culture, Media and Sport as being of special architectural, historical or cultural significance.  
 
Local Area Agreements (LAA): LAAs  set out the priorities for a local area agreed between 
central gover nment and Upper Tier Local Authorities and their partners. LAAs simplify some 
central funding, help join up public services more effectively and allow greater flexibility for local 
solutions to local circumstances.  
 
Local Development Document (LDD): The co llective term for Development Plan Documents 
(DPD) and Supplementary Planning Documents (SPD).  
 
Local Development Framework (LDF): This is the name for the portfolio of Local Development 
Documents introduced by the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 . It consists of 
DPDs, SPDs, a Statement of Community Involvement (SCI), the Local Development Scheme 
and Annual Monitoring Reports. Together these documents will provide the framework for 
delivering the spatial planning strategy for a local authority area . 
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   175 Local Development Scheme (LDS): The LDS sets out the programme for preparing Local 
Development Documents.  
 
Local List of Historic Buildings: Buildings on the Local List of Historic Buildings are offered a 
degree of protection against unnecessary and/or  damaging development owing to their local 
interest. Such buildings will not enjoy the full protection of those buildings of national public 
interest which are likely to feature on the Statutory Register of Listed Buildings.   
 
Local Strategic Partnership: In Havant the LSP is called the Havant Local Strategic 
Partnership and includes Hampshire Primary Care Trust, Faith groups, Hampshire 
Constabulary, Hampshire County Council, Havant Borough Council, Havant Business and 
Prosperity Network, Voluntary Sector, Portsmouth City Council, Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry and the six area Community Boards.  
 
Multi Area Agreements (MAA):  MAAs are similar to LAAs but mean that strategic partners 
across boundaries can agree targets and pooling of funding arrangements wit h Government. 
They bring together key players in flexible ways to tackle issues that are best addressed in 
partnership – at a regional and sub -regional level.  
 
Natural England:  Is a government advisor on the natural environment. Its aim, as defined 
under t he Natural Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006, is to ensure that the natural 
environment is conserved, enhanced and managed for the benefit of present and future 
generations, thereby contributing to sustainable development.  
 
Net: The total amount of new homes or floorspace completed minus the loss of existing 
dwellings or floorspace. The net figure is calculated by subtracting total losses from the gross 
completion.  
 
Open Book Approach: An open book approach is where a developer makes their costing s and 
financial figures associated with the development ‘open’ (i.e. available for view). An open book 
approach allows the Council to assess any case put forward by the developer that the 
contributions and requirements being sought, such as affordable hous ing provision, make the 
site unviable for development.  
 
Planning Policy Statement (PPS): These are issued by central Government and provide 
policies for local authorities on planning and the operation of the planning system. PPSs replace 
Planning Policy Gu idance Notes (PPG).  
 
Primary Frontage: The core of the main shopping area where the highest Zone A rental levels , 
(i.e. where the rental  value of the first 6m depth of floorspace in retail units from the shop 
window ) are achieved and where retail uses domi nate.  
 
Proposals Map:  The Proposals Map will identify areas of protection, areas at risk from flooding, 
allocate sites for development and set out areas to which specific policies apply. This map will 
be effectively added to and amended as individual docum ents of the LDF are adopted.  
 
Previously Developed Land (PDL): This is land that was or is occupied by a permanent 
structure, including the curtilage of the developed land and any associated fixed surface 
infrastructure. PDL is often referred to as brownf ield land.  
 
PUSH:  The Partnership for Urban South Hampshire is a formally constituted organisation 
comprising East Hampshire, Eastleigh, Fareham, Gosport, Hampshire County Council, Havant, 
New Forest, Portsmouth, Southampton, Test Valley and Winchester Cou ncils. They have come 
together to improve the economic performance of South Hampshire and enhance it as a place 
to live and work.  Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   176  
Ramsar Site : Wetland of international importance designated by the Government under the 
terms of the Ramsar Convention.  
 
Regional Spatial Strategy (RSS): A strategy  that sets out the region’s policies in relation to the 
development and use of land and forms part of the development plan for local planning 
authorities. The RSS for this region is the South East Plan. The RSS repla ces the Regional 
Planning Guidance.  
 
Registered Social Landlord (RSL): An independent, not for profit, housing provider registered 
with the Housing Corporation under the Housing Act 1996.   
 
Saved policies: Policies saved from the Local Plan. They will be u sed in the transitional period 
between the old local plan system and the new LDF.   
 
Secondary Frontage: Part of the main shopping area where Zone A rents are lower and where 
there is a greater proportion of non -retail uses.  
Shoreline Management Plan (SMP):  Provides a large scale assessment of the risks 
associated with coastal processes and presents a policy framework to reduce these risks to 
people and the developed, historic and natural environment in a sustainable manner.  
Site of Importance for Nature Co nservation (SINC):  Sites within Hampshire that are of 
particular importance for nature conservation, containing habitats or features that are effectively 
irreplaceable (excluding statutory designated sites).  
 
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI):  Site of Special Scientific Interest as designated by 
Natural England under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 to afford protection to flora, fauna, 
geological or physiological features of special interest being of national importance.  
 
Small Area Populatio n Forecasts:  This data looks at population forecasts on a county, district, 
ward or super -output area (e.g. smaller than ward) basis. The information is produced by 
Hampshire County Council and it takes account of expected delivery of new dwellings.  
 
Smar t Growth:  Lifting under performance through increasing the region’s stock of businesses; 
maximising the number of people ready for employment at all skill levels, and ensuring they are 
equipped to progress in the labour market; increasing the participatio n of South East 
businesses (especially small businesses and social enterprises) in tendering for public sector 
contracts; reducing road congestion and pollution levels by improving travel choice, promoting 
public transport, managing demand and facilitating  modal shifts; ensuring sufficient and 
affordable housing and employment space of the right type and size to meet the needs of the 
region and create the climate for long -term investment through efficient use of land resources, 
including mixed -use developme nts; and improving the productivity of the workforce and 
increasing economic activity.  
 
South East Plan: The South East Plan is the Regional Spatial Strategy (RSS) for the south 
east of England. The South East Plan looks at the development requirements fo r the region and 
apportions requirements to the sub -regional or local authority area.  
 
Special Area of Conservation (SAC):  A Special Area of Conservation recommended by the 
Government under the European Habitats Directive. An area considered important for  its wildlife 
population and diversity.  
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   177 Special Protection Area (SPA):  Special Protection Area designated by the Government under 
the terms of the European Communities Council Directive 79/404/EEC on the Conservation of 
Wild Birds. A site of European impo rtance for birds.  
 
Statement of Community Involvement (SCI): The SCI  sets out the standards which 
authorities will achieve with regard to involving local communities in the preparation of local 
development documents and development control decisions. The SCI is not a development plan 
document but is subject to independent examination.  
 
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA): A generic term used to describe environmental 
assessment as applied to policies, plans and programmes. The European ‘SEA Directive’  
(2001/42/EC) requires a formal ‘environmental assessment of certain plans and programmes, 
including those in the field of planning and land use’.  
 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA):  This is a key part of the evidence base for the 
Local Development Fr amework. It identifies land at risk of flooding and the degree of risk of 
flooding from river, sea and other sources. It is a free standing assessment that contributes to 
the Sustainability Appraisal  of local development documents.  
 
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA): The SHLAA is a key component 
of the evidence base to support the delivery of sufficient land for housing.  
 
Strategic Sites:  These are sites that are considered central to the achievement of the Core 
Strategy. The Havant Bor ough Core Strategy includes a number of strategic sites that are 
considered key to delivery of the strategic objectives outlined in the Core Strategy.  
 
Super Output Area (SOA): Super Output Areas are small geographical areas within larger 
electoral wards.  They are typically used in data analysis of small individual areas where it is 
beneficial to look at smaller areas than electoral wards. For instance it allows identification of 
pockets of deprivation that may be less likely to be identified on analysis o f electoral ward data.  
 
Supplementary Plan Documents (SPD): An SPD provides supplementary information in 
respect of the policies in Development Plan Documents. They do not form part of the 
Development Plan and are not subject to independent examination.  
 
Sustainability Appraisal (SA): Tool for appraising policies to ensure they reflect sustainable 
development objectives including social, environmental and economic factors and required in 
the Act to be undertaken for all local development documents.  
 
Sustai nable Community Strategy: The collective, long term vision of a Local Strategic 
Partnership for its area, which takes account of the needs of current communities without 
compromising the needs of future communities. Local Strategic Partnerships are respons ible for 
producing sustainable community strategies to co -ordinate the actions of the local public, 
private, voluntary and community sectors. The Havant Local Strategic Partnership produced its 
Community Strategy Forward Together in 2008.  
  
Sustainable Dev elopment:  Development which meets the needs of the present generation 
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.  
 
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS):  Sustainable Drainage Systems are a range of 
management practices and  control mechanisms that drain surface water in a way that mimics 
natural drainage and reduces the adverse impacts on river regimes and the risk of erosion, 
flooding and ecological damage.  
 Havant Borough Core S trategy March 2011  
 
   178 Tests of Soundness:  An Inspector appointed to examine in public De velopment Plan 
Documents will check that it complies with the legislation and determine whether the document 
is sound. To be sound the document should be justified, effective and consistent with national 
policy.  
 
The Regulations: Town and Country Planning  (Local Development) (England) Regulations 
2004, and the Town and Country Planning (Transitional Arrangements) Regulations 2004, partly 
superseded by the Town and Country Planning (Local Development) (England) (Amendment) 
Regulations 2008.  
 
Tree Preservati on Order (TPO):  Statutory protection given to an individual tree of groups or 
trees by the Local Planning Authority under the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 to protect 
and prevent the removal of trees.  
 
Use Classes Order: The Town and County Planning (Use Classes) Order 2005 lists sixteen 
classes of land use. Change of use within a use class does not normally require planning 
permission.  
 
Wellbeing: The state of being contented and healthy.   
 
Windfalls: Windfalls are development and redevelopment propo sals which unexpectedly 
become available for housing. These may be sites for a number of dwellings or small changes, 
such as the conversion of vacant space into a flat over a shop.  
 
Worklessness: Worklessness is used to describe those without work. It can also be deemed as 
unemployment claimants; those who are out of work and looking for a job; and those who are 
economically inactive.  
 