Herefordshire Local Plan 
Core Strategy 2011 - 2031 
Adopted October 2015            
                  
         
        
        
        
           
         
                 
                 
              
              
              
                
              
         
       
              Contents Page No. 
F o r e w o r d 1 
SecƟon 1 – Introduc Ɵon and Background 
 2 
SecƟon 2 – Herefordshire Context 
 11 
SecƟon 3 – Vision, Objec Ɵves and Spa Ɵal Strategy 21 
- Herefordshire Key Diagram 47
 
SecƟon 4 – Place Shaping 48
 
- Hereford 48
 
- Bromyard 73
 - Kington 79
 - Ledbury 82
 - Leominster 89
 
- Ross on Wye 96
 - Rural Areas 103
 
SecƟon 5 – General Policies 117
 
SecƟon 6 – Delivery, Implementa Ɵon and Monitoring 164
 
Glossary of Terms 168
 Contents
 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
            
   
        Please note: The Appendices to the Herefordshire Local Plan - Core Strategy are contained within a separate 
document. 
Appendix 1 – Saved Unitary Development Plan (UDP) (2007) policies                        (including policies to be replaced by the Local Plan – Core Strategy) 
Appendix 2 – Evidence Base Appendix 3 – Implementa Ɵon, Monitoring and Delivery Plan 
Appendix 4 – Detailed Annualised Trajectory Appendix 5 – SS3: Necessary Infrastructure for Strategic Sites Appendix 6 – SS5:Key Employment Sites Deliverability and Timescales Appendix 7 – Housing Value Areas by Postcode Appendix 8 – Sites with Environmental Designa Ɵons 
8A - Conserva Ɵ on Areas 
8B – Scheduled Ancient Monuments (SAMs) 
8C – Registered Historic Parks and Gardens 8D – Unregistered Parks and Gardens 8E – Special Areas of Conserva Ɵ on (SACs) 
8F – Sites of Special Scien Ɵﬁc Interest (SSSIs) 
8G – NaƟonal Nature reserves (NNRs) 
8H – Local Nature Reserves (LNRs) 8I – Local Wildlife Sites (LWS) 8J – Local Geological Sites (LGS) 8K – Areas of Ancient and Semi-Natural Woodland Appendices
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
             
             
       
  
 
 
            
 
 
  
              
  
      
                
 
              
        
        
              
        
              
              
        
              
       
             
       
      
   
              
 
        
       
      
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
  
 
 Page No. 
SecƟon 1: Introduc Ɵon and Background 
1.1 -	Structure of Herefordshire Local Plan 3 
1.2 -	Herefordshire’s adjoining authori Ɵes and Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty 7 
SecƟon 2: Herefordshire Context 
2.1 -	Herefordshire and surrounding Coun Ɵes 11 
2.2 -	Map showing the areas of Herefordshire that are amongst the most deprived 13 
2.3 -	Age structure of Herefordshire and England and Wales from the 2011 Census 14
 
SecƟon 3: Vision, Objec Ɵves and Spa Ɵ al Strategy 
3.1 -	Strategic objec Ɵves 23 
3.2 	 - Key strategic decisions that the Core Strategy has taken and reasonable  26
 alterna Ɵ ves considered 
3.3 -	Age structure of the popula Ɵon 2011-2031 29
 
3.4 -	Retail hierarchy 40
 
SecƟon 4: Place Shaping Policies 
4.1 -	Hereford Town Proﬁle 49
 
4.2 -	Hereford Key Diagram 51
 
4.3 -	Hereford City Centre 58
 
4.4 -	Bromyard Town Pro ﬁle 73
 
4.5 -	Bromyard Key Diagram 76
 
4.6 -	Kington Town Pro ﬁle 79
 
4.7 -	Ledbury Town Pro ﬁle 82
 
4.8 -	Ledbury Key Diagram 85
 
4.9 -	Leominster Town Pro ﬁle 89
 
4.10 -	 Leominster Key Diagram 92
 
4.11 -	 Ross on Wye Town Pro ﬁle 96
 
4.12 -	 Ross on Wye Key Diagram 99 
4.13 -	 Housing Market Areas in Herefordshire 104
 
4.14 -	 The seƩlements which will be the main focus of propor Ɵonate housing growth 109
 
4.15 -	 Other seƩlements 110
 
SecƟon 5: General Policies 
5.1 -	Housing Value Areas 120 
5.2 -	Green Infrastructure Assets 147 
5.3 -	Green Infrastructure concept diagram 148
 
5.4 -	River Sub-Catchments 162
 List of Figures
 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
            
     
           
      
             
             
           
       
 
              
             
             
     
      
     
       
        
        
             
       
       
       
       
       
              
             
    
            
    
       
              
 
 
      
              
    
              
             
      List of Policies
            P a g e N o . 
SecƟon 3: Vision, Objec Ɵves and Spa Ɵ al Strategy 
SS1 - Presump Ɵon in favour of sustainable development 21
 
SS2 - Delivering new homes 28 
SS3 - Releasing land for residen Ɵal development 31
 
SS4 - Movement and transporta Ɵon 33
 
SS5 - Employment provision 38
 
SS6 - Environmental quality and local dis ƟncƟveness 42
 
SS7 - Addressing climate change 45
 
SecƟon 4: Place Shaping Policies 
HD1 - Hereford 50
 
HD2 - Hereford city centre 53
 
HD3 - Hereford movement 59
 
HD4 - Northern urban expansion (Holmer West) 61
 
HD5 - Western urban expansion (Three Elms) 64
 
HD6 - Southern urban expansion (Lower Bullingham) 68
 
HD7 - Hereford employment provision 71
 
BY1 - Development in Bromyard  74
 
BY2 -  Land at Hardwick Bank 75
 
KG1 - Development in Kington 80
 
LB1 - Development in Ledbury 83
 
LB2 - Land north of the viaduct 84
 
LO1 - Development in Leominster 90
 
LO2 -  Leominster urban expansion 91
 
RW1 - Development in Ross on Wye 97
 
RW2 - Land at Hildersley 98
 
RA1 - Rural housing distribu Ɵon 105
 
RA2 - Housing in se Ʃlements outside Hereford and the market towns 108
 
RA3 - Herefordshire’s countryside 111
 
RA4 - Agricultural, forestry and rural enterprise dwellings 112
 
RA5 - Re-use of rural buildings 114
 
RA6 - Rural economy 115 
SecƟon 5: General Policies 
Social Progress 
H1 - Aﬀordable housing - thresholds and targets 119
 
H2 - Rural excep Ɵon sites 121 
H3 - Ensuring an appropriate range and mix of housing 122
 
H4 - Traveller sites 123
 
SC1 - Social and community facili Ɵes 125
 
OS1 - Requirement for open space, sport and recrea Ɵ on faciliƟes 128
 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
            
      
     
     
             
    
              
               
              
  
       
       
             
     
             
      
    
     
  
                         P a g e N o . 
SecƟon 5: General Policies con Ɵnued 
OS2 - Mee Ɵng open space, sport and recrea Ɵon needs 128 
OS3 - Loss of open space, sport and recrea Ɵ on faciliƟes 129 
MT1 - Tra ﬃc management, highway safety and promoƟ  ng acƟve travel  130 
Economic Prosperity 
E1 - Employment provision 133 
E2 - Redevelopment of exis Ɵng employment land and buildings 135 
E3 - Homeworking 136 
E4 - Tourism 137 
E5 - Town centres 138 
E6 - Primary shopping areas and primary and secondary shopping frontages 140 
Environmental Quality 
LD1 - Landscape and townscape 145 
LD2 - Biodiversity and geodiversity 146 
LD3 - Green infrastructure 149 
LD4 - Historic environment and heritage assets 150 
SD1 - Sustainable design and energy e ﬃciency 151 
SD2 - Renewable and low carbon energy 154 
SD3 - Sustainable water management and water resources 155 
SD4 - Waste water treatment and river water quality 158 
SecƟon 6: Delivery, Implementa Ɵon and Monitoring 
ID1 - Infrastructure delivery 165 List of Policies
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
 Foreword
 
The Herefordshire Local Plan Core Strategy was adopted at the Herefordshire Council mee Ɵng on 16 October 
2015. It represents the vision for the County to 2031 and provides the context for future work on the 
preparaƟon of the Hereford Area Plan, the Minerals and Waste Local Plan and the Travellers’ Sites 
Development Plan Document. 
Cllr Philip Price
Cabinet Member Infrastructure 
Herefordshire Council 
October 2015 
11 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
     
  
 
 
       
       
      
      
  
      
      
     
      
      
 
 
  
 
 
      
 The Local Plan 
1.1 	 The council has prepared a Local Plan  to guide development and change in the county up to 2031. The 
Local Plan is made up of a number of documents including the Core Strategy. A list of all the Local Plan 
documents and the timetable for their preparation are set out in the Local Development Scheme. 
1.2 	 The Local Plan, in addition to dealing with the use of land, considers how the area functions and how 
different parts of the county should develop or change over the next 20 years in response to key issues, such as the need to: 
•	 deliver more, better quality homes (especially affordable homes) to meet growing needs in this 
‘high house price’ compared to ‘average income’ area; 
•	 deliver improved infrastructure to support economic development and a growing population; 
•	 promote a thriving local economy with successful city, town and village centres and provide 
sufficient employment land to meet business needs and provide higher incomes through a wider range of better quality jobs; 
•	 protect, conserve and enhance valued natural, historic and built environments, including areas of 
outstanding natural beauty, special areas of conservation, open spaces as well as the county’s
 intrinsic attractive character; 
•	 address issues arising from an ageing population and the reducing younger age population; IntroducƟon & Background
 
•	 meet the challenge of climate change and adapt to its impacts such as increased risk of flooding and 
air pollution; 
•	 create places that actively promote and enable healthy lifestyles; 
•	 achieve sustainable development and reduce reliance on the private car whilst accepting the 
sparsely populated nature of the area and difficulty communities have in accessing services. 
1.3 	 Working in partnership with other agencies that operate in the county is a key element of delivering the 
Local Plan. The Local Plan needs to show how the strategies for various sectors such as housing, employment, transport, retail, education, health, culture, recreation and climate change inter-relate and how they are likely to shape and affect different parts of the county. 
The Core Strategy 
1.4 	 This first document in the production of the Local Plan is the Core Strategy. This is a very important part 
of the Local Plan because it shapes future development and sets the overall strategic planning framework for the county. The Core Strategy needs to balance environmental issues with economic and social needs and ensure that development is sustainable and does not cause irreversible harm to important resources 
and features. It sets a vision, closely aligned with the Herefordshire Sustainable Community Strategy, June 
2010 , as to how the county should look and function and how development needs will be met up to 2031. 
22 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
 
  
  
 
     
 
 IntroducƟon & Background
1.5 
1.6 
1.7 
Figure 1.1 - The structure of the Herefordshire Local Plan The Core Strategy does not allocate land directly, but proposes broad strategic directions for growth in 
sustainable locations. A Hereford Area Plan and other Development Plan Documents (DPD) and 
Neighbourhood Development Plans (NDP) are proposed to follow the Core Strategy and will allocate 
large, medium and small sites to meet the identified development requirements for the county. Figure 1.1 
shows how the Core Strategy forms part of the Local Plan and how it relates to other planning documents 
and the Sustainable Community Strategy . 
When adopted, the Core Strategy policies will replace most Unitary Development Plan (UDP), 2007 
policies. However, some of the policies contained in the previous UDP have been saved (see appendix 1) and will remain in force until replaced by other Development Plan Documents and Neighbourhood Development Plans. Together with the Hereford Area Plan DPD, Minerals and Waste Local Plan, Travellers’ Sites Document (DPD) and other Development Plan Documents and Neighbourhood Development Plans, the Core Strategy will form the statutory “development plan” for Herefordshire. A Policies Map sets out the strategic designations in the county. 
The Supplementary Planning Documents (SPD) referred to in Figure 1.1 will be supporting documents 
which add to or expand upon policies e.g. the policy on infrastructure contributions, but do not include site allocations. They are subject to public consultation, but are not formally examined. 
33 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
  
 
 
  
  
    
    
 
 
   
      
 
  
 
 
     
 
     
  
  Relationship with other strategies 
1.8 	 Planning policies for Herefordshire have been prepared in the context of national planning guidance set 
out in the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) and National Planning Policy Guidance (NPPG). Regard has also been had to other plans and strategies produced by the council and other organisations. 
1.9 	 The principal role of the Core Strategy is to deliver the spatial planning strategy for Herefordshire based 
on the local characteristics of the area. It is based on the outcomes of the consultations that have taken place, other council plans, programmes and initiatives and also on the findings of the evidence base that 
has been prepared to support it. It is also underpinned by a Sustainability Appraisal which assessed the 
social, economic and environmental impacts of the Core Strategy throughout the development of the 
document and a Habitats Regulations Assessment which has assessed any impacts on protected European 
sites. 
Minerals and Waste 
1.10 	 Minerals and waste policies will be dealt with through a separate Minerals and Waste Local Plan 
Development Plan Document (DPD). This will be produced taking account of the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF), the minerals and waste sections of Planning Practice Guidance and up to date evidence base studies and ensuring close co-operation with neighbouring local authorities on cross-boundary issues. It will establish targets and planning policies relating to minerals and waste activities and associated development in Herefordshire to cover the plan period to 2031. The timetable IntroducƟon & Background
 
for the production of this DPD will be included in a revised Local Development Scheme. Until the Minerals 
Development Plan will be ‘saved’ and remain in force until replaced by the Minerals and Waste Local Plan. and Waste Local Plan is adopted, the minerals and waste sections of the Herefordshire Unitary 
Gypsies and travellers 
1.11 	 A Herefordshire Travellers’ Sites Document (DPD) will set out allocations and planning policies relating to 
the provision for travellers in the county to cover the plan period to 2031. This DPD is included in the 
Local Development Scheme. 
The Sustainable Community Strategy 
1.12 	 The Sustainable Community Strategy (SCS) , 2010 sets out a long-term vision for the county up to 2020 
and has been developed by the Herefordshire Partnership. The latter comprises a range of local people and organisations, including business groups and public sector bodies. The purpose of the SCS is to set a clear vision and direction focusing on improving the social, economic, and environmental well-being of the area, in addition to providing an overarching framework within which other local strategies will sit. The policies and proposals within the Core Strategy will help to deliver some of the SCS priorities. Equally, the themes from the SCS have helped to guide the strategic objectives of the Core Strategy. 
Neighbourhood Development Plans 
1.13 	 With the introduction of Neighbourhood Development Plans through the Localism Act, communities 
will be positively encouraged to produce their own development plans for their area taking on board the 
strategic objectives of the Local Plan - Core Strategy. The Core Strategy has been prepared to provide a strategic base for Neighbourhood Development Plans, along with other Development Plan Documents, to 
allocate sites for employment, housing and other uses as well as providing more locally detailed policies. 
44 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
 
 
  
  
 
    
 
       
 
    
  
 
  
  
 Neighbourhood Development Plans will form part of the statutory development plan (but not the Local Plan) and be referred to within the council’s Local Development Scheme. IntroducƟon & Background
1.14 
1.15 
Community Right to Build 
1.16 
Community Right to Bid 
1.17 1.18 Neighbourhood Development Plans are required to be in general conformity with the strategic policies 
of the development plan for the area in order to meet ‘the basic conditions’. With this regard, the whole 
Core Strategy is defined as being ’the strategic policies contained within the development plan for the area’ in terms of Paragraph 8 Schedule 4B of the Town and Country Planning Act (1990). 
Significant progress is being made on a number of Neighbourhood Development Plans across the county. 
However, to ensure delivery, areas without a designed neighbourhood area by the adoption of the Core Strategy will be included within the ‘Rural Area Site Allocation Development Plan Document’. Monitoring of neighbourhood plan progress will take place and consideration will be given to those areas not making progress to Regulation 14 draft by the Issues and Options stage of the Rural Area Site Allocation DPD for their inclusion within the document. 
The Community Right to Build enables community organisations to progress new local developments 
without the need to go through the normal planning application process, as long as the proposals meet certain criteria and there is community backing in a local referendum. Communities may wish to build new homes or new community amenities, and providing they can demonstrate local support through a positive referendum result, the Community Right to Build will give communities the powers to deliver this directly. All profits derived from a Community Right to Build must be used for the benefit of the community, for example to provide and maintain local facilities such as village halls. Communities which wish to use the new powers must produce and submit a Community Right to Build Order. A proposal can be developed as part of the Neighbourhood Development Plan, or on its own. 
The Community Right to Bid enables a community to nominate assets of community value, and if any of 
these assets are at risk, the community has a right to delay the marketing of the asset in order to raise funds to bid to buy community buildings. For example, this could be the village shop, public house, community centre, children’s centre, allotment or library. 
The council will continue to work with partners, the community and the voluntary sector to ensure that 
provision of services and facilities is maintained and enhanced; and expanded in areas identified for population growth, in areas of relative deprivation and in areas where a deficiency has been identified. 
Local Transport Plan 
1.19 	 The council’s  Local Transport Plan  (LTP) establishes the framework for the delivery of all aspects of 
transport and travel for Herefordshire. The development of the LTP and the Core Strategy has been a linked process. The council’s LTP covers the first part of the Core Strategy period from April 2013/14 to 2015/16 and is an important local document which supports the delivery of the Core Strategy. The LTP will be updated to include key elements of infrastructure set out in the Core Strategy following its adoption. 
Economic Development Strategy 
1.20 	 The council’s  Economic Development Strategy 2011-2016, November 2011  is called Enterprising County 
and outlines the path and direction to foster economic vitality. Its vision is to increase the economic 
55 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
    
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
     
 
  
   
      
      
      
                   
      
         wealth of the county through the growth of business. It aims to improve business sustainability, increase 
start-up and sustain growth; increase wage levels, range and quality of jobs; have a skilled population to 
meet future work needs; and develop the county’s built infrastructure for enterprise to flourish. 
Local Investment Plan 
1.21 	 The Herefordshire Local Investment Plan, 2011-2026 has been developed by Herefordshire Council in 
partnership with the Homes and Communities Agency. It provides a strategic framework within which the organisations will work and invest together alongside partners in the public and private sectors to deliver the key priorities in meeting the vision for Herefordshire. 
1.22 	 The Local Investment Plan focuses on meeting the Government’s ‘Total Place’ agenda, which has an 
emphasis on a ‘whole area’ approach to commissioning and investment by all partners and demonstrates how joint investment by organisations and the private sector will be prioritised through agreed spatial and thematic priorities for regeneration, including transport, health, housing and education. The emerging Core Strategy has fed into the projects, proposals and evidence base in the investment plan. 
Other plans 
1.23 	 Feeding into the Community Strategy and the Core Strategy are various other plans, such as parish and 
town plans and market town health checks, produced by the local communities of the county. Broadly, these types of plans identify the economic, environmental and social issues important to a particular area 
overall proposals in the Core Strategy and by adding local detail and support to particular policies within 
it. 
1.24 	 Future strategies and plans may become relevant during the plan period. In particular Herefordshire 
Council, as the Lead Local Flood Authority (LLFA) for the county, has responsibility for the management of will be on addressing flooding from surface water, groundwater and ordinary watercourses. In addition, 
Herefordshire Council is one of a number of organisations that is involved in the preparation of a county-wide Carbon Reduction Strategy in order to meet targets for reduction in line with the Climate Change Act 2008. This will seek a 34% reduction of carbon on 1990 levels by 2020. 
Consultation 
1.25 	 One of the main principles of development plan preparation is that local communities are involved from 
the outset. This approach is set out in national policy and in Herefordshire’s Statement of Community 
Involvement 2007, which forms part of the Local Plan. To ensure early engagement on the preparation of the Core Strategy and the opportunity to comment and help shape it, the following key stages of consultation were undertaken: 
• Issues Paper (Autumn 2007)
• Developing Options (Summer 2008)
• Place Shaping Paper (Spring 2010)
• Preferred Options (Autumn 2010)
• Revised Preferred Options (Autumn 2011)
• Draft Core Strategy (Spring 2013)
• Pre-Submission Publication (Summer 2014)
• Main Modifications (Spring 2015) IntroducƟon & Background
 
and set out a vision for how the community wants to develop. These plans are very useful in informing the 
local flood risks. One of its duties is to develop a Local Flood Risk Management Strategy and its main focus 
66 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
 77 
        
   
   
  
 
 
   
  IntroducƟon & Background
 Working with other authorities and organisations 
1.26 
1.27 
1.28 
Figure 1.2 - Herefordshire’s adjoining authori Ɵes and Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty Herefordshire is a landlocked county that does not exist in isolation from its neighbours. The Core 
Strategy needs to take account of wider challenges, issues and opportunities affecting neighbouring areas, 
as well as in the wider region. Cross-boundary working has taken place during the preparation of the Core Strategy, both through on-going liaison with neighbouring authorities, at sub-regional level and through the review of proposals within adjoining local plans and other Development Plan Documents. This will continue with the development of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan – the document that sits alongside the Core Strategy and sets out all the infrastructure needs, funding and developer contributions required for Core Strategy projects and proposals to be realised. This on-going relationship with other authorities and organisations is essential to meet the legal requirement of the Localism Act 2011 (s110) – a ‘Duty to
 Co-operate’. 
Herefordshire shares boundaries with five English local authorities and three Welsh local authorities. 
The English authorities are the two strategic planning authorities of Worcestershire and Gloucestershire County Councils, both of which are responsible for waste and minerals planning. Malvern Hills and Forest of Dean District Councils are the respective local planning authorities for their two tier structure. Shropshire County is a unitary authority. The three neighbouring Welsh authorities are Monmouthshire County Council, Powys County Council and the Brecon Beacons National Park Authority. 
Herefordshire contains parts of two protected landscapes of na Ɵonal importance: the Wye Valley and  
Malvern Hills Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB). These adjoin Monmouthshire and 
 Worcestershire respec Ɵvely (see Figure 1.2). The emerging Core Strategy must ensure a consistency of 
approach to development within both areas through its planning policies, joint working via the AONB partnerships and implementa Ɵon of the AONB management plans. 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
 
   
      
  
 
 
            
    
    
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
    
   
  
  
  
  1.29 	 Economic influences are particularly significant in the county. The Economic Development Strategy 2011 
for Herefordshire highlights a number of objectives, some of which (such as enhanced skills, increasing 
wage levels and better infrastructure) are reflected in similar documents across the wider sub region. Historically, the county has a low economic output level compared to other authorities in the West Midlands and the United Kingdom as a whole. This is related to the type of businesses in the county and its relatively low wage levels, which results in less money being spent here. Herefordshire also experiences a net loss of people travelling beyond its boundaries to work. Two projects in Herefordshire linked to Core Strategy and Economic Development Strategy objectives, which exemplify co-operation with adjoining authorities and other bodies include: 1) the Fastershire Broadband Project and 2) the setting up of the Hereford Enterprise Zone.
 1) The Fastershire Project involves close co-opera Ɵon with Gloucestershire County Council to u Ɵlise 
government and private sector funding to provide access to faster broadband. 
2) Herefordshire has formed a Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP) with Shropshire and Telford. The 
Marches LEP will be used to share resources to create bene ﬁts for local businesses and raise the 
proﬁle of the area. One example of this is the crea Ɵon of the Hereford Enterprise Zone at
 Rotherwas. The Enterprise Zone has a focus on the defence and security sector, with addi Ɵonal 
employment hubs focused on advanced technologies, environmental technologies and food and 
drink technologies. 
Evidence base 
1.30 	 The Core Strategy is underpinned by a robust evidence base that is regularly reviewed to inform decision 
and plan making. The policies and proposals must be both informed by and assessed against relevant IntroducƟon & Background
 
available evidence. The list of documents and sources making up this evidence base is set out in Appendix 
2. 
Sustainability Appraisal, Strategic Environmental Assessment and Habitats Regula Ɵon 
Assessment 
1.31 	 Sustainability Appraisal (SA) is a government requirement for all Development Plan Documents. 
Sustainability is about ensuring the long term maintenance of well-being and the environment for our present and future communi Ɵes. The process assesses the impact of the Core Strategy on the 
environment, people and the economy. It incorporates the requirements of the European Direc Ɵve on 
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA). Following consulta Ɵon with key local, regional and na Ɵonal 
organisaƟons such as the Environment Agency, Natural England and Historic England, sustainability 
criteria have been agreed covering issues such as; air quality; water quality and quan Ɵty; landscape; 
health and economic performance. This Core Strategy has been assessed against these sustainability criteria and the results can be found in the Sustainability Appraisal. 
1.32 	 The Core Strategy has also been subject to Habitats Regula Ɵons Assessment (HRA) screening to assess 
whether there would be likely signi ﬁcant eﬀ ects on sites of interna Ɵonal importance for wildlife 
(European designated sites). Where a land use plan is likely to have a signi ﬁcant eﬀ ect on such sites, an 
appropriate assessment must be carried out of the implica Ɵons in respect of their conserva Ɵon 
objecƟves. The screening exercise has considered poten Ɵal eﬀects on European sites within and around 
Herefordshire. It concluded that some uncertain e ﬀects would require appropriate assessment under the 
Habitats Regula Ɵons. This assessment is contained in a separate Habitats Regula Ɵons Assessment Report. 
88 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
       
 
     
  
 
   
  
  
 
  
 
      
 
 
      
 IntroducƟon & Background
Monitoring and Review 
1.33 
1.34 
Flexibility 
1.35 
1.36 Monitoring and review are key aspects of the approach to the preparation of Local Plans. Continuous 
monitoring enables an assessment of the effectiveness of the Core Strategy and the policies contained 
within it in terms of both delivering and controlling various types of development across the county. As part of the Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations 2012, the council is required to prepare Authority Monitoring Reports containing information on all the plans set out in the local planning authority’s Local Development Scheme. One of the key functions of the report is to monitor policies contained within Development Plan Documents and to report on their performance, particularly where policies are not being implemented and why and also where policies specify a target of net additional dwellings or net additional affordable dwellings to be reached. 
To assess the performance of the Core Strategy, a separate monitoring framework is set out at the end of 
each section and in Appendix 3 which will be implemented after adoption of the plan. This includes key plan indicators as well as those to monitor the sustainability of the plan. Where policies are not performing as intended, the annual monitoring process will suggest the actions that need to be taken to address the issues. It is intended that, in addition to annual monitoring, a five-yearly cycle of a more comprehensive review of the Core Strategy is established, with dates of 2019 and 2024. Review processes would need to commence in advance of the review dates to enable any new policies to be adopted in a 
timely manner. 
The Core Strategy has been written to enable development which takes place within the context of 
changing circumstances both nationally and across the county. General changes could include; changes to national policy and updates to the evidence base, as well as external impacts such as changes to migration trends, fuel prices, use of the internet and so on. More specifically, situations which may arise are: housing development failing to come forward as planned, infrastructure not being provided at the same time as development and market changes adversely affecting the viability of development. 
The evidence base will be kept up to date and specific studies e.g. Strategic Flood Risk Assessment will be 
regularly reviewed. All of the policies are written to refer to national policy rather than repeat it and to refer to the evidence base. This allows the policies to be useable even where there are minor changes to higher level policies or the evidence base. Some policies also refer to further Development Plan Documents or Supplementary Planning Documents which may also update existing policies or allow for flexibility without changing the policy itself. 
1.37 	 With respect to housing developments, various measures are already in place to ensure that sites come 
forward as planned, and measures that can be taken if they do not, include: 
•	 The Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) 2012  is made up of a large number of 
smaller and medium sites with over 30,000 deliverable and developable sites identified, some of which could be brought forward if there are unforeseen constraints to larger strategic sites being 
developed as planned; 
•	 A Hereford Area Plan, Neighbourhood Development Plans and other Development Plan Documents 
are planned to be progressed by adoption of the Core Strategy and will include residential sites 
which will provide more certainty for sites coming forward in the middle and later part of the period. 
99 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
  1.38 	 If monitoring shows that residential sites are coming forward more slowly than planned, the Hereford 
Area Plan, Neighbourhood Development Plans and other Development Plan Documents will provide the opportunity to review other designations/policies to bring further sites forward if necessary. The mechanisms set out in Policy SS3 may also be used. IntroducƟon & Background
 
1010 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
 
   
  
 
 
  Herefordshire Context
2.1 	 The Core Strategy is based on an understanding of Herefordshire’s unique characteristics, derived and 
continually evolving from the interaction between people and the environment, in addition to its 
relationship with adjoining areas, knowledge of past trends and how things are likely to change in the future. This section provides a profile of Herefordshire, its social, economic and environmental components and identifies the key issues and challenges we face. 
2.2 	 Many of the key facts have been drawn from the Understanding Herefordshire Report 2013 unless 
otherwise stated. This can be viewed at: http://factsandfigures.herefordshire.gov.uk/ 
The place 
2.3 	 Herefordshire is a large, predominately rural, landlocked county situated in the south western corner of 
the West Midlands region, on the border with Wales. It has a close relationship with neighbouring Shropshire and Worcestershire and there are a range of interactions taking place which cross Herefordshire’s boundaries in all directions, including service provision, transport links and commuting 
patterns. 
Figure 2.1 - Herefordshire and surrounding coun Ɵes 
1111 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
    
 
   
  
 
   
    
 
   
      
  
 2.4 	 The county area covers 217,973 hectares. High hill ranges, including the Malvern Hills and Black 
Mountains, encircle much of the county at its perimeter. Away from these areas, the landscape is one of gentle rolling hills, dissected by wide river valleys with lower-lying plains in the centre. River crossing points have provided a natural focus for the development of many settlements, with others dispersed across Herefordshire’s rich and diverse landscape. 
2.5 	 The meandering river valley landscape which is the county’s principal geographical feature is that of the 
River Wye; which enters Herefordshire near the Welsh town of Hay-on-Wye, flowing east to Hereford before leaving the county at the Wye Gorge, downstream of Ross-on-Wye. In addition to significant parts of the county being drained by the Wye river system, the River Wye, together with its valley setting, is in part, an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty and integral to Herefordshire’s identity. 
2.6 	 At the county’s heart is the city of Hereford which is the main centre for civil and ecclesiastical 
administration, health, education and leisure facilities, shopping and employment. The five market towns of Bromyard, Kington, Ledbury, Leominster and Ross-on-Wye, surround the city with a regularity that harks back to medieval times.  Outside these urban areas, nucleated villages and smaller settlements, farms and other isolated properties characterise much of Herefordshire. 
Social progress - key facts 
PopulaƟon: 183,6001 
Density: 0.8 persons per hectare (84 per square kilometre) 
PopulaƟon growth: +5% in the decade since 20012
   E s Ɵmated growth of 12% by 20313 
Age structure: 1 in 5 people (21.3%) are aged 65 or over.  
Since 2001 residents aged 90 or over grew by almost 40% whilst those aged 5-15 years fell by 12%
4 
Ethnicity: 6% of residents are from ethnic groups other than ‘white Bri Ɵsh’ 
DeprivaƟon: A ﬁŌh of households (14,500) live in poverty, mostly in urban areas 
Access to services: Close to two thirds of the county are amongst the 25% most 
deprived areas in England with respect to geographical barriers to services. These areas are predominantly rural (Figure 2.2) 
EducaƟon: 57.5% of pupils achieve 5 A*-C GCSEs 
                             ‘A’ level results in or close to upper quar Ɵ le naƟonally Herefordshire Context
 
1 Mid-2011 estimate based on the 2011 Census from the Office for National Statistics 
2 2011 Census: population & household estimates for Herefordshire 
3 Update to Local Housing Requirement Study  – March 2012 
4 2011 Census: population & household estimates for Herefordshire 
1212 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
 
    
 Herefordshire Context
The people 
2.7 	 Herefordshire’s resident population is 183,600 (2011). This is the first estimate based on the 2011 Census 
and represented a growth of 5% between 2001 and 2011 (slower than the previous two decades and below the national average of 7% for the same period). The population is estimated to grow by about 12% 
 by 2031
5 . 
2.8 	 Herefordshire has a sparse population, with the fourth lowest overall population density in England (ninth 
in England and Wales). Just under a third of Herefordshire residents live in Hereford, with about a fifth in the five market towns and nearly half in the surrounding rural areas. Despite other counties having a lower overall population density, Herefordshire has the greater proportion of its population living in ‘very sparse’ areas (25%)
6 . 
Figure 2.2 - Map showing the areas of Herefordshire that are amongst the most deprived in England (Geographical Barriers 
to Services sub-domain of the Index of Multiple Deprivation 2010) 
Source: Department of Communities and Local Government 
5 Update to Local Housing Requirement Study  – March 2012 
6 Population Density - http://www.herefordshire.gov.uk/factsandfigures/subcounty 
1313 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
    
 
 
 2.9 	 This scattered population presents many challenges, both for residents in terms of dependence on the  
private car, increased household costs, access to services, often poor or no broadband access and social 
isolation, as well as for the delivery of services, particularly to community members already experiencing  
 disadvantage. 
2.10 	 Whilst Herefordshire is widely regarded as being an affluent county, this masks issues of deprivation, 
poverty and a continued widening of the gap between the most and least deprived. Close to two thirds of 
the county are amongst the 25% most deprived in England with respect to geographical barriers to services and the average income of residents is significantly below both the regional and national averages. There are pockets of severe deprivation in parts of Hereford and Leominster, as well as potentially ‘hidden’ deprivation in rural areas (Figure 2.2). 
2.11 	 Like the national population structure, Herefordshire’s population is ageing with one in five people aged 
65 or over (compared to one in six nationally)
7. Figure 2.3 shows how much older the age structure of 
Herefordshire is compared to England and Wales, with higher proportions of residents in all age groups from 45-49 upwards and less in the middle aged groups. Both national and local forecasts predict a further rise in the proportion of older people and thus a need to plan for the consequence of an ageing population, for example by providing for supported and extra care housing, and ensuring better access to health care and community facilities. 
Figure 2.3 - Age structure of Herefordshire (bars) and England and Wales (lines), from the 2011 Census8 
Herefordshire Context
 
7 2011 Census: population & household estimates for Herefordshire 
8 2011 Census: population & household estimates for Herefordshire 
1414 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
    
 
     
 
        
     
  
 
  
 
 Herefordshire Context
Housing and transport 
2.12 	 There are 79,122 households in Herefordshire (2011) and this is projected to increase by 20.3% by 20319 , 
contributing to the need to provide additional housing. Housing affordability is a key issue, with Herefordshire having the worst housing affordability ratio within the West Midlands. In 2011 house prices were 8.6 times annual earnings. High houses prices particularly relative to earnings (brought about by strong demand and a current housing offer that encompasses a high proportion of high value properties) has increased the need for lower priced market housing and all forms of affordable houses. 
2.13 	 Planning for Herefordshire’s ageing population and strong retirement market by the development of 
‘homes for life’ to facilitate independent living and care needs will become increasingly important. At the same time, there is the opportunity to plan for more balanced and integrated communities by providing the right mix of housing and facilities to cater for people at different stages in their life cycle, and with different incomes and needs. This will require the provision of more affordable housing, more family sized and smaller homes for younger households, facilities for children and young people, and a wider range of employment opportunities for people of working age. 
2.14 	 Herefordshire plays a strategic role in facilitating cross boundary links between England and Wales. Whilst 
vehicle flows along these strategic routes are considered low in a national context, when coupled with local movement, congestion, journey time delays and air pollution they are problematic, notably within Hereford. This is evidenced in the Draft Route-Based Strategy - Evidence Report for the Midlands to Wales and Gloucestershire section produced by the Highways Agency in February 2014. This states that the A49 through Hereford is a “key junction capacity issue” which should be afforded high priority. It is also an issue for higher than average collision rates through the city. Car ownership and dependency in the county is high due to the lack of public transport in rural areas and the need to access services and employment from these areas. The need for significant investment in transport infrastructure is acknowledged, although the current economic climate is likely to affect this. 
Education and training 
2.15 	 In 2012 the portion of pupils achieving 5 A*-C GCSEs including English and Maths was marginally below 
the national average (56.5% compared to 58.8% nationally). The performance of young people in full time education up to 19 has been strong in Herefordshire’s schools and colleges, with performance consistently in or close to the upper quartile nationally for ‘A’ levels. Significant redevelopment projects at Hereford’s colleges have also been completed and may improve access to courses and training. However access to further and higher education sites remains a key issue for such a rural county, with many young people leaving the county altogether to undertake formal higher education. 
Community safety 
2.16 	 Herefordshire is generally a low crime area, with a 13% reduction in total crimes over the three years to 
March 2011. The highest level of all types of recorded crime is in the main population centres and residents in some of these areas experience a higher fear of crime. Road safety is a key concern for county 
 residents. 
9 Update to Local Housing Requirement Study March 2012  by GL Hearn 
1515 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
     
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  Summary of social issues, problems and challenges 
• 	 Provide for all genera Ɵ ons; promo Ɵng balanced and integrated communi Ɵes
 • 	 Ensure the provision of the right mix of housing, including a ﬀordable housing to maximise community  
bene ﬁts
 • 	 Ensure the provision of and enhanced access to services, facili Ɵ es, educa Ɵon and broadband in a rural,  
sparsely populated county
• 	 Improve transport and communica Ɵ on infrastructures
 • 	 Reduce opportuni Ɵes for crime 
Economic prosperity – key facts
 
Economic output: Low and increasing at a lower rate than the West Midlands and England 
   between 2001 - 201010 
Business sizes:  Predominantly small, employing 10 or fewer sta ﬀ 
Business starts-up: Low rate but businesses survive longer 
Main industry sectors:  Wholesale & retail, manufacturing, health & social work 
Employment: 76% of 16-64 year olds are economically ac Ɵve 
Self-employment rate: 15% of working age popula Ɵon in 2008-200911 
Unemployment:  2.5% (October 2012) 
Average income:  Low – £20,080 (gross median annual earnings 2011) Herefordshire Context
 
The economy 
2.17 	 Herefordshire’s economic output is low when compared regionally and na Ɵonally. The overall produc Ɵvity 
of the county is a ﬀected by a rela Ɵvely large proporƟon of employment being in sectors that tend to
 aƩract lower wages such as ‘wholesale and retail’ and ‘accommoda Ɵon and food services’ and 
 ‘agriculture’12. There is compara Ɵvely low employment in knowledge based industries and out of county 
 commuƟng for work, both of which a ﬀ ect output. 
2.18 	 Herefordshire has a small business economy, with 87% of businesses employing 10 or fewer sta ﬀ13 . 
Business start-up rates are lower than England as a whole, although business survival rates are be Ʃ er. In 
2011, the self-employment rate (14%) was in the top 10% na Ɵonally and along with home based 
businesses plays an important role in the economy, par Ɵcularly in rural areas. 
10 Herefordshire Local Economic Assessment 2010 
11 Herefordshire Economic Assessment 2010 
12 Herefordshire Local Economic Assessment 2010 
13 Annual Business Inquiry 2008
1616 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
 
  
   
 
   
 
   
   
  
   
  
  
   
    
   
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
    
  
 
   Herefordshire Context
2.19 	 In 2012, the three sectors which employ the greatest proportion of workers are: wholesale and retail 
trade (19%); manufacturing (16%); and human health and social work (15%). However, agriculture 
accounts for a greater proportion of employees (8%) when compared regionally and nationally (both 
1%)14. With regard to employment locations, the majority of workers are employed in Hereford (42%) and 
the market towns 26% (of which Leominster accounts for 8% and Ross-on-Wye 7%)15. In 2011 the county’s 
primary employment site, the Rotherwas Estate (on the edge of Hereford), was awarded Enterprise Zone status. This is an opportunity to provide a catalyst for economic growth through inward investment and skilled job creation. 
2.20 	 The principal barrier to business growth and diversi ﬁcaƟ on, parƟcularly in rural Herefordshire, is poor 
infrastructure, including poor broadband and mobile phone coverage. The £50 million Fastershire project, in partnership with Gloucestershire County Council, aims for all rural areas to gain access to at least 2Mbps (megabits per second) broadband speeds, with many people receiving much higher speeds. 
2.21 	 Earnings are persistently low and the gap between Herefordshire’s earnings and those of the West 
Midlands and England as a whole is geƫng wider. By contrast unemployment is lower when compared on these scales. Since 2009 the propor Ɵon of residents without any quali ﬁcaƟon has been higher in 
Herefordshire than in England as a whole
16. A gap in skills and hard-to- ﬁll vacancies are problema Ɵ c for 
businesses. There also remains a demand for migrant labour. Herefordshire has a strong, diverse and independent third sector (voluntary, community & non-pro ﬁt), with a wide range of voluntary 
 organisa Ɵons, community groups, social enterprises and housing associa Ɵ ons contribu Ɵng to county life. 
Tourism 
2.22 	 With ﬁne, tranquil, rural landscapes where leisure ac ƟviƟes can be enjoyed, cultural and historic interest, 
together with a calendar of varied events and a strong crea Ɵ ve oﬀer that includes local food produce, 
Herefordshire has much to appeal to visitors. Tourism has become an important part of the local economy with visits and tourist expenditure growing. In 2011 there were 5.1 million visitors, spending £466.8 million and 9% of employees in Herefordshire worked in tourism
17. There remains poten Ɵal to grow 
Herefordshire’s tourism oﬀ er and further investment will have bene ﬁts for the county. 
Revitalising town centres 
2.23 	 Hereford is iden Ɵﬁed as a sub-regional centre and is the dominant centre for shopping and services for 
county residents. However it lacks a wide range of shopping (non-food goods) and entertainment 
 facili Ɵes, thereby struggling to compete with neighbouring centres outside of the county (Worcester 
and Gloucester). The reloca Ɵon of Hereford’s livestock market and the opening of the Old Market mixed 
retail and leisure redevelopment in 2014 has transformed an under-u Ɵlised area, regenerated the local 
economy and enhanced the experiences o ﬀered by the city, strengthening its role in the county and 
region. The Old Market development also anchors the proposed urban village to the north. Hereford and 
the ﬁve market towns have a good provision of independent retailers and whilst being primarily locaƟ ons 
for food shopping for residents, their historic environments and niche shopping also make them appealing to visitors. Revitalising the town centres and making them more a Ʃ racƟ ve desƟnaƟons for both 
residents and visitors will bene ﬁt the local economy and aid wider regenera Ɵon. 
14 Herefordshire Local Economic Assessment 2010 
15 Herefordshire Local Economic Assessment 2010 
16 Quali ﬁcaƟ ons - hƩ p://factsand ﬁ gures.herefordshire.gov.uk/qer.aspx 
17 Herefordshire - Steam Report 2011 
1717 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
 
 
  
  
 
  
   
  
 
      
 
   
 
  
  
  
 
        
 
    
  
      
 
   Summary of economic issues, problems and challenges 
•	 Diversify the economy, crea Ɵng more skilled jobs to reduce out of county commu Ɵng and reten Ɵon of 
young educated residents 
•	 Raise wage levels so reducing the earnings gap
 •	 Overcome barriers to business growth and diversi ﬁcaƟon
 •	 Capitalise on educa Ɵonal achievements and improve rates of quali ﬁcaƟon
 •	 Invest in and promote Herefordshire’s tourism poten Ɵal for the enjoyment of all
 •	 Strengthen the roles of Hereford and the market towns as a Ʃ racƟve centres for retail and leisure in the  
county and region 
Environmental quality – key facts
 
Natural environment: 2 Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) 
4 Special Areas of Conserva Ɵ on (SAC) 
77 Sites of Special Scien Ɵﬁc Interest (SSSI)
   3 Na Ɵonal Nature Reserves (NNR) 
773 Local Wildlife Sites (LWS) 
   131 Local Geological Sites 
Historic environment: 5899 Listed Buildings18 
263 Scheduled Ancient Monuments (SAM) 
24 Registered Historic Parks and Gardens
   64 Conserva Ɵ on Areas 
Flooding: 10% of land within Flood Zone 2 (low to medium risk) 
9% within a Flood Zone 3 (high risk) Herefordshire Context
 
Natural environment 
2.24 	 Herefordshire is considered to be the West Midlands’ most rural county. The countryside is rich and 
varied, ranging from the high hills of the border areas and the drama Ɵc steep sloping Wye Gorge, to the 
gentle rolling slopes of the Golden and Teme Valleys and the low lying river meadows of central Herefordshire. Large tracts of this landscape are of high quality with the Wye Valley and Malvern Hills 
 having na Ɵonal AONB designa Ɵon, whilst the area along the western boundary with the Brecon Beacons 
NaƟonal Park is also of the highest quality it lacks any na Ɵ onal designa Ɵon. Many ancient local landscapes 
 conƟnue to survive intact in the face of development pressures and the county’s remoter areas o Ōen 
possess a con Ɵnuity and tranquillity that is increasingly scarce. 
2.25 	 Due to its topography, geology and rivers the landscape of Herefordshire has preserved many natural 
features and tradi Ɵonal land uses resul Ɵng in a county rich in biodiversity and natural assets. 
Herefordshire’s natural environment supports a wide range of habitats, including the ancient woodlands of the Wye Valley, the near natural River Wye, the forested ravine of the Downton Gorge and the county’s 
18 This total is derived from the records for Herefordshire currently held in the Na Ɵonal Heritage List. It is a dynamic ﬁ gure 
which may ﬂuctuate as new assets are designated and/or exis Ɵ ng designa Ɵons are reviewed.
1818 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
   
  
   
 
 
  
   
 
  
   
  
   
 
 
    
  Herefordshire Context
treasured traditional fruit orchards. The richness of biodiversity within Herefordshire is reflected in the  number of statutory (e.g. SACs, SSSIs & NNRs) and non-statutory sites (e.g. LWS) designated for nature conservation which cover 9% of the county. 
2.26 	 The county’s geology, resultant soil types and the vegetation they support have shaped a landscape which  
is highly fertile, particularly on low lying land, making food production an enduring primary activity. The Herefordshire landscape is a key economic asset creating not only an attractive place to live and work but also an important tourist destination. 
Historic environment 
2.27 	 Herefordshire possesses a rich historic environment which includes numerous Iron Age hill forts, sites 
of Roman towns, defensive features such as O ﬀa’s Dyke and the border castles, together with some of the 
best preserved tradi Ɵonal Ɵmber framed buildings in the country. The richness of the historic 
environment is re ﬂected in the number of designated heritage assets encompassing a wealth of listed 
buildings, registered historic parks and gardens, scheduled ancient monuments and conserva Ɵ ons areas. 
These add to the special built quality and environmental character of many areas of the county and their 
 protecƟon and enhancement is recognised as an important ingredient for economic and neighbourhood  renewal. 
2.28 	 The county’s archaeological heritage is a valuable but fragile part of our historic environment. A large part 
of central Hereford is one of only ﬁ ve ciƟes in England to be designated an area of archaeological 
importance. Despite having such na Ɵonally recognised heritage at its core, the great extent of 
Herefordshire’s archaeological resource is not well surveyed or even assessed. Opportuni Ɵ es associated 
with developments and externally funded projects will con Ɵnue to be secured to gain a be Ʃer 
understanding of our archaeological heritage. 
2.29 	 The wider value of historic landscapes is recognised through the designa Ɵon of 64 conserva Ɵ on areas, 
which vary in character and size from Ɵny hamlets to villages to country house estates, market towns 
and Hereford’s historic centre. Rather than one vernacular building style, Herefordshire has a diverse 
range of buildings of which perhaps the most well-known and dis ƟncƟve is the ‘black and white’ Ɵmber 
 framed tradiƟonal buildings of the northern half of the county. 
Climate change 
2.30 	 The threat of climate change means that the climate is likely to become unpredictable, probably with 
longer periods of both dry and wet weather and these may be more severe and intense. Signi ﬁ cant areas 
of Herefordshire are low-lying and liable to ﬂooding. Climate change will further increase the risk and 
 events of ﬂ ooding (including ﬂash ﬂooding) across the county. Addi Ɵonally, climate change will result in a 
loss of biodiversity and landscape character, together with an impact on agricultural prac Ɵces leading to 
increased water demand. 
2.31 	 The poten Ɵal impacts of climate change need to be taken into account in planning for all new 
development, both in terms of loca Ɵon and design. Increased energy and water e ﬃciency will have to be 
taken on board along with water storage measures, sustainable drainage systems, and the provision of renewable energy genera Ɵon. 
1919 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
   
     
 
 
  
  
  
   
   
  
 
 
   
   
    
   
 
   
   Air quality 
2.32 	 There are rela Ɵvely low levels of air pollu Ɵon within Herefordshire, however two areas have been 
idenƟﬁed as Air Quality Management Areas (AQMA) due to levels of the pollutant nitrogen dioxide (from 
vehicle emissions) exceeding na Ɵonal standards. These two areas are the A49 road corridor through 
Hereford and the area of the Bargates road junc Ɵon in central Leominster. Emissions of carbon dioxide 
whilst decreasing remains higher per head of popula Ɵon (9 tonnes per capita) when compared na Ɵonally 
(7.6 tonnes per capita), 2010. Herefordshire’s rural nature and high car dependency has an impact on air quality locally and more widely on climate change. 
Water environment 
2.33 	 Flood risk is a key issue in Herefordshire and in some areas a signi ﬁcant constraint to new development. 
10% of land is situated within ﬂood zone 2 (low to medium risk) and 9% is situated within ﬂood zone 3 
(high risk) as iden Ɵﬁed by the Environment Agency. In addiƟon to river ﬂ  ooding, runo ﬀ has increased as 
 agriculture has intensi ﬁed and more roads and houses have been built, degrading the natural permeability 
of the landscape and capacity to retain water. 
2.34 	 As already indicated, the River Wye and its tributaries are amongst the most important natural assets 
of Herefordshire. However, phosphate levels in sec Ɵons of the River Wye Special Area of Conserva Ɵon 
(SAC) are presently exceeding the conserva Ɵ on objec Ɵves for the river, degrading the ecosystem. This 
is the result of controlled waste water discharges associated with residen Ɵal and industrial developments 
and agricultural prac Ɵces in the catchment area. Therefore, to ensure all secƟons of the River Wye SAC 
(including the River Lugg sec Ɵon) meet the favourable condi Ɵon phosphate target it is essen Ɵ al that 
future inputs are controlled. The catchment of the Wye covers a signi ﬁcant area of the county and a 
 conƟnuing programme of management and improvements is necessary to facilitate new development 
during the plan period. 
Summary of environmental issues, problems and challenges Herefordshire Context
 
•	 Protect, conserve and where possible enhance the county’s rich natural and historic assets 
•	 Address climate change and ﬂooding 
•	 Plan for the poten Ɵal impact of climate change in new developments 
•	 Ensure new developments are of high quality design and construc Ɵ on re ﬂecƟ ng Herefordshire’s 
disƟncƟ ve character 
•	 Use resources e ﬃ  ciently 
•	 Improve air and water quality 
2020 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
 
 
      
      
      
       
      
 
   
 
 
         
       
       
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
  Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵ al Strategy
3.1 	 The Core Strategy sets out a spatial strategy for Herefordshire for the period up to 2031.  This is quite  
different to the land use planning approach of the previous development plan (Unitary Development Plan  2007). It includes: 
•	   a definition of what sustainable development means for Herefordshire; 
•	   a vision for Herefordshire towards the end of the plan period; 
•	   a set of objectives to deliver the vision; 
•	   a spatial strategy that addresses the different needs and opportunities of different parts of 
          Herefordshire; and 
•	   details of how the Core Strategy proposals will be monitored. 
3.2 	 The council’s strategy is based on targeting future development in places where specific needs and 
opportunities have been identified, thereby addressing key issues raised in the Herefordshire Context section. This approach seeks to accommodate economic and population growth with new housing and supporting infrastructure, whilst protecting and enhancing the attractive and distinctive character of the different areas of the county, so that sustainable development is achieved. 
Sustainable development 
3.3 	 Sustainable development is about mee Ɵng the needs of the present without compromising the ability of 
 future genera Ɵons to meet their own needs. The Government has set three aims for sustainable 
 development: 
•	   contribu Ɵng to building a strong, compe ƟƟve and responsive economy; 
•	 supporƟng strong, vibrant and healthy communi Ɵ es; and 
•	   conƟnuing to protect and enhance our natural, historic and built environment. 
3.4 	 At the heart of the Government’s policy in the Na Ɵonal Planning Policy Framework March, 2012 is a 
 presump Ɵon in favour of sustainable development. The council intends to achieve this presump Ɵ on in 
accordance with the following policy: 
Policy SS1 – Presump Ɵon in favour of sustainable development 
When considering development proposals Herefordshire Council will take a posi Ɵve approach that re ﬂ ects the 
presumpƟon in favour of sustainable development contained within na Ɵonal policy. It will always work 
proacƟ  vely to ﬁ nd soluƟons which mean that proposals can be approved wherever possible and to secure 
development that improves the social, economic and environmental condi Ɵons in Herefordshire. 
Planning applica Ɵons that accord with the policies in this Core Strategy (and, where relevant with policies in 
other Development Plan Documents and Neighbourhood Development Plans) will be approved, unless material considera Ɵons indicate otherwise. 
Where there are no policies relevant to the applica Ɵon or relevant policies are out of date at the Ɵme of making 
the decision then the council will grant permission unless material considera Ɵons indicate otherwise - taking 
into account whether:
 a) any adverse impacts of gran Ɵng permission would signi ﬁcantly and demonstrably outweigh the bene ﬁts, 
when assessed against the policies in na Ɵonal policy taken as a whole; or
 b) speci ﬁc elements of na Ɵonal policy indicate that development should be restricted. 
2121 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
   
 
  Vision and objectives 
3.5 	 The Core Strategy has a vision and 12 objectives aligned under the themes of promoting social progress 
(supporting strong communities by meeting housing, education and health, transport and infrastructure 
needs), economic prosperity (supporting new jobs, area regeneration, business, tourism and retail) and environmental quality (addressing climate change, protecting and enhancing the environmental assets of the county). The objectives set the framework for the spatial strategy and policy guidance that follow later. They will be monitored annually to measure how well they are working. 
Overall vision for the county 
Herefordshire will be a place of dis ƟncƟve environmental, historical and cultural assets and local communi Ɵes, 
with sustainable development fostering a high quality of life for those who live, work and visit here. A sustainable future for the county will be based on the interdependence of the themes of social progress, economic prosperity and environmental quality with the aim of increasing the county’s self-reliance and resilience. 
Vision for social progress in Herefordshire 
3.6 	 By 2031, decent, affordable homes, jobs, health and community facilities and other necessary 
infrastructure will have been provided in urban and rural areas to meet the needs of all sections of the population, creating healthy, safe and secure, low crime, inclusive places and robust communities that promote good health and well-being, maintain independence and self-sufficiency and reduce social 
isolation. 
3.7 	 The opportunities and benefits from open space, leisure, shopping, sport, art, heritage, learning, health 
and tourism facilities and assets will be maximised, enabling more active lifestyles and helping to retain existing and attract new young people, supporting older people and an improved quality of life for all. 
3.8 	 Residents and workers in urban and rural areas will have a reduced need to travel by private car with 
opportunities for “active travel” i.e. walking and cycling promoted, along with improved accessibility to public transport. In Hereford, congestion will be managed and public transport improved through a balanced package of transport measures including the provision of a relief road, park and choose facilities and bus priority schemes. Residents will have the opportunity to contribute to the shape of their local area through engagement in plan making. 
Vision for economic prosperity in Herefordshire 
3.9 	 By 2031, Herefordshire will have a thriving local economy with a balanced and diversified business base 
incorporating more knowledge-based and high-tech businesses and a more skilled and adaptable workforce. A genuine commitment by all businesses to sustainable development will underpin a unique quality of life. New employment land will have been provided to complement new homes and support higher incomes jobs enabling existing and future businesses to grow and thrive. 
3.10 	 Communications infrastructure will be in place to enable a similar level of broadband service everywhere 
in the county, with the major employment locations enjoying broadband services matching the best in the 
country. 
3.11 	 Educational developments (including higher education) will bolster and support local resources and 
strengths, such as environmental technologies, creative industries, agriculture, food production, forestry, Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵal Strategy
 
2222 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
  
  
  
  
   
 
   
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
   Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵ al Strategy
equestrian expertise and tourism as well as support improved skills training, development and local job 
opportunities. 
3.12 	 Hereford will provide a strong, sub-regional shopping, employment, leisure and cultural focus for the 
county. Comprehensive proposals for regenera Ɵon in and around the city centre will complement the 
historic core in providing homes, jobs, shops and leisure facili Ɵes and transport improvements. As a result 
the city will be a vibrant des ƟnaƟon of choice for shoppers and visitors alike. The market towns will 
contribute to the economic development of the county whilst being dis ƟncƟve, thriving service centres 
that are be Ʃer linked to their surrounding rural se Ʃlements through enterprise hubs, service provision 
and transport accessibility. Our village-based services will be supported through new development (including live/work units) in appropriate loca Ɵons to foster sustainable communi Ɵes and promote rural 
 regenera Ɵon. 
3.13 	 Herefordshire will be a sought a Ō er desƟnaƟon for quality leisure visits and sustainable tourism by more  
 fully u Ɵlising, but respec Ɵng, the county’s unique environmental assets such as the River Wye. 
Vision for environmental quality in Herefordshire 
3.14 	 New development will be designed and constructed in ways to ensure that local dis ƟncƟ veness is 
reinforced. The wider impacts of climate change will be addressed by reducing carbon emissions, 
 minimising pollu Ɵon and the risk of ﬂooding, ensuring availability of natural resources. The provision of 
appropriate waste management and recycling facili Ɵes and renewable energy schemes will be guided 
through the policies of the Minerals and Waste Local Plan. 
3.15 	 Networks of connected, well managed and accessible natural green spaces will provide a range of 
enhanced leisure and health bene ﬁts within and between towns, villages and the countryside. Local food 
 produc Ɵon and processing will be fostered whilst suppor Ɵng stewardship of soils and water, biodiversity 
and the characteris Ɵc Herefordshire landscape. 
3.16 	 The area’s valued heritage and signi ﬁcant environmental resource, including its natural beauty and quality 
of landscape, biodiversity, geodiversity, built environment and cultural heritage, will be protected, conserved and enhanced. It will underpin and foster growth and innova Ɵon in businesses and jobs; being 
accessed, appreciated and acƟvely supported by more people, for more purposes, in all walks of life. 
Figure 3.1 - Strategic objec Ɵ ves 
Core Strategy Objec Ɵves 
Social Progress 
To meet the housing needs of all sec Ɵons of the community (especially 
1 those in need of a ﬀordable housing), by providing a range of quality, energy 
eﬃcient homes in the right place at the right Ɵme 
To improve the health, well-being and quality of life of all residents by 
ensuring new developments posiƟvely contribute towards be Ʃer access to, 
2 provision and use of, improved public open spaces, sport and recrea Ɵon, 
educaƟon, cultural and health facili Ɵes, local food produc Ɵon and ensuring 
safer communi Ɵes Core Strategy Policies 
SS2 SS3
 Place Shaping Polices 
H1 H2 H3 H4
 SD1 SD2 SD3 
SD4 
OS1 OS2 OS3 SC1 
2323 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
    
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   Social Progress con Ɵnued 
To support exis Ɵ ng educa Ɵon, life-long learning and the reten Ɵon of our 
3
 young people through the provision and/or improvement of higher 
educaƟon, skills development and training facili Ɵes 
To reduce the need to travel and lessen the harmful impacts from tra ﬃc
 
growth, promote ac Ɵve travel and improve quality of life by loca Ɵng 
4
 signiﬁcant new development where access to employment, shopping, 
educaƟon, health, recrea Ɵon, leisure and other services are, or could be 
made available by walking, cycling or public transport 
To improve access to services in rural areas and movement and air quality 
within urban areas by ensuring new developments support the provision 5 of an accessible, integrated, safe and sustainable transport network and 
improved tra ﬃ  c management schemes 
Economic prosperity 
To provide more local, be Ʃer paid job opportuni Ɵes to limit out-commu Ɵng 
and strengthen the economy by a Ʃ racƟng higher value-added, knowledge 
based industries and cu ƫng-edge environmental technologies to new / 6 exisƟng employment land and enabling exis Ɵng businesses to grow and 
diversify, facilitated by the universal provision of a high bandwidth 
broadband service
 
To strengthen Hereford’s role as a focus for the county, through city centre 
expansion as part of wider city regenera Ɵon and through the provision of a 
7 balanced package of transport measures including park and ride, bus 
priority schemes and a relief road including a second river crossing
 
To strengthen the economic viability of the market towns, rural se Ʃ lements 
and their surrounding rural areas by facilita Ɵng employment genera Ɵ on and 
8 diversiﬁ caƟon, improving delivery and access to services through housing 
(including a ﬀordable housing) and improved ICT as well as realising the 
value of the environment as an economic asset 
To support and to encourage the development and diversi ﬁcaƟon of the 
county’s historic strength in land-based industries, including agriculture and 
food produc Ɵon, to provide for the maintenance of a thriving, produc Ɵ ve, 8a eﬃ  cient, compe ƟƟve and sustainable agricultural sector, recognising the 
high importance of this sector to the county’s economy as a whole and to 
the rural economy in par Ɵ cular. 
To develop Herefordshire as a des ƟnaƟon for quality leisure visits and 
9
 sustainable tourism by enabling the provision of new, as well as 
enhancement of exis Ɵng tourism infrastructure in appropriate loca Ɵons 
Environmental quality 
To achieve sustainable communi Ɵes and protect the environment by 
10 SC1 
SS1 SS2 SS4 
MT1 
SS5 E1 E2 E3 
Place Shaping Policies 
HD1 HD2 HD3 HD4 HD5 
HD6 E5 E6 
BY1 BY2 LO1 LO2 LB1 LB2 
RW1 RW2 KG1 RA1-6 
E4 E5 E6 
SS5 RA6 E1 
E4 Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵ al Strategy
 
delivering well-designed places, spaces and buildings, which use land SD1 SD3 SD4 
eﬃciently, reinforce local dis ƟncƟveness and are supported by the necessary LD1 LD2 LD3 ID1 
infrastructure including green infrastructure 
2424 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
  
   
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
    
 
  
  
  
 Environmental quality con Ɵnued Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵ al Strategy
11 
12 To address the causes and impacts of climate change by ensuring new 
development: uses sustainable design and construc Ɵon methods to 
conserve natural resources; does not increase ﬂood risk to new or exis Ɵng 
property; increases the use of renewable forms of energy to reduce carbon 
emissions; minimises waste and pollu Ɵon; manages water supply and 
conservaƟon; and conserves and protects biodiversity and geodiversity. 
To conserve, promote, u Ɵlise and enjoy our natural, built, heritage and 
cultural assets for the fullest bene ﬁts to the whole community by 
safeguarding the county’s current stock of valued heritage and signi ﬁ cant 
environmental assets from loss and damage, reversing nega Ɵ ve trends, 
ensuring best condi Ɵon and encouraging expansion, as well as appropriately 
managing future assets. SS7 SD1 SD2 SD3 SD4 LD3
 
SS6 SS7 LD1 LD2 LD3 LD4
 
The spaƟ al strategy 
Background 
3.17 	 The spaƟal strategy seeks to deliver the spa Ɵal vision and objec Ɵves for the county set out earlier in this 
secƟon. The strategy has been developed through analysis of the results of the evidence base, the 
outcomes of several public consulta Ɵons on di ﬀerent stages of the Core Strategy and the Sustainability 
Appraisal/Strategic Environmental Assessment (SA/SEA) and the Habitats Regula Ɵons Assessment (HRA) 
of the opƟ ons/alterna Ɵves and policies throughout the plan produc Ɵon process. It provides a broad 
 indica Ɵon of the overall scale of development in the county up to 2031 and the infrastructure needed to 
support it. The role of the strategy is to achieve an appropriate balance between improving quality of life 
(social progress) and economic prosperity for all and the protec Ɵon of the county’s environmental assets, 
making sure that any necessary change and development is sustainable in the interests of future 
 genera Ɵons. The explana Ɵon of the strategy is set out under the three themes of social progress, 
economic prosperity and environmental quality.  These have been derived from the considera Ɵ on of 
approaches at the early stages of the Core Strategy. The policies set out in this and the following sec Ɵons 
seek to deliver the en Ɵ re spaƟal strategy and provide the context for the prepara Ɵon of other 
Development Plan Documents, including Neighbourhood Development Plans. 
3.18 	 Producing the Core Strategy has been about taking di ﬃcult decisions to achieve the long term vision for 
the county. During the produc Ɵon of the Core Strategy these decisions along with reasonable alterna Ɵ ves 
(which are outlined in Figure 3.2), have been assessed against the objec Ɵves of sustainable development 
and are explained further in the Final Sustainability (including Strategic Environmental Assessment) 
 Report (SA/SEA). 
2525 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
    Figure 3.2 - Key strategic decisions that the Core Strategy has taken and reasonable alterna Ɵ ves considered 
Key decision 
Focussing the majority of 
development to Hereford 
and the market towns 
with a combined strategy 
of considering social, 
economic and 
environmental goals
 
Focussing the largest
 
strategic alloca Ɵ on (aŌer 
Hereford) to Leominster
 
PromoƟng a western relief 
road route corridor as part 
of a new transport 
package for Hereford
 
Reducing the amount 
of housing proposed in 
the strategy overall from 
18,000 to 16,500 by 
reducing the amount at
 
Hereford and increasing 
the amount proposed in 
the rural areas
 
Revising the Preferred 
OpƟon Rural Areas policy 
to allow for a more 
ﬂexible approach to
 
housing in the rural areas
 AlternaƟ ves considered 
1. 	Economic op Ɵon 
2. 	Social opƟon 
3. 	Environmental op Ɵon 
4. 	New town or expanded 
seƩ lement 
1. 	Disperse growth 
     around the town at
     smaller sites 2. 	LimiƟ ng growth 
1. 	No relief road 
2. 	PromoƟng an eastern 
     route corridor op Ɵon 
3. 	VariaƟons to the 
southern part of the 
     western route corridor 4. 	Promote a parƟ al 
     eastern route corridor      instead of a western      route corridor 
1. 	Make no changes 
2. 	Just change Ɵme 
period of plan 
3. 	Retain 18,000, but 
     redistribute 2000      houses from Hereford      to rural areas 4. 	Retain 18,000 
     dwellings total, but        redistribute 2000      houses from Hereford      to the market towns 5. 	Build more than 18,000 
     new homes up to 2031 6. 	Reduce all the strategic 
     sites in Hereford 
1. 	Maintaining the rural 
     areas policy suggested      at Preferred Op Ɵon 
2. 	Allow unrestricted 
     development to meet 
the housing demand Stage of Core Strategy 
producƟon SA/SEA report 
reference 
Developing Op Ɵ ons and 
Place Shaping Developing Op Ɵons 
SA/SEA 
(Appendix B2-2) 
Place Shaping SA 
(Appendix B3-1 
page 1) 
Developing Op Ɵons Developing Op Ɵons 
SA/SEA 
(Appendix B3 page 41) 
Preferred Op Ɵ on SA/SEA 
Note for Hereford 
Preferred Op Ɵ on and 
Revised Preferred Op Ɵon (page 17) and Revised 
Preferred Op Ɵon SA Note 
(page 13) 
Revised Preferred Revised Preferred Op Ɵons 
OpƟon SA/SEA (page11) 
DraŌ Core Strategy DraŌ Core Strategy 
SA/SEA 
(pages 28 and 134) Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵ al Strategy
 
2626 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
    
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
   
   
  
  
  
     
      
  
    
    
  
   
   
  
  
    
 
  
 
          
         
  
           
 
           
         
                  
    
  Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵ al Strategy
3.19 	 It has been decided that not all development should be accommodated within the county’s urban areas, 
and indeed this would not be the best approach to meeƟng housing needs across Herefordshire, which 
has such a dispersed se Ʃ lement pa Ʃern. However, it has been determined to try to focus most 
development within and adjoining urban areas in the interests of sustainable development i.e. reducing the need to travel by private car where possible. The spa Ɵal strategy builds upon the exis Ɵ ng seƩ lement 
paƩern of Herefordshire, with a focus on Hereford as the county’s administra Ɵve centre and on other 
sustainable market towns. However, almost a third of all housing will be directed to the rural areas to help to sustain local services, generate new ones and support local housing provision for local 
 communi Ɵes. In accordance with the outcomes of the Revised Preferred Op Ɵ ons, combina Ɵ ons of 
strategic urban extensions are iden Ɵﬁed in the Core Strategy in Hereford and the market towns and 
smaller (non-strategic) sites will be iden Ɵﬁed in the Hereford Area Plan, the Bromyard Development Plan, 
the Rural Areas Site Alloca Ɵons Development Plan Document  and Neighbourhood Development Plans. 
The aim is to maintain a network of sustainable seƩlements that meet the needs of communi Ɵ es whilst 
 protecƟng and enhancing the dis ƟncƟve environmental assets of the county. 
3.20 	 The spaƟal strategy re ﬂects the exis Ɵng and future role and func Ɵon of all se Ʃlements in Herefordshire. A 
hierarchy of se Ʃlements was iden Ɵﬁed through the consulta Ɵons on Developing Op Ɵons and Place 
Shaping Paper stages of produc Ɵon of the Core Strategy; with the majority of growth taking place in the 
urban areas of Hereford and the market towns at the highest level of the hierarchy. Following a revised methodology of the hierarchy below the market towns level a Ōer the Preferred Op Ɵons stage, a more 
localised approach has iden Ɵﬁ ed seƩlements countywide where propor Ɵonal levels of development may 
be acceptable. These are detailed in the Place Shaping sec Ɵon and include se Ʃ lements considered 
sustainable due to their exis Ɵng range of services, together with those se Ʃlements where some future 
development will o ﬀer the poten Ɵal for them to become more sustainable, thus strengthening their role 
 locally. 
3.21 	 The exisƟng urban areas are regarded as the most suitable loca Ɵons for future development because of 
 their exis Ɵng easy access to services and facili Ɵes. This provides the opportunity to reduce out-commu Ɵng 
to other centres such as reducing the need to travel by private car for  work or shopping, thus increasing 
‘self-containment’. Further development in Hereford and the market towns will help to maintain their role as service centres and contribute to their future regenera Ɵon, through provision of addi Ɵ onal services 
 and facili Ɵes required to support new development. This in turn, will help to sustain the rural areas that 
 surround them. 
3.22 	 The spaƟal strategy is ‘housing, economic and environment- led.’ In promo Ɵng growth, the strategy aims  
to undertake the following across the county: 
•	 spearhead the regenera Ɵon of Hereford and our market towns; 
•	 help fund necessary new or improved infrastructure including a transport package to ease 
          conges Ɵon in Hereford; 
•	 address issues around an increasingly ageing popula Ɵon structure and poten Ɵal decline in the 
          working age popula Ɵon;
•	 address issues of housing a ﬀordability across the county but par Ɵcularly in the rural areas; 
•	 tackle issues regarding accessibility to services in rural areas; 
•	 foster self-reliance, independence and resilience; and 
•	 address issues of water quality. 
3.23 	 AdapƟng to and mi ƟgaƟng the e ﬀects of climate change are integral to the spa Ɵal strategy and cut across 
all policies. Addressing the impacts of climate change will be achieved by loca Ɵng the majority of growth 
2727 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
  
   
 
   
  
 
   
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 in places with good, sustainable transport links and jobs and services, thereby reducing the need to travel by private car. Climate change is speci ﬁcally addressed in the environmental quality theme of the spa Ɵal 
strategy. The spa Ɵal strategy is represented in the Key Diagram at the end of this sec Ɵon of the 
 document. 
Achieving social progress 
3.24 	 Social progress and improved quality of life will be delivered through iden Ɵfying areas for growth and the  
general strategic policies which will address issues of housing need and demand; improving movement around the county; working towards improving health and educa Ɵon; improving access to services; and 
delivering sustainable communi Ɵes with the necessary infrastructure. 
Policy SS2 - Delivering new homes 
A supply of deliverable and developable land will be iden Ɵﬁed to secure the delivery of a minimum of 16,500 
homes in Herefordshire between 2011 and 2031 to meet market and a ﬀordable housing need.
 
Hereford is the focus for new housing development to support its role as the main centre in the county. Outside Hereford, the main focus for new housing development will take place in the market towns of Bromyard, Kington, Ledbury, Leominster and Ross on Wye, on exis Ɵng or new alloca Ɵons to enhance their roles as 
mulƟ -funcƟonal centres for their surrounding rural areas. In the rural areas new housing development will be 
acceptable where it helps to meet housing needs and requirements, supports the rural economy and local services and facili Ɵes and is responsive to the needs of its community. In the wider rural areas new housing will 
be carefully controlled re ﬂecƟng the need to recognise the intrinsic character and beauty of the countryside. 
The use of previously developed land in sustainable loca Ɵons will be encouraged. Residen Ɵal density will be 
determined by local character and good quality design. The target net density across the county is between 30 
and 50 dwellings per hectare, although this may be less in sensi Ɵ ve areas.
 
The broad distribu Ɵon of new dwellings in the county will be a minimum of: 
Hereford Wide range of services and main focus for development 6,500 
Other urban areas – Bromyard, Range of services and reasonable transport provision – 
Kington, Ledbury, Leominster, opportuni Ɵes to strengthen role in mee Ɵng 4,700 
Ross on Wye requirements of surrounding communi Ɵes 
Rural seƩlements – see list in More limited range of services and some limited 5,300Place Shaping sec Ɵon development poten Ɵal but numerous loca Ɵons 
Total 16,500 
Providing high quality homes 
3.25 The Core Strategy housing provision requirement in Policy SS2 is based on the recommendaƟons of the 
independent research from the Local Housing Requirements Studies (2011, 2012 and 2014) . These reports 
provided evidence-based guidance on the future level of housing needed in the light of changing economic and social trends. The provision of 16,500 homes over the period 2011 to 2031 will meet the 
objecƟvely assessed need for the county set out in the 2014 study. Place FaciliƟes New Homes Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵ al Strategy
 
2828 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
    
   
     
   
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
     
  
  
  
 
  
 Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵ al Strategy
3.26 	 In 2011 Herefordshire had an es Ɵ mated popula Ɵon of 183,600. The popula Ɵon grew by almost 5% in 
the period 2001-2011. However, the popula Ɵon structure has an above average propor Ɵon aged over 
50 and a par Ɵcularly low propor Ɵon aged 15-34, rela Ɵve to the regional and na Ɵonal picture. Over the 
last 30 years, the proporƟon of the popula Ɵon aged over 34 has been increasing, whist the numbers aged 
15-34 has been declining. Popula Ɵon growth has been driven by growth in the number of people aged 
over 35. Looking at the components of popula Ɵon change 1999-2009, the death rate has generally 
exceeded the birth rate by an average of 240 persons per year resul Ɵng in natural decrease. This has been 
countered by net in-migra Ɵon which averaged over 900 per annum and which has therefore driven 
populaƟon growth. Household size has been generally decreasing in recent years following the na Ɵonal 
trend for increasing single person households. 
3.27 	 The level of housing provision proposed will support growth in the number of people in the working age 
populaƟon thereby suppor Ɵng economic growth.  Such a level would go towards addressing the 
imbalance in the popula Ɵon structure of the county by providing an appropriate mix of housing including 
encouraging the building of new homes for people of working age and younger families. However, this is an issue which will also need to be addressed beyond 2031 in subsequent plans. 
3.28 	 Figure 3.3 shows the age structure of the popula Ɵon at 2011 and what it is projected to be following the 
 implementa Ɵon of the spa Ɵal strategy in 2031. The age structure of the popula Ɵon will s Ɵll be top-heavy 
with the biggest increase in the over 65’s, but this will not be uncommon with the rest of the region and the country as a whole. 
Figure 3.3 - Age Structure of the popula Ɵ on 2011-31 
3.29 	 More speciﬁc details of the strategic loca Ɵons regarding house types, density and design are included in 
the Place Shaping sec Ɵon. The Hereford Area Plan, the Bromyard Development Plan, the Rural Areas Site 
 Alloca Ɵons Development Plan Document and Neighbourhood Development Plans will iden Ɵfy 
non-strategic sites and will also consider the ques Ɵon of whether or not to de ﬁ ne seƩ lement boundaries 
in developing planning policies. 
2929 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
   
   
 
 
 
   
   
  
 
   
 
  
 
    
   
  
 
  
   
    
 
 
 
   
 
  
   
  
   
  
 3.30 	 In terms of distribu Ɵon of housing, Hereford is the service and economic centre of the county re ﬂecƟng 
its higher popula Ɵon (58,500 people) and, being the most sustainable se Ʃlement, it should take the most 
growth. Therefore, strategic loca Ɵons for new homes and employment land have been iden Ɵﬁ ed around 
the city in areas considered acceptable in environmental terms. 
3.31 	 The decision to focus the largest single alloca Ɵon of new homes to Leominster has been based on the 
 recogniƟon of its economic importance, located on the A49 Corridor, its excellent public transport links, 
including a railway sta Ɵon, and the fact that an urban extension will bring transport bene ﬁts in the form of 
a southern link road. The la Ʃer will bene ﬁt the centre of the town in terms of reducing conges Ɵ on and 
improving air quality. Rela Ɵve to the county’s other market towns, Leominster is also the least constrained 
 environmentally. 
3.32 	 The quan Ɵty and type of development, in terms of housing and employment land, allocated to Ross on 
Wye, Ledbury, Bromyard and Kington re ﬂects their respec Ɵve roles, needs, opportuni Ɵ es and 
environmental development constraints. Ledbury and Ross on Wye (larger in scale and popula Ɵ on terms) 
will support quan ƟtaƟvely more development than Bromyard and Kington. This is explained further in the 
Place Shaping sec Ɵon. 
3.33 	 The plan seeks to encourage new developments which support and enhance access to local services and 
tackle issues of rural housing a ﬀordability, giving considera Ɵon to the introduc Ɵon of neighbourhood 
planning. The loca Ɵon and level of development allocated to se Ʃlements will be determined through the 
 prepara Ɵon of a Rural Areas Site Alloca Ɵons Development Plan Document or Neighbourhood 
 Development Plans. 3.34 	 The NaƟonal Planning Policy Framework states, as one of its core principles, that the planning system 
should encourage the e ﬀecƟve use of land by re-using land that has been previously developed, provided 
that it is not of high environmental value. Given the level of growth planned for this plan period, it will 
not be possible to achieve development of a high percentage on brown ﬁeld land, but this will con Ɵnue 
to be encouraged for future development proposals. The target net density in Policy SS2 has been based on a balance of issues, including the encouragement of the e ﬃcient use of land and the need to protect 
the county’s environmental assets. 
MeeƟ ng speciﬁc housing needs 
3.35 	 The council has produced a Strategic Housing Market Assessment 2008 and a Local Housing Market
 Assessment 2013 , which indicates that there is an urgent need to increase the provision of aﬀ  ordable 
housing in the county. However, whilst there is a very high need, this has to be balanced against the outcomes of the Aﬀordable Housing Viability Study 2011  and the Economic Viability Study 2014 . Whilst 
aﬀordable housing is a priority for the county, the need for new infrastructure to help economic growth 
is another priority. Levels of a ﬀordable housing and percentages and thresholds required, have been set 
 to re ﬂect the viability of achieving both priori Ɵes. In terms of delivery, a strategy focussed on growth and 
development of strategic sites is considered the best approach in order to get a ﬀordable homes built 
in the county over the plan period. The council has been looking at other forms of a ﬀ ordable housing 
delivery, including using public sector land assets and suppor Ɵng direct delivery through Registered 
Providers. The place shaping policies and the general policy on a ﬀordable housing will deliver this part of 
 the strategy. 
3.36 	 A report on the Housing and Support Needs of Older People 2012  in Herefordshire has highlighted a 
growing need for suitable homes for older people to live independently, as well as a need for specialist Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵ al Strategy
 
3030 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
    
  
 
 
  
  
  
   
  
 
  
 
    
 
  
   
 
   
 
 
 
    
      
 
   
 Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵ al Strategy
housing with extra care to be built. These issues are addressed within place speci ﬁc policies in the Place 
 Shaping sec Ɵon and within policies on social progress in the General Policies sec Ɵon of this document. 
3.37 	 The Gypsy and Travellers and Travelling Showperson Accommoda Ɵon Assessment, 2015  highlighted a 
need for further permanent pitches in the county. A Travellers’ Sites Document will be prepared following on from the Core Strategy to allocate pitches, but in the mean Ɵme an interim policy is set out in the 
policies on social progress in the General Policies sec Ɵon of this document. 
3.38 	 The council recognises that individual or group self and custom build projects will contribute to the 
delivery of homes over the plan period. These may be in the form of a ﬀordable, low cost market and open 
market housing. The council will encourage and support this type of development where the proposals are in line with the relevant policies of the Core Strategy and neighbourhood plans. Speci ﬁc sites may be 
allocated for this type of development in Area and Neighbourhood Development Plans where a demand for this type of development has been demonstrated. 
Housing trajectory 
3.39 	 In respect of the housing target for Herefordshire the expecta Ɵon is that the highest rate of housing 
 comple Ɵons will be towards the la Ʃer end of the plan period. 
3.40 	 Overall the delivery of the housing levels and distribu Ɵon proposed in the Core Strategy is dependent 
upon necessary infrastructure being funded and delivered. A detailed trajectory is set out in Appendix 4. The delivery of housing will be monitored throughout the plan period and may need further re-adjustment and added detail to re ﬂect progress on the delivery of the strategic housing sites and key 
elements of infrastructure. 
Policy SS3 - Ensuring su ﬃcient housing land delivery 
A suﬃ cient supply of housing land will be maintained to ensure the delivery of the Core Strategy housing target 
as set out in Policy SS2 over the plan period.  The rate of housing delivery and supply will be assessed though the annual monitoring process.  If monitoring demonstrates that the number of new dwelling comple Ɵons is below 
the cumula Ɵ ve target ﬁgure over a 12-month monitoring period (1 April to 31 March) as set out in the housing 
trajectory in Appendix 4 the Council will priori Ɵse increasing housing supply in the following monitoring 
periods using appropriate mechanisms which, depending on the scale and nature of poten Ɵ al under-delivery, 
will include:
 •	 A parƟal review of the Local Plan – Core Strategy; or
•	 The prepara Ɵon of new Development Plan Documents; or
•	 The prepara Ɵon of an interim posi Ɵon statement and u Ɵlising evidence from the Strategic Housing Land 
               Availability Assessment to iden Ɵ fy addiƟonal housing land. 
A range of strategic housing proposals are iden Ɵﬁed which are key to the delivery of the spa Ɵal strategy. In 
addiƟon there are elements of key infrastructure which will need to be provided to enable full delivery of the 
strategic housing targets. The council will work with developers and other stakeholders to ensure the Ɵmely 
development of these strategic proposals and the key infrastructure requirements. 
3131 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
     
  
  
 
   
    
   
  
  
 
   
   
   
  
  
 
  
 
             
    
           
              
 
   
  
   
  
  
     
   
 
 Policy SS3 - Ensuring su ﬃcient housing land delivery con Ɵnued 
Appendix 5 sets out the rela Ɵonships between the delivery of housing and the Ɵming of the main infrastructure 
requirements. It also iden Ɵﬁ es acƟons necessary to safeguard the integrity of the River Wye Special Area of 
ConservaƟon (SAC) from adverse e ﬀects. The council will ac Ɵvely monitor the rela Ɵ onships iden Ɵﬁed in this 
appendix. Any material delays in the implementa Ɵon of iden Ɵﬁed infrastructure or environmental safeguards 
and which will lead to under-delivery of housing supply will inform the implementaƟon of the range of measures 
set out above to ensure plan-led correcƟve measures are put in place. 
3.41 	 The delivery and supply of new housing will be monitored on a regular basis and through the annual 
monitoring process in par Ɵcular.  Appendix 4 sets out an indica Ɵve trajectory for total housing 
 comple Ɵons, which will provide a basis for monitoring comple Ɵons over the plan period.  In the event 
that the monitoring process demonstrates that the rate of comple Ɵons have fallen below targets, an early 
assessment will be made as to the most appropriate mechanism to boost housing delivery depending upon the scale and nature of the issue.  The stepped target of 600 dpa for the ﬁ rst ﬁve years of the plan 
(2011-2016), 850 dpa for years 6-10 (2016-2021), 900 dpa for years 11-15 (2021-2026) and 950 dpa for years 16-20 (2026-2031) would be the basis for monitoring and assessing land supply (including the ﬁve 
year housing land supply) throughout the plan period. For calculaƟon of the ﬁve year housing land supply, 
due to persistent under delivery a bu ﬀer of 20% is considered appropriate. 
3.42 	 To achieve the Core Strategy housing target there is a need to ensure that appropriate and necessary 
infrastructure is co-ordinated with the development. This will be par Ɵcularly the case in respect of major 
elements of infrastructure such as the Hereford Relief Road. 
3.43 	 In addiƟon, the River Wye SAC currently includes secƟons where the water quality exceeds phosphate 
level targets and this prevents sec Ɵons of the river from achieving favourable condi Ɵon. It is also 
necessary to ensure that secƟons of river currently mee Ɵng the water quality targets do not fail as a result 
of new development. Natural England and the Environment Agency have prepared a Nutrient Management Plan (NMP) which sets out to control and reduce phosphates in the SAC. The
 implementa Ɵon of the ac Ɵons in the NMP will facilitate the delivery of new development. Policy SD4 deals 
speci ﬁcally with wastewater treatment and river water quality. 
Windfalls 
3.44 	 The NaƟonal Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) indicates that local planning authori Ɵes should draw on 
 informa Ɵon from Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessments (SHLAA) to iden Ɵfy: 
•	 suﬃ  cient speci ﬁc sites to deliver housing in the ﬁ rst ﬁve years of the plan period with an addi Ɵonal 
buﬀer of 5% to ensure choice and compe ƟƟon in the market for land; and 
•	 a further supply of speci ﬁc, developable sites or broad loca Ɵons for years 6-10 and where possible, 
          for years 11-15. 
3.45 	 It goes on to say that sites with planning permission should only be included where there is robust 
evidence that the sites are developable and viable and are likely to contribute to housing delivery at the point envisaged. In respect of sites not speci ﬁ cally iden Ɵﬁed, the NPPF advises that allowances for 
‘windfalls’, can be included in the ﬁve year supply if there is robust evidence of consistent local 
circumstances and reliable future supply. Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵ al Strategy
 
3232 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
     
 
  
   
     
  
 
 
   
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
    
    
 
  
   
  
   
 
  
   
   
   
    
 Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵal Strategy
3.46 	 In Herefordshire there is longstanding evidence that housing on ‘non-allocated’ sites has made a 
signiﬁcant contribu Ɵon to mee Ɵng housing needs and requirements. Such housing has not only come 
forward within urban parts of the county but also has been the major element of new housing in rural areas, where the conversion of agricultural buildings have contributed signi ﬁcant numbers of new homes. 
3.47 	 It is therefore important to consider how windfalls, including the conversion of rural buildings, should be 
reﬂected in the housing land supply and residen Ɵal targets for the county. The prepara Ɵon of the SHLAA 
should mean that a higher propor Ɵon of sites will be iden Ɵﬁed as part of the supply ﬁgures and so only 
a modest windfall allowance is included within the housing targets of 2,000 dwellings, equa Ɵng to 50 
dwellings a year in rural areas with the same allowance for urban parts of Herefordshire. 
Movement and transporta Ɵon 
3.48 	 The approach of the strategy for movement and transporta Ɵon is two-fold. Firstly, the spa Ɵal strategy 
itself aims to direct the loca Ɵon of signi ﬁcant new development proposed through the plan to the more 
accessible loca Ɵons in the county to promote the use of exis Ɵng nearby services and facilitate the use of 
acƟve travel (walking and cycling) as well as public transport. However, this principle needs to apply to 
all new signi ﬁcant development proposals that may come forward through the plan period. It will also 
require policies to minimise the impact of addi Ɵonal highway demand generated by new development 
on the transport network, so that journey Ɵmes, journey Ɵme reliability, public realm and highway safety 
in the county do not deteriorate. 
3.49 	 Secondly, the approach is to work with developers, the Highways Agency and transport providers to 
improve transport infrastructure, connec Ɵons and choices in our main centres and rural areas (where 
reliance on the private car is o Ōen the only op Ɵon). This is par Ɵcularly important for local journeys in 
Hereford where a balanced package of measures including more walking and cycling, bus transport and a Relief Road would improve connec Ɵvity and travel choice, reduce conges Ɵon, enhance the public realm 
and foster local enterprise and tourism. 
3.50 	 Herefordshire is a diverse county incorpora Ɵng both rural and urban communi Ɵes. The scale of the 
county, alongside its historic se Ʃlement pa Ʃern, places signi ﬁcant importance on movement and 
transporta Ɵon. As recognised in the Na Ɵonal Planning Policy Framework, transport and movement can 
play a posi Ɵve role in contribu Ɵng to sustainable development; whether through providing 
opportuni Ɵes for greater public transport, or delivering air quality improvements by removing vehicular 
movements from pedestrian areas. Alongside this, the following pro-ac Ɵve strategic policies on 
movement and transporta Ɵon can build upon objec Ɵves and policies within Herefordshire Council’s Local 
Transport Plan (LTP) to improve journey Ɵme and connec Ɵvity across the county. In partnership with the 
LTP the strategic policies are designed to deliver Herefordshire Council’s Core Strategy objec Ɵves of 
improving movement and transporta Ɵon across the county. 
Policy SS4 - Movement and transporta Ɵon 
New developments should be designed and located to minimise the impacts on the transport network; ensuring that journey Ɵmes and the e ﬃcient and safe opera Ɵon of the network are not detrimentally impacted. 
Furthermore, where prac Ɵcable, development proposals should be accessible by and facilitate a genuine choice 
of modes of travel including walking, cycling and public transport. 
3333 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
   
  
 
  
     
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
   
      
   
   
     
 
   Policy SS4 - Movement and transporta Ɵ on conƟnued 
Development proposals that will generate high journey numbers should be in sustainable loca Ɵ ons, accessible 
by means other than private car. Alterna Ɵvely, such developments will be required to demonstrate that they can 
be made sustainable by reducing unsustainable transport pa Ʃerns and promo Ɵng travel by walking, cycling and 
public transport. 
Proposals to provide new and improved exis Ɵng public transport, walking and cycling infrastructure will be 
supported. Where appropriate, land and routes will be safeguarded as required in future local or Neighbourhood 
Development Plans and developer contribu Ɵons, which meet the statutory tests, sought to assist with the 
delivery of new sustainable transport infrastructure, including that required for alterna Ɵve energy cars. 
Herefordshire Council will work with the Highways Agency, Network Rail, bus and train operators, developers and local communi Ɵes to bring forward improvements to the local and strategic transport network to reduce 
congesƟon, improve air quality and road safety and o ﬀer greater transport choices, including the provision of 
the following major schemes:
 • ESG Link Road (safeguarded route) and Transport Hub;
• Hereford Relief Road;
 • Leominster Relief Road;
 • Connect 2 Cycleway in Hereford;
• Park and Choose schemes; and
 • other schemes iden Ɵﬁed in the Local Transport Plan and Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
 
Proposals which enable the transfer of freight from road to rail will be encouraged. Development proposals incorpora Ɵng commercial vehicular movements that could detrimentally impact on the environmental quality, 
amenity, safety and character of the surrounding locality will be expected to incorporate evidence demonstra Ɵng how the tra ﬃc impacts are to be mi Ɵ gated. 
3.51 	 Herefordshire Council’s Local Transport Plan sets out programmes of work for achieving the council’s 
objecƟves for transport, accessibility and pollu Ɵon control which posi Ɵvely contribute to addressing 
climate change. Development arising under the Core Strategy can play a posi Ɵve role in delivering the 
objecƟves of the LTP; developers should provide evidence showing how their proposed developments will 
deliver against those objec Ɵves. Accordingly, development proposals will be supported where they 
respond to the opportuni Ɵes and constraints detailed within the LTP . 
3.52 	 By inﬂuencing the loca Ɵon of new development, land use can reduce the need to travel par Ɵ cularly by 
private car, and minimise its impact on the environment. At the same Ɵme the planning system must 
respond to the need for new transport infrastructure and recognise the challenges faced by rural 
seƩlements, where reliance on private motorised transport, for many people, is the only realis Ɵ c opƟon 
for travel. Accordingly, strategic developments will be located on or have access to exis Ɵ ng passenger 
transport networks so that they are convenient, accessible, safe and a Ʃ racƟve to use. Where appropriate, 
development proposals should be accompanied by travel plans and transport assessments outlining 
 alterna Ɵves to private motorised transport use. Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵ al Strategy
 
3434 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
    
 
  
    
   
 
  
   
     
    
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
 
  Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵ al Strategy
Pedestrians and cyclists 
3.53 	 The role of walking and cycling in crea Ɵng liveable places, promo Ɵng health improvements and social 
inclusion has not always been recognised. Despite this, almost all journeys include an element of walking. Ensuring that there is safe and convenient access to housing, jobs, educa Ɵon, health care, other services 
and local facili Ɵes for pedestrians and cyclists is an essen Ɵal part of promo Ɵng social inclusion and the 
delivery of sustainable development. Consequently, Herefordshire Council will advocate developments which promote pedestrian and cycle friendly access, avoiding con ﬂict with private motorised vehicles, and 
provide appropriate links to the green infrastructure network where possible.   
Public transport 
3.54 	 ConnecƟng improvements to pedestrian and cycling facili Ɵes with public transport facili Ɵ es provides 
greater transport opportuni Ɵes and alterna Ɵves to reliance on private motorised transport. Herefordshire 
Council will work in partnership with the Highways Agency, Network Rail, bus and rail operators, developers and the community to achieve improvements to the public transport network. This may include improving both the quality and quan Ɵty of the service on oﬀ er.  Land and routes will be 
safeguarded from inappropriate development and iden Ɵﬁed in site speci ﬁc plans. Where appropriate, 
 developer contribu Ɵons will be sought to deliver improvements to the public transport network. 
Major transport schemes 
3.55 	 The strategically important schemes, including ESG Link Road, Transport Hub, Hereford Relief Road and 
Connect 2, are explained further in the Hereford part of the Place-Shaping sec Ɵon. The Leominster Relief 
Road is explained in detail in the Leominster part of the same sec Ɵon. The funding required for these 
schemes is detailed in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan. 
Freight 
3.56 	 Road freight will con Ɵnue to be the dominant mode of transport for freight distribu Ɵ on within 
Herefordshire due to its ﬂexibility and accessibility. The county’s railway network is limited and few of its 
key industrial networks are adjacent, or in close proximity to, the four passenger railway sta Ɵ ons. The 
 exis Ɵng railhead for minerals transport at Moreton-on-Lugg will con Ɵnue to be protected. It is however, 
important to encourage increased movements by rail to alleviate the addi Ɵonal pressure that growth will 
place on the county’s roads, and to minimise any increase in carbon emissions associated with transport. 
3.57 	 During the plan period, advancements in technologies may bring forward alterna Ɵ ve transport 
technologies. Where such developments are not covered by na Ɵ onal legisla Ɵon, Herefordshire Council 
will support their development. Such proposals must be in accordance with the principles of other policies of the Core Strategy and demonstrate their contribu Ɵon towards delivering sustainable transport 
soluƟons. 
3.58 	 In order to deliver the strategic objecƟves outlined above, development proposals will be expected to 
demonstrate how they have incorporated the criteria contained within policy MT1 in the sec Ɵ on on 
 general policies. 
3.59 	 Partnership working will ensure all major housing and employment sites are served by public transport 
and that rail services and infrastructure within Herefordshire is improved over the long term and that 
smarter travel choices are promoted in the short term. The place shaping policies and the general policy 
3535 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
    
 
  
 
   
    
  
 
 
   
   
 
  
   
     
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
   on tra ﬃc management, alongside the Local Transport Plan, will also work towards delivering this part of 
 the strategy. 
EducaƟon and Skills 
3.60 	 Improved and expanded higher educa Ɵon provision in Herefordshire is envisaged as part of the strategy to 
help retain our young people and improve the skills base of the county.  The place shaping policies and 
the general policy on community facili Ɵes will deliver this part of the strategy. Signi ﬁcant recent work has 
been undertaken to bring about the establishment of a university in Herefordshire. This proposal has widespread support in the Council, the wider community and with local businesses. The emerging proposal will do much to consolidate the role of Hereford as a tradi Ɵonal county town and which provides 
a vibrant and diverse range of services. Depending on the state of the project at that Ɵme there will be an 
opportunity for it to be included in greater detail in the Hereford Area Plan. 
Health and wellbeing 
3.61 	 Health services are being developed through an integrated approach of providing for an increased need 
for age appropriate services (Understanding Herefordshire). This includes; access to community centres, keeping people independent in their own home and personalised services such as the provision of extra care homes and supported housing generally. Other objec Ɵves of this plan, such as improving the 
provision of open space to help combat obesity and mental health problems, and the provision of improved broadband technology to facilitate access to services, will all work together to provide for improved health and wellbeing in the future. The place shaping policies and the general policies on 
 community facili Ɵes and housing will help to facilitate this approach. 
Access to services 
3.62 	 Historically, Herefordshire performs poorly in na Ɵonal assessments measuring the accessibility to 
services for the popula Ɵon (see Herefordshire Context sec Ɵon). This is because of its size and very 
sparsely populated nature. It is envisaged that the strategy of focussing most growth to urban areas, coupled with improvements in technology, such as broadband availability alongside council ini ƟaƟ ves 
such as Locality working, will address this issue. Some nine ‘natural communi Ɵes’ or ‘locali Ɵes’ have been 
idenƟﬁed as forming the basis for engagement and providing the opportunity to deliver joined-up 
customer access points for people. 
New and/or improved infrastructure 
3.63 	 Necessary community infrastructure including transport, green spaces, leisure uses, health, emergency 
services and educa Ɵ on faciliƟes will be delivered alongside new homes through planning condi Ɵ ons and 
 developer contribu Ɵons or the Community Infrastructure Levy. This will ensure that sustainable 
 communi Ɵes are created and maintained and that health and well-being is promoted. The type and 
phasing of infrastructure required to support the growth strategy is set out in the accompanying Core Strategy Infrastructure Delivery Plan or IDP . This is backed up by a separate evidence base on Economic Viability, which reports that the infrastructure listed in the IDP to support the projects and proposals in the Core Strategy, are viable at the Ɵme of wriƟng for developers to want to build. 
3.64 	 Signiﬁcant infrastructure projects are required to: deliver the strategy; ease conges Ɵ on, improve 
broadband speeds and availability to foster economic growth; and improve the county’s sewerage treatment to prevent adverse e ﬀects on water quality. These projects will require joint working by a range Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵ al Strategy
3636 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
         
         
          
          
 
 
   
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
   
 
 Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵ al Strategy
of partners who will work with housing providers and the council to ensure new housing can be delivered as part of an overall approach to increased sustainability for the county. The place shaping policies and general policies, as well as that on infrastructure delivery, explain these projects in detail and will work towards delivering this part of the strategy. 
Key outcomes of the strategy for social progress 
3.65 	 These are: mee Ɵng housing need and demand; improved access to services; improving the health and 
well-being of residents; and reducing the need to travel, delivering Core Strategy objec Ɵves 1, 2, 3, 4 
 and 5. 
Achieving economic prosperity 
3.66 	 The elements needed for s ƟmulaƟng economic prosperity will be delivered through: encouraging the 
 diversiﬁ caƟon of the county’s employment base; area regenera Ɵon; improving connec Ɵ vity; promoƟ ng 
shopping and tourism in the right places; and improving economic output. 
Employment provision 
3.67 	 The Economic Development Strategy (Nov 2011)  is an integral part of the Local Development Framework. 
Its vision is to increase economic wealth through the growth of business. This will be achieved through 
 the following: 
• Sustain business survival and growth; 
• Increase incomes and the range and quality of jobs; 
• Have a skilled popula Ɵon to meet future work needs; 
• Develop the county’s built infrastructure for enterprise to ﬂourish. 
3.68 	 Herefordshire’s economic output is low compared to regionally and na Ɵonally; in 2012 GVA per head in 
Herefordshire was £15,300 compared to £17,400 in the West Midlands and £21,900 across England. This is partly a result of persistently lower wages in the county with median weekly earnings for people who work in Herefordshire of £385, signi ﬁcantly lower than those in the West Midlands region (£470) and 
England (£512). Low wage levels are borne out in housing a ﬀ ordability issues. 
3.69 	 The low value economy is partly a func Ɵon of the county’s economic structure. There are a high 
 propor Ɵon of employees in manufacturing (accoun Ɵng for 16% of employee jobs compared to 8% across 
England), but these are primarily in low and medium technology ac ƟviƟes, including food and beverage
 produc Ɵon, rather than higher value-added ac ƟviƟes. The wholesale and retail trade are also strongly 
 represented (accoun Ɵng for 19% of employee jobs compared to 16% across England) and this includes 
jobs in tourism-related sectors. The agricultural sector is also well represented. There is a low level of 
 employment in ﬁnance, IT and other business ac ƟviƟes, which has been a key growth sector na Ɵ onally in 
recent decades. The county has a high propor Ɵon of small and medium sized enterprises and the council 
 will o ﬀ er conƟnuing support for such businesses in future. 
3.70 	 A keynote feature of the economic structure is a low representa Ɵon of higher-value private sector 
businesses. This is a structural economic weakness, which partly re ﬂects the county’s rela Ɵ vely remote 
 loca Ɵon in a na Ɵonal or regional context, together with the size of its popula Ɵon and key centre 
(Hereford) and the nature of the area’s road and rail links.  However this needs to be set against 
 supply-side regenera Ɵon measures, including proposals in the Core Strategy for addi Ɵ onal employment 
3737 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
     
  
 
   
   
 
   
  
   
   
 
  
   
    
  
  
  
      
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 land provision, together with regenera Ɵon projects, such as the regenera Ɵon of the Livestock Market in 
Hereford, the designa Ɵon of the Hereford Enterprise Zone at Rotherwas and the future development of 
 exis Ɵ ng commi Ʃed sites such as Model Farm in Ross-on-Wye. 
3.71 	 In overall terms, the numbers working in land-based industries accounts for a much greater propor Ɵon 
than regionally or na Ɵonally. However, agriculture has a track record in diversi ﬁcaƟon. For example; the 
use of polytunnels for a greater range of fruits, increased quan ƟƟes of produce, improved quality and a 
lengthened growing season, which has enabled many farmers to stay in business. Land-based industries 
are seen as a strength of the county since they foster other business enterprises such as renewable energy 
technologies and crea Ɵ ve industries. 
3.72 	 Evidence of commu Ɵ ng paƩerns suggests that there is a moderate net ouƞlow of people to work, 
although the level of self-containment of travel to work pa Ʃerns was rela Ɵvely high. Travel to work 
paƩerns highlight that Bromyard and Ledbury have a net ou ƞlow of workers. This issue is re ﬂected in the 
 alloca Ɵons of employment land to these centres. 
3.73 	 The Employment Land Study 2012 states that the emerging Core Strategy has an overall target of 148 
hectares (ha) of available employment land over the plan period, which includes a rolling ﬁ ve year 
reservoir of 37 ha. Based on the output of projec Ɵng past comple Ɵon rates, the overall target of 148 ha 
outlined in the emerging Core Strategy would provide a robust level of supply and would enable a wide range and choice of employment sites across the county to be provided throughout the plan period. Higher quality land referred to in this policy is that de ﬁned as “best” and “good” in the 2012 Study and is 
subject to more detailed discussion in policy E2. Appendix 6 sets out details regarding the provision of strategic employment land and its delivery and monitoring and review. 
Policy SS5 - Employment provision 
ExisƟng higher quality employment land countywide will be safeguarded from alterna Ɵve uses. A con Ɵnuous 
supply of 37ha of readily available employment land will be made available over a 5 year period, with an overall target of 148ha of employment land over the plan period. New strategic employment land, in tandem with housing growth and smaller scale employment sites, will be delivered through the plan period. New strategic employment land loca Ɵons are iden Ɵﬁed at Hereford (15ha); Leominster (up to 10ha), Ledbury (15ha), 
and Ross-on-Wye (10ha). The Hereford Enterprise Zone at Rotherwas will con Ɵnue to provide the largest focus 
for new employment provision in the county. Proposals for employment land provision at Bromyard and Kington will be brought forward through Neighbourhood Development Plans or other Development Plan Documents. 
The conƟnuing development of the more tradiƟonal employment sectors such as farming and food and drink 
manufacturing will be supported. The diversi ﬁcaƟon of the business base, through the development of 
knowledge intensive industries, environmental technologies and crea Ɵve industries as well as business hubs, 
live-work schemes and the adap Ɵve design of residen Ɵal development, will be facilitated where they do not 
have an adverse impact on the community or local environment. The provision of high speed broadband to 
facilitate diversi ﬁcaƟon will be supported. 
Area regenera Ɵon 
3.74 	 Hereford is the county’s main economic centre and as such has the poten Ɵal to in ﬂuence the prosperity of 
the whole area. A combined approach to regenera Ɵon means investment in covering travel, housing, 
employment land development and job crea Ɵon can make a signi ﬁ cant diﬀerence to the county. It is an Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵ al Strategy
 
3838 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
 
 
 
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
     
 
   
  
  
     
 
    
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵ al Strategy
objecƟve of the Core Strategy that the role of Hereford as the main business, service and visitor centre for 
the county will be maintained and enhanced through the expansion of the city centre as part of wider city 
 regenera Ɵon. This will include new retail, leisure, tourist and commercial development and new 
sustainable transport infrastructure. The designated Hereford Enterprise Zone (HEZ) at Rotherwas will further support an enhanced economic outlook with the aim of promo Ɵng a more diverse employment 
base. An extra 5 ha of employment land has been designated as part of a mixed use development at the Lower Bullingham urban extension to support the HEZ. This is an addi Ɵon to the policy since Revised 
 Preferred Op Ɵ on stage. 
3.75 	 Each of the market towns has their own dis Ɵ nct quali Ɵ es, re ﬂecƟve of their posi Ɵon in the county and the 
organic growth of their industries. Ledbury and Ross both bene ﬁt from access to motorway links, whilst 
Leominster and Ledbury have connec Ɵons to the rail infrastructure. There are clusters of industry within 
all the market towns, providing valuable employment. Tourism opportunity is a strong feature of all the market towns, which have their own unique selling points. The regenera Ɵon of the wider economy of the 
county’s market towns will be priori Ɵsed in order to support their viability as key service centres for their 
rural hinterlands, by ensuring they remain the focus for appropriate levels of new homes and jobs. Whilst no strategic employment sites are proposed in Kington over this plan period, smaller scale employment sites will be encouraged and iden Ɵﬁed through either Development Plan Documents or Neighbourhood 
 Development Plans. 
3.76 	 The rural economy is populated by small businesses, o Ōen sole traders or the self-employed working from 
home. This is higher than the na Ɵonal average and is driven by increasing opportuni Ɵes to use technology 
to work from any loca Ɵon. Businesses in rural areas support the sustainability of local services and 
 communi Ɵes (Taylor Review of Rural Economy and Aﬀ ordable Housing, July 2008). Therefore in the rural 
areas, businesses will be supported by taking into account local demand, the ability to retain, grow or 
diversify employment opportuni Ɵes and op Ɵons to reuse exis Ɵng buildings and sites, as well as 
 contribu Ɵon to the sustainability of the area. 
Sustainable tourism 
3.77 	 Tourism is worth £469m to the county‘s local economy (2011). Over 4.7 million visitors come per year 
mainly for short stays to take advantage of the outstanding countryside, rich heritage and cultural o ﬀ er. 
This supports 8,480 jobs. “Visit Herefordshire” is the agency in the county that promotes tourism and alongside the council works to develop it as a visitor des ƟnaƟon. The delivery of high quality tourist, 
cultural and leisure development will be supported in the county where it capitalises on exisƟ  ng assets, 
develops sustainable walking, cycling or heritage routes, bene ﬁts local communi Ɵes and the economy and 
 is sensi Ɵve to Herefordshire’s natural and built environmental quali Ɵes and heritage assets. The place 
shaping policies and the general policy on tourism will deliver this part of the strategy. 
ConnecƟ vity 
3.78 	 A key principle of the Core Strategy is that intensive trip genera Ɵng development should be built in the 
most accessible loca Ɵons. The co-loca Ɵon of employment, shopping, leisure, transport and other facili Ɵes 
means that people can carry out mul Ɵ ple acƟ viƟes in a single journey and there will be a boost to the 
local retail economy. 
3.79 	 New transport infrastructure countywide (to include a western relief road around the city to facilitate a 
package of sustainable transport measures within the city) and faster, more accessible ICT/Broadband infrastructure will be delivered to facilitate the genera Ɵon and diversi ﬁcaƟon of employment 
opportuni Ɵes and to improve accessibility to educa Ɵon and training opportuni Ɵes. 
3939 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
    
   
  
   
   
  
  Retail 
3.80 	 For some Ɵme, the retail economy has been losing ground to compe ƟƟon from outside the county from 
other major centres like Gloucester, Cheltenham and Worcester. To try and address this, Hereford Futures and the council has promoted the development of the £90 million retail scheme in Hereford city centre. This includes a new department store, supermarket and smaller shops, which is fully funded by the 
 private sector. 
3.81 	 The Core Strategy de ﬁnes a network and hierarchy of centres which forms the basis for the retail strategy 
for the plan. This hierarchy has been con ﬁrmed in the Town Centres Study update 2012 as follows: 
Figure 3.4 - Retail hierarchy Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵ al Strategy
 Principal centre Secondary centre Local centres Neighbourhood centres 
Hereford Bromyard 
Ledbury 
Leominster Kington Ross-on-Wye Bartestree/Lugwardine Barons Cross Rd, Leominster Bodenham Colwall Cradley Credenhill Eardisley Ewyas Harold Fownhope Kingsland Kingstone Leintwardine Marden Pembridge Peterchurch Weobley Withington Belmont Bobblestock Bullingham* Chilton Square College Green Folly Lane (Whi Ʃ ern Way) 
Grandstand Road Holme Lacy Road Holmer West* Hinton Road Old Eign Hill Oval Quarry Road Three Elms* Whitecross 
*Neighbourhood centres at Bullingham, Holmer West and Three Elms will be required as part of the urban extensions at 
these loca Ɵons 
3.82 	 The Core Strategy will encourage appropriate town centre and retail investment in Hereford and the 
market towns of Bromyard, Ledbury, Leominster, Kington and Ross-on-Wye, as well as suppor Ɵ ng local 
services such as village shops, pubs and post o ﬃces throughout the rural areas. Regardless of their retail 
and commercial o ﬀer all these centres play a signi ﬁcant role in providing local services and facili Ɵ es which 
has many bene ﬁts in social, economic and environmental terms. 
3.83 	 This hierarchy recognises the importance of Hereford as the principal shopping centre within the county, 
serving an extensive rural hinterland. The city centre provides the main loca Ɵon for retail ac Ɵvity in the 
county, as well as the focus for commercial and administra Ɵve services. In addi Ɵon, a range of leisure, 
tourism and entertainment opportuni Ɵes are available in Hereford, which help to enhance foo ƞ all within 
the city centre and will consolidate the recent improvements in vitality following the opening of the Old 
Livestock Market retail/leisure scheme. 
4040 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
     
  
 
 
   
 
 
    
 
  
  
   
  
 
 
   
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
  
  
   Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵ al Strategy
3.84 	 The scale and retail o ﬀer of the ﬁve market towns varies according to their popula Ɵon size and loca Ɵon, 
but in broad terms they perform similar func Ɵons and play an important role in serving their own 
populaƟons and rural catchments. The strategy for each market town is outlined in the place shaping 
secƟon. 
3.85 	 Retail development will be concentrated in the town centre but will be complemented by other uses such 
as restaurants, cafes, appropriate leisure uses and businesses. Primary shopping areas, which will include both primary and secondary frontages, will be iden Ɵﬁed through Neighbourhood Development Plans or 
other Development Plan Documents. 
3.86 	 Neighbourhood centres also play an important role in providing day to day convenience needs for nearby 
 residen Ɵal areas and generally provide small food stores, other services and community facili Ɵ es. These 
centres also have an important role to play both as community hubs and also in helping to reduce harmful emissions by being accessible by foot and bicycle. Speci ﬁc place-based policies iden Ɵfy where new 
neighbourhood centres are required to serve strategic developments. 
3.87 	 In the rural areas, village shops and other facili Ɵes meet both daily shopping ‘top up’ needs and help to 
facilitate the independence of those who are not able to travel farther a ﬁeld. They are important to the 
vitality of rural communi Ɵ es, acƟng as a focus and informal mee Ɵng place, and provide a valuable service, 
parƟcularly to those without their own transport. The policies in the place shaping sec Ɵon and the 
general retail policies will deliver this part of the strategy. 
Key outcomes of the strategy for economic prosperity 
3.88 	 These comprise: more local and be Ʃer paid employment opportuni Ɵes, so limi Ɵng out commu Ɵng; 
 business diversi ﬁcaƟon and growth; a more vibrant and robust Hereford City and more economically 
self-contained market towns and rural areas; and a strengthened role and contribu Ɵon to the economy for 
tourism. These deliver Core Strategy objecƟves 6, 7, 8, 8a and 9. 
Improving environmental quality 
3.89 	 The strategy for improving environmental quality will support the crea Ɵon of sustainable communi Ɵes 
 through protec Ɵ ng exisƟng built, heritage and natural environment assets, the be Ʃer use of resources and 
addressing the causes and e ﬀects of climate change. 
3.90 	 A high quality environment has a key role to play in delivering the spa Ɵal strategy. Herefordshire has 
an important cultural heritage, two Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty and a river of interna Ɵonal 
ecological importance. The high quality environment is important to the quality of life of Herefordshire residents and has a fundamental role in a Ʃ racƟng visitors and investment. Green infrastructure, such as 
open space, biodiversity, geodiversity and other semi-natural features will be protected and enhanced, including networks of green wildlife corridors and spaces. Green infrastructure has an important role in 
 our adap Ɵon to climate change and contribu Ɵng to carbon neutral development. 
3.91 	 The maintenance of the county’s environmental quality and its improvement, where necessary, will be 
through the preserva Ɵon, management and enhancement of its environmental assets and safeguarding 
the natural and cultural environment in an integrated way that supports the health and wellbeing of its inhabitants. Although the approach will be based upon addressing issues at a landscape scale, there will be instances where detailed features and assets should be conserved when they contribute to local 
disƟncƟ veness. 
4141 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
  
 
 
  
   
   
   
 
   
  
  
  
   
   
  
 
   
   
  
 
    
     
   
   
    
    
   
 
  
 
  3.92 	 The range of environmental factors is considerable and high quality assets extend throughout the 
county. Balancing the provision of necessary development requirements within such circumstances o Ōen 
requires a rigorous approach to determining the most appropriate opƟon in terms of minimising adverse 
 environmental e ﬀects. As a consequence, developers need to work with the council and local 
 communi Ɵes to assess environmental factors in an integrated manner, with appropriate informa Ɵon 
informing decisions from the outset and with mi ƟgaƟon and compensatory measures being advanced 
where necessary.  In addi Ɵon, where opportuni Ɵes exist to improve environmental quality, these should 
 be pursued. 
3.93 	 In undertaking assessments, the values a Ʃached to local dis ƟncƟveness by communiƟes can include 
social and economic percep Ɵons as well as environmental characteris Ɵcs. Where produced, local 
guidance should inform the design process. A series of documents exist that provide planning guidance 
and advice on biodiversity, archaeology and landscape character. Management plans have been prepared for both Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty within the county and conserva Ɵ on objec Ɵves set for sites 
 of interna Ɵonal and na Ɵonal biodiversity interest. 
3.94 	 The scale of development within the Core Strategy cannot be met solely through re-using previously 
developed land and buildings. Accordingly, green ﬁeld sites will be developed during the plan period but 
 the spa Ɵal strategy will con Ɵnue to direct development to the most sustainable loca Ɵ ons. Development 
proposals will be expected to avoid detrimental impact to designa Ɵons and locally dis ƟncƟ ve assets. 
Where evidence iden Ɵﬁ es poten Ɵal impact, development proposals will be required to include mi ƟgaƟon 
measures appropriate in size, scale and e ﬀecƟveness. Where the nature of individual assets is site speci ﬁc, 
oﬀ -site compensa Ɵon will only be considered in excepƟ  onal cases. 
Policy SS6 - Environmental quality and local dis ƟncƟ veness 
Development proposals should conserve and enhance those environmental assets that contribute towards the county’s dis ƟncƟveness, in parƟcular its se Ʃ lement pa Ʃern, landscape, biodiversity and heritage assets and 
especially those with speci ﬁc environmental designa Ɵons. In addi Ɵon, proposals should maintain and improve 
the eﬀecƟveness of those ecosystems essen Ɵal to the health and wellbeing of the county’s residents and its 
economy. Development proposals should be shaped through an integrated approach to planning the following environmental components from the outset, and based upon su ﬃ  cient informa Ɵon to determine the e ﬀect 
upon each where they are relevant:
 •	 landscape, townscape and local dis ƟncƟveness, especially in Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty;
•	 biodiversity and geodiversity especially Special Areas of Conserva Ɵon and Sites of Special Scien Ɵﬁc 
 Interest;
 •	 historic environment and heritage assets, especially Scheduled Monuments and Listed Buildings; 
•	 the network of green infrastructure;
•	 local amenity, including light pollu Ɵon, air quality and tranquillity;
•	 agricultural and food produc Ɵvity;
•	 physical resources, including minerals, soils, management of waste, the water environment, renewable 
energy and energy conserva Ɵon. 
The management plans and conserva Ɵ on objec Ɵves of the county’s interna Ɵonal and na Ɵ onally important 
features and areas will be material to the determina Ɵon of future development proposals.  Furthermore 
assessments of local features, areas and sites, de ﬁning local dis ƟncƟveness in other development plan 
documents, Neighbourhood Development Plans and Supplementary Planning Documents should inform decisions upon proposals. Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵ al Strategy
 
4242 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
  
  
 
 
   
    
   
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
   
 
 
 
  
    
  
    
   
 
 
  
  
  
   
  
 
 
    
  
  Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵ al Strategy
CreaƟng sustainable communi Ɵes 
3.95 	 The strategic growth areas avoid loca Ɵons at high risk of ﬂooding wherever possible, to protect against 
loss of life and recurring damage to property. Flood allevia Ɵon measures will be used where ﬂood 
avoidance is not possible. New development will provide for a range of type and size of sustainably constructed and well-designed buildings to reduce carbon dioxide emissions, contribute to climate change 
 adapta Ɵon, enhance energy e ﬃciency and respect local dis ƟncƟ veness. 
3.96 	 The protecƟon of residen Ɵal and local amenity is essen Ɵal to ensuring local communi Ɵes are and remain 
sustainable. Amenity considera Ɵons include such issues as noise, air quality and ligh Ɵng amongst others. 
Within the wider context, the issues of tranquillity and intrinsically dark landscapes may also be material 
 considera Ɵons. 
3.97 	 Whilst this strategy will inevitably result in the loss of areas of open land, the approach has generally 
been to avoid land of high sensi Ɵvity in landscape terms or biodiversity interest or land of high agricultural 
value (although given the scale of development around Hereford this has not always been possible – an issue that is re ﬂected in the Sustainability Appraisal). 
3.98 	 New parks and green spaces in Hereford and the market towns will be delivered to provide facili Ɵ es for 
 recrea Ɵon and sport, as well as contribu Ɵng to the local green infrastructure network, promo Ɵng 
biodiversity and to enhance community health and well-being. Other, necessary new or enhanced 
 community facili Ɵes including sustainable transport choices will be delivered in associa Ɵon with new 
development to improve access to services and reduce the need to travel long distances by private car. Relevant policies in the place shaping sec Ɵon and the general local dis ƟncƟveness policies will deliver this 
part of the strategy. 
ProtecƟng the environment 
3.99 	 The locaƟon of new development proposed should deliver sites that, protect and/or enhance 
Herefordshire’s natural, built, heritage and cultural assets in the county’s cathedral city, historic market towns, smaller se Ʃlements and dis ƟncƟve countryside. In addi Ɵon Natural England has prepared 
 conserva Ɵ on objec Ɵves for each Special Area of Conserva Ɵon within the county; it is also consulted 
upon proposals that might a ﬀect Special Areas of Conserva Ɵon and Sites of Special Scien Ɵﬁ c Interest, 
and will be aware of management principles that may be relevant to the maintenance and achievement of their favourable conserva Ɵon status. Management Plans have been prepared for both the Wye Valley and 
Malvern Hills Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty. These documents will be relevant to the assessment 
 of e ﬀects of development upon these important assets. The most rigorous approaches to assessing the 
eﬀect of development should be taken for those areas with interna Ɵonal and na Ɵ onal designa Ɵons, 
including proposals in areas outside but having an e ﬀect upon them, in accordance with the protec Ɵon 
aﬀorded to such areas in the Na Ɵonal Planning Policy Framework. Sites and features of local importance 
should also receive an appropriate level of protec Ɵon when determining the e ﬀects of proposals upon the 
environment and local dis ƟncƟveness. Subsequent policies set out the approach that should be applied in 
 rela Ɵon to these and a number of supplementary planning documents are also referred in their 
supporƟng statement which will also be relevant. Appendix 8 provides lists of those which have been 
idenƟﬁed at the Ɵme of dra Ōing this Core Strategy. 
3.100 	 Proposals for new/improved infrastructure to protect water quality, especially of the Rivers Wye and part 
of the Lugg which are European protected Special Areas of Conserva Ɵon, will need to ensure the special 
features of these sites are maintained, despite the requirement for increased sewage treatment capacity from new development. 
4343 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
    
  
 
 
   
 
  
  
    
 
  
    
   
   
   
   
  
 BeƩer use of resources 
3.101 	 The percentage of previously developed land to be developed over the longer term of the plan period will 
be much lower than experienced in recent years (which exceeded the na Ɵonal target of 60%) at around 
40%. This re ﬂects the scale of strategic land release proposed during this plan period. 
3.102 	 The introduc Ɵon of renewable energy genera Ɵon into larger development schemes will be promoted, 
where viable, to reduce the use of carbon producing fuels. Water management schemes and the use of sustainable drainage measures in new developments will strive towards water neutrality despite increased demands for water usage from new development. 
3.103 	 Where necessary to achieve the objec Ɵves of this plan, areas of lower quality agricultural land will be 
uƟlised in preference to the best and most versa Ɵle agricultural land, in accordance with the Na Ɵonal 
Planning Policy Framework (Para 112), where possible. Changes in agricultural prac Ɵces and food supply 
need to be recognised in terms of suppor Ɵng resilience. In addi Ɵon, the u Ɵlity of providing gardens and 
allotments to support green infrastructure, food produc Ɵvity and a low carbon economy will also 
contribute to the vision for the county. 
3.104 	 New waste facili Ɵes are to be integrated into sites suitable for industrial use close to the origin of such 
waste. Proposals to minimise waste, including re-use, recycling and treatment, will need to have been considered in the design of new large scale developments. The strategy of promo Ɵng beƩer use of 
resources is dealt with in policies of the Place Shaping and general environmental policies sec Ɵons. In 
addiƟon, the Minerals and Waste Local Plan will provide guidance rela Ɵng to the safeguarding of mineral 
resources. 
Addressing climate change 
3.105 	 Tackling climate change in Herefordshire will be a di ﬃcult challenge. The predominantly rural character of 
the area oŌ en makes access to a range of services extremely di ﬃcult and increases reliance on the private 
motor car. This in turn can have a major impact on CO2 emissions, the main greenhouse gas that 
contributes to climate change. These emissions can also have an impact on air quality, par Ɵcularly in the 
urban area of Hereford city centre. As well as providing more sustainable transport choices, there is a necessity to facilitate the increased use of renewable and low carbon energy sources and encourage in appropriate cases measures such as the provision of electric car charging points. Together these can go some way towards reducing Herefordshire’s dependency on fossil fuels. Enabling the level of development in the strategy has to be balanced against the challenge of protec Ɵng the high quality of the built and 
natural environment, including our best agricultural land where at all possible. Ensuring that new development is resilient to the e ﬀects of climate change is also important, for example, including 
measures to safeguard water quality, reduce water consump Ɵon and deal with increased ﬂood risk and 
surface water ﬂooding. The Climate Change Background Paper  explains the challenges facing the county, 
including possible e ﬀects on agriculture, ﬂood risk, transport and so on. 
3.106 	 As climate change is acknowledged as a very broad and complicated issue, government legisla Ɵon will 
conƟnually be reviewed in order to ensure that Core Strategy policies are demonstra Ɵng appropriate 
measures to reduce our impacts to climate change. Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵal Strategy
 
4444 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
   
 
 
    
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
  
 
   
  Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵ al Strategy
 Policy SS7- Addressing climate change 
Development proposals will be required to include measures which will mi Ɵgate their impact on climate change. 
At a strategic level, this will include:
 •	 focussing development to the most sustainable loca Ɵons;
 •	 delivering development that seeks to reduce the need to travel by private car and which encourages   
sustainable travel op Ɵons including walking, cycling and public transport;
 •	 designing developments to reduce carbon emissions and use resources more e ﬃ  ciently;
 •	 promo Ɵng the use of decentralised and renewable or low carbon energy where appropriate; 
•	 suppor Ɵ ng aﬀordable, local food produc Ɵon, processing and farming to reduce the county’s contribu Ɵon 
to food miles*;
 •	 protecƟng the best agricultural land where possible; 
Key considera Ɵons in terms of responses to climate change include:
 •	 taking into account the known physical and environmental constraints when iden Ɵ fying loca Ɵ ons for 
 development;
 •	 ensuring design approaches  are resilient to climate change impacts, including the use of passive solar 
design for hea Ɵng and cooling and tree plan Ɵng for shading;
 •	 minimising the risk of ﬂooding and making use of sustainable drainage methods; 
•	 reducing heat island e ﬀects (for example through the provision of open space and water, plan Ɵ ng and 
 green roofs);
 •	 reducƟon, re-use and recycling of waste with par Ɵcular emphasis on waste minimisa Ɵ on on 
development sites; and
 •	 developments must demonstrate water e ﬃciency measures to reduce demand on water resources. 
AdaptaƟon through design approaches will be considered in more locally speci ﬁc detail in a Design Code 
Supplementary Planning Document. 
*From ﬁeld to table – a sustainable food and drink strategy for Herefordshire 2011 
Key outcomes of the strategy for environmental quality 
3.107 	 These comprise: recognising the intrinsic character and beauty of the countryside; respec Ɵ ng local 
disƟncƟveness; funding new green infrastructure; and addressing the causes and impacts of climate 
change. These link to Core Strategy objec Ɵves 10, 11 and 12. 
Delivering and monitoring the spa Ɵ al strategy 
3.108 	 To implement the spa Ɵal strategy, a delivery strategy is set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) 
which accompanies the Core Strategy. This is supported by the Implementa Ɵon, Monitoring and Delivery 
Plan in Appendix 3. 
3.109 	 Where changes are made to na Ɵonal planning policy the annual monitoring process will be used to
 iden Ɵfy if the policies set out in the spa Ɵal strategy require review. The following monitoring indicators 
will be used by the council to assess the e ﬀecƟveness of the strategic policies:­
4545 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
              
  
       
         
       
       
      
      
      
       
      
      
 
      
      
      Social 
•	 housing comple Ɵons by size, type and tenure and loca Ɵon – assessed in rela Ɵon to 5 year periods in 
          order to ensure that there remains a ﬂexible supply of available and deliverable land for housing 
          across the county; 
•	 transport patronage by mode; 
•	 housing densi Ɵes in urban and rural areas. 
Economic 
•	   employment land ﬂoor space by type and loca Ɵon; 
•	   number of live-work units granted permission; 
•	   accessibility to Broadband; 
•	   number of new jobs created; 
•	   employment and income levels in rela Ɵon to regional and na Ɵ onal averages; 
•	   business survival rate at 3 years; 
•	   GVA per head. 
Environmental 
•	   the percentage of all new development completed on previously developed land; 
•	   total CO2 emissions per capita (Department of Energy and Climate Change); 
•	   number of decentralised energy schemes granted permission. Vision, Objec Ɵves and the Spa Ɵ al Strategy
 
4646 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
 4747Herefordshire Key Diagram 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
         
         
                           
          
         
 
  
   
 
 
  
 
   
  
  
  
    
  
 
 
     
  
  
    
   
 
  
   
  IntroducƟon 
4.1 This sec Ɵon sets out proposals for: 
• Hereford 
• Bromyard 
• Kington 
• Ledbury
• Leominster 
• Ross-on-Wye 
• Rural Areas 
4.1.1 	 For each area policies and proposals are set out, including a range of broad loca Ɵons where larger scale 
or strategic development is proposed. The Core Strategy does not iden Ɵ fy speci ﬁc development sites. For 
the purpose of the Core Strategy, a strategic loca Ɵon is generally de ﬁned as around 500 or above homes 
for Hereford, around 100 or above homes within the market towns or around 5 hectares or above for 
 employment land. 
Hereford 
The vision for Hereford 
4.2.1 	 By 2031, Hereford will consist of healthy, safe, secure, low crime and sustainable communiƟes with a widePlace Shaping - Hereford
 
within walking distance of residen Ɵal areas. Developers will be encouraged to have early engagement and range of homes and employment opportuni Ɵes for all, which are well serviced by a range of community 
 facili Ɵes, green infrastructure and public transport.  The imbalance of housing types and income levels 
across Hereford, par Ɵcularly within South Hereford, where there is a high concentra Ɵon of aﬀ ordable 
housing and income depriva Ɵon, will be addressed by providing a greater balance and mix of proper Ɵes 
and employment opportuni Ɵes across the city and at the urban extensions. 
4.2.2 	 New communiƟes and neighbourhoods will be successfully integrated with exis Ɵ ng communi Ɵes and the 
surrounding countryside. Residents will have greener environments and energy e ﬃ  cient homes which 
contribute to reducing the county’s carbon footprint. Educa Ɵon and community facili Ɵes will be provided 
 consulta Ɵon with the community including the city/town/parish council. 
4.2.3 	 CongesƟon in Hereford will be eased by a number of measures. Newmarket Street, Blueschool Street and 
Commercial Square will be upgraded for pedestrians enabling a range of environmental enhancements, air quality improvements and sustainable transport measures to be implemented. The dependency on the private car will be reduced with a network of cycleways, footpaths and bus priority lanes to enable people within the city to move between home, work, school and other facili Ɵes by foot, cycle and bus. 
A transport hub will enable bus, train, taxi facili Ɵes to be linked. Park and Choose/cycle areas will be 
provided to reduce reliance on private cars to access the city centre. A Relief Road will be key element to
 a conges Ɵon free city by enabling an alterna Ɵve trunk route, providing addi Ɵonal highway capacity to 
implement sustainable transport measures and reducing the level of through traﬃ c in the city centre. 
4.2.4 	 Hereford will be a strong sub-regional shopping, employment, educa Ɵonal, leisure and cultural focus for 
the county. Comprehensive proposals for regenera Ɵon in and around the city centre will complement 
the historic core by providing homes, jobs, educa Ɵon, shops and leisure facili Ɵes, urban greening and 
transport improvements. This will make the city a vibrant des ƟnaƟon of choice for shoppers and visitors 
 alike. 
4848 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
 
   
     
     
  
  
  
 Place Shaping - Hereford
4.2.5 	 The high educa Ɵonal standards within the county will be capitalised upon by the provision of higher 
 educa Ɵ on faciliƟes and addi Ɵonal good quality employment land to encourage higher value employers. 
4.2.6 	 Hereford will be home to innova Ɵve design and sustainable construc Ɵon which complements the exis Ɵng 
historic character. Sightlines and heights of new buildings will be sensi Ɵve to the city skyline. Areas of the 
city, its near-countryside se ƫng and wider rural areas will be well connected by a network of high quality 
open areas, green spaces and green infrastructure. New residen Ɵal and employment areas will be 
integrated into the exis Ɵng urban fabric and surrounding countryside. 
4.2.7 	 To achieve this vision, the following policies will ensure that Hereford maintains and enhances its role as a 
strategic centre. Within the context of the wider Plan in general, and Policies HD1 to HD6 in par Ɵcular 
“Hereford” should be regarded in policy terms as the area to be iden Ɵﬁed within the Hereford Area Plan. 
The policies re ﬂect its capacity to accommodate addi Ɵonal development without signi ﬁcant harm to
 local communi Ɵes and in sustainable loca Ɵons. Concentra Ɵng the largest porƟon of the county’s 
development in Hereford will help to develop and support the regenera Ɵon of the city in the long term, 
by capitalising on exis Ɵng services and other infrastructure and providing greater opportuni Ɵ es for 
improving and increasing them. Policies HD2, HD4, HD5 and HD6 and the suppor Ɵng text explain the 
requirements for the development at the urban extensions in terms of associated infrastructure and 
 facili Ɵes. 
Figure 4.1: Hereford Town Pro ﬁle 
4949 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
   
   
      
 
 
   
   Policy HD1- Hereford 
Hereford will accommodate a minimum of 6,500 new homes within the plan period and a minimum of 15ha of 
new employment land. 
Major residen Ɵal development will take place in the following loca Ɵons: 
• 800 new dwellings in Hereford City Centre (HD2) 
• 500 dwellings at the Northern Urban Expansion Area (HD4) 
• 1,000 dwellings at the Western Urban Expansion Area (HD5) 
• 1,000 dwellings at the Southern Urban Expansion Area (HD6) 
The remaining housing requirement of around 3,200 dwellings will be provided through the implementa Ɵ on of 
exisƟng commitments, windfall development and the development of non-strategic sites allocated through the 
producƟon of the Hereford Area Plan or Neighbourhood Development Plans. 
Major employment development will take place in the following loca Ɵons: 
• 10ha of employment land at the Western Urban Expansion area 
• Around 5ha of employment land at the Southern Urban Expansion area. 
Further employment land provision will be made in accordance with Policy HD7. 
4.2.8 	 Policies SS3 and Appendix 5 together with HD2, HD4, HD5 and HD6 and their explanatory text also set out 
 the parƟcular issues for each area and their infrastructure requirements. However the delivery of 
development under all these policies will require improvements to the water supply and waste water 
 treatment systems. Place Shaping - Hereford
 
5050 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
 Figure 4.2: Hereford Key Diagram Place Shaping - Hereford
5151 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
      
        
        
  
      
      
      
       
       
      
       
         
      
      
            
       
       
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
   
   
 
 
 
   
  
  4.2.9 	 Non-strategic policies and proposals will be contained within the Hereford Area Plan, Minerals and Waste 
Local Plan, master plans and addi Ɵonal supplementary guidance. These documents will include 
 considera Ɵ on of: 
•	   non-strategic housing and employment alloca Ɵons; 
•	   type and mix of energy e ﬃcient housing to be provided on non-strategic sites; 
•	   need for addi Ɵonal or improvements to exis Ɵng open space, play areas and sports and recrea Ɵon 
          facili Ɵes following further evidence base studies currently being prepared; 
•	   the boundaries of the primary shopping areas and the primary and secondary frontages; 
•	   need for further non-strategic retail ﬂ oorspace; 
•	   enhancement proposals for the historic core and heritage assets including archaeology; 
•	   conserva Ɵon and design to enhance the city centre and surrounding areas; 
•	 addiƟonal sustainable transport measures and car park management; 
•	   need for any renewable energy proposals; 
•	   need for addi Ɵonal waste management facili Ɵes; 
•	   need for addi Ɵonal tourism facili Ɵes and accommoda Ɵon in the city;
•	   design and density policy by character area; 
•	   enhanced night Ɵ me economy; 
•	   health and well-being; 
•	   need for surface water management in Hereford; 
•	   need for a new police headquarters site and facility and for a new ﬁ  re staƟ on; and 
•	   non-strategic sport, leisure and recrea Ɵon policies and proposals. 
Hereford city centre 
4.2.10 	 Hereford city centre plays an important role in contribu Ɵng to the economic, cultural and social 
performance of the wider city and the county as a whole. It has a rich heritage which makes it an 
aƩ racƟ ve locaƟon for residents and visitors alike. 
4.2.11 	 The strategic growth policy for Hereford’s central area has been in ﬂuenced by the Hereford City Centre 
 Regenera Ɵon Strategy, which sets out a ten-year ambi Ɵon up to 2018 containing broad views and 
 aspira Ɵons for the successful future of the city. The successful and sustainable future of the city relies Place Shaping - Hereford
 
upon maximising its current strengths and realising opportuni Ɵes for the regenera Ɵon and redevelopment 
of the city centre. The role of Hereford as the main business, service and focal point for the county will be 
maintained and enhanced through the expansion of its retail, commercial, leisure and residen Ɵal 
funcƟons. 
4.2.12 	 Policy HD2 will strengthen Hereford’s role as a focus for the county and outlying areas. Hereford will 
become a stronger shopping, employment, leisure, educa Ɵon and cultural focus for the county. In 
addiƟon to new retail and leisure opportuni Ɵes, city expansion and regenera Ɵon proposals will also 
provide new homes (including a ﬀordable ones) and tackle exis Ɵng movement and ﬂ ooding constraints, 
improving the city for residents and visitors. Maintaining and enhancing the city’s historic heritage and environmental assets will be high priority issues, as will the sustainability of the new development for 
 exis Ɵng and future genera Ɵons. 
4.2.13 	 The Core Strategy aims to improve Hereford’s status as a sub-regional shopping des ƟnaƟ on by 
enhancing and improving exis Ɵ ng faciliƟes and integra Ɵng new development into the historic centre. The 
Eign Gate and Edgar Street regenera Ɵon areas are the focus for achieving this aim, and these areas will be 
deﬁned in detail in the HAP . Development in the Edgar Street regenera Ɵon area will be developed in 
5252 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
  
   
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
     
   
   
 
   
 
   
 
 accordance with a masterplan to ensure the delivery of a high quality mixed use development. This will  be informed by the exis Ɵng masterplan which sets out an overarching vision of how the area will be 
developed and along with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan iden Ɵﬁes the required suppor Ɵng 
infrastructure to enable the successful delivery of the project. Place Shaping - Hereford
Policy HD2 – Hereford city centre 
The city centre will accommodate around 800 new homes, the majority to be located within a new urban village. Further residen Ɵal development will take place through the implementa Ɵon of exis Ɵ ng commitments, 
re-development of exis Ɵ ng brown ﬁeld sites, re-use of upper ﬂoors above commercial premises, in ﬁll 
development and site alloca Ɵons through the Hereford Area Plan. A target of 35% of these new homes will be 
mixed tenure a ﬀordable with a density that is compa Ɵble with the sustainable urban loca Ɵon of the site. 
The urban village will be served by safe and a Ʃ racƟve pedestrian and cycle links to other areas of the city, 
the new transport interchange, the Courtyard Arts Centre and nearby areas of green space. A new Link Road will also serve development parcels forming part of the urban village connec Ɵng Edgar Street to the west and 
Commercial Road to the east (with a spur linking Blackfriars Street to the south), as well as assis Ɵng in reducing 
traﬃc within the core of the city. 
Newmarket Street, Blueschool Street and Commercial Square will be re-designed to become safe and a Ʃ racƟve 
routes for pedestrians and cyclists, with improved public transport facili Ɵes and enhanced connec Ɵ vity between 
the historic city centre and regenera Ɵon area partly facilitated by the construc Ɵon of the new link road.  
The urban village will be complemented by other uses and infrastructure forming part of the wider regenera Ɵon 
area creaƟng a sustainable mixed use development which respects and where possible enhances the historic 
environment. These include the following: 
•	 land and contribu Ɵons towards a canal basin forming the terminus of the Herefordshire & 
Gloucestershire Canal, which is being delivered by the Hereford & Gloucester Canal Trust;
 
•	 each stage of development which adjoins Widemarsh Brook will maximise opportuni Ɵes for enhanced 
biodiversity, to provide ﬂood relief and sustainable surface water drainage solu Ɵons and op Ɵ mised as 
a green infrastructure link;
 
•	 Herefordshire Council in partnership with public transport operators will deliver an integrated transport interchange close to the railway sta Ɵon to maximise opportuni Ɵes for sustainable travel; 
•	 opportuni Ɵes for new commercial, tourism, educa Ɵon (including ter Ɵ ary faciliƟes), leisure, health, civic 
and police and ﬁre uses will be available to meet any iden Ɵﬁ ed need; 
•	 Herefordshire Council will work with the tenant(s) of Edgar Street football stadium to explore 
opportuni Ɵes for a sports led mixed-use redevelopment and
 
•	 new public car parking facili Ɵes. 
In order to maintain and enhance the viability and vitality of the city centre, new retail uses will be focused to the core of the city centre as de ﬁned below. Any iden Ɵﬁed need for further major retail development over the 
plan period will be met within the Eign Gate and that part of the Edgar Street regenera Ɵon area which lies within 
the de ﬁned town centre, including the Old Market, along Blueschool Street and through the refurbishment and 
re-development of the Bu Ʃ ermarket. 
5353 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
   
  
 
 
 
   
    
  
  
 
  
  
  
   
   
        
    
   
 
 
   
     
       
 
   
    
    Policy HD2 – Hereford city centre con Ɵnued 
Within Hereford city centre, new developments including changes of use will be approved where they: 
•	 provide new commercial and o ﬃce space in appropriate city centre loca Ɵons including above exis Ɵng 
retail and commercial premises;
 
•	 maintain and enhance the vitality and viability of the city centre. Proposals for town centre uses outside 
 the de ﬁned town centre will be subject to the sequen Ɵal test and applica Ɵons for development over 
700m2 gross ﬂoor space will require an impact assessment to determine whether there could be any 
adverse impacts on the town centre; 
•	 improve overall accessibility by walking, cycling and public transport; 
•	 provide new, or enhanced sport, recrea Ɵon and leisure facili Ɵes for local residents and visitors; 
•	 provide new and improve exis Ɵng cultural and tourism a Ʃ racƟons and facili Ɵes, which respect the city’s 
historic character and local dis ƟncƟ veness; 
•	 enable the provision of a canal basin with associated wharfage and visitor centre; 
•	 enable the protecƟ  on, conserva Ɵon and enhancement of Hereford’s heritage assets, their signi ﬁ cance 
 and se ƫng, including archaeology, with par Ɵcular regard to the historic street pa Ʃerns and the skyline. 
New homes 
4.2.14 	 Policy HD2 promotes living in the city centre. This has many advantages, including good accessibility levels 
for residents to a range of services and facili Ɵes, encourages walking and cycling and makes best use of 
 exis Ɵ ng properƟes by using vacant and underused spaces above shops and o ﬃces. This approach will 
contribute to the vitality of the city centre as its role is broadened from mainly day Ɵme shopping and 
business uses to create an inclusive ‘evening’ economy beyond normal working hours. This will make it a 
 more a Ʃ racƟve place to live, as well as boost the local economy. 
4.2.15 	 The development of the urban village will provide the majority of the 800 new homes in the city centre. 
These will comprise a mixture of apartments and family housing at a minimum average density of 50 
dwellings per hectare. 35% of these homes will be a ﬀordable, with di ﬀerent types of tenures available, 
 to sa Ɵ sfy idenƟﬁed local needs. Housing will be delivered that meets the needs of all sec Ɵons of the 
community, including housing for older persons – a need highlighted in the study of the Housing and 
Support Needs of Older People in Herefordshire 2012 . All homes will be constructed to high energy 
eﬃciency standards in accordance with other policies in this plan.  
4.2.16 	 The urban village will require associated infrastructure in order to address ﬂooding issues. A key element 
of this will be the produc Ɵon of an integrated surface water management strategy. This should inform the 
design and layout of development and help deliver sustainable drainage and ﬂood risk reduc Ɵon 
measures taking into account the development of the other strategic sites in Hereford. Access and tra ﬃc 
constraints will also need to be addressed. The need for good pedestrian and cycle links to other parts of the city, including the railway sta Ɵon and retail and leisure areas, is vital to a successful urban village 
 development. 
4.2.17 Place Shaping - Hereford
 
The residents of all new homes will have access to public open space and, where possible, there should be 
green corridors to link the site to other green areas. Opportuni Ɵes exist to make an a Ʃ racƟve feature of 
the canal basin and its corridor within the new residen Ɵ al area. 
5454 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
   
  
 
 
 
   
 
   
    
 
 
  
  
  
   
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
   
 
 
   
   
 
  
   
   
   
  Place Shaping - Hereford
New jobs 
4.2.18 	 The Employment Land Study Update (2012)  conﬁrms the role of Hereford city as the main business centre 
for the county and iden Ɵﬁes the need to promote small-scale sustainable employment opportuni Ɵes in 
and on the edge of the Hereford city area. It also recommends that opportuni Ɵes for new o ﬃce 
development in the city centre should be enhanced. 
4.2.19 	 The development of new commercial and oﬃ ce faciliƟes will take place within the city centre as part of 
the regenera Ɵon scheme. This approach is also supported by the Employment Land Study Update (2012) , 
which concludes that the regenera Ɵon as a whole will create a be Ʃer environment for exis Ɵng businesses 
and raise the rates of company forma Ɵon. 
4.2.20 	 Proposals for o ﬃce uses outside the city centre will be subject to the sequen Ɵal approach, as outlined 
in policy E5. Proposals for o ﬃces which have a gross ﬂoor space of 700m2 or over outside the city centre 
will be required to provide an impact assessment which meets the requirements of the Na Ɵonal Planning 
Policy Framework and policy E5. 
Movement 
4.2.21 	 The regenera Ɵon in the north of the city centre will be enabled by the construc Ɵon of a new link road 
which will connect Edgar Street, Widemarsh Street and Commercial Road. This new road will create safe access through Edgar Street regenera Ɵon area; unlocking development plots, whilst also signi ﬁcantly 
reducing the large volumes of tra ﬃc on the inner ring road. This will improve pedestrian links between 
the historic city core and the old livestock market area and accessibility within and across the northern 
secƟon of the Edgar Street regenera Ɵon area. 
4.2.22 	 Newmarket Street, Blueschool Street and Commercial Square will be upgraded for pedestrians and 
cyclists in order to create a safer and more visually a ƩracƟve environment. An integrated public transport 
interchange will be provided in the vicinity of the railway sta Ɵon, which will become a central point for 
access to all modes of transport, providing transfer opportuni Ɵes for trains, buses, taxis, private and hire 
cars, mobility vehicles, cyclists and pedestrians. 
4.2.23 	 The Local Transport Plan  aims to support growth of the city by improving tra ﬃc management and 
promoƟng walking and cycling for the majority of trips. The strategy iden Ɵﬁes a number of strategic and 
non-strategic transport measures and smarter travel ini ƟaƟves to encourage modal shi Ōs from private 
cars to public transport, walking and cycling. 
Green infrastructure and open space 
4.2.24 	 The city has a number of natural heritage assets with the River Wye ﬂowing through it with its associated 
landscape, biodiversity, recrea Ɵon and tourism bene ﬁts. The River Wye is a designated Special Area of 
ConservaƟon and Site of Special Scien Ɵﬁc Interest. Development proposals must meet the requirements 
of Policy SD4, which will ensure that the achievement of water quality targets for the county’s rivers will be met. This is a key environmental objec Ɵve of the Core Strategy. The wider river corridor provides a 
special se ƫng for the city and brings opportuni Ɵes for open space and green infrastructure. Its 
disƟncƟveness helps to provide an a ƩracƟve locaƟon to live and work, which needs to be protected and 
enhanced. New development should respect this natural heritage. The importance of managed green spaces as a posi Ɵve element in city living is recognised, with these assets providing opportuni Ɵes for 
recreaƟon, leisure and tourism. These natural and managed assets make an important contribu Ɵon to the 
5555 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
    
   
 
 
  
  
    
  
           
  
      
  
  
 
         
 green infrastructure of the city centre and wider area and should be protected and enhanced. 
Opportuni Ɵes for new and enhanced green infrastructure within the city; par Ɵcularly associated with the 
River Wye corridor and the Edgar Street regenera Ɵon area, should form part of any new proposals. 
4.2.25 	 The Green Infrastructure Strategy 2010  idenƟﬁes an enhancement zone in the city centre at the 
 con ﬂuence of a number of strategic green infrastructure corridors and includes the Edgar Street 
 regenera Ɵon area. The strategy highlights a number of important biodiversity features, including the 
Widemarsh Brook, the ‘Police Meadow’ and the railway corridor, where there will be numerous 
opportuni Ɵes to enhance, as well as create addi Ɵonal green infrastructure, as part of the redevelopment 
of this area. 
EducaƟ on faciliƟes 
4.2.26 	 ContribuƟons and/or community infrastructure levy monies will be sought from new development for 
the enhancement of primary and secondary educa Ɵ on faciliƟes to accommodate increased demand from 
new residents. The city centre will play a role in providing greater access to higher educa Ɵon. At the Ɵme 
 of adop Ɵon there is an ambi Ɵon to create a University in Hereford, the principal of which is fully 
supported by Policy SC1. 
Heritage 
4.2.27 	 Hereford’s heritage must be viewed as a valuable asset as the city expands and changes. Development 
proposals will be expected to demonstrate how heritage assets, their signi ﬁcance and se ƫ  ng, will be 
protected, conserved and where appropriate enhanced. Hereford is fortunate to have a wealth of historic buildings, archaeological remains, historic streetscapes, such as Widemarsh Street and St Owens Street and open spaces, which provide valuable se ƫngs for historic buildings,  for example; at the Cathedral 
Close and the plots of the adjoining Canons’ houses. Within Hereford there is the naƟ  onally designated 
Hereford Area of Archaeological Importance (AAI). Addi Ɵ onally, opportuni Ɵes exist to enhance the se ƫng 
 of exis Ɵng heritage assets including the City Wall and Blackfriars Friary/Coningsby Hospital site. Public 
realm works to Newmarket Street and Blueschool Street will also provide the opportunity to improve the 
seƫng of the City Wall, an important historic asset.  
4.2.28 	 In addiƟon to central and local government guidance on the protec Ɵon of heritage assets, there are a 
number of background studies undertaken to form part of the evidence base for the Core Strategy. The ﬁndings and recommenda Ɵons of these studies must be referred to as part of any masterplanning of new 
proposals in the city and they will be central to the appropriate future development of Hereford. These include the following: 
•	 Hereford Rapid Townscape Assessment 2010 : which iden Ɵﬁes areas of local interest, sites for 
          poten Ɵal development and enhancement and factors that contribute to the loss of character 
•	   Hereford Urban Archaeology Strategy comprising the Hereford Urban Archaeological Database, 
          Characterisa Ɵon of the Historic Townscape of Central Hereford 2010, the Research Framework 
          (2012) and the Strategy itself (2013) – a form of historic landscape characterisa Ɵon, undertaken in 
          an urban context, examining the townscape from an archaeological perspec Ɵ ve, and 
•	 Hereford Town Centre: Streetscape Design Strategy 2009  guidance on the development, 
          management and maintenance of new and exis Ɵ ng streets. Place Shaping - Hereford
 
5656 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
   
 
  
  
 
  
   
   
  
 
   
    
  
  
   
 
   
   
   
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
 Place Shaping - Hereford
Retail 
4.2.29 	 The Town Centres Study Update 2012 con ﬁrms Hereford as the principal shopping centre within the 
county. Although the report acknowledges that Hereford has been a ﬀected by the downturn in the 
economy along with many other town centres in the United Kingdom, it ﬁnds that the city centre shows 
signs of resilience and its outlook is good. The opening of the Old Market (2014) added to the exis Ɵng 
mix of naƟ onal mul Ɵples and independent traders and strengthens Hereford’s role as a principal centre, 
providing economic bene ﬁts and reducing unsustainable travel and retail expenditure leakage to other 
ciƟes such as Worcester, Cheltenham, Bristol and Cardi ﬀ. 
4.2.30 	 The city centre of Hereford, referred to as ‘town centre’ for the purposes of Policy E5 includes primary 
and secondary frontages which will be de ﬁned by the Hereford Area Plan (HAP). Retail development will 
be concentrated in the town centre. Applica Ɵons for proposals which have a gross ﬂoor space of 700m2 or 
over, outside the de ﬁned centre, as de ﬁned by the HAP , will be required to provide an impact assessment 
which meets the requirements of the Na Ɵonal Planning Policy Framework and policies E5 and E6. 
4.2.31 	 Following the opening of the ‘Old Market’ (2014) the ﬁndings of the Town Centres Study Update 2012, 
indicates that opportuni Ɵes remain for new retail development in the city centre, par Ɵcularly within the 
Eign Street regenera Ɵon area. Therefore at the Ɵme of adop Ɵon there is no need to allocate addi Ɵonal 
development sites for retail or other uses within the city. However this situa Ɵon will be reassessed when 
the Hereford Area Plan is produced. The Hereford Area Plan will also provide an opportunity to reconsider the extent of the town centre and primary and secondary retail frontages. 
Leisure and tourism 
4.2.32 	 Tourism plays an important role in Hereford’s economy and it will be promoted through the planned 
 mixed-use regenera Ɵon of the city. Opportuni Ɵes to aƩract more tourists, who make an important 
 contribu Ɵon to the local economy, will be supported where appropriate. The business tourism poten Ɵal 
can be further developed through the promo Ɵon of new mee Ɵ ng/conferencing facili Ɵes, which make 
beƩer use of exis Ɵng assets, such as the Courtyard Theatre for example. The Marches Hotel Study (2012)
 iden Ɵﬁes capacity for new hotels as well as the poten Ɵal for the redevelopment and/or extension of 
 exis Ɵng hotels. Opportuni Ɵes to promote tourism and recrea Ɵ on acƟviƟes on the River Wye in Hereford 
will be encouraged where they are in accordance with policy E4 on Tourism. 
4.2.33 	 Opportuni Ɵes will be facilitated through the Core Strategy and Hereford Area Plan for other leisure and 
tourism uses within the extended city centre. 
4.2.34 	 Any proposals for leisure uses outside the town centre, having a gross ﬂoor space of 700m2 or over, will 
be subject to the sequen Ɵal test and be required to provide an impact assessment which meets the 
requirements of the Na Ɵonal Planning Policy Framework and policy E5. 
5757 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
  
 
   
 
    
    
   Figure 4.3 – Hereford City Centre 
Place Shaping - Hereford
 
Surface water management and ﬂ ooding 
4.2.35 	 A proporƟon of the Edgar Street regenera Ɵon area lies within Flood Zone 3. The Yazor Brook ﬂood 
alleviaƟon scheme has now been completed, which provides some ﬂood relief to the Edgar Street 
 regenera Ɵon area and outlying areas. Secondary measures are required to ensure that any development 
in this area is safe and will not increase ﬂood risk to third par Ɵes. Further measures will also be 
implemented within the city that will improve surface water drainage and any residual ﬂ ooding impacts. 
This may include opportuni Ɵes in other parts of the city to a Ʃ enuate ﬂood ﬂows from exis Ɵng 
watercourses. Developers will also be required to provide surface water management plans to ensure sustainable surface water drainage solu Ɵons are adopted and risk of ﬂooding is minimized as well as a 
detailed Flood Risk Assessment to ensure ﬂood risk improvement. The restora Ɵon of the canal may also 
5858 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
     
  
  
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
   
    
 
   
   
 
   
 
 
     
 
   
  
   
  
   
 Place Shaping - Hereford
provide an opportunity to mi Ɵ gate ﬂood risk in the longer term. In ﬂood risk terms, sequen Ɵ ally, the 
Edgar Street regenera Ɵon area is considered acceptable for redevelopment proposals, including 
 residen Ɵal development described in policy HD2. Issues of low ﬂows in the Yazor and Widemarsh Brooks 
also require considera Ɵon. Regard will also be had to the impact of development on the water quality 
issues in rela Ɵon to the River Wye SAC in accordance with policy SD4. 
Movement 
4.2.36 	 FacilitaƟng access and maximising connec Ɵvity within the city by all transport modes is essen Ɵ al to
 reduce conges Ɵon, support future prosperity and enable growth within Hereford. The Core Strategy is 
complemented and supported by the Local Transport Plan within the city on the basis of a transport 
strategy for Hereford.  
4.2.37 	 Transport modelling undertaken to understand the extent of exis Ɵ ng traﬃc issues and how the city’s 
growth can be supported in the long-term has indicated that new highway infrastructure supported by a “package of sustainable transport improvements” are required.  Sustainable transport measures on their own, without new highway infrastructure will not accommodate the addi Ɵonal travel demand 
derived from the planned growth in the Core Strategy.  
4.2.38 	 The convergence of the county’s highway network in Hereford means that the city’s roads must 
accommodate both long distance and local tra ﬃc. The city network has only one main river crossing 
which, combined with the levels of local through tra ﬃc, results in increasingly prolonged periods of 
 conges Ɵon. As a result, the A49 between Asda and Newtown roundabouts, the inner ring road and much 
of Whitecross Road have been declared an Air Quality Management Area (AQMA).  
4.2.39 	 The scale of future development proposed for Hereford and the county will place further demand on the 
city’s constrained highway network infrastructure resul Ɵng in increased periods of conges Ɵ on and 
 consequen Ɵally greater environmental problems, unless the demand for short distance car journeys can 
be reduced by encouraging more people to walk, cycle or use public transport within Hereford. 
Policy HD3 - Hereford movement 
Herefordshire Council will: 
•	 improve Hereford’s economy by increasing connec Ɵvity to the na Ɵonal and local transport networks by 
 reducing conges Ɵon and improving journey Ɵme; 
•	 improve health, wellbeing and the environment by improving air quality and reducing noise through 
 maximising opportuni Ɵes for the use of sustainable transport modes, par Ɵcularly for short distance 
 journeys.
 
Herefordshire Council will use a variety of funding mechanisms to deliver the following: 
•	 packages of transport improvements focussing on key routes into the city delivering a range of public 
realm improvements and improving access and connec Ɵvity for sustainable mode users; 
•	 behavioural change campaigns which will complement infrastructure delivery to encourage sustainable mode use and healthy lifestyles; 
5959 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
        
       
       
      
                         
 
   
   
   
  
    
 
     
 
    
 
     
 
     
  
  
     
   
    
 
 Policy HD3 - Hereford movement con Ɵnued 
•	 reduced reliance on car use by incorpora Ɵng sustainable mode routes within new developments and  
 connecƟng them with exis Ɵ ng networks;
 
•	 improvements to public transport infrastructure enabling improved access and integra Ɵon between bus 
and to rail services; 
•	 convenient, safe and secure car parking facili Ɵes which a Ʃract shoppers and visitors and deter 
commuter parking in the city centre, through the development of Park and Choose sites; and
 
•	 a Relief Road to the west of Hereford to reduce the volume of tra ﬃc from the city centre and enable the 
delivery of walking, cycling and bus improvements on the exis Ɵng highway network. The road will be 
designed and developed in such a way which avoids and mi Ɵgates adverse impacts or physical damage 
to or loss of habitats, noise pollu Ɵon and vibra Ɵon, light pollu Ɵon, air pollu Ɵon, ﬂood risk and water 
quality on the River Wye SAC, as well as residen Ɵal amenity and business interests. Considera Ɵon of the 
impact of the road on heritage assets, their signi ﬁcance and se ƫng, as well as the historic character of 
the wider landscape will also be required. Further assessments will be undertaken as part of the Hereford Area Plan and subsequent planning applica Ɵon(s). 
The pace of delivery of transport and movement infrastructure will be aligned with that of housing provision in accordance with policy SS3. 
4.2.40 	 The Hereford Transport Strategy includes a programme of infrastructure and services to facilitate growth 
 proposals including: 
•   real Ɵ  me informa Ɵon on core bus network and stop upgrades; 
• acƟve travel network; 
•   extension of Des ƟnaƟon Hereford project; 
•   Hereford transport hub; 
•   city centre refurbishments; 
•   bus priority measures; 
•   rail track and signal improvements between Hereford and Malvern; and 
•   faciliƟes to support electric and low carbon vehicles. 
 Par Ɵcular transport infrastructure necessary to bring forward the Core Strategy proposals are detailed in 
the Infrastructure Delivery Plan. 
4.2.41 	 A key element of the long-term Hereford transport strategy is the requirement for a Relief Road. This vital 
addiƟon to the city’s transport network will enable the realloca Ɵon of exis Ɵng highway for bus priori Ɵes 
and walking and cycling measures and the re-rou Ɵng of the exis Ɵng A49 Trunk Road (managed by the 
Highways England) removing longer distance tra ﬃc from the centre of the city. 
4.2.42 	 The Hereford Relief Road – Study of Op Ɵons (Aug 2010) reviewed all route op Ɵons and assessed the 
impacts of the routes in rela Ɵon to environmental, engineering and tra ﬃc impacts. The inner western 
corridor is the preferred corridor for the Relief Road based on the study’s overall assessment. 
4.2.43 	 The report indicates that the impact on biodiversity at the River Wye crossing can be largely mi Ɵ gated 
through the use of wide span structures and avoidance of direct working in the watercourse. Place Shaping - Hereford
 
6060 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
   
  
 
 
 
 
  
   
    
    
   
  
    
 
  
   
    
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
   
 Place Shaping - Hereford
4.2.44 	 The ﬁ rst secƟon of the Relief Road to be constructed will be the sec Ɵon between the A49 and A465, as 
part of the South Wye Transport Package (as iden Ɵﬁed in the Local Transport Plan ). The second sec Ɵon 
will link the A465 and the A4103 and include a bridge crossing of the Wye. This sec Ɵon will be 
co-ordinated with the delivery of the Western Urban Expansion at Three Elms. The ﬁ nal secƟ  on would 
link the A4103 to the western and eastern sides of the A49 in the north of Hereford.  Costs of the link 
secƟons are highlighted within the study. 
4.2.45 	 Detailed alignment of the road will be shown in the Hereford Area Plan. Close working with key statutory 
stakeholders and any necessary assessments will be undertaken in preparing the HAP and subsequent 
 planning applica Ɵon(s) to ensure the avoidance of impact on natural assets and appropriate iden ƟﬁcaƟon 
 of mi ƟgaƟon measures, parƟcularly in rela Ɵon to impacts from physical damage/loss of habitat, noise 
polluƟon and vibra Ɵon, light pollu Ɵon, air pollu Ɵon and water quality on the River Wye SAC. The design 
and exact loca Ɵon of the proposals will need to fully take account of ﬂood risk to ensure no detriment to
 third par Ɵes. Regard should also be had to any impact on Source Protec Ɵon Zones.  Considera Ɵon of the 
impacts on the historic environment will also be required with par Ɵcular regard being paid to any 
designated heritage assets, including their signi ﬁcance and se ƫng, archaeological interest, and the 
historic character of the wider landscape. 
4.2 46 	 In addiƟon, it will be essen Ɵal to work closely with the Highways Agency to ensure that all opportuni Ɵes 
are realised to re-route trunk road tra ﬃc to the new Relief Road. This will reduce the intrusion of 
commercial and longer distance tra ﬃc through the city centre, reduce exis Ɵng air quality problems and 
provide the council with greater control of the exis Ɵng city transport network. 
Hereford urban expansion areas 
4.2.47 	 Three expansion areas and associated infrastructure, services and facili Ɵes are proposed. The broad 
 loca Ɵon of these is shown in Figure 4.2: Hereford Key Diagram and the proposals are described in the 
 following paragraphs. 
Northern Urban Expansion (Holmer west) 
4.2.48 	 A locaƟon to the north of the city has been iden Ɵﬁed as a strategic urban expansion area. This area is 
broadly located north of the A4103 and west of the A49 extending westwards towards the A4110 comprising predominantly of agricultural land. 
4.2.49 	 Holmer West will be planned on a comprehensive basis. This will include variaƟons in layout, density and 
design to achieve a form and character to the development that respects the landscape sensiƟ  vity, and 
 exis Ɵng natural and historic features of the area. 
Policy HD4 – Northern Urban Expansion (Holmer West) 
Land at Holmer West will deliver a comprehensively planned sustainable urban expansion. The new develop­ment will be sensi Ɵvely integrated into both the exis Ɵng urban fabric of Hereford, and the wider landscape, 
through high design and sustainability standards. The development will be expected to provide: 
•	 500 new homes, at an average density of up to 35 dwellings per hectare, comprising a mix of market and 
aﬀordable house sizes and types that meet the requirements of policy H3 and the needs iden Ɵﬁed in the 
latest version of the Herefordshire Local Housing Market Assessment; 
6161 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
     
  
 
   
    
 
  
   
   
       
   
 
   
   
      
     
  
  
     
      
    
   
 
 Policy HD4 – Northern Urban Expansion (Holmer West) con Ɵnued 
•	 a target of 35% of the total number of dwellings shall be a ﬀ ordable housing; 
•	 Park and Choose site (land and infrastructure) adjacent to the western side of the A49 in close proximity to the Hereford Relief Road and land or a contribu Ɵon to facilitate the construc Ɵon of the adjoining 
phase of the Hereford Relief Road; 
•	 walking and cycle routes and green infrastructure corridors linking to the Park and Choose site the 
 exis Ɵng public right of way network and exis Ɵ ng educa Ɵon and community facili Ɵes and employment 
sites in the locality;
 
•	 appropriate new green bu ﬀers and linear green routes, par Ɵcularly along Ayles Brook; 
•	 measures to miƟ  gate ﬂood risk both for the new homes within the expansion area and for the bene ﬁt 
 of exis Ɵng residents and businesses in other parts of the city through the incorpora Ɵon of sustainable 
urban drainage solu Ɵons, as part of the green infrastructure network and measures to control water 
levels within Ayles Brook;
 
•	 appropriate provision of and contribu Ɵons towards indoor and outdoor sports and play facili Ɵ es, open 
space and allotments; 
•	 where appropriate a contribu Ɵon towards pre-school facility and contribu Ɵons towards the 
enhancement of exis Ɵng primary and secondary school provision and any iden Ɵﬁed need for other 
 community infrastructure/facili Ɵ es; and
 
•	 sustainable standards of design and construc Ɵon. 
This expansion area will be accessed primarily o ﬀ the A4103 Roman Road. The area will be planned in a 
comprehensive manner to show the layout of development and the required infrastructure. Appendix 5 sets out the relaƟonship between the development of urban expansion areas and the provision of key new 
infrastructure.   
New homes 
4.2.50 	 This policy will deliver a minimum of 500 new homes will be provided within the Holmer west area. All 
will be built to high energy e ﬃciency standards. A target of 35% will be a ﬀordable. Housing will be 
delivered that meets the needs of all sec Ɵons of the community including housing for older persons – a 
need highlighted in the study of the Housing and Support needs of Older People in Herefordshire 2012 . 
The design and styles of the new housing will complement the built and landscape character of the locality and the scale and density will be re ﬂecƟve of the topography and prominence of the area. The 
development will need to be laid out and all homes and community buildings constructed to a high sustainability standard to ensure energy and water usage is minimised and sustainably sourced materials are used where prac Ɵcable. This will include the use of renewables and other low carbon energy sources. 
Movement 
4.2.51 	 The new area will be required to encourage sustainable modes of travel and discourage car use. It will be 
primarily accessed from Roman Road with the op Ɵon of a further access link to the northern Hereford 
Relief Road corridor and Park and Choose. The scheme will be reliant on walking and cycling routes and bus priority to access the city and exis Ɵng community facili Ɵes. 
4.2.52 	 A Park and Choose site is planned on part of the northern expansion area, alongside the A49, which will 
work in combina Ɵon with the proposed western and southern Park and Choose facili Ɵes. The design and 
siƟng of the Park and Choose should take into account any impact on the landscape. Place Shaping - Hereford
 
6262 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
    
    
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
  
 
    
   
     
 
  
 
   
 
 
    
  
 
   
 
    
  
  
  
   Place Shaping - Hereford
Landscape and heritage 
4.2.53 	 The landscape character assessment de ﬁnes this broad loca Ɵon as being ‘principal se Ʃled farmland’. The 
expansion area is of a high to medium sensi Ɵvity on the higher northern por Ɵon of the land. However, 
as the land falls away southwards towards Ayles Brook, the landscape is less sensi Ɵve to change. Careful 
 considera Ɵon must be given to the impact of the development on the landscape and vistas. Landscape 
 characteris Ɵcs should be used to direct new development to the most appropriate areas, which is likely to 
concentrate most built development to the lower, southern three quarters of the expansion area. The masterplan should iden Ɵfy measures which will successfully integrate the new development into the 
 landscape se ƫ  ng including opportuni Ɵes for enhancement to restore and reinforce the landscape 
 character. 
4.2.54 	 Listed buildings and a Scheduled Ancient Monument at St Bartholomew’s Church and Holmer House lie to 
the east of the expansion area. New development should be designed to ensure that the impacts on the 
signiﬁcance and the se ƫng of these heritage assets are minimised and that opportuni Ɵ es for 
enhancement are pursued and regard should be had to the Herefordshire Historic Land Characterisa Ɵon 
project. There is poten Ɵal for signi ﬁcant buried archaeological remains to survive within this area as parts 
are of it are adjacent to the Roman Road and aerial photographs indicate the presence of former 
seƩlements here. Earthworks also indicate the presence of medieval se Ʃ lements. 
Green infrastructure and biodiversity 
4.2.55 	 The Green Infrastructure Strategy 2010 idenƟﬁes the expansion area as predominantly arable in use. It 
lies within a local enhancement zone (HerLEZ3) and incorporates strategic corridor HerLSC3. The strategy 
idenƟﬁes a number of opportuni Ɵes to enhance exis Ɵng green infrastructure, including establishing 
robust linear habitats along Ayles Brook, plan Ɵng new hedgerows and tradi Ɵonal orchards and 
 appropriate plan Ɵng to so Ōen the transi Ɵon between se Ʃlement and open countryside. A network of 
green infrastructure will be required with linear green routes which can be used for biodiversity and 
 conserva Ɵon as well as sustainable transport routes, leisure and ﬂood management. The expansion area’s 
 natural characteris Ɵcs and features together with the area’s heritage assets should form the basis for new 
green infrastructure and open space proposals.  Opportuni Ɵes exist for the reten Ɵon and enhancement  
of ﬁeld boundaries and other linear features, and for the maintenance and enhancements of connec Ɵvity 
 between habitats. 
Community, recrea Ɵon and educa Ɵ on faciliƟes 
4.2.56 	 Appropriate community facili Ɵes will be provided within the area to support the iden Ɵﬁed need to 
support the new development. Contribu Ɵons will be sought where appropriate for primary and 
 secondary educa Ɵ on faciliƟes in order to accommodate children living in the expansion area.  There will 
also be a need for contribu Ɵon towards expanded pre-school provision within exis Ɵng primary schools or 
the provision of a new pre-school facility as part of the expansion area.  
4.2.57 	 The Open Space Study 2007 highlights there is an under provision in the north of the city of natural and 
semi-natural green space. The Play Facili Ɵes Strategy 2012  idenƟﬁes provision north of the city as being 
‘average’ with par Ɵcular gaps in the provision for older children. Therefore the development will be 
expected to incorporate acceptable levels of open space and play facili Ɵes in accordance with Policies 
OS1 and OS2 and addi Ɵonal semi natural green space. Provision for community allotments will also be 
required to assist in mee Ɵng the shor ƞall in provision across the city. 
6363 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
 
    
     
  
  
  
 
  
    
  
   
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
   
  
  
   
    
   
 Fluvial ﬂooding, surface water management and drainage 
4.2.58 	 The expansion area is within Flood Zone 1 which has a low probability risk of ﬂooding, with the excep Ɵon 
of the southern eastern boundaries de ﬁned by the Ayles Brook which is iden Ɵﬁed as being in Flood Zone 
3. Ayles Brook is an exis Ɵng source of ﬂooding to proper Ɵes, community facili Ɵes and highway 
infrastructure south of the site. Therefore a detailed Flood Risk Assessment to model the Ayles Brook, to 
accurately ascertain the degree of ﬂooding from this watercourse, will be required. This assessment will 
inform decisions regarding the developable area of the site and the required mi ƟgaƟon measures.  
Overall, the developer will be required to demonstrate that adequate measures, primarily through the 
ﬂood risk for exis Ɵng residents. The area su ﬀers from low water pressure and therefore an upgrade to the 
mains water supply to serve the area may be required. Improvements in the capacity of the public foul 
drainage network in the locality will also be required to serve the new development. 
Western Urban Expansion (Three Elms) 
4.2.59 	 Land on the outskirts of Hereford, north west of the city centre, is iden Ɵﬁed as a loca Ɵon for a major 
mixed use urban expansion of the city. The area is broadly located between the A4103 to the north and A438 to the south, immediately west of Yazor Road extending westwards towards the new livestock market. The land is currently predominantly being used for agriculture and is of low/medium landscape 
sensiƟvity. Yazor Brook runs through the land and the brook corridor is designated a ﬂood zone. The 
 exis Ɵ ng residen Ɵal areas of Three Elms and Kings Acre are adjacent and Hun Ɵ ngton Conserva Ɵon Area is 
within the development area. 
4.2.60 	 The expansion area referred to as Three Elms will be planned on a comprehensive basis, informed by a 
development brief and masterplan prepared through the Hereford Area Plan. This will include varia Ɵons 
in layout, density and design to achieve a form and character to the development that respects the 
 landscape sensi Ɵvity and exis Ɵng natural features of the area and the se ƫ  ng of Hun Ɵ ngton Conserva Ɵon 
 Area. 
4.2.61 	 In planning for urban growth to the west of the city, it will be essen Ɵal that the development integrates 
both visually and physically with the remainder of the city and exis Ɵng neighbouring communi Ɵes. Place Shaping - Hereford
 
development of sustainable urban drainage systems, are incorporated within the development to mi Ɵ gate 
Policy HD5 – Western Urban Expansion (Three Elms) 
Land at Three Elms will deliver a comprehensively planned sustainable urban expansion. The new development 
will be sensi Ɵvely integrated into both the exis Ɵng urban fabric of Hereford, and the wider landscape, through 
high design and sustainability standards. The development will be expected to provide:  
•	 a minimum of 1,000 homes, at an average density of up to 35 dwellings per hectare, comprising a mix of 
market and a ﬀordable house sizes and types that meet the requirements of policy H3 and the needs 
idenƟﬁed in the latest version of the Herefordshire Local Housing Market Assessment; 
•	 a target of 35% of the total number of dwellings shall be a ﬀ ordable housing; 
•	 delivery of land and infrastructure to facilitate the construc Ɵon of the adjoining phase of the Hereford 
 Relief Road;
 
•	 a minimum of 10 hectares of employment land, comprising predominantly of a mixture of use class B1, 
B2 and B8 located near to the new livestock market with access to the Hereford Relief Road and Roman 
 Road; 
6464 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
  
 
 
  
  
  
    
     
  
    
  
     
    
  
    
  
    
    
     
   
  
     
 
    
      
    
 Place Shaping - Hereford
 Policy HD5 – Western Urban Expansion (Three Elms) con Ɵnued 
•	 land and infrastructure for  Park & Choose facili Ɵes; 
•	 a new linear park along the Yazor Brook corridor connec Ɵng with the exis Ɵng green infrastructure links 
east of the expansion area, the public rights of way network within and adjoining the expansion area and informal recrea Ɵ on space; 
•	 a series of new green infrastructure connec Ɵons which enhance the biodiversity value of the area and 
also serve as pedestrian cycle links through the development, including op Ɵmising the use of the 
disused railway line to connect with the transport interchange, schools, community facili Ɵes, 
employment land and the remainder of the city;
 
•	 provision for new bus links through the expansion area; 
•	 development of bespoke, high quality and inclusive design, including accommoda Ɵon that will meet the 
needs of older persons and contributes to the dis ƟncƟveness of the site and surrounding environment; 
•	 the provision on site of appropriate sports and play facili Ɵes, formal and informal open space, 
community orchards, woodland plan Ɵng and allotments;
 
•	 integra Ɵon of Hun Ɵngton village into the development area in a way which  respects, protects, 
conserves and, where possible, enhances the se ƫng of the Conserva Ɵon Area and heritage assets;
 
•	 210 primary school places with addi Ɵonal pre-school accommoda Ɵon; 
•	 an extension of Whitecross High School to increase capacity from a 6 form entry to 7 form entry school, 
with commensurate school playing ﬁ eld provision; 
•	 a neighbourhood community hub to meet any iden Ɵﬁed need for small scale convenience retail, 
 community mee Ɵng space, health provision, indoor sports and other community infrastructure/facili Ɵes 
 where appropriate; 
•	 sustainable urban drainage and ﬂ ood miƟgaƟ on soluƟons to form an integral part of the green 
 infrastructure network;
 
•	 opportuni Ɵes to miƟ  gate ﬂood risk arising from Yazor Brook for exis Ɵng residents and businesses within 
the city; and 
•	 sustainable standards of design and construc Ɵon. 
The area will be planned in a comprehensive manner to show the layout of development and the required infrastructure.  Appendix 5 sets out the rela Ɵonship between the development of urban expansion areas and the 
provision of key new infrastructure. 
New homes 
4.2.62 	 This policy will deliver a minimum of 1,000 new homes will be provided within the western expansion 
area. Around 35% of the total number of dwellings will be aﬀ ordable housing to be distributed in small 
clusters across the development. Housing will be delivered that meets the needs of all sec Ɵons of the 
community, including housing for older persons – a need highlighted in the study of the Housing and 
Support needs of Older People in Herefordshire 2012 . 
4.2.63 	 This expansion area will be developed in smaller clusters to create new neighbourhoods that dovetail in 
 with exis Ɵ ng communi Ɵes adjoining the development area.  It is an Ɵcipated that the residen Ɵ al element 
of the new growth will be to the east of the Hereford Relief Road, adjacent to the exis Ɵng urban fabric. 
New employment 
4.2.64 	 The provision of addi Ɵonal 10 hectares of employment land will balance the exis Ɵng provision to the 
south of the city within the Hereford Enterprise Zone at Rotherwas and to the north at Moreton Business 
6565 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
 
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
   
 
  
  
  
     
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
    
    Park. Employment land should be provided close to the new livestock market, with poten Ɵal access on 
to the Hereford Relief Road and A4103 and pedestrian/cycle links to the development area and city beyond. This land is rela Ɵvely ﬂat, will have good road frontage and is su ﬃciently large to o ﬀer 
opportuni Ɵes for large and small scale businesses, thus adding to the diversity of employment land 
opƟons around the city. The expansion area will also o ﬀer opportuni Ɵes for live work units. 
Sustainable construc Ɵon and resources use 
4.2.65 	 All homes, community and employment buildings will need to be constructed to a high sustainability 
standard to ensure energy and water usage is minimised and sustainably sourced materials are used 
where prac Ɵcable. This will include the use of renewables and other low carbon energy sources and the 
feasibility of combined heat and power systems will also be inves Ɵgated. 
Movement 
4.2.66 	 A package of transport measures in the area will assist in crea Ɵng a development which is less 
dependent on the private car whilst providing safe and convenient access to the local and future strategic road network (Hereford Relief Road). The new urban extension will be designed to inhibit tra ﬃc 
and facilitate more sustainable travel choices. Key to achieving this will be the crea Ɵon of new pedestrian 
and cycle links through the development area connec Ɵng with exis Ɵng links within the city and local 
community facili Ɵes. Where necessary, the development will also be required to upgrade exis Ɵng links 
to make them more user friendly for pedestrians and cyclists. Addi Ɵonally, the provision of new, or 
enhancement of, exis Ɵng bus links to serve the new community will also be required, including the 
introducƟon of bus priority measures both within the development and on the exis Ɵng highway network. 
4.2.67 	 Vehicular access op Ɵons will need to be informed by a tra ﬃc assessment but opportuni Ɵes exist to 
connect to Roman Road, Three Elms Road and Kings Acre Road as well as the new Relief Road. 
4.2.68 	 The development will also include a Park and Choose site with ancillary facili Ɵes such as secure cycle lock 
ups. 
Green infrastructure 
4.2.69 	 A network of green infrastructure is planned within the western expansion area. Green corridors which 
can be used for biodiversity and conserva Ɵon enhancement as well as leisure and sustainable transport 
routes will be required. 
4.2.70 	 Linear green spaces will also be provided along exis Ɵng footpaths to link key features within the 
development, including the Park and Choose site, to exis Ɵng faciliƟes such as schools, employment and 
retail areas. The old railway and Yazor Brook linear green spaces should link to exis Ɵng footpaths and 
cycleways through Moor Park and into the city via Plough Lane. Opportuni Ɵes to link heritage assets as 
part of the green infrastructure network should also be explored. 
Heritage 
4.2.71 	 Within the expansion area, the development will need to respect and where possible enhance the se ƫng 
of HunƟngton Conserva Ɵon Area and the rural character of Hun Ɵngton Lane. Key a Ʃributes such as the 
built heritage within the conserva Ɵon area, the landscape se ƫng of the village and the width, hedgerows 
and alignment of the lane will be safeguarded and enhanced whilst also ensuring the development fully assimilates with these features. The poten Ɵal for survival of signi ﬁcant buried archaeological remains Place Shaping - Hereford
 
6666 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
   
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
   
  
  
   
  
  
   
 
  
   
  
 Place Shaping - Hereford
within the expansion area is high. The development will also be required to conserve and where possible 
enhance other heritage assets. The historic linkages in this area should not be obscured and new development should maximise the poten Ɵal for vistas that take in the key landmark and historic feature 
of Credenhill Park Wood. Regard should be had to the historic landscape characterisa Ɵon project in 
 rela Ɵon to the design of the development. 
Community hub and facili Ɵes 
4.2.72 	 A community hub would address the needs of the new homes and the exis Ɵng residents of Three Elms, 
Kings Acre, Bobblestock and Moor Park. This hub could provide a range of mul Ɵ-agency use facili Ɵes, 
including a health centre, pre-school educa Ɵon, community rooms and local convenience retail. To serve 
as a hub, it will be situated near the new school, with safe direct pedestrian and cycle access to exis Ɵng 
 communi Ɵes. 
New educa Ɵ on faciliƟes 
4.2.73 	 210 primary school places will be required to meet the educa Ɵonal needs of the new popula Ɵon 
generated by the development. 
4.2.74 	 Whitecross High school is the principal secondary school likely to serve the development. This school is 
currently at capacity and therefore the development will also deliver an extension of the school to create capacity for an addi Ɵonal form (150 pupils). This is most likely to entail building on the exis Ɵ ng school 
 playing ﬁelds and therefore new playing ﬁelds to serve the larger school will need to be provided 
adjoining the school. 
Surface water management and ﬂ uvial ﬂooding 
4.2.75 	 The Yazor Brook corridor is designated as ﬂoodplain which also extends to a wider land area at the 
eastern end of the expansion area. The Water Cycle Study and the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment have highlighted that a strategy to address both the sustainable management of new surface water discharges from the urban extension and measures to mi Ɵ gate against ﬂuvial ﬂood risk will be required. 
This is likely to encompass surface water a ƩenuaƟon features which will be an integral part of the 
development and will provide opportuni Ɵes for biodiversity enhancement. A detailed ﬂ ood risk 
assessment will be required to address these issues. Yazor Brook is also an exis Ɵng source of ﬂ ooding to
 properƟes, community facili Ɵes and highway infrastructure east of the expansion area and the 
development will also need to include measures to assist in reducing this exis Ɵng ﬂood risk, in accordance 
 with na Ɵonal policy and technical guidance on the management of ﬂood risk. The area su ﬀers from low 
water pressure and therefore an upgrade to the mains water supply to serve the area may be required. 
4.2.76 	 With regard to the Whitecross High School expansion, ﬂood management and mi ƟgaƟon will also be 
 required. Opportuni Ɵes to uƟ lise exisƟng and new playing ﬁ elds for ﬂ ood beƩerment will be explored. 
Minerals 
4.2.77 	 The expansion area is subject to a safeguarding policy in respect of mineral reserves (sand and gravel).  
 Applica Ɵons for development will be assessed in this respect using the saved UDP policy M5 un Ɵl this is 
replaced by the Minerals and Waste Local Plan policy. 
6767 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
   
  
  
   
   
 
   
   
   
 
    
     
  
    
    
   
   
 
    
   
  
   
   
   
  Southern Urban Expansion (Lower Bullingham) 
4.2.78 	 A strategic loca Ɵon to the south of the city at Lower Bullingham has been highlighted as an expansion 
area for urban growth. This loca Ɵon is to the east of Hoarwithy Road between the railway line and the 
Rotherwas Access Road. 
4.2.79 	 The expansion area referred to as Lower Bullingham will be planned on a comprehensive basis, informed 
by a masterplan prepared through the Hereford Area Plan. This will include varia Ɵons in layout, density 
and design to achieve an organic form and character to the development that respects the landscape 
sensiƟvity and exis Ɵng natural features of the area. 
Policy HD6 - Southern Urban Expansion (Lower Bullingham) 
Land at Lower Bullingham will deliver a comprehensively planned sustainable urban expansion. The new development will be sensi Ɵvely integrated into both the exis Ɵng urban fabric of Hereford, and the wider 
landscape, through high design and sustainability standards. The development will be expected to provide:  
•	 a minimum of 1,000 new homes, at an average density of up to 35 dwellings per hectare, comprising a mix of market and a ﬀordable house sizes and types that meet the requirements of policy H3 and the 
 needs iden Ɵﬁed in the latest version of the Herefordshire Local Housing Market Assessment; 
•	 a target of 35% of the total number of dwellings shall be a ﬀ ordable housing; 
•	 around 5 hectares of employment land comprising a mixture of use class B1, B2 and B8 to complement Hereford Enterprise Zone;  
•	 suitable vehicular access to the site principally from the B4399; 
•	 Park and Choose site (land and infrastructure) adjacent  to the A49/ Rotherwas Access Road 
 roundabout;
 
•	 green infrastructure corridors through the area to include strategic greenways along Red Brook and 
Norton Brook and links with Withy Brook;
 
•	 crea Ɵon of a country park to incorporate new footpaths linking with the exis Ɵng public right of way 
network in the locality, woodland and orchard plan Ɵng;
 
•	 development of bespoke, high quality and inclusive design, including accommoda Ɵon that will meet the 
needs of older persons and contributes to the dis ƟncƟveness of the site and surrounding environment; 
•	 the provision on site of appropriate sports and play facili Ɵes, open space, community orchards and 
 allotments;
 
•	 210 primary school places and where appropriate contribu Ɵons towards new addi Ɵ onal pre-school 
 facili Ɵes;
 
•	 a neighbourhood community hub, including small scale convenience retail and provision of and/or 
 contribu Ɵons towards any iden Ɵﬁed need for other community infrastructure/facili Ɵ es, including 
 community mee Ɵng space and health provision, indoor and outdoor sports, where appropriate;
 
•	 sustainable urban drainage and ﬂ ood miƟgaƟ on soluƟons to form an integral part of the green 
 infrastructure network;
 
•	 new direct walking, cycling and bus links from the urban extension to the Park and Choose to the west, Hereford Enterprise Zone to the east and exis Ɵ ng communi Ɵes and the city centre to the north; 
•	 sustainable standards of design and construc Ɵ on; and 
•	 the protecƟ  on, conserva Ɵon and, where possible, enhancement of the heritage assets, their signi ﬁ cance 
 and se ƫng. An evalua Ɵon of the archaeological importance of the area should be provided to ensure 
 appropriate protec Ɵon of heritage assets and inform the detailed development proposals. Place Shaping - Hereford
 
6868 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
   
  
  
  
 
   Place Shaping - Hereford
Policy HD6 - Southern Urban Expansion (Lower Bullingham) con Ɵnued 
The area will be planned in a comprehensive manner to show the layout of development and the required infrastructure. Appendix 5 sets out the rela Ɵonship between the development of urban expansion area and the 
provision of key new infrastructure. 
New homes 
4.2.80 	 This policy seeks to deliver a minimum of 1,000 new homes with a minimum of 35% of the total number 
of dwellings will be a ﬀordable housing, to be distributed in small clusters across the development. 
Housing will also be delivered that meets the needs of all sec Ɵons of the community including housing for 
older persons – a need highlighted in the study of the Housing and Support needs of Older People in 
 Herefordshire 2012 . The housing will be predominantly two storeys in height, re ﬂecƟng the residen Ɵal 
character of the locality.  
Sustainable construc Ɵon and resources use 
4.2.81 	 All homes, community and employment buildings will need to be constructed to a high sustainability 
standard to ensure energy and water usage is minimised and sustainably sourced materials are used, 
 where prac Ɵcable. This will include; the use of renewables and other low carbon energy sources. The 
feasibility of combined heat and power systems will also be inves Ɵgated, possibly in combina Ɵon with the 
Hereford Enterprise Zone at Rotherwas. 
New employment 
4.2.82 	 The Hereford Enterprise Zone (HEZ) lies adjacent the expansion area and will provide opportuni Ɵ es for 
local employment. Part of this designa Ɵon includes land within this urban extension. To assist with the 
delivery of future employment land on the HEZ, provision for around 5 hectares of employment land is included as part of the urban extension. This would largely relate to land west of Watery Lane and be linked to the new housing and the remainder of the employment area by new walking and cycling routes. 
 The composi Ɵon of employment uses will need to complement that to be provided on the remainder of 
the HEZ but the site oﬀ ers the opportunity for sustainable small scale businesses with good access and 
road frontage.  
Movement 
4.2.83 	 The provision of new road infrastructure, along with a package of sustainable transport measures, is 
necessary for Hereford to deliver its full housing and economic growth. Sustainable transport measures are also required to assist in crea Ɵng a development which is less dependent on the private car. New 
growth areas will be designed to inhibit tra ﬃc and encourage more sustainable modes of travel and 
contribute to new and the enhancement of exis Ɵng highway and sustainable transport infrastructure. 
4.2.84 	  It is expected that the principal vehicular access to the development is via Rotherwas Access Road and 
likely to take the form of a new roundabout. Access to the north into the city and to the employment to the east will be restricted to and/or priori Ɵsed for buses, walking and cycling. 
4.2.85 	 New cycle ways and footpaths will need to link the development to the exis Ɵng and new employment 
areas, community facili Ɵes, local schools and the city centre. This will include a new link to the Connect 
6969 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
    
  
    
    
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
     
 
 
   
  2 Greenway cycle route. Collec Ɵvely, this will provide residents with safe and pleasant routes to walk and 
cycle. Key to the transporta Ɵon strategy will also be the expansion of the exis Ɵng bus network into the 
site to further encourage sustainable travel choices. 
4.2.86 	 As part of the development, a southern Park and Choose site is required in the vicinity of the A49 / 
Rotherwas Access Road roundabout to complement those proposed north and west of the city aside other expansion loca Ɵons. Provision will also need to be included for a small parking area to serve the 
country park. The design and si Ɵng of the Park and Choose should take into account any impact on the 
 landscape. 
Landscape and green infrastructure 
4.2.87 	 The Urban Fringe Sensi Ɵ vity Analysis  highlights the southern sec Ɵon of the site is of higher landscape 
sensiƟvity and is vulnerable to change, forming part of rising land to Dinedor Hill. This will require careful 
design in any masterplan. The protec Ɵon of the se ƫng of the Iron Age hill fort, Dinedor Camp, and the 
ridge extending eastwards into Rotherwas Park requires careful considera Ɵon as part of the master 
planning process. The expansion area is however, largely contained to the south by the Rotherwas Access Road, which e ﬀecƟvely forms a visual barrier to the more sensi Ɵve landscape beyond. 
4.2.88 	 The expansion area will need to be designed to incorporate a network of green infrastructure. This will 
serve as biodiversity and landscape enhancement corridors as well as sustainable transport routes. The Green Infrastructure Strategy  has highlighted a strategic corridor along Red Brook, Norton Brook and 
Withy Brook as an enhancement zone.  Opportuni Ɵes for enhancement include reinforcing the 
biodiversity value of the linear features including the railway and water corridors and establishing 
 landscape bu ﬀer areas.  Further green infrastructure will need to be provided to safely connect the new 
homes to the country park proposed as part of the urban extension and other community facili Ɵes in the 
 locality. Opportuni Ɵes to link heritage assets as part of the green infrastructure network should also be 
 explored. 
4.2.89 	 The exisƟng rural nature of Watery Lane and Lower Bullingham Lane should be protected and will provide 
 new opportuni Ɵes for sustainable transport links to connect to wider footpaths to Dinedor Hill, the 
historic Hill Fort, Rotherwas Park and beyond.  
Heritage 
4.2.90 	 Recent ﬁ  eld inves ƟgaƟons in the locality have revealed a number of archaeological ﬁnds of signi ﬁ cance, 
including the Bronze Age feature known as the Rotherwas Ribbon.  Further archaeological ﬁ eld evalua Ɵon 
will be required to inform the masterplan for the expansion area and it may be appropriate to include this 
area as part of a green corridor. Any statutory designa Ɵ on aﬀorded to this site will in ﬂuence the master 
 planning process. 
Community, recrea Ɵon and educa Ɵ on faciliƟes 
4.2.91 	 Local communi Ɵes will be more sustainable if they have access to necessary local services and facili Ɵes 
that meet their needs. A community hub is required to address the needs of the new homes and adjacent Place Shaping - Hereford
 
neighbourhoods in the south Hereford area. This hub will provide a range of facili Ɵes including community 
rooms for public and mul Ɵ-agency use, local convenience retail, health care and pre-school educa Ɵon. 
7070 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
   
  
   
   
 
  
 
    
    
  
  
 
 
     
    
      
   
   
   
    
 
    Place Shaping - Hereford
4.2.92 	 The development will require the provision of a new 210 place primary school within the urban extension 
along with sustainable travel links to the secondary school in the locality to meet the educa Ɵ onal needs 
of the increased popula Ɵon generated by the development. 
4.2.93 	 Land to the west of the urban extension will be required to deliver a new country park.  This will comprise 
of an area of land to be transferred to Herefordshire Council containing a series of informal paths connected to the exis Ɵng public right of way network and the Park and Choose site beyond. The country 
park will include measures to restore degraded landscape to include new tree plan Ɵng and biodiversity 
enhancement along Norton Brook which is also iden Ɵﬁed as a strategic green infrastructure corridor 
 connecƟng with Withy Brook and the enhancement of the se ƫng of Bullinghope village. 
4.2 94 	 Open space, play and sport facili Ɵes will need to be provided on site in accordance with the requirements 
of policy OS1 informed by the Play Facili Ɵes Strategy, Playing Pitch Strategy, Sports Facili Ɵ es Framework 
and Open Space Study . 
Surface water management and ﬂ uvial ﬂooding 
4.2.95 	 The northern part of the urban extension adjacent the railway line and along the brook corridor is 
designated as Flood Zone 3. The site is also bisected by a number of smaller watercourses such as the Withy and Red Brooks. The impact of the development on these will also need to be assessed as part of the Flood Risk Assessment. The Water Cycle Study  and the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment  have 
highlighted that a strategy to address both the sustainable management of new surface water discharges from the urban extension and measures to mi Ɵ gate against ﬂuvial ﬂood risk will be required. 
This is likely to encompass surface water a ƩenuaƟon features, which will be an integral part of the 
development and will provide opportuni Ɵes for biodiversity enhancement. 
Hereford Employment Provision 
Policy HD7 – Hereford Employment Provision 
Hereford will con Ɵnue to provide focus for employment provision in the county. Employment supply at Hereford 
will be delivered through: 
•	 the expansion of the city centre as part of wider city regenera Ɵon which will include commercial uses 
including new o ﬃce provision and crea Ɵng a beƩer environment for exis Ɵng businesses. Proposals for 
oﬃce uses outside of the city centre will be subject to the sequen Ɵal test, as set out in paragraph 24 of 
 the NPPF; 
•	 conƟnuing development of employment land at Hereford Enterprise Zone at Rotherwas to strengthen 
the enterprise zone, with parƟcular focus on defence and knowledge sectors, crea Ɵng added bene ﬁ t for 
companies who locate in the area; 
•	 encouraging small scale environmental and knowledge based employment development opportuni Ɵes; 
and 
•	 provision of new areas of employment land par Ɵcularly through the development of strategic urban 
 extensions.
 
4.2.96 	 Hereford provides a signiﬁcant focus for employment provision in the county. Proposals such as city 
 centre regenera Ɵon and the development of employment sites as elements of strategic urban extensions 
will provide new opportuni Ɵes for job crea Ɵon during the plan period. In addi Ɵon to new areas of 
7171 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
     
 
  
   
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
   
  
  
 
   
    
  
  employment land the protec Ɵon and con Ɵnued development of exis Ɵng employment land will also be an 
important contributor to the economic prosperity of Hereford. The following areas provide important 
elements of the porƞ olio of employment land in and close to the city. 
Hereford Enterprise Zone (HEZ) 
4.2.97 	 The Rotherwas industrial estate is located south-east of Hereford and is over 120 hectares in size and has 
over 125 companies opera Ɵng within it. As part of mee Ɵng the employment needs and the development 
of the economy in Herefordshire, the Rotherwas industrial estate was awarded Enterprise Zone status in 
2011. The site has a range of classes of employment land and buildings ranging from ‘best’, ‘good’ and ‘moderate’ in the Employment Land Study 2012  and a number of speci ﬁc sites within the estate, which 
are allocated in the Enterprise Zone Masterplan as sites for new B1, B2 and B8 development. 
4.2.98 	 The HEZ was originally nominated by the Marches Local Enterprise Partnership, an ƟcipaƟng that the 
scheme will become a catalyst for enhanced economic growth throughout the Marches through the 
 crea Ɵon of highly skilled jobs and encouragement of overseas investment into the area. The aspira Ɵ on of 
the HEZ Board is to develop part of the site into a centre of excellence for the defence and security sector, 
 with addi Ɵonal employment hubs focused on advanced technologies, environmental technologies and 
food and drink technologies. 
Wesƞields trading estate 
4.2.99 	 The Wesƞields trading estate is a 25 hectare site located in the northern region of Hereford. The en Ɵre 
site is rated as ‘good’ in the Employment Land Study 2012  and contains a number of di ﬀerent sized units, 
although it would bene ﬁt from new investment in employment buildings with many older units being 
present. This site contains a small amount of development opportuni Ɵes, as well as redevelopment 
opportuni Ɵes. 
Three Elms trading estate 
4.2.100 Three Elms trading estate is located north of Hereford and occupies 3 hectares of land, which has shown  
good employment land take-up, with few vacant sites. The trading estate is designated as ‘good’ in the 
Employment Land Study 2012  and there is the opportunity to expand the estate by an addi Ɵonal 10ha as 
part of further housing development to the north of Hereford. The addi Ɵonal 10ha of employment land is 
likely to cater for a range of di ﬀerent sizes of B1, B2 and B8 employment uses. 
Holmer Road 
4.2.101 The industrial precinct on Holmer Road is located to the north of Hereford and is approximately 16 
hectares in size and contains a number of larger, as well as smaller, employment units. The site is 
designated as ‘moderate’ in the Employment Land Study 2012  and contains land available for further B1, 
B2 and B8 employment development. 
Moreton Business Park 
4.2.102 Although this business park is located 7km north of Hereford, it is one of the county’s largest employment 
sites and is su ﬃciently close to Hereford to assist in mee Ɵng the current and future employment needs. 
This site presently comprises 60,000m² of predominantly B1 and B8 ﬂoorspace, a planning permission has Place Shaping - Hereford
 
been granted  for around a further 51,000 m² of mixed B1, B2 and B8 ﬂoorspace, totalling an addi Ɵ onal 21 
 hectares. 
7272 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
    
  
   
  
   
  
   Place Shaping - Bromyard
Market Towns 
Bromyard 
4.3.1 	 As part of the vision for Herefordshire, Bromyard will con Ɵnue to ful ﬁl a diverse range of important roles 
as a focus for residen Ɵal, employment, recrea Ɵonal and cultural uses. The town will con Ɵnue to act as a 
service centre for the surrounding rural area. The strategy promotes the con Ɵnued development of the 
town, taking into considera Ɵon its needs, opportuni Ɵes and constraints. This vision is manifested in 
 strategic objecƟves 1, 4, 6, 8 and 10, which for Bromyard, centre on mee Ɵng housing need (including 
aﬀordable housing), reducing the need to travel, facilita Ɵng employment genera Ɵon and diversi ﬁcaƟon 
and improving delivery and access to services. The spa Ɵal strategy for Bromyard is balanced against its 
unique needs, opportuni Ɵes and constraints which are represented in the town pro ﬁle map in Figure 4.4. 
Figure 4.4 Bromyard Town Pro ﬁle 
7373 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
  
   
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
   
  
   
    
      
 
   
 
       
    
    
    Background to policies 
4.3.2 	 To achieve the vision for Bromyard, a strategic urban extension for residen Ɵal development is proposed 
in the north west area of the town. In addi Ɵon, new employment land of around 5 hectares will be 
idenƟﬁed through a Bromyard Development Plan. The proposed housing at Hardwick Bank is located on 
mainly ‘high’ and ‘medium-high’ sensi Ɵvity landscape according to the Urban Fringe Sensi Ɵ vity Analysis 
2010 . High landscape constraints are predominant all around Bromyard and ﬂooding issues also constrain 
development to the east of the town. The environmental constraints of Bromyard must be balanced with Place Shaping - Bromyard
 
the need for new development. The spa Ɵal strategy proposes to direct some development to Bromyard to 
support its service centre role, meet local housing needs and provide further employment opportuni Ɵes 
for the local community. Policies BY1 and BY2 set out how the spa Ɵal strategy for Bromyard will be 
delivered and managed and are illustrated in the Bromyard Key Diagram – Figure 4.5. 
Policy BY1 - Development in Bromyard 
Bromyard will accommodate a minimum of 500 new homes together with around 5 hectares of new 
employment land during the plan period. The majority of new development will be located in the north western areas of the town with a minimum of 250 new homes. Around 5ha of employment land will also be required to come forward through the Bromyard Development Plan. Further development will take place through the implementa Ɵon of exis Ɵng commitments, windfall development and sites allocated through the Bromyard 
Development Plan. 
Within Bromyard, new development proposals will be encouraged where they:
 •	 can accommodate small scale employment sites including live/work units within and around the town; 
•	 protect and enhance the vitality and viability of the town centre. Proposals for new retail, leisure or 
oﬃce development of over 200m
2 in gross ﬂoor space and located outside of the de ﬁned town centre 
will need to be supported by an impact assessment, to determine whether there could be any adverse 
impacts on the town centre; 
•	 provide for the sustainable conserva Ɵon and enhancement of its green infrastructure and natural 
environmental resources such as water; there should be no adverse impact on water quality in the River 
 Frome; 
•	 facilitate a genuine choice of modes of travel including public transport, cycling and walking as 
 alterna Ɵves to the private car; 
•	 contribute to iden Ɵﬁed needs for new or improved community facili Ɵes as a result of new development; 
•	 take account of the ability of exis Ɵng and proposed infrastructure including foul drainage, water supply 
and water resources, and the highway network to serve the development proposed without undue 
 environmental impact; 
•	 contribute to the quality of Bromyard’s local environment, including its landscape and historic character;  
and 
•	 have demonstrated engagement and consulta Ɵon with the community including the town/parish 
 council.
 
7474 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
    
  
  
   
    
 
   
  
  
 
     
 
      
 
    
    
     
   
 
   
 Place Shaping - Bromyard
Policy BY2 – Land at Hardwick Bank 
Land at Hardwick Bank will deliver a comprehensively planned sustainable urban extension to the town and will 
be expected to deliver: 
•	 a minimum of 250 new homes at an average density of up to 35 dwellings per hectare comprising a mix of market and a ﬀordable house sizes and types that meet the requirements of Policy H3 and the needs 
idenƟﬁed in the latest version of the Hereford Local Housing Market Assessment; 
•	 a target of 40% of the total number of dwellings shall be a ﬀ ordable housing; 
•	 a new formal park to form part of the residen Ɵal development complemented by new play and sports 
 facili Ɵes and allotments; 
•	 the development areas should be linked by a suitable vehicular access, likely to take the form of a roundabout, onto the A44. The development areas should also be serviced by a residen Ɵal road which 
will allow for opportuni Ɵes to extend development beyond the plan period and serve as a future route 
to other parts of the local highway network;  
•	 the residen Ɵal roads leading o ﬀ Winslow Road should be u Ɵlised to provide sustainable links to the 
town (including pedestrian and cycle links) as well as public transport links between the area and the 
 town centre;
 
•	 the provision of and contribu Ɵons towards any iden Ɵﬁed need for new/improved community facili Ɵes. 
This shall include improvements to classroom provision for the local primary school which should incorporate publicly accessible youth facili Ɵes; 
•	 a high standard of design and layout which respects the townscape, landscape and green infrastructure of the area;  
•	 sustainable standards of design and construc Ɵon; 
•	 incorporate signi ﬁcant landscape bu ﬀers to miƟgate the impacts of the development areas on the wider 
 landscape; 
•	 an evalua Ɵon of the archaeological importance of the area in order to ensure appropriate protec Ɵ on of 
heritage assets and inform the detailed development proposals; and 
•	 a comprehensive sustainable urban drainage system which includes measures such as rain gardens and swales to manage ground and surface water drainage and safeguard against any increased ﬂ ood risk. 
7575 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
 Figure 4.5: Bromyard Key Diagram Place Shaping - Bromyard 
© Crown copyright and database rights [2015] Ordnance Survey 100024168
 
7676 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
    
 
 
  
   
 
    
 
  
 
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
 
    
    
   
  
   
   
 
   
 Place Shaping - Bromyard
New homes 
4.3.3 	 A minimum of 250 new homes will be provided within the Hardwick Bank area, north-west of the town. 
The strategic loca Ɵon is expected to be developed on an area of higher ground which slopes steeply to 
the north and west, down to the River Frome. The environmental suitability of including addi Ɵonal land 
south of the A44 and/or eastwards towards the B4214 will also be considered and consulted upon 
following comple Ɵon of further technical analysis of these areas. It is an Ɵcipated that the layout of any 
site will incorporate the exis Ɵng historic ﬁeld paƩern to respect the local dis ƟncƟveness of the area. It is 
important that the scheme is brought forward as a comprehensively planned development to enable the proper planning of the site and not prejudice any future development. All homes will be built to high design standards with energy e ﬃcient measures in place. It is expected that 40% of the homes will be 
aﬀordable and with an appropriate mix of housing, informed by the Local Housing Market Assessment  in 
order to meet the needs of all secƟons of the community including housing for older persons – a need 
highlighted in the study of the Housing and Support needs of Older People in Herefordshire 2012 . 
New jobs 
4.3.4 	 The policy to deliver around 5 hectares of employment land through the Bromyard Development Plan will 
help create greater and more diverse employment opportuniƟes for Bromyard. Any employment development is likely to need signi ﬁcant landscaping to mi Ɵgate any visual impact. If employment land is 
adjacent to exis Ɵng housing, it will be necessary to co-ordinate both developments to achieve greater 
economies of scale and ensure neighbouring land uses are compa Ɵble. This may include the restric Ɵon 
of the employment areas next to the residen Ɵal to use class B1 or suitable live/work units. The 
Bromyard Development Plan will seek to iden Ɵfy the required employment land of ﬁve hectares. Given 
the level of constraints in Bromyard the delivery of employment land over the plan period will be closely monitored and reviewed if necessary. The policy enabling small scale employment/mixed use 
opportuni Ɵes as part of housing development will allow for a more sustainable development reducing the 
need to travel. Further small scale sites for employment use will be iden Ɵﬁed through the Bromyard
 Development Plan. 
Movement 
4.3.5 	 The A44 Leominster Road will provide the primary access to housing and employment areas likely to be in 
the form of a roundabout serving land to the north and south of the A44. The visual and landscape impact of the access will also require mi ƟgaƟon with signi ﬁcant new landscaping. 
4.3.6 	 The highway infrastructure within the new development area should also facilitate a connec Ɵon for 
vehicular access which will serve the proposed new land uses over the plan period. It must also be designed so as not to prejudice the delivery of addi Ɵonal development beyond the plan period and the 
eventual comple Ɵon of a full road connec Ɵon from the A44 to Tenbury Road. 
4.3.7 	 The new development should have a network of cycle ways and footpaths that are easily accessible and 
connect with the town centre, exis Ɵng employment sites, community facili Ɵes and the surrounding 
countryside. This is par Ɵcularly important given the peripheral loca Ɵon of the development area. Car 
parking will be addressed through the Bromyard Development Plan. 
Green infrastructure, biodiversity and open space 
4.3.8 	 In addiƟon to new play facili Ɵes to serve the addiƟ onal popula Ɵon created, a new park will form part of 
the residen Ɵal development at Hardwick Bank. This will be designed for both informal recrea Ɵon and 
7777 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
 
  
  
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
   
 
  
   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
   
 biodiversity enhancement purposes. There will be a network of green infrastructure routes through the area with linkages to the park to encourage sustainable travel choices. Access to the River Frome and surrounding countryside will also form part of the enhanced linkages. 
4.3.9 	 Due to the sensi Ɵve nature and landscape visibility of the housing and employment loca Ɵ ons parƟcularly 
from long distance views from the north west and east, strong landscape mi ƟgaƟon measures will be 
required. This will include the restora Ɵon of the degraded landscape character through the conserva Ɵon 
and enhancement of hedgerows, with new plan Ɵng to include hedgerow oak trees, plan Ɵng of new 
orchard to replace degraded orchard land to the north of the A44 and elsewhere and new landscape 
buﬀers around the western and northern boundaries.  
Community and educa Ɵ onal facili Ɵes 
4.3.10 	 The local primary school will require addi Ɵonal classroom provision as well as addi Ɵ onal contribu Ɵons 
to pre-school, post 16, youth and special educa Ɵonal services. Addi Ɵonal community requirement needs 
include improvements to the ﬁre service, police service and improvements to exis Ɵ ng community 
buildings. Such requirements should be met by developer contribu Ɵons. 
Heritage and archaeological value 
4.3.11 	 The conserva Ɵon area of Bromyard has been iden Ɵﬁed as an area at risk. It is important that new 
development respects and where possible enhances, the character of the area. 
4.3.12 	 Recent ﬁ  eld inves ƟgaƟons in the area have revealed moderate to high poten Ɵal for the presence of 
currently undiscovered prehistoric remains. Further archaeological ﬁ eld evalua Ɵon will be required to 
inform the proposed development of the area. 
Retail 
4.3.13 	 The Town Centres Study Update 2012 concluded that new retail convenience (food store) and comparison 
retail development within the centre should be encouraged, but this is unlikely to be of scale to warrant any new retail alloca Ɵon in the town for the plan period.  
4.3.14 	 The town retains a modest amount of comparison goods expenditure from exis Ɵng residents and any 
opportunity to increase this part of the o ﬀer will be dependent upon the market having the necessary 
 con ﬁdence in the town. New homes in Bromyard with enhanced means of access into town should 
strengthen support for the town centre’s vitality and viability. The size threshold of 200 m
2 set out in 
Policy E5 indicates when impact tes Ɵng will be required. 
Surface water management 
4.3.15 	 Whilst the east of Bromyard is prone to ﬂuvial ﬂooding, the urban extension area is located to the north 
and south west of the town on land outside the ﬂood risk zones. However, development in this loca Ɵon 
will need signi ﬁcant assessment to ensure that there is no increased risk of ﬂooding. This must be 
addressed through a comprehensive surface water management plan. Place Shaping - Bromyard
 
7878 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
  
  
    
  
 
  
  
    
  Place Shaping - Kington
Kington 
4.4.1 	 The vision for Kington places signi ﬁcant emphasis upon the crea Ɵon of new homes, employment 
opportuni Ɵes, delivery of and access to services, including a ﬀordable housing, reducing the need to travel 
to other centres, and uƟlising the natural and historic environment as economic assets (see Figure 4.6). 
As one of the county’s ﬁve market towns it contributes to the Core Strategy’s strategic objec Ɵves 1, 4, 6, 
8, 10, 11 and 12. Consequently, Kington’s role in providing facili Ɵes and services to its hinterland should 
be maintained and, where possible, enhanced. However as the smallest of the market towns and with 
signiﬁcant environmental and loca Ɵonal constraints, the challenges that the town faces are such that it  
will need to be ﬂexible in terms of the way it both encourages and accommodates development. Integral 
to the spa Ɵal approach will be the need to support rural regenera Ɵon both speci ﬁcally within the town 
itself and also for the area it serves.  
Figure 4.6: Kington Town Pro ﬁle 
7979 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
 
  
  
 
   
   
    
   
   
   
    
   
    
  
       
    
   
   
     Background to policy 
4.4.2 	 Although Kington will need to accommodate new housing as part of the spaƟal strategy, no proposals for 
strategic housing loca Ɵons are proposed. Low building compleƟon rates coupled with the Strategic 
Housing Land Availability Assessment 2012 indicate signi ﬁcant constraints upon the need and 
opportuni Ɵes for any strategic loca Ɵons both within and around the town. Similarly, provision for 
employment will be on the basis of small scale proposals and a ﬂexible approach to home-working. The 
role of the town centre as the loca Ɵon for shops, supported by service and tourism facili Ɵes should not 
be undermined by developments that might a ﬀect its viability. A range of other suppor Ɵ ng community 
 facili Ɵes is also required to ensure balance between development pressures and needs in terms of infra 
 structure. 
Policy KG1 – Development in Kington 
Kington will accommodate around 200 new homes during the plan period  A Neighbourhood Development Plan will allocate sites to meet this level of housing. In addi Ɵon, provision for new employment uses should be 
brought forward to meet needs from within the Kington and West Herefordshire Housing Sub-Market Area. 
Development proposals for Kington will be encouraged where they:   
•	 deliver a ﬀordable housing in accordance with the requirements of Policy H1; 
•	 provide a mix of market and a ﬀordable house sizes and types that meet the requirements of Policy H3  
and the needs iden Ɵﬁed in the latest version of the Herefordshire Local Housing Market Assessment; 
•	 enable an overall density of up to 35 dwellings per hectare; 
•	 enable home working; 
•	 make available small scale employment sites, brought forward in balance with housing within the 
Kington and West Herefordshire Housing Sub-Market Area; 
•	 maintain and enhance the vitality and viability of the town centre. Proposals for new retail, leisure or 
oﬃce development of over 200m
2  in gross ﬂoor space and located outside the de ﬁned town centre will 
need to be supported by an impact assessment in accordance with the Na Ɵonal Planning Policy 
Framework, to determine whether there could be any adverse impacts on the vitality and viability of the Kington town centre; 
•	 make provision for green infrastructure and amenity space, including play facili Ɵes, community access to 
open space, and the linking of habitats into ecological networks within and surrounding the town; 
•	 make provision for or improve walking and cycling links to the town centre, schools, shopping and 
 employment;
 
•	 protect, conserve and where possible enhance the historic character of Kington, in par Ɵ cular the 
 Conserva Ɵon Area and its signi ﬁcance and se ƫ  ng, including par Ɵcular features, its heritage assets, 
important buildings, scenic views and the landscape features surrounding the town; and
 
•	 have demonstrated engagement and consulta Ɵon with the community including the town/parish 
 council.
 Place Shaping - Kington
 
New Homes 
4.4.3 	 Approximately 200 new homes will be delivered in Kington between 2011 and 2031, with sites allocated 
through a Neighbourhood Development Plan. Sites within the exis Ɵ ng con ﬁnes of the town are 
constrained in terms of ﬂooding. Developing peripheral sites will require compromise in terms of e ﬀect 
upon the landscape. Choice of sites should seek those with least impact and where the provision of
 signi ﬁcant landscape and townscape mi ƟgaƟon measures can best be achieved. Phasing will be necessary 
8080 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
   
  
  
   
   
 
 
 
  
   
    
 
  
   
   
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
    
  
   
 
  
  
  
  Place Shaping - Kington
to overcome current infrastructure constraints. Given the level of constraints in Kington, the delivery of 
housing over the plan period will be closely monitored. If this monitoring process indicates that it will not be possible to deliver the required level of housing, the Council will use appropriate mechanisms to address the situa Ɵon in accordance with policy SS3. This may include a review of this policy. 
4.4.4 	 The Aﬀordable Housing Viability Study, 2010  concluded that prices are rela Ɵvely high in the Kington 
Housing Market Area and therefore a target of 35% a ﬀordable homes would be the most appropriate 
within the town, with an appropriate mix of housing, informed by the latest Local Housing Market
 Assessment  in order to meet the needs of all sec Ɵons of the community including housing for older 
persons – a need highlighted in the study of the Housing and Support needs of Older People in 
 Herefordshire 2012 . 
New Jobs 
4.4.5 	 The policy encourages the development of small scale employment opportuni Ɵes at Kington, which 
 would bene ﬁt both the town and its surrounding rural area. It may not be possible for such provision to 
be located within or even immediately adjacent to the exis Ɵng town. The considera Ɵon of such sites 
should not adversely a ﬀect the town’s se ƫng and other environmental features. Enabling working from 
home in accordance with Policy E3 – Home Working may reduce the level of need although the provision for small scale employment opportuni Ɵes is expected to remain. 
Movement 
4.4.6 	 Kington is a rela Ɵvely compact se Ʃlement where access can be gained rela Ɵvely easily to its central area 
 and facili Ɵes elsewhere through walking or cycling. The loca Ɵon of new development should seek to 
maintain this character. A par Ɵ cular characteris Ɵc of the town centre is its network of historic walled 
lanes which should form the core for any footpath strategy. Where possible, improvements should be made to promote sustainable modes of transport, in par Ɵcular walking and cycling which can be 
combined with green infrastructure proposals including beƩ er access to greenspace. The principle of 
shared spaces will be encouraged on Kington High Street in accordance with Policy MT1. 
Retail 
4.4.7 	 Herefordshire Town Centre Town Centres Study Update 2012 suggests the expenditure forecast for 
Kington over the plan period is unlikely to be of a scale to require proposals for further convenience ﬂoor 
space. Many of the smaller units within the town could absorb more turnover within exis Ɵng ﬂ oor space. 
The size threshold of 200 m2 indicates when impact tes Ɵng will be required. The Neighbourhood 
Development Plan will determine the level of ﬂexibility given to uses within the town centre area. 
UƟliƟes, Community Facili Ɵes Green Infrastructure, Open Space and Heritage 
4.4.8 	 UƟliƟes, the river ﬂoodplain, heritage assets, se ƫng and landscape all pose constraints upon 
development within and around the town although some also add to the aƩ  racƟveness of its character 
 providing poten Ɵ al bene ﬁts to local people and visitors. In addi Ɵon, evidence base studies have iden Ɵﬁed 
open space needs and green infrastructure requirements. The level of new development proposed both within and surrounding the town should support the current provision of community facili Ɵes. In addi Ɵon 
to phasing development to address u Ɵlity constraints developers may also need to assist proposals for 
surface water management in par Ɵ cular loca Ɵons depending upon which sites are brought forward. All 
these issues need to be addressed comprehensively and in detail through any Neighbourhood Development Plan or other Development Plan Documents. 
8181 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
   Ledbury 
4.5.1 	 Within the overall vision for Herefordshire, Ledbury will con Ɵnue to be supported in its role as a thriving 
service centre to its surrounding rural area in the east of the county. This vision is manifested in strategic 
objecƟves 1, 4, 6, 8 and 10. For Ledbury, the focus will be on mee Ɵng housing needs including a ﬀ ordable 
housing, reducing the need to travel by private car, facilita Ɵng the provision of new jobs to stem 
 out-commu Ɵng, improving delivery of and access to services, and realising the value of the local 
environment as an economic asset through promo Ɵng sustainable tourism and high quality housing. The 
spaƟal strategy, which proposes sustainable development for the town (in terms of new homes and 
 employment opportuni Ɵes), is balanced against Ledbury’s unique needs, opportuni Ɵes and constraints as 
represented in the town pro ﬁle – Figure 4.7. 
Figure 4.7: Ledbury Town Pro ﬁle 
Place Shaping - Ledbury
 
Background to policies 
4.5.2 	 To achieve the strategy, an urban extension of new homes is proposed to the north of the town and new 
employment land to the west. This approach will address the speci ﬁc issues and opportuni Ɵ es idenƟﬁed 
8282 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
    
     
 
  
 
 
 
   
   
    
    
    
 
     
  
     
     
     
    
  
      
  
    Place Shaping - Ledbury
in the town pro ﬁle for Ledbury, namely: addressing high a ﬀordable housing need; high levels of 
 commuƟng for jobs; and the signi ﬁcant environmental constraints a ﬀecƟng the se ƫng of the town, which 
is enclosed on the east side by the Malvern Hills Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty and ﬂ oodplains of 
the Leadon Valley and adjoining sensi Ɵve landscapes to the west. Policies LB1 and LB2 set out how the 
spaƟal strategy for Ledbury will be delivered and managed and are explained in the Ledbury Key Diagram, 
 Figure 4.8. 
Policy LB1- Development in Ledbury 
Ledbury will accommodate a minimum of 800 new homes balanced with a minimum of 15 hectares of new employment land during the plan period. The majority of new housing development will be focussed to the north of the town as set out in Policy LB2 and the strategic loca Ɵon for new employment of around 12 hectares 
to the west of the town, south of Li Ʃle Marcle Road. Further development will take place through the 
implementa Ɵon of exis Ɵng commitments, in ﬁll development, and sites allocated through a Neighbourhood 
Development Plan. A number of sites which have future poten Ɵal for development have been iden Ɵﬁed in the 
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) . 
Within Ledbury, new development proposals will be encouraged where they: 
•	 allow for suitable small scale employment sites including live work opportuni Ɵes within or adjoining the 
 town; 
•	 maintain and enhance the vitality and viability of the exis Ɵng town centre.  Proposals for new retail, 
leisure or o ﬃce development of over 400m
2 in gross ﬂoor space and located outside the town centre 
will need to be supported by an impact assessment to determine whether there could be any adverse impacts on the town centre; 
•	 improve accessibility within Ledbury by walking, cycling and public transport, par Ɵcularly where they 
 enhance connec Ɵvity with, for example, local facili Ɵes, new employment areas and the town centre; 
•	 contribute to addressing de ﬁciencies in community facili Ɵes and/or allow for infrastructure 
improvements (including broadband) in the town, to promote sustainable development;
 
•	 re ﬂect and enhance the characteris Ɵc built historic elements of Ledbury, such as its stone, brick and 
Ɵmber-framed buildings, medieval plan form, conserva Ɵon areas and se ƫng overlooking the Leadon 
 Valley;
 
•	 protect and enhance its green infrastructure, including connec Ɵons to the public right of way network 
and biodiversity, par Ɵcularly the Malvern Hills Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty to the east and the 
Leadon Valley to the west; 
•	 protect and enhance the se ƫng of the town from eastern and western viewpoints; and, where this is 
not possible, incorporate appropriate mi ƟgaƟon measures; and
 
•	 have demonstrated engagement and consulta Ɵon with the community including the town council. 
8383 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
   
 
   
   
   
    
 
     
      
 
    
      
    
   
    
  
  
    
   
  
 
    
   
 Policy LB2 - Land north of the Viaduct 
Development proposals north of the viaduct in Ledbury will be expected to bring forward the following to 
achieve a sustainable mixed use urban extension of the town: 
•	 mixed use development of around 625 new homes, at an average density of around 40 dwellings per 
              hectare, comprising a mix of market and a ﬀordable house sizes and types that meet the requirements of 
              Policy H3 and the needs iden Ɵﬁed in the latest version of the Herefordshire Local Housing Market
              Assessment;  
•	 around 3 hectares of employment land, restricted to Use Class B1; 
•	 a target of 40% of the total number of dwellings to be a ﬀ ordable housing; 
•	 land and contribu Ɵons to facilitate a restored canal to be delivered in partnership with the Herefordshire 
and Gloucestershire Canal Trust; 
•	 a new linear informal park to link to the exis Ɵng town trail, riverside walk,  recrea Ɵonal open space and 
 exis Ɵ ng allotments; 
•	 the provision of developer contribu Ɵons towards any iden Ɵﬁed need for new/improved community 
 facili Ɵes/infrastructure improvements. This shall include a new 210 place primary school within the 
development (or an expansion of the exis Ɵng primary school) and new recrea Ɵonal open space, play,
 
indoor and outdoor sport facili Ɵes;
 
•	 provision of sa Ɵsfactory vehicular access arrangements, the details of which will be determined at
 planning applica Ɵ on stage;
 
•	 appropriate mi ƟgaƟon to safeguard the amenity of future occupants from unacceptable levels of noise 
and to safeguard the con Ɵ nued opera Ɵon of exis Ɵng businesses adjoining the area; 
•	 development of bespoke, high quality and inclusive design, including accommoda Ɵon that will meet 
the needs of older persons and that contributes to the dis ƟncƟveness of this part of Ledbury and 
respects the se ƫ  ng and signi ﬁcance of the listed viaduct and the Malvern Hills Area of Outstanding 
 Natural Beauty;
 
•	 safeguards to ensure there is no adverse impact on water quality and quan Ɵty in the River Leadon; 
•	 new walking, cycling and bus links from the urban extension directly to the town trail and riverside walk under the viaduct, the railway sta Ɵon and town centre to create linkages to nearby development and 
 exis Ɵng community facili Ɵes; 
•	 sustainable standards of design and construc Ɵon; and 
•	 a comprehensive sustainable urban drainage system which includes measures such as rain gardens and swales to manage ground and surface water drainage and safeguard against any increased ﬂ ood risk. Place Shaping - Ledbury
 
8484 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
 Figure 4.8: Ledbury Key Diagram Place Shaping - Ledbury
© Crown copyright and database rights [2015] Ordnance Survey 100024168
 
8585 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
    
 
  
 
     
  
  
  
   
  
 
 
 
    
 
 
   
  
   
 
  
 New homes 
4.5.3 	 The policy for Ledbury focuses on delivering high quality, sustainably constructed new homes to meet 
housing need and demand, especially for that of smaller open market housing and a ﬀordable housing, in 
this high house price area. It also aims to balance new development against the environmental constraints of this historic market town. The strategy to deliver new homes mainly in a single locaƟ  on is 
not only economically viable but also limits development mainly to land of medium-low landscape 
sensiƟvity and of lesser environmental merit, with regard to agricultural and biodiversity value. The listed 
viaduct adjoining the area also represents an opportunity to create a bespoke design solu Ɵon and high 
quality townscape to meet the needs of all sec Ɵons of the community including housing for older persons 
– a need highlighted in the study of the Housing and Support needs of Older People in Herefordshire 
2012 . Housing will be phased to Ɵe in with the construc Ɵon and provision of essen Ɵal new community 
infrastructure in line with Policy SS3. The remaining housing requirement for Ledbury will be delivered 
 through exis Ɵng commitments, windfalls and the alloca Ɵon of sites through a Neighbourhood 
 Development Plan. 
New jobs 
4.5.4 	 The policy to deliver around 12 hectares of employment land to the south of Li Ʃle Marcle Road will help 
facilitate greater employment opportuni Ɵes for Ledbury residents, promo Ɵng its role as a mul Ɵ
 func Ɵoning centre and reduce the need for commu Ɵng by private car. This area of arable land adjoins 
 exis Ɵng employment land and sports pitches and is of low landscape sensi Ɵvity and biodiversity value. 
Acceptable access can be achieved from Li Ʃle Marcle Road, whilst new sustainable transport links can 
be created into the town including safe crossings of the by-pass. Structural landscaping will be required along the western and southern boundaries to mi Ɵgate the visual impact of new buildings. The land will 
parƟcularly provide opportuni Ɵes for medium and large size business requiring large land areas, including 
the expansion of exis Ɵ ng businesses. 
4.5.5 	 Land north of the viaduct will also include around 3 hectares of employment land (in addi Ɵon to any 
 exis Ɵng commitments), which will be restricted to use class B1 (light industry, o ﬃ  ces, research and 
development) in order to complement the larger employment area. Small-scale sites for employment use will also be iden Ɵﬁed through a Neighbourhood Development Plan. 
4.5.6 	 The ﬁgures for employment (as with housing) are targets for the whole plan period and will be monitored 
through the annual monitoring process to assess performance and the need for any management 
 measures. 
Movement 
4.5.7 	 The policy approach for movement in Ledbury is based on reducing the need to travel by private car. This 
will be achieved by loca Ɵng new development within walking and cycling distance of exis Ɵng and new 
 facili Ɵes (including the railway sta Ɵon) and improving and extending sustainable transport routes. New 
employment land and other policies in the Core Strategy, as well as the forthcoming Neighbourhood Development Plan, will also promote local employment opportuni Ɵes. This will help address the issue of 
reducing the need to travel. Herefordshire Council (through the Local Transport Plan ) proposes to work in 
partnership with bus operators and developers to ensure housing and employment loca Ɵons are served 
by public transport and that service frequencies linking to Hereford are maintained. Place Shaping - Ledbury
 
8686 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
    
  
    
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
    
  
  
    
 
  
  
  
 
 
   
 
   
 
  
 
   
 Place Shaping - Ledbury
4.5.8 	 Vehicular, pedestrian, cycle and bus access to the housing site will need to be provided with addi Ɵonal 
sustainable transport links to the sta Ɵon. A reduc Ɵon in the speed limit along the Bromyard Road and 
improvements to the Hereford Road/Bromyard Road junc Ɵon are also likely to be required to improve 
the design, safety and e ﬃciency of this road and junc Ɵon. These, and any other highway improvements, 
will be informed by a tra ﬃc assessment, and will be considered as part of the Council’s determina Ɵ on of 
 planning applica Ɵons on the site. 
4.5.9 	 The issue of car parking supply and demand at the railway sta Ɵon and in the town centre will be 
addressed through a Neighbourhood Development Plan. With regards parking to serve the railway
 sta Ɵon, the opportunity may exist for an underground overspill car park on land north of the railway line 
which could be funded through community infrastructure levy monies, subject to landowner agreement. 
Green infrastructure and open space 
4.5.10 	 Developing land to the north of the viaduct addresses aspira Ɵons of the Green Infrastructure Strategy
 which iden Ɵﬁes the area as an Enhancement Zone, represen Ɵng a possible intersec Ɵon of the riverside 
linear park and the town trail green infrastructure corridors. It enables the introduc Ɵon of new, accessible 
green space through the provision of a linear park, on-site recrea Ɵonal open space and part of a strategic 
canal route all of which will address the issue of de ﬁciencies in open space in Ledbury as iden Ɵﬁed in the 
Open Space Study  and Playing Pitch Strategy , as well as promote biodiversity. The strategic employment 
area also o ﬀ ers opportuni Ɵes to reinforce the green infrastructure enhancement zone. 
4.5.11 	 This approach realises the value of the environment as an economic asset, as the urban extension will 
 create be Ʃer access to and enjoyment of new green infrastructure for residents and tourists alike. A 
review of open space needs and exis Ɵ ng designa Ɵons in Ledbury will be undertaken as part of a 
Neighbourhood Development Plan. 
Community and educa Ɵ onal facili Ɵes 
4.5.12 	 Improving the delivery of and access to, services is addressed in this policy through requirements for new 
infrastructure. This will be either directly delivered by a developer or through developer contribu Ɵons, 
including either a new primary school at the urban extension or an expansion of the exis Ɵ ng primary 
school, canal, riverside park, outdoor sports pitches and other community facili Ɵes. A centrally located, 
 equipped, mul Ɵ age play area will also be provided on the urban extension, along with new outdoor 
 sports facili Ɵes, further enhancing the opportuni Ɵes for acƟve play. An upgrade to the public water 
supply infrastructure to serve the new housing and employment growth may also be required. 
4.5.13 	 Opportuni Ɵes will also be sought to secure the reinstatement of other sec Ɵons of the former 
Herefordshire and Gloucestershire Canal within/adjoining the town through a Neighbourhood 
 Development Plan. 
Heritage and archaeological value 
4.5.14 	 A landmark feature of Ledbury is its railway viaduct which is Grade II listed. Any development of the 
viaduct site will need to respect the se ƫ  ng and signi ﬁcance of the viaduct, yet regard it as a posi Ɵve 
feature to be integrated within, and inform the detailed master planning and design of, any scheme. 
8787 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
 
  
 
 
    
  
  
   
   
 
   
  
  
  
 
  
  
   
    
 
   
    Retail 
4.5.15 	 The policy for shopping in Ledbury, based on the evidence in the Town Centres Study Update 2012, is to 
maintain the exis Ɵng, thriving centre which is based on a mixture of popular high street and independent 
stores. New homes and households in Ledbury will strengthen this support for the town centre and improvements to sustainable modes of transport into the town centre via the exis Ɵng town trail will also 
support this approach. 
4.5.16 	 The Town Centres Study Update 2012 indicates a need for further convenience shopping ﬂoor space in 
the town up to 2031 and further comparison retail from 2026. The study also concludes that there is an opportunity to increase the specialist nature of some of the independent shops which a Ʃracts a large 
amount of people from the wider surrounding area. Ini ƟaƟves such as the Ledbury: From Field to Fork 
IniƟaƟve will assist in suppor Ɵng this aim. As is required by paragraph 23 of the NPPF, an area near to 
the edge of the town centre area at Bye Street/Lawnside Road is iden Ɵﬁed as a possible loca Ɵon for 
addiƟonal convenience retail ﬂoor space in any sequen Ɵal search, but is not included as a site-speci ﬁc 
proposal of the Core Strategy. Should any proposals be advanced for this area it will be subject to the 
retenƟon or the replacement of the exis Ɵng community facili Ɵes, including the swimming pool, either on 
must be completed prior to the loss of exis Ɵng faciliƟes. The need highlighted in the Town Centres Study 
Update 2012  will be reviewed regularly against expenditure capacity and the iden ƟﬁcaƟon of any speci ﬁc 
proposals to meet the needs will be considered through a Neighbourhood Development Plan. 
Surface water management and ﬂ uvial ﬂooding 
4.5.17 	 The west of Ledbury is prone to ﬂooding from the River Leadon. The physical development within the 
urban extension and employment area will need to demonstrate through a ﬂood risk assessment that 
the housing, employment, play and sports facili Ɵes avoids the areas that are vulnerable to ﬂooding and 
does not increase ﬂood risk for any exis Ɵng residents and businesses. Addi Ɵonally, the urban extension 
and employment area should include a sustainable surface water drainage management system, 
incorpora Ɵng features such as swales and ponds, sensi Ɵvely integrated with the development, to achieve
 exis Ɵng or be Ʃer than exis Ɵng green ﬁeld runoﬀ rates. Place Shaping - Ledbury
the site or in an appropriate and accessible loca Ɵon elsewhere within the town. Any replacement facili Ɵes 
8888 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
  
   
   
 
  
  
 Place Shaping - Leominster
Leominster 
4.6.1 	 Leominster, as the main centre in the north of the county, will con Ɵnue to ful ﬁl a diverse range of 
important roles as a centre for residen Ɵal, employment, cultural, retail, tourism and recrea Ɵ onal uses. 
Leominster will con Ɵnue to act as a service centre to the surrounding rural areas. This strategy seeks to 
promote the con Ɵnued development of the town, taking into considera Ɵon its needs, opportuni Ɵ es and 
 constraints. 
4.6.2 	 This vision is manifested in strategic objec Ɵves 1, 4, 6, 8 and 10, which for Leominster, centres on mee Ɵng 
housing need (including a ﬀordable housing), reducing the need to travel, facilita Ɵ ng employment 
 genera Ɵon and diversi ﬁcaƟon, improving delivery and access to services and realising the value of the 
environment as an economic asset. 
Figure 4.9 Leominster Town Proﬁ le 
8989 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
   
 
  
   
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
   
    
  
      
    
     Background to policies 
4.6.3 	 ResidenƟal development is proposed to the south-west of the town. The decision to focus the largest 
single strategic alloca Ɵon of new homes to Leominster has been based on the recogni Ɵon of its economic 
importance located on the A49 corridor; that it is the least constrained market town; its good public transport links, including the railway sta Ɵon; and that an urban extension will bring transport bene ﬁ ts in 
the form of a relief road. The la Ʃer will bene ﬁt the centre of the town in terms of reducing conges Ɵon 
and improving air quality. 
4.6.4 	 The residen Ɵal growth proposed for Leominster will ensure a sustainable popula Ɵon for the town and the 
Core Strategy’s policies will provide opportuni Ɵes for and the encouragement of appropriate economic 
growth as well as the provision of appropriate community facili Ɵes, environmental enhancement and 
 protecƟon as re ﬂected in the Leominster Key Diagram – Figure 4.10. 
Policy LO1 – Development in Leominster 
Leominster will accommodate a minimum of 2,300 new homes throughout the plan period, (2011-2031) of which a minimum of 1,500 dwellings will be provided in a single strategic urban extension to the south-west of the town. The remaining dwellings will be provided through exis Ɵng commitments, smaller scale non-strategic 
sites within the exis Ɵng built up area; those which come forward through the Leominster Neighbourhood 
Development Plan, or sites judged as having development poten Ɵal which are iden Ɵﬁed in the Strategic Housing 
Land Availability Assessment . 
The Leominster Enterprise Park will con Ɵnue to serve the employment needs of Leominster, which will include 
a further extension of up to 10ha to the south of the enterprise park. The release of the addi Ɵonal land will be 
phased across the plan period depending upon the availability or otherwise of land within the exis Ɵ ng enterprise 
park. 
In Leominster new development proposals will be encouraged where they: 
•	 conƟnue the development of the Leominster Enterprise Park and encourage proposals for suitable small 
scale employment sites within the town; 
•	 maintain and enhance the viability and vitality of the town centre. Proposals for new retail, leisure or 
oﬃce development of over 400m
2 in gross ﬂoor space and located outside of the de ﬁned town centre 
will need to be supported by an impact assessment in accordance with the Na Ɵonal Planning Policy 
Framework to determine whether there could be any adverse impacts on the vitality and viability of 
Leominster town centre;
 
•	 ensure that developments do not exacerbate air pollu Ɵon levels within the designated air quality 
management area at Bargates;
 
•	 ensure that development does not undermine the achievement of water quality targets in accordance 
with Policy SD3 and SD4; and
 
•	 have demonstrated engagement and consulta Ɵon with the community including the town/parish 
 council.
 Place Shaping - Leominster
 
9090 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
    
  
  
   
 
    
 
   
    
    
  
        
   
   
      
  
   
   
 
   
 Place Shaping - Leominster
Policy LO2 – Leominster urban extension 
Land south west of Leominster will deliver a comprehensively planned sustainable urban extension and will be 
expected to deliver: 
•	 a minimum of 1,500 new homes at an average density of up to 35 dwellings per hectare comprising a  mix of market and a ﬀordable house sizes and types that meet the requirements of Policy H3, and the  
 needs iden Ɵﬁed in the latest version of the Herefordshire Local Housing Market Assessment;  
•	 an a ﬀordable housing target of 25% will be required as an opportunity to address the range of homes  
currently available in the town; 
•	 Leominster relief road linking the Worcester Road roundabout directly to the A44, to help relieve tra ﬃc 
 conges Ɵon within the town and improve air quality in the Bargates area; 
•	 small scale neighbourhood retail facili Ɵes; 
•	 poten Ɵal for employment opportuni Ɵes as demand arises in the form of use class B1 and live/work  
units;
 
•	 provision of appropriate community and youth facili Ɵes within a community hub;
 •	 provision of a new 420 place primary school and pre-school facili Ɵes; 
•	 appropriate provision of on-site open space, sports and recrea Ɵon provision (in addi Ɵon to Cockcro Ō
 
Hill). This shall include fully accessible semi-natural and natural greenspace; play provision for all age 
groups, indoor and outdoor sports provision (some of which may be o ﬀ site); allotments and new 
 orchard plan Ɵng;
 
•	 new green infrastructure walking and cycling links to the town centre, schools, the Enterprise Park and local public right of way network; 
•	 reten Ɵon of the highly sensi Ɵve landscape areas and geological features of Cockcro Ō Hill (which 
encompasses Ryelands Cro Ō) by retaining this site as natural open space;
 
•	 sustainable standards of design and construc Ɵon; 
•	 a comprehensive sustainable urban drainage system which includes measures such as rain gardens and swales to manage ground and surface water drainage and safeguard against any increased ﬂ ood risk; 
and 
•	 an evalua Ɵon of the archaeological importance of the area in order to ensure appropriate protec Ɵ on of 
heritage assets and inform the detailed development proposals. 
The land available for development to the south-west of Leominster will also enable the housing needs of the town to be met beyond the plan period. 
9191 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
 Figure 4.10: Leominster Key Diagram 
Place Shaping - Leominster
 
© Crown copyright and database rights [2015] Ordnance Survey 100024168
 
9292 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
  
    
  
  
  
   
  
 Place Shaping - Leominster
New homes 
4.6.5 	 Land to the south of Leominster provides the most appropriate loca Ɵon for mee Ɵng the future strategic 
housing requirements of the town. A minimum of 1,500 new homes will be provided within the urban extension up to 2031 together with a range of other facili Ɵes to enable the development to meet the 
needs of its residents and integrate with the exis Ɵng town. The development will be comprehensively 
master-planned to create a series of neighbourhoods integrated with the town. Density and design will vary across the development with all homes constructed to minimise their energy use and CO
2 footprint. 
4.6.6 	 It is recognised that there is a need for a ﬀordable homes across the county. It has been iden Ɵﬁ ed through 
 the Aﬀ ordable Housing Viability Study  that land values are lower within Leominster, therefore a target 
of 25% aﬀordable homes would be the most appropriate within the town. An appropriate mix of housing 
will be needed, informed by the most up to date Local Housing Market Assessment , in order to meet the 
needs of all sec Ɵons of the community including housing for older persons. 
4.6.7 	 The development of the urban extension provides an opportunity to create a scheme which is sensi Ɵ ve to 
the landscape of this edge of town whilst mee Ɵng the needs of all sec Ɵons of the community, including 
those of working age, who will be close to exis Ɵng and new employment opportuni Ɵes, and also older 
people. 
4.6.8 	 The land south of Leominster is su ﬃcient not only to meet the housing target for the current plan period 
but is also likely to help meet  the housing needs of the town through further development post 2031 supported by new highway infrastructure and community facili Ɵes. 
New jobs 
4.6.9 	 There remains a reasonable supply of employment land on Leominster Enterprise Park and at Southern 
Avenue but it is envisaged that vacant employment land in the Leominster Enterprise Park will be taken up during the early stages of the plan period. As a result, in order to accommodate employment needs over the plan period, Leominster will require an extension of the Leominster Enterprise Park to the south, which will provide up to 10ha of employment land. There is also the opportunity to provide 
addiƟonal smaller B1 class live/work units which could be integrated into the urban extension. 
Movement 
4.6.10 	 The Bargates area of the town su ﬀers from conges Ɵon and without new road infrastructure the poten Ɵal 
growth of Leominster would be limited. In addi Ɵon, the Bargates area is also designated as an Air Quality 
Management Area as a result of poor air quality and new road infrastructure would enable much of the heavy vehicular tra ﬃc to be diverted from this area. 
4.6.11 	 The urban extension provides the opportunity to provide new road infrastructure as an integral element 
of the development. A relief road connecƟng the Worcester Road roundabout to the A44 at Baron’s Cross will be constructed. Much of the link from the B4361 Hereford Road to the Worcester Road roundabout has already been constructed, with a small area of approximately 200 yards needed to complete the link. 
 The en Ɵre relief road will be designed to provide an alterna Ɵve direct and more convenient route for 
vehicles and avoid the need for through tra ﬃc to pass through the town centre, and in par Ɵ cular, the 
 Bargates juncƟon. The relief road is also likely to require new roundabout junc Ɵons on the B4361 and A44 
and an extension of the highway infrastructure in the south west corner of the Enterprise Park. 
9393 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
 
  
  
  
  
    
   
 
 
 
   
   
 
   
  
 
  
   
  
    
    
  
 
  
  
  4.6.12 	 In addiƟon to the provision of new road infrastructure the urban extension also provides an opportunity 
to encourage more sustainable modes of transport within the town through new footpaths and cycle routes developed to ensure that good linkages and opportuni Ɵes to integrate with the exis Ɵ ng networks 
are provided, par Ɵcularly to the primary schools, high school, the town centre and the Enterprise Park. 
Green infrastructure and open space 
4.6.13 	 The poten Ɵal housing alloca Ɵon located to the south west of the town is a mixture of medium-low 
and medium-high sensi Ɵvity landscape areas according to the Urban Fringe Sensi Ɵ vity Analysis . However 
such landscape constraints are lower than sites to the north and west of Leominster. It will be necessary to provide landscape mi ƟgaƟ on parƟcularly along the outer edge of the residen Ɵal and employment 
development areas adjoining open countryside and Cockcro Ō Hill. Cockcro Ō Hill incorporates the 
 Ryelands Cro Ō Local Geological Site, a locally important landscape and geological feature and will 
therefore need to be retained as semi-natural open space. 
4.6.14 	 Leominster has an under provision of semi-natural greenspace, play facili Ɵes, parks, gardens and outdoor 
sport space according to the Open Space Study  and Playing Pitch Strategy , and hence there is the 
opportunity to provide a number of open space, sports and recrea Ɵ on faciliƟes within the urban 
extension in addi Ɵon to Cockcro Ō Hill. The development will also generate a need for addi Ɵonal 
allotments which will be met and designed into the urban extension. 
Community and educa Ɵ onal facili Ɵes 
4.6.15 	 There will be a need for addi Ɵonal community facili Ɵes or hub within the south west extension to achieve 
a sustainable development. This may include a doctor’s surgery, a community hall, youth facili Ɵ es and 
small scale retail. This will ensure that journeys that need to be made regularly can be made within the 
 new development. 
4.6.16 	 The addiƟonal housing provided by the urban extension will place a need for 420 new primary school 
places. In addi Ɵon, there will be a need for a children’s centre for the early years which could form part of 
the community hub. In terms of high school places, the Earl Mor Ɵmer College has adequate capacity to 
cover the new growth of the town. These new facili Ɵes will help create a more sustainable community. 
Heritage and archaeological value 
4.6.17 	 Archaeological poten Ɵal has been iden Ɵﬁed, in Leominster, parƟcularly at land south of Barons Cross 
where there are earthworks. The proposed route of the relief road needs full assessment prior to any 
works taking place on the south west extension. The Sustainability Appraisal highlighted that any archaeological concern on the proposed site needed to be addressed, and detailed ﬁ eld evalua Ɵon will be 
 required. 
Retail 
4.6.18 	 As part of the Town Centres Study Update 2012 it is iden Ɵﬁed that Leominster has some convenience and 
 comparison retail ﬂoorspace need which increases over the plan period. In terms of convenience retail, 
this could create the opportunity for an addi Ɵonal food store development in the town centre, which Place Shaping - Leominster
 
would draw more shoppers into the centre and complement the exis Ɵng independent convenience shops. 
Small scale convenience retail will be provided within the urban extension to meet the day to day needs of the residents of the new development. 
9494 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
   
  
  
    
   
  
      
      
      
 
   
 
 
  
  
 
  
   
  
 
 
   Place Shaping - Leominster
4.6.19 	 The need for comparison retail proposals is more limited with a modest capacity towards the end of the 
plan period. The study indicated that the priority should be to steer any new ﬂoorspace to the town 
centre as far as this is prac Ɵcal, and only to permit out-of-centre facili Ɵes if they would materially 
enhance the retail o ﬀer of the town and assist in retaining catchment residents’ expenditure. Impact 
assessments will be required for developments of 400m2 of ﬂoorspace and greater and this is re ﬂ ected in 
 Policy E5. 
4.6.20 	 The study also iden Ɵﬁes a number of sites that provide redevelopment opportuni Ɵes to accommodate 
retail development during the plan period and should be considered ﬁrst in a sequen Ɵal test in 
accordance with the Na Ɵonal Planning Policy Framework: 
•   Broad Street Car Park at Arkwright Close; 
•   Broad Street Car park, rear of Fire Sta Ɵon; 
•   The Original Factory Shop, 52 Broad Street. 
4.6.21 	 More detailed assessment of the need for future retail provision for Leominster, including the need to 
allocate sites will be provided through the prepara Ɵon of a Neighbourhood Development Plan. The extent 
of the town centre and the primary shopping area, (made up of the primary and secondary frontages) will 
 be de ﬁned as part of the Neighbourhood Development Plan. 
Surface water management, water quality and ﬂuvial ﬂooding 
4.6.22 	 There are extensive areas at risk of ﬂooding in Leominster, par Ɵcularly to the north of the town. 
Leominster lies near the con ﬂuence of two major river systems, the Lugg and the Arrow, which further 
downstream becomes the River Lugg Special Area of Conserva Ɵ on (SAC). 
4.6.23 	 The Water Cycle Study  idenƟﬁes that developers would need to ensure there are no adverse impacts as a 
result of any new development, this could be managed to mi Ɵgate the e ﬀects on the SAC through 
adequate control measures and addi Ɵonal capacity in water treatment infrastructure and surface water 
 management. SecƟons of the River Wye SAC where the water quality targets are already exceeded will 
be subject to measures to reduce nutrients in line with the targets. All new development proposals 
including the Leominster urban extension must not compromise the ability of the Nutrient Management Plan to deliver the necessary overall reduc Ɵons along these stretches. 
9595 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
    
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 Ross-on-Wye 
4.7.1 	 Within the overall vision for Herefordshire, Ross-on-Wye, as the market town serving the south of the 
county, will be supported in con Ɵnuing to ful ﬁl a diverse range of roles as a centre for residen Ɵal, 
 employment, recrea Ɵonal and cultural services. The town will also con Ɵnue to act as an important service 
centre for the surrounding rural area. The connec Ɵons to the motorway network make Ross-on-Wye an 
important gateway into the county and it is also a tourist des ƟnaƟon in its own right. The strategy seeks 
to promote the sustainable development of Ross-on-Wye, taking into considera Ɵon its needs, 
opportuni Ɵes and constraints. 
4.7.2 	 This vision is manifested in strategic objec Ɵves 1, 6, 8 and10 which, for Ross-on-Wye, focuses on enabling 
some strategic growth on the town’s peripheries and also some smaller scale growth in and around the town itself. The proposed development of Ross-on-Wye is planned taking account of the town’s very 
signiﬁcant environmental constraints, including the ﬂoodplain of the River Wye, and the Wye Valley Area 
of Outstanding Natural Beauty. 
Figure 4.11: Ross-on-Wye Town Pro ﬁle Place Shaping - Ross-on-Wye 
9696 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
   
   
  
  
   
  
 
  
   
  
 
 
    
   
    
 
    
    
    
     
 
   
    
     Place Shaping - Ross-on-Wye
Background to policies 
4.7.3 	 To achieve the strategy, an urban extension of new homes is proposed to the southeast of the town at 
Hildersley. This loca Ɵon has a limited capacity, in order to avoid encroachment on the wooded hillside to 
the south and the constraint of an ac Ɵ ve ri ﬂe range to the west. It does, however, have the poten Ɵ al for 
sustainable transport links to the town centre without crea Ɵng a need for new strategic highway links, 
it is within walking distance of the proposed employment site at Model Farm and can be designed to minimise landscape impacts on the se ƫng of the town. 
4.7.4 	 The remainder of new homes for Ross-on-Wye will be provided on a range of, primarily, smaller sites of 
less than 100 dwellings, in and around the town. The loca Ɵon of these can be further detailed through a 
forthcoming Neighbourhood Development Plan or other Development Plan Document. 
4.7.5 	 The poten Ɵal for new employment development will remain at Model Farm. This combined approach to 
housing and employment will help to address the issues of high a ﬀordable housing need and signi ﬁ cant 
levels of commuƟng, whilst working within the environmental constraints of Ross-on-Wye. 
Policy RW1 – Development in Ross-on-Wye 
Ross-on-Wye will accommodate a minimum of 900 new homes, balanced with approximately 10 hectares of allocated employment land during the plan period, in accordance with the spa Ɵal strategy. A strategic housing 
locaƟon will focus a minimum of 200 new homes to the south east of the town. The remaining requirement for 
homes will be delivered on sites allocated through a Neighbourhood Development Plan. 
Within Ross-on-Wye, new development proposals will be encouraged where they: 
•	 allow for suitable employment sites, including live-work opportuni Ɵes within or adjoining the town; 
•	 maintain and enhance the vitality and viability of the town centre. Proposals for new retail, leisure or 
oﬃce development of over 400m
2 gross ﬂoor space and located outside the town centre will need to
 
be supported by an impact assessment to determine whether there could be any adverse impacts on 
the town centre;
 
•	 improve accessibility within Ross-on-Wye by walking, cycling and public transport, par Ɵ cularly where 
they enhance connecƟvity with local facili Ɵes, the town centre and exis Ɵng employment areas;
 
•	 contribute towards new or improved community facili Ɵes and/or allow for infrastructure improvements 
in the town to promote sustainable development; 
•	 re ﬂect and enhance the characteris Ɵc natural and built historic elements of Ross-on-Wye, such as its red  
 sandstone and Ɵmber framed Tudor buildings and boundary walls, the medieval plan form, conserva Ɵon 
area and natural se ƫng overlooking the River Wye; 
•	 enhance green infrastructure and biodiversity, par Ɵcularly the Wye Valley Area of Outstanding Natural 
Beauty and the River Wye; and 
•	 have demonstrated engagement and consulta Ɵon with the community including the town/parish 
 council.
 
9797 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
 
  
  
 
    
  
  
  
     
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
   
  
 
    
 
 
  
  
   Policy RW2 – Land at Hildersley 
The strategic residen Ɵal development on land to the south east of Ross-on-Wye at Hildersley will be required to 
include the following to deliver a comprehensively planned sustainable urban extension of the town: 
•	 a minimum of 200 new homes at an average density of up to 35 dwellings per hectare, comprising a mix 
of market and a ﬀordable house sizes and types that meet the requirements of Policy H3 and the needs 
idenƟﬁed in the latest version of the Herefordshire Local Housing Market Assessment; 
•	 a target of 40% of the total number of dwellings shall be a ﬀ ordable housing; 
•	 the provision of and contribu Ɵons towards any iden Ɵﬁed need for new/improved community facili Ɵes/ 
infrastructure improvements. This shall include contribu Ɵons towards the provision of: addi Ɵonal 
pre-school places; addi Ɵonal classrooms at John Kyrle High School for secondary, post 16 and youth/ 
community infrastructure and further special educa Ɵonal needs provision; 
•	 the provision of a sport/recrea Ɵon space either on or o ﬀ site as an alterna Ɵve to the exis Ɵng on site 
John Kyrle High School playing ﬁeld; 
•	 the crea Ɵon of new green infrastructure within the development area to bene ﬁt residents, local bat 
populaƟons and other ﬂora and fauna; 
•	 new pedestrian and cycle links from the area towards the town and nearby employment sites, to ease  
 road conges Ɵon and limit CO2 emissions; 
•	 appropriate mi ƟgaƟon measures to be implemented, which ensure that acous Ɵc and safety issues 
 rela Ɵng to the proximity of the adjacent ﬁring range are sa Ɵ sfactorily addressed; 
•	 adverse impacts on the Water Source Protec Ɵon Zone should be avoided or mi Ɵgated, including through 
 the incorpora Ɵon of sustainable urban drainage solu Ɵons such as rain gardens and swales; and the 
 produc Ɵon by the developer of a Surface Water Management Plan; 
•	 avoid and mi Ɵgate adverse impacts from noise and air pollu Ɵon and vibra Ɵon (during both construc Ɵon 
 and occupa Ɵon of new homes) on the River Wye SAC, Wye Valley Woodlands SAC and the Wye Valley 
and Forest of Dean Bat Sites SAC; and 
•	 development of bespoke, high quality and inclusive design, including accommoda Ɵon that will meet the 
needs of older persons and that contributes to the dis ƟncƟveness of this part of Ross-on-Wye and 
enhances the se ƫng of the adjacent Wye Valley Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty. Place Shaping - Ross-on-Wye
 
9898 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
 Figure 4.12: Ross on Wye Key Diagram Place Shaping - Ross-on-Wye
© Crown copyright and database rights [2015] Ordnance Survey 100024168
 
9999 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
 
     
 
  
    
  
  
      
 
    
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
   
   
 
  
 
 New homes 
4.7.6 	 The policy for Ross-on-Wye focuses on delivering high quality, sustainably constructed new homes to 
meet housing need and demand, especially for smaller open market housing and a ﬀordable housing, in 
this high house price area. It also aims to balance new development against the environmental constraints of this historic market town. The strategy to deliver new homes in a dispersed manner between a single strategic site and other smaller sites within and around the town is economically viable and spreads the e ﬀect of new buildings across this sensi Ɵve town and its surroundings, which is 
predominantly within the Wye Valley Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty. 
4.7.7 	 The development of the strategic extension at Hildersley represents an opportunity to create a scheme 
which is sensi Ɵve to the landscape of this edge of the town and that can provide addi Ɵ onal biodiversity 
bene ﬁts to the local protected bat popula Ɵon, whilst mee Ɵng the needs of all sec Ɵons of the community, 
including those of working age who will be close to exis Ɵng and new employment opportuni Ɵ es. New 
homes will also bene ﬁt older people – a need which was highlighted in the study of the Housing and 
Support Needs of Older People in Herefordshire 2012 . 
4.7.8 	 The development at Tanyard Lane will provide upgrades to road infrastructure including a new 
roundabout and tra ﬃc calming measures, which will allow sites iden Ɵﬁed in the Strategic Housing Land 
Availability Assessment such as ‘Over-Ross’ to come forward during the plan period. The housing requirement to be met through the development of smaller non-strategic sites in and around Ross-on-Wye will be delivered through exis Ɵng commitments, windfalls and/or the alloca Ɵon of sites through a 
Neighbourhood Development Plan and/or other Development Plan Documents. 
New jobs 
4.7.9 	 The policy to deliver employment land to the north of the strategic housing loca Ɵon at Model Farm will 
help facilitate greater employment opportuni Ɵes for the residents of Ross-on-Wye. This employment area 
is located at an important entrance to the town and consists of a farm and surrounding agricultural ﬁelds 
 with a ﬁ eld buﬀer to the nearby residen Ɵal area to the west. A high quality development for B1, B2 and 
B8 uses will be accommodated, which should include appropriate landscaping to form a key element of any proposal, providing an appropriate eastern edge which is open to long distance views.  
4.7.10 	 The developer of Model Farm will need to ensure that the Environment Agency is sa Ɵsﬁed that adequate
 pollu Ɵ on preven Ɵon measures are in place to protect ground and surface waters on this site, since it is 
located on a source protec Ɵon zone of the Alton Court aquifer. 
4.7.11 	 The need for addi Ɵonal employment land to serve the needs of Ross-on-Wye and surrounding areas will 
be monitored during the Plan period. Any iden Ɵﬁ ed addiƟonal need will be addressed through: 
development coming forward in accordance with policies SS5, RW1, E1 and E3 of the Plan; a review of the Local Plan Core Strategy; or a Neighbourhood Development Plan or other Development Plan Document for the area. 
Movement 
4.7.12 	 The policy approach for movement in Ross-on-Wye is based on reducing the need to travel by private car. 
This will be achieved by loca Ɵng new development within walking and cycling distance of exis Ɵ ng and Place Shaping - Ross-on-Wye
 
 new facili Ɵes and improving and extending sustainable transport routes. New employment land and other 
policies in the Core Strategy, as well as any Neighbourhood Development Plan or other Development Plan 
100100 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
 
  
 
 
  
  
   
  
 
  
  
   
 
  
 
   
   
  
   
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 Place Shaping - Ross-on-Wye
Document will also promote local employment opportuni Ɵes, which will help address the issue of 
 commuƟng for jobs. The council (through the Local Transport Plan ) proposes to work in partnership with 
bus operators and developers to ensure housing and employment loca Ɵons are served by public transport 
and that service frequencies linking to Hereford are maintained. The issue of car parking will be addressed though a Neighbourhood Development Plan or other Development Plan Document. 
4.7.13 	 The development at both Model Farm and the Hildersley strategic loca Ɵon will access directly onto 
the A40. The developers of both areas will be required to make a contribu Ɵon to the design of the local 
roads to achieve acceptable tra ﬃc movements between the sites and the town centre and adjoining road 
networks. Developers should ensure that suitable pedestrian and cycle connec Ɵons to encourage 
sustainable movements between the areas and the town centre are incorporated in to the schemes. 
4.7.14 	 Since a signi ﬁcant amount of residen Ɵal development will take place on other sites dispersed around 
the town, developers must ensure that the council and/or Highways Agency are sa Ɵsﬁed that the 
 necessary miƟ gaƟon measures and/or contribu Ɵons towards altera Ɵons and improvements to the local 
road networks and sustainable modes of travel are made. 
Green infrastructure and open space 
4.7.15 	 The urban extension is located on an area of medium-low landscape value, and is generally ﬂ at, low-lying 
land, of mixed landscape character, contained within the rising land and wooded Penyard Hills to the south. The Town and Country Trail acts as a green corridor along the south-eastern boundary of the town. 
 Poten Ɵal new links between such green corridors and the urban extension will be encouraged. 
4.7.16 	 The urban extension falls within 10km of two SACs: the Wye Valley Woodlands and the Forest of Dean 
Bat Sites. A speci ﬁc study of bat ac Ɵvity on the Hildersley area in 2010 found that development could 
take place without incurring adverse impacts on these SACs.  However, the proposed landscaping and open space provision within the Hildersley urban extension should be located and designed so as to
 provide addi Ɵonal and appropriate bat foraging opportuni Ɵes where possible. The bats currently use 
the Town and Country Trail as a foraging corridor therefore links between the urban extension and this pathway would be bene ﬁcial to the protected bats. 
4.7.17 	 The Hildersley loca Ɵon contains a sports ﬁeld, under the ownership of Herefordshire Council, for use 
by John Kyrle High School. Any redevelopment of the recrea Ɵon ﬁeld at Hildersley for residen Ɵal use must 
be in accordance with Policy OS3 – Loss of open space, sports or recrea Ɵ on faciliƟes. 
Community and educa Ɵ onal facili Ɵes 
4.7.18 	 Improving the delivery of and access to services is addressed in this policy. The addi Ɵonal housing within 
Ross-on-Wye will create a need for further early years, secondary school, post 16, youth/community and 
 special educa Ɵonal needs provision. Such requirements should be met through developer contribu Ɵons 
 towards o ﬀ site facili Ɵes. 
Heritage and archaeological value 
4.7.19 	 It is not an Ɵcipated that development at Hildersley will have a signi ﬁcant impact on any heritage assets. 
For any smaller residen Ɵal sites proposed within and around the town development management 
 considera Ɵons to protect heritage interests will apply. Ross-on-Wye’s central area is contained within a 
 Conserva Ɵon Area and the majority of the town is within the Wye Valley Area of Outstanding Natural 
 Beauty. 
101101 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
   
  
   
 
  
  
 
  
  
   
 Retail 
4.7.20 	 The policy for retail in Ross-on-Wye, based on the evidence in the Town Centres Study Update 2012, is to 
maintain its exis Ɵng busy shopping centre, which is based on a mixture of popular high street chains and 
independent stores. New homes and households in Ross-on-Wye will strengthen and provide support for the town centre. 
4.7.21 	 The town centre for Ross-on-Wye is iden Ɵﬁed on the ‘saved’ Herefordshire Unitary Development Plan 
proposals map. This will be reviewed through the iden ƟﬁcaƟon of Primary Shopping Areas in the 
Neighbourhood Development Plan. Saved policies can be viewed in Appendix 1 
4.7.22 	 The Town Centres Study Update 2012 indicates that with the assumed implementa Ɵon of exis Ɵng 
planning permissions, there is not a need for further convenience or comparison retail capacity over the plan period. This means that any new addi Ɵ onal retail ﬂoorspace will be dependent on changed shopping 
paƩerns or the a Ʃ racƟon of new trade to the town. The need for retail provision will, however, be 
reviewed regularly against expenditure capacity and sites will be iden Ɵﬁed through a Neighbourhood 
Development Plan and/or other Development Plan Documents if required. 
Surface water management and ﬂ uvial ﬂooding 
4.7.23 	 The Hildersley area has been iden Ɵﬁed by the Environment Agency as being on a Secondary Aquifer and 
the majority of the preferred strategic development loca Ɵon lies within an outer groundwater source 
 protecƟon zone. Consequently, measures should be taken to ensure that this important source of water is 
not adversely a ﬀected by any future development. 
4.7.24 	 Other dispersed residen Ɵal development in and around Ross-on-Wye should ensure that areas prone to 
ﬂooding from the River Wye are avoided and that any poten Ɵ al future ﬂooding risk is appropriately 
addressed through appropriate sustainable urban drainage systems, which include rain gardens and 
 swales. Place Shaping - Ross-on-Wye
 
102102 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
    
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
    
    
 
 
  
   
   
   
  
 
    
 
  
  Place Shaping - Rural Areas
Herefordshire’s Rural Areas 
4.8.1 	 The council’s strategy for the rural areas outside Hereford and the market towns recognises the many 
challenges in securing their long term future in a sustainable manner. The concept of sustainability is based upon a range of social, economic and environmental factors which includes the presence of employment, market and a ﬀordable housing, facili Ɵes and services, access to sustainable transport, as 
well as factors such as social fabric re ﬂecƟng community cohesion, interdependence and commitment. 
4.8.2 	 Sustainable development is about posi Ɵve growth. Improved sustainability is central to achieving a strong 
living and working rural Herefordshire and mee Ɵ ng objecƟves 1, 5, 8, 8a,10 and 12 of the Core Strategy. 
4.8.3 	 To achieve this aim, the rural policies seek to enhance the role the county’s rural areas have tradi Ɵonally 
played as accessible, sustainable centres for their rural catchments. Therefore the posi Ɵve growth of 
seƩlements through the development of appropriate rural businesses and housing, including a ﬀ ordable 
housing, that contributes towards their maintenance and strengthening will be supported. 
A housing strategy for Rural Areas based on Housing Market Areas (HMAs) 
4.8.4 	 Within this large, predominantly rural county, di ﬀerent areas of Herefordshire have their own iden ƟƟes 
shaped by a variety of factors and a ﬃ  niƟes that have evolved through Ɵme. A signi ﬁcant aspect of this 
parƟcular local character is the se Ʃ lement pa Ʃern. As the pa Ʃern of rural se Ʃlements varies, a more 
localised approach to the rural areas has been developed for the Core Strategy. 
4.8.5 	 The approach adopted builds upon work undertaken on Housing Market Areas (HMAs) through the 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment 2008, Herefordshire Local Housing Market Assessment 2013  and 
Local Housing Requirement Study 2012 . These assessments of Herefordshire’s housing market have
 iden Ɵﬁed that there are spa Ɵ al variaƟons. The county can be divided into seven areas based upon 
common housing market characteris Ɵcs including tenure, house type pro ﬁle, incomes and a ﬀ ordability, 
and house prices. It also re ﬂects geographical proximity, pa Ʃerns of household movement (migra Ɵon) 
and travel to work pa Ʃerns. The seven Housing Market Areas of Herefordshire are illustrated in Figure 
4.13. 
4.8.6 	 The rural area of each HMA has di ﬀering future housing needs and requirements. The approach adopted 
in this plan sets out to respond to these needs and requirements in a ﬂexible and responsive way. 
Together with the roll out of the neighbourhood planning agenda, this strategy will empower 
 communi Ɵes to evolve as sustainable places whilst respec Ɵng their fundamental rural character. 
4.8.7 	 Herefordshire’s seven HMAs are broadly focused on Hereford and the market towns (except for the 
Golden Valley) and u Ɵlise ward boundaries. The term ‘rural HMAs’ refers only to the rural parts of the 
deﬁ ned HMAs. 
103103 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
 Figure 4.13: The Housing Market Areas of Herefordshire Place Shaping - Rural Areas 
104104 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
    
  
  
 
 
  
   
    
   
  
 
 
    
  
  
 
    
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 Place Shaping - Rural Areas
4.8.8 	 Housing development in rural areas will be delivered through Neighbourhood Development Plans, any 
required Rural Areas Site Alloca Ɵons Development Plan Document and a combina Ɵon of exis Ɵng 
commitments and windfall development. The council’s Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment 
indicates there is poten Ɵal for the level of development proposed in this policy. 
4.8.9 	 Past rates of housing comple Ɵons in the rural areas suggest that this level of growth is appropriate and 
achievable. Historically it is evident that much rural housing has come forward on small sites, o Ō en for 
individual dwellings, being allowed through the applicaƟon of planning policy rather than the alloca Ɵon 
of housing sites. Addi Ɵ onally, signi ﬁcant numbers of new housing con Ɵnues to be delivered through the 
conversion of rural buildings, many being redundant agricultural buildings on farmsteads. Paragraph 48 of NPPF indicates that an allowance may be made for windfall if there is compelling evidence that such sites have consistently become available in the local area and will con Ɵnue to provide a reliable source. 
There is clear evidence over many years that such sites have delivered an important element of the county’s housing supply and as such a modest windfall allowance for rural areas has been included of 1000 dwellings (50 per annum). 
4.8.10 	 The minimum rural HMA target represents a level of growth for parishes, as a percentage and which is 
 propor Ɵonate to exis Ɵng HMA characteris Ɵcs. 
4.8.11 	 The Rural Housing Background Paper (March 2013) sets out in its Appendix 2 the assessment of each  
rural HMA undertaken. The data will be subject to review during the plan period. 
4.8.12 	 All seƩ lements iden Ɵﬁed in Figures 4.14 and 4.15 will have the opportunity for sensi Ɵve and appropriate 
housing growth. The primary focus for this housing will be in those se Ʃlements highlighted in Figure 
4.14. In the remaining, typically smaller se Ʃlements of each HMA, as set out in Figure 4.15, par Ɵcular 
aƩenƟon will be given to ensure that housing developments should respect the scale, form, layout, 
character and se ƫng of the se Ʃlement concerned. By virtue of their size and character many of these 
seƩlements do not have a tradi Ɵonal village or nuclear centre and in many cases have a dispersed 
seƩ lement pa Ʃern which would need to be respected in the design of new housing proposals. This will 
ensure the delivery of schemes that are locally dis ƟncƟ ve. 
Policy RA1 – Rural housing distribu Ɵon 
In Herefordshire’s rural areas a minimum of 5,300 new dwellings will be provided between 2011 and 2031 to contribute to the county’s housing needs. The development of rural housing will contribute towards the wider regeneraƟon of the rural economy. 
New dwellings will be broadly distributed across the county’s rural areas on the basis of seven Housing Markets Areas (HMA) as illustrated in Figure 4.13. This acknowledges that di ﬀerent areas of Herefordshire have 
diﬀerent housing needs and requirements. 
The 5,300 dwellings will be delivered throughout the rural HMAs as set out in the table below. The indica Ɵve 
housing growth targets in each of the rural HMAs will be used as a basis for the produc Ɵon of Neighbourhood 
Development Plans in the county. Local evidence and environmental factors will determine the appropriate scale of development. 
105105 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
  
     
 
   
   Policy RA1 – Rural housing distribu Ɵ on conƟnued
 
Bromyard 364 15 
Golden Valley 304 12 
Hereford 1870 18 
Kington 317 12 
Ledbury 565 14 
Leominster 730 14 
Ross-on-Wye 1150 14 
Total 5300 Rural HMA Approximate number of 
dwellings 2011 - 2031 IndicaƟve housing growth 
target  (%) 
Housing in Herefordshire’s se Ʃ lements 
4.8.13 	 NaƟonal policy supports a sustainable approach to development in rural areas which is locally responsive, 
reﬂecƟng local housing needs with an emphasis on suppor Ɵng services, employment and facili Ɵ es in 
villages, avoiding new isolated homes in the countryside. 
4.8.14 	 As set out earlier in this sec Ɵon, each rural HMA was evaluated through combining the applica Ɵon of a 
localised benchmark (median se Ʃlement size in each rural HMA), together with an assessment of 
services. This approach will enable se Ʃlements in the rural areas to accommodate appropriate and 
 environmentally sensi Ɵve sustainable housing development in accordance with the Na Ɵ onal Planning 
 Policy Framework. 
4.8.15 	 One hundred and nineteen se Ʃlements have been iden Ɵﬁed across the county to be the main focus of 
 propor Ɵonate housing development in the rural areas. These are listed in Figure 4.14. Within these 
seƩlements carefully considered development which is propor Ɵonate to the size of the community and 
its needs will be permi Ʃed. 
4.8.16 	 ResidenƟal development will be located within or adjacent to the main built up area(s) of the se Ʃ lement. 
This will ensure that unnecessary isolated, non-characteris Ɵc and discordant dwellings do not arise which 
would adversely a ﬀect the character and se ƫng of a se Ʃlement and its local environment. 
4.8.17 	 Given the importance of the Herefordshire landscape, and par Ɵcularly the Malvern Hills and Wye Valley 
Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty1, new dwellings should make a posi Ɵ ve contribu Ɵon to their rural 
landscape by being built to a high standard, incorpora Ɵng appropriate materials and landscaping. High 
1 Malvern Hills  AONB Guidance on Building Design Place Shaping - Rural Areas
 
106106 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
 
   
   
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
   
  
   
 
     
    
 
 
  
 
  
  
   
   
  
   
  
  
  
    
   Place Shaping - Rural Areas
quality design that is sustainable and reinforces the locally dis ƟncƟve vernacular will be par Ɵcularly 
 encouraged. Innova Ɵve and/or contemporary design will also be supported where it is appropriate to its 
context, it makes a posi Ɵ ve contribu Ɵon to the architectural character of the locality and achieves high 
levels of sustainability in terms of energy and water e ﬃciency, as set out in Policy SD1. All residen Ɵal 
development proposals will need to consider the capacity of the drainage network in the area and the impact of future development on water quality in accordance with Policy SD4. 
4.8.18 	 ResidenƟal development will be expected to contribute to the future housing needs of each HMA by 
providing an appropriate mix of dwelling types and sizes having regard to the Local Housing Market
 Assessment  and other relevant evidence sources. Developments should be sensi Ɵvely and inclusively 
designed to re ﬂect the lifelong housing needs of the local community.  They should also contribute, 
where appropriate, to the provision of infrastructure, a ﬀordable homes and improving community 
 cohesion. 
4.8.19 	 Housing a ﬀordability is a signi ﬁcant issue in rural Herefordshire. This situa Ɵon is exacerbated by an 
 exis Ɵng housing mix that is heavily skewed towards higher value proper Ɵes, together with demand from 
people moving to rural areas and restricted scope for new house building. As a result there is a need for 
market housing priced at a level that can be a ﬀorded by local people. 
4.8.20 	 On this basis, housing proposals will be expected to re ﬂect the range that is required for the se Ʃ lement 
concerned. In rela Ɵon to proposals that seek speci ﬁcally to meet iden Ɵﬁed local housing needs, those 
proposed developments must be based on appropriate, compelling evidence of how the proposal meets that need. A planning obliga Ɵon will restrict the occupa Ɵon of dwellings on this basis to ensure their long 
term availability for those with local housing needs. 
4.8.21 	 A proacƟve approach has been taken to neighbourhood planning within the county. At February 2015, 
there were 88 designated neighbourhood areas in the county and signi ﬁcant progress is being made in 
 the produc Ɵon of Neighbourhood Development Plans. These plans will be the principal mechanism by 
which new rural housing will be allocated. The propor Ɵonal growth target within policy RA1 will provide 
the basis for the minimum level of new housing that will be accommodated in each Neighbourhood Development Plan. The target represents a level of growth for parishes, as a percentage, that is 
 propor Ɵonate to exis Ɵng HMA characteris Ɵcs. The main focus for development will be within or adjacent 
 to exis Ɵ ng seƩlements indicated within ﬁg 4.14 and 4.15. In parishes which have more than one 
seƩlement listed in Figure 4.14 and 4.15 the relevant Neighbourhood Development Plan will have
 appropriate ﬂexibility to appor Ɵon the minimum housing requirement between the se Ʃ lements 
concerned. This will allow for a locally ﬂexible approach that will respect se Ʃ lement characteris Ɵ cs, the 
 distribu Ɵon of local facili Ɵes and other local factors. This approach will accord with paragraph 55 of the 
NPPF which indicates that where there are groups of smaller se Ʃlements in rural areas, the development 
in one loca Ɵon may support services in a loca Ɵon nearby. The adop Ɵon of this approach will allow 
disƟncƟ ve soluƟons which re ﬂect the varied geographies in the county. 
107107 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
   
  
   
 
  
   
  
  
   Policy RA2 –  Housing in se Ʃlements outside Hereford and the market towns. 
To maintain and strengthen locally sustainable communi Ɵes across the rural parts of Herefordshire, sustainable 
housing growth will be supported in or adjacent to those se Ʃ lements iden Ɵﬁed in Figures 4.14 and 4.15. This 
will enable development that has the ability to bolster exis Ɵng service provision, improve facili Ɵ es and 
infrastructure and meet the needs of the communi Ɵ es concerned. 
The minimum growth target in each rural Housing Market Area will be used to inform the level of housing 
development to be delivered in the various se Ʃlements set out in Figures 4.14 and 4.15. Neighbourhood 
Development Plans will allocate land for new housing or otherwise demonstrate delivery to provide levels of housing to meet the various targets, by indica Ɵng levels of suitable and available capacity. 
Housing proposals will be permi Ʃed where the following criteria are met:
 1. 	 Their design and layout should re ﬂect the size, role and func Ɵon of each se Ʃlement and be located 
within or adjacent to the main built up area. In rela Ɵon to smaller se Ʃ lements iden Ɵﬁ ed in ﬁ g 4.15 
proposals will be expected to demonstrate par Ɵ cular aƩenƟon to the form, layout, character and se ƫng 
of the site and its loca Ɵon in that se Ʃlement and/or they result in development that contributes to or is 
essenƟal to the social well-being of the se Ʃ lement concerned; 
2. 	 Their loca Ɵons make best and full use of suitable brown ﬁeld sites wherever possible; 
3. 	 They result in the development of high quality, sustainable schemes which are appropriate to their 
context and make a posi Ɵ ve contribu Ɵon to the surrounding environment and its landscape se ƫ  ng; and
 4. 	 They result in the delivery of schemes that generate the size, type, tenure and range of housing that is 
required in par Ɵ cular seƩ lements, re ﬂecƟng local demand. 
Speci ﬁc proposals for the delivery of local need housing will be par Ɵcularly supported where they meet an 
idenƟﬁed need and their long-term reten Ɵon as local needs housing is secured as such. Place Shaping - Rural Areas
 
108108 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
 Figure 4.14: The se Ʃlements which will be the main focus of propor Ɵonate housing development Place Shaping - Rural Areas
HMA 
Bromyard Golden Valley Kington Ledbury 
Bodenham 
Bodenham Moor Bredenbury Bringsty Burley Gate Hope under Dinmore Linton Pencombe Risbury Stoke Cross/Stoke Lacy Stoke Prior Whitbourne Bredwardine Cliﬀ ord 
Cusop Dorstone Ewyas Harold Longtown Michaelchurch Escley Moccas Peterchurch Preston on Wye Vowchurch Almeley Brilley Eardisley Lyonshall Norton Canon Pembridge Staunton on Wye Shobdon Titley Whitney on Wye Winforton Ashperton Bishops Frome Bosbury Colwall Cradley Eastnor Fromes Hill Lower Eggleton/Newtown Putley Wellington Heath 
Leominster Hereford Ross-on-Wye 
Adforton Bartestree/Lugwardine Bromsash Walford (Coughton) 
Bircher Bishopstone Brampton Abbots Whitchurch 
Brampton Bryan Burghill Bridstow Wilton 
Brimﬁeld Canon Pyon Crow Hill Winnal 
Bush Bank Clehonger Garway Woolhope 
Dilwyn Credenhill Goodrich Wormbridge 
Eardisland Eaton Bishop Gorsley Wormelow 
Kimbolton Fownhope Hoarwithy 
Kingsland Hampton Bishop Kingstone 
Leintwardine Holme Lacy Kingsthorne 
Leysters LiƩ le Dewchurch Kings Caple 
Lingen Madley Lea 
Lucton Marden Linton 
Luston Mordiford LiƩ le Birch 
Monkland Moreton on Lugg Llangrove 
Orleton StreƩ on Sugwas Much Birch 
Richards Castle SuƩon St Nicholas Much Dewchurch 
Shirlheath Swainshill Much Marcle 
Weobley Tarrington Orcop Hill 
Wigmore Tillington Peterstow 
Yarpole Wellington Westhope Withington Pontrilas Pontshill St Weonards Weston-under-Penyard 
109109 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   Figure 4.15: Other se Ʃlements where propor Ɵonate housing is appropriate. Place Shaping - Rural Areas 
HMA 
Bromyard Golden Valley Kington Ledbury 
Docklow 
Edwyn Ralph Haƞield 
Munderﬁ eld 
Ocle Pychard Pudleston Steensbridge Ullingswick Abbeydore Bacton Blakemere Lower Maes-coed Priory Wood Rowlestone Tyberton Hergest Holme Marsh Kinnersley LeƩon 
Staunton on Arrow Woonton Canon Frome Coddington Eggleton Mathon Monkhide Much Cowarne StreƩ on Grandison 
Leominster Hereford Ross-on-Wye 
Ashton Aymestrey Brierley Cobnash Combe Moor Eyton Ivington Kinsham Leinthall Earls Leinthall Starkes LiƩ le Hereford 
Moreton MorƟ  mers Cross 
Middleton on the Hill Stapleton Upper Hill Walford Wharton YaƩon Burmarsh Breinton Byford Dinedor Dormington GraŌon 
Kings Pyon Ledgemoor LiƩ le Tarrington 
Litmarsh Mansel Lacy Moorhampton Munstone Pipe and Lyde Preston Wynne Priors Frome Ruckhall Shelwick Shucknall Stoke Edith Twyford Common Vauld Westhide Weston Beggard Withington Marsh Yazor Aconbury Allensmore Aston Ingham Bishopswood Broad Oak Brockhampton Cobhall Common Didley Glewstone Harewood End Howle Hill Kilpeck Llancloudy Llangarron Llanwarne Much Birch/The Axe and Cleaver Orcop Rushall St Owens Cross Symonds Yat (West) Three Ashes Thruxton Upton Crews Welsh Newton Common 
110110 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
    
 
   
  
   
   
   
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
    
   
 
  
    
  
    
   
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
   
 Place Shaping - Rural Areas
Housing in Herefordshire’s countryside 
4.8.22 	 NaƟonal guidance emphasises the importance of not promo Ɵng unsustainable pa Ʃerns of development 
in rural areas and avoiding the provision of new isolated homes.  
4.8.23 	 Where appropriate, se Ʃlement boundaries (or a reasonable alterna Ɵve) for those se Ʃlements listed in 
Policy RA2 will be de ﬁned in either Neighbourhood Development Plans or the Rural Areas Sites 
 Alloca Ɵon DPD. In the period leading up to the de ﬁniƟon of appropriate se Ʃlement boundaries the 
Council will assess any applica Ɵons for residen Ɵal developments in Figure 4.14 and 4.15 against their 
 rela Ɵonship to the main built up form of the se Ʃlement.  Outside of these se Ʃlements new housing will 
be restricted to avoid unsustainable pa Ʃerns of development. Residen Ɵal development will therefore be 
limited to those proposals which meet the criteria listed in Policy RA3. Proposals should seek to make use 
 of exis Ɵng buildings through conversion and adap Ɵon in preference to new development.  This approach 
accords with Paragraph 55 of the NPPF. 
Policy RA3 – Herefordshire’s countryside 
In rural loca Ɵons outside of se Ʃlements, as to be de ﬁned in either Neighbourhood Development Plans or the 
Rural Areas Sites Alloca Ɵons DPD, residen Ɵal development will be limited to proposals which sa Ɵsfy one or more 
of the following criteria:
 1. 	 meets an agricultural or forestry need or other farm diversi ﬁcaƟon enterprise for a worker to live 
permanently at or near their place of work and complies with Policy RA4; or
 2. 	 accompanies and is necessary to the establishment or growth of a rural enterprise, and complies with 
Policy RA4; or
 3. 	 involves the replacement of an exis Ɵng dwelling (with a lawful residen Ɵal use) that is comparable in size 
and scale with, and  is located in the lawful domes Ɵ c curƟlage, of the exis Ɵng dwelling; or
 4. 	 would result in the sustainable re-use of a redundant or disused building(s) where it complies with Policy 
RA5 and leads to an enhancement of its immediate se ƫ  ng; or 
5. 	 is rural excep Ɵon housing in accordance with Policy H2; or
 6. 	 is of excep Ɵonal quality and innova Ɵve design sa Ɵsfying the design criteria set out in Paragraph 55 of 
 the Na Ɵonal Planning Policy Framework and achieves sustainable standards of design and construc Ɵon; 
or
 7. 	 is a site providing for the needs of gypsies or other travellers in accordance with Policy H4. 
4.8.24 	 Occupancy controls will be applied to dwellings arising from the expansion of rural business enterprises, 
as well as to agricultural and forestry dwellings (Policy RA4) and will be secured from the start by a 
SecƟon 106 Agreement. 
4.8.25 	 Replacement dwellings will only be permi Ʃed provided that the exis Ɵng building has established and 
 conƟ  nuing residen Ɵal use rights and has not been abandoned. Proposals should ordinarily be sited in a 
 similar posi Ɵon as the original dwelling unless there is technical jus ƟﬁcaƟon to consider an alterna Ɵve
 loca Ɵon within the exis Ɵng lawful domes Ɵ c curƟlage. To safeguard the character and appearance of the 
rural landscape from the visual impact of large buildings, the size of any replacement dwelling will be of 
a comparable total cubic volume (measured externally) to the exis Ɵng dwelling. To minimise the impact of 
the proposal on the surrounding area, the design of the dwelling and any associated development should 
respect the local character of the area and/or make a posi Ɵ ve contribu Ɵon to the rural landscape. As 
such the mass, scale, height and external appearance of the resultant development should be taken into
 account. PermiƩ ed development rights may be removed from replacement dwellings. 
111111 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
 
 
   
   
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
    
   
 
 4.8.26 	 All residen Ɵal development proposals will need to take account of capacity of the drainage network in the 
area and the impact of future development on water quality in accordance with Policy SD4. 
Rural enterprise dwellings in Herefordshire’s countryside 
4.8.27 	 One of the few circumstances in which isolated residen Ɵal development in the countryside may be 
jusƟﬁed is when accommoda Ɵon is required to enable rural enterprise workers to live at, or in the 
immediate vicinity of, their place of work to provide essen Ɵal supervision and management. The need to 
make an excep Ɵon to the general policy approach to development in the countryside in order to meet the 
requirements of rural businesses has long been recognised and this approach to rural workers has been 
endorsed by the Na Ɵonal Planning Policy Framework (2012). 
Policy RA4 – Agricultural, forestry and rural enterprise dwellings 
Proposals for dwellings associated with agriculture, forestry and rural enterprises will be permi Ʃed where it can 
be demonstrated that there is a sustained essen Ɵ al funcƟonal need for the dwelling and it forms an essen Ɵal 
part of a ﬁnancially sustainable business, and that such need cannot be met in exis Ɵ ng accommoda Ɵ on. Such 
dwellings should:
 1. 	 demonstrate that the accommoda Ɵon could not be provided in an exis Ɵ ng building(s); 
2. 	 be sited so as to meet the iden Ɵﬁ ed funcƟonal need within the unit or in rela Ɵon to other dwellings; and 
3. 	 be of a high quality, sustainable design which is appropriate to the context and makes a posi Ɵve
 contribu Ɵon to the surrounding environment and rural landscape.  
Where evidence of the economic sustainability of the rural enterprise is not proven or where an enterprise is not yet established, planning permission for temporary accommoda Ɵon may be granted for a maximum period of 
three years to enable the sustainability of the enterprise to be assessed. Successive extensions will not normally be granted. Temporary accommoda Ɵon should be carefully sited within the unit or in rela Ɵon to other dwellings. 
Dwellings permi Ʃed in accordance with this policy will be subject to occupancy controls secured through a 
SecƟon 106 Agreement. In some situa Ɵons it will be appropriate to use legal agreements to Ɵe other dwellings 
to the unit and/or restrict the occupancy of other dwellings within the farm/business unit. ApplicaƟons for the removal of occupancy condi Ɵons (or sec Ɵon 106 Agreements) will only be permi Ʃ ed where 
it can be demonstrated the dwelling is surplus to the current and sustained original business needs, as well as other rural enterprises in the locality and there has been a genuine and unsuccessful a Ʃempt to market the 
property at a realis Ɵc price (for rent or sale) which has been independently veri ﬁed. Place Shaping - Rural Areas
 
4.8.28 	 ApplicaƟons for planning permission for new dwellings advanced through this policy will be based on 
an accurate assessment of the needs of the rural enterprise. Rural enterprises comprise land related businesses including agriculture, forestry and other ac ƟviƟes that obtain their primary inputs from the 
site, such as the processing of agricultural, forestry and mineral products together with land 
 management ac ƟviƟes and support services, tourism and leisure enterprises. The sustainability of the 
business will be scru Ɵnised to ensure any essen Ɵal need established can be sustained so the criteria set 
out in Policy RA4 are not abused. 
4.8.29 	 Therefore, in terms of agricultural or forestry dwellings it will be essen Ɵ al to ﬁrstly establish that stated 
 inten Ɵons to engage in agriculture are soundly based, reasonably likely to materialise and capable of 
being sustained for a reasonable period of Ɵme. Where proposals are advanced in associa Ɵ on with 
112112 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
   
  
  
 
  
    
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
     
 
  
  
  
  
    
   
   
 
   
  
 
   
   
  
 
 
  Place Shaping - Rural Areas
non-agricultural rural enterprises it should also be established that the business could not exist without close and con Ɵnual supervision, for example where a worker is required day and night for supervision, 
inspecƟon or emergency responses. Security is not of itself su ﬃ  cient to jus Ɵfy a dwelling but it may be a 
 contribu Ɵng factor in associa Ɵon with others. 
4.8.30 	 All applica Ɵons will be required to demonstrate that a dwelling at the enterprise is essen Ɵal by showing a 
funcƟonal need for the occupier to be present at the business for the majority of the Ɵme. 
4.8.31 	 Where the economic sustainability of the rural enterprise is not proven or where an enterprise has not 
been established, planning permission for a caravan or other temporary accommoda Ɵon may be 
granted for a limited period. This is to enable the economic sustainability of the enterprise to be proven through the development of the business, including investment, planned on a sound ﬁnancial basis. At 
the end of the temporary period a reassessment of the sustained essen Ɵ al funcƟonal needs of the 
business, together with the ﬁnancial sustainability of the enterprise will be reviewed. 
4.8.32 	 To avoid a prolifera Ɵon of dwellings in the countryside, occupancy controls will be secured through 
SecƟon 106 Agreements a Ʃached to dwellings advanced through this policy. Where a second dwelling is 
necessary for the essen Ɵal management of a rural enterprise, the council will restrict the occupa Ɵon/ 
separate sale of any exis Ɵng dwellings on the holding which are in the ownership or control of the 
applicant or their registered business/partners. Similarly, where appropriate, planning obliga Ɵons may be 
used to prevent the future separa Ɵon of a farmhouse(s) from any adjoining farm buildings and land. 
These measures may be taken to ensure that new proposals for addi Ɵonal dwellings do not allow exis Ɵng 
farm dwellings to be removed from the rural worker housing stock, protect the countryside against the pressure for new homes and to prevent the original jus ƟﬁcaƟon for the addi Ɵonal dwelling being 
undermined. 
4.8.33 	 Where the need for a dwelling is established on the basis of proven essen Ɵal need, preference should be 
given to the use of suitable exis Ɵng buildings through conversion. Where this is not possible, any new 
development should relate closely to the ac ƟviƟes for which there is a need. In most cases this will mean 
that the new dwelling should be sited in close proximity to exis Ɵng buildings. Isolated loca Ɵ ons or 
 loca Ɵons that could encourage farm fragmenta Ɵon in the case of dwellings for agricultural enterprises 
should be avoided. The loca Ɵon and siƟng of temporary accommoda Ɵon will itself be considered on the 
basis of permanent accommoda Ɵon being provided. Where other development rela Ɵng to the enterprise 
is being proposed at the same Ɵme as part of an overall scheme, si Ɵng of all development will be 
considered on a comprehensive basis. 
4.8.34 	 Where applica Ɵons are made to remove occupancy condiƟons (or obliga Ɵons) on dwellings when an 
essenƟal on-site worker is no longer required, applica Ɵons will be required to demonstrate that the 
 condi Ɵon is no longer appropriate. Accordingly applicants should demonstrate there is no func Ɵ onal need 
and thus the dwelling is surplus to both the current and sustainable needs of the original rural enterprise, as well as other rural enterprises in the locality. Evidence should be provided that genuine a Ʃ empts have 
been made to market the property for sale or rent at a realis Ɵc price that re ﬂects its occupancy restricƟ on 
for a period of at least 12 months. The council will require the markeƟng price to be independently 
 veri ﬁed by the District Valuer prior to the commencement of marke Ɵng. 
Re-use of rural buildings 
4.8.35 	 Policy RA5 recognises that the re-use of exis Ɵng rural buildings has an important role to play in promo Ɵng 
economic prosperity and sustainable development in rural areas. Such proposals can result in the crea Ɵon 
of local accessible jobs, the provision of premises for business start-ups and/or expansions, improving 
113113 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
    
   
 
 
    
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
 
   
   
     
  
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 business networks and suppor Ɵng farming through diversi ﬁcaƟon schemes. The re-use of buildings can 
also provide environmental bene ﬁts by making use of exis Ɵng resources and at the same Ɵ  me conserving 
buildings of heritage value. 
Policy RA5 – Re-use of rural buildings 
The sustainable re-use of individual and groups of redundant or disused buildings, including farmsteads in rural areas, which will make a posi Ɵ ve contribu Ɵon to rural businesses and enterprise and support the local economy 
(including live work units) or which otherwise contributes to residen Ɵal development, or is essen Ɵal to the social 
well-being of the countryside, will be permi Ʃ ed where:
 1. 	 design proposals respect the character and signi ﬁcance of any redundant or disused building and  
demonstrate that it represents the most viable op Ɵon for the long term conserva Ɵon and enhancement 
of any heritage asset a ﬀected, together with its se ƫng;
 2. 	 design proposals make adequate provision for protected and priority species and associated habitats; 
3. 	 the proposal is compa Ɵble with neighbouring uses, including any con Ɵnued agricultural opera Ɵ ons and 
does not cause undue environmental impacts and;
 4. 	 the buildings are of permanent and substan Ɵ al construc Ɵon capable of conversion without major or 
 complete reconstrucƟ  on; and
 5. 	 the building is capable of accommoda Ɵng the proposed new use without the need for substan Ɵal 
 altera Ɵon or extension, ancillary buildings, areas of hard standing or development which individually or 
taken together would adversely a ﬀect the character or appearance of the building or have a detrimental 
impact on its surroundings and landscape se ƫng. 
Any planning permissions granted pursuant to this policy will be subject to a condi Ɵon removing permiƩ ed 
development rights for future altera Ɵons, extensions and other developments. 
4.8.36 	 Redundant rural buildings in Herefordshire vary greatly in terms of scale, design and materials depending 
on their original use. Some are situated within villages, but the majority are located in the countryside.  They may occasionally be single buildings but more commonly are grouped together in farmsteads or other clusters. Many are former agricultural buildings which are no longer required for their original 
purpose. Others may relate to di ﬀ erent acƟviƟes such as corn mills or other industrial buildings. Most of 
these buildings have heritage value and are referred to in the policy as ‘heritage assets.’   
4.8.37 	 Policy RA5 is not intended to support the rebuilding of rural buildings which have fallen into a derelict 
state. At this point, their signi ﬁcance has usually been lost. Buildings should therefore be structurally 
sound and capable of bona ﬁde conversion for the proposed use without major reconstruc Ɵon. A full 
structural survey may be required to demonstrate whether this is the case. 
4.8.38 	 Many rural buildings, par Ɵcularly those previously used for agricultural purposes, provide valuable 
wildlife habitats including for legally protected species such as bats and barn owls. Applica Ɵ ons for 
planning permission for the re-use of these buildings will need to demonstrate that an appropriate wildlife survey has been carried out and will be required to make adequate provision for wildlife 
miƟgaƟon and enhancement measures within their design and se ƫng. They must also demonstrate 
 appropriate species-protec Ɵon measures before, during and a Ōer the conversion process. 
4.8.39 	 Where required applicants will also be required to demonstrate that proposed uses respect the character 
of the buildings, are suitable for the rural environment, address sustainable transport issues and do not 
have a nega Ɵve impact on the amenity of local residents and environment and in terms of noise, light and Place Shaping - Rural Areas
 
114114 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
    
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
   
    
   
  
 
  
   
 Place Shaping - Rural Areas
air polluƟon. Detailed design requirements for proposals for the re-use of individual buildings and 
farmsteads must ensure that schemes respect the historic character and interest of the buildings, its 
 rela Ɵonship with other buildings and heritage assets, and its place in the wider landscape. Overall, 
schemes should keep new openings to a minimum; respect internal features and spaces; and avoid 
 introducing non-tradi Ɵonal features such as dormer windows, chimney stacks, porches or unsympathe Ɵc 
 materials. 
4.8.40 	 Redundant rural buildings may also provide good opportuni Ɵes for the development of live/ work units 
and these can poten Ɵally make a posi Ɵ ve contribu Ɵon to the rural economy. Therefore these will be 
encouraged in accordance with Policy E1 and the criteria of Policy RA5.  
Rural economy 
4.8.41 	 The rural areas have consistently played a strong role in local, regional and na Ɵonal food and drink 
 produc Ɵ on, parƟcularly in areas such as agriculture and farming. Other uses within the rural economy 
consist of local businesses and services, village shops and public houses, tourism ac ƟviƟ es and 
 accommoda Ɵon, home working businesses, military uses, as well as farm diversi ﬁcaƟon enterprises. The 
strengthening of the rural economy is also important in retaining a skilled labour force. In order to 
allow the rural economy to grow the following policy provides ﬂexibility for start-ups and con ƟnuaƟ on of 
business enterprises, business diversi ﬁcaƟon and home working. It also embraces new technologies and 
methods to allow the rural economy to prosper. 
Policy RA6 - Rural economy 
Employment genera Ɵng proposals which help diversify the rural economy such as knowledge based crea Ɵve 
industries, environmental technologies, business diversi ﬁcaƟon projects and home working will be supported. A 
range of economic acƟ viƟes will be supported, including proposals which: 
• support and strengthen local food and drink produc Ɵon;
 • support and/or protect the vitality and viability of commercial facili Ɵes of an appropriate type and scale 
in rural areas, such as village shops, petrol ﬁ lling staƟons, garden centres and public houses;
 • involve the small scale extension of exis Ɵ ng businesses;
 • promote sustainable tourism proposals of an appropriate scale in accordance with Policy E4 - Tourism;
 • promote the sustainable use of the natural and historic environment as an asset which is valued, con served and enhanced;
 • support the reten Ɵon of exis Ɵng military sites;
 • support the reten Ɵon and/ or diversi ﬁcaƟon of exis Ɵng agricultural businesses; 
Planning applica Ɵons which are submi Ʃed in order to diversify the rural economy will be permi Ʃed where they: 
• ensure that the development is of a scale which would be commensurate with its loca Ɵon and se ƫng;
 • do not cause unacceptable adverse impacts to the amenity of nearby residents by virtue of design and mass, noise, dust, ligh Ɵng and smell;
 • do not generate tra ﬃc movements that cannot safely be accommodated within the local road network; 
and
 • do not undermine the achievement of water quality targets in accordance with Policies SD3 and SD4. 
115115 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
   
   
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
 
       
      
      
 
   
  
        4.8.42 	 The rural economy will be strengthened by providing ﬂexibility for new and expanding rural businesses. 
Policy RA6 sets out a range of cri Ɵeria that will need to be met to ensure that resul Ɵng developments are 
of an appropriate scale and loca Ɵon and do not signi ﬁcantly impact upon the environmental quality of 
 the area. 
4.8.43 	 The Wye Valley AONB and the Malvern Hills AONB are recognised by the Na Ɵonal Planning Policy 
Framework as areas where development should be restricted. Guidance on proposed developments in 
AONBs is set out in Paragraph 116 of the NPPF.  Policy LD1 of this plan also sets out guidance on how development proposals should seek to safeguard the character and appearance of these areas. 
4.8.44 	 Tourism plays a role within the rural economy. The varied tourism facili Ɵes enable exis Ɵng farms and rural 
businesses to diversify as well as accommoda Ɵng the needs of visitors. 
4.8.45 	 Isolated employment sites may be appropriate for small extensions and/or redevelopment. A jus ƟﬁcaƟon 
should be provided to demonstrate the need for these addi Ɵons. Proposed developments will need to 
take into account other relevant policies within this plan. 
Delivery and monitoring of the Place Shaping Policies 
4.8.46 	 These policies will be delivered by: 
•	   the Infrastructure Development Plan and developer contribu Ɵons/Community Infrastructure Levy 
•	   the development management process 
•	   Hereford Area Plan, Bromyard Development Plan, Neighbourhood Development Plans, other 
          Development Plan Documents as appropriate and Supplementary Planning Documents. 
4.8.47 	 In addiƟon to the indicators listed in the Spa Ɵal Strategy and General Policies’ secƟons, the following 
indictors will be used to measure the e ﬀecƟveness of the policies: 
• uƟlising the AMR to develop an indicator of housing comple Ɵons by HMAs and rural HMAs. Place Shaping - Rural Areas
 
116116 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
   
     
   
  
 General Policies
The General Policies are divided into three di ﬀ erent sec Ɵons: 
Social Progress, Economic Prosperity and Environmental Quality 
5.1 Social progress 
IntroducƟon 
5.1.1 	 Social progress is about improving the well-being of our communi Ɵes. The Core Strategy’s vision for social 
progress is a long-term one, seeking to deliver decent a ﬀordable homes, social and community facili Ɵes 
and other necessary infrastructure in urban and rural areas. There are ﬁ ve objecƟves which develop this 
vision (strategic objec Ɵves 1-5 in the spa Ɵal strategy sec Ɵon) and this sec Ɵon sets out a series of policies 
 on a ﬀordable housing, social and community infrastructure, open space, sport and recrea Ɵon, and tra ﬃc 
management to deliver these objecƟves, alongside Policies SS1 to SS7 and the Place Shaping policies. 
117117 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
   
   
  
 
    
   
   
 
 
  
   
  
  
  
  
 
  
       
       
       
   
  
  
  
 
    
   
   
 Aﬀ ordable housing 
5.1.2 	 There is a signi ﬁcant need for a ﬀordable housing within Herefordshire and the planning system can assist 
the delivery of a ﬀordable homes. Policy H1 establishes a ﬀordable housing targets whilst speci ﬁ c place 
based policies in Sec Ɵon 4 of this document set out targets for individual strategic housing developments. 
5.1.3 	 Within the county, the need for a ﬀordable housing has been inves Ɵgated through the Strategic Housing 
Market Assessment 2008  (SHMA) which introduced the broad housing needs of the county. A Local 
Housing Market Assessment (LHMA) was completed in 2011 and updated in 2013, which draws on and develops the SHMA to provide a local assessment of housing requirements for the seven local housing markets across Herefordshire. In addi Ɵon to the LHMA, parish level housing needs surveys are 
undertaken to iden Ɵfy needs at a very local level, to support the development of a ﬀordable housing. The 
need for a ﬀordable homes across the county is signi ﬁcantly high, but the viability of delivering a ﬀ ordable 
homes over the plan period has been recognised in order to provide an achievable target in the Core 
 Strategy. 
5.1.4 	 Aﬀordable housing is housing provided to eligible households whose needs are not met by the open 
market. It encompasses housing provided at below market prices and allocated on the basis of need, to 
people who are unable to purchase or rent houses available generally on the open market without ﬁnancial assistance. Eligibility is determined with regard to local incomes and local house prices.  
5.1.5 	 Aﬀordable housing can include a range of rented and home ownership housing op Ɵons which meet local 
housing need. By seeking to provide a range of housing op Ɵons, the council can help to address the needs 
of those seeking to gain a ﬁrst step on the property ladder, reduce the demand for social rented housing, 
free up exis Ɵng social rented homes, provide wider choice for households and ensure that sites have a 
mix of tenures. 
5.1.6 The Na Ɵonal Planning Policy Framework divides a ﬀordable housing into three categories: 
•	   social rented for which guideline target rents are determined through the na Ɵonal rent regime; 
•	 aﬀordable rented housing subject to rent controls that require no more than 80% of the local 
          market rent; and 
•	   intermediate homes for sale and rent, provided at a cost above social rent but below market levels. 
5.1.7 	 Aﬀordable housing under these de ﬁniƟons can include both individual and mul Ɵple dwellings, those 
constructed under self-build projects funded by registered providers or community housing groups as  well as individual projects providing low cost housing that does not exceed a ﬀordable levels – as de ﬁned 
in the council published ‘Provision of A ﬀordable Housing Technical Data.’ In such cases planning 
 condi Ɵons will be imposed to ensure that housing is retained in perpetuity for future local housing needs. 
5.1.8 	 Housing provided under these categories whether for rent or sale must be made available at a price level 
that can be sustained by local people in housing need. It is important to emphasise the dis ƟncƟons 
between the roles of the di ﬀerent categories of a ﬀordable housing and not to treat one as a subs Ɵ tute for 
the other. It is important to set criteria iden Ɵfying what cons Ɵtutes local housing need. This is in order 
that proposals for addi Ɵonal dwellings coming forward can be clearly shown to be contribu Ɵng to this 
requirement – and thus to the aim of sustaining urban and rural communi Ɵes. General Policies
 
118118 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
  
  
    
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 General Policies
 Policy H1 - A ﬀordable housing – thresholds and targets 
All new open market housing proposals on sites of more than 10 dwellings which have a maximum combined 
gross ﬂoor space of more than 1000m2 will be expected to contribute towards mee Ɵ ng aﬀ ordable housing 
needs. 
The amount and mix of a ﬀordable housing including those on strategic housing sites will vary depending on 
evidence of housing need as iden Ɵﬁed through the latest housing market assessment, and, an assessment of the 
viability of the development. The following indica Ɵve targets have been established based on evidence of need 
and viability in the county’s housing market and housing value areas:
 1. 	 a target of 35% a ﬀordable housing provision on sites in the Hereford, Hereford Northern and Southern 
Hinterlands, and Kington and West Herefordshire housing value areas;
 2. 	 a target of 40% a ﬀordable housing provision on sites in the Ledbury, Ross and Rural Hinterlands; and 
Northern Rural housing value areas (which includes Bromyard);
 3. 	 a target of 25% a ﬀordable housing provision on sites in the Leominster housing value area. 
Any aﬀordable housing provided under the terms of this policy will be expected to be available in perpetuity for 
those in local housing need. 
5.1.9 	 Aﬀordable housing targets and thresholds have been informed by an E conomic Viability Assessment 2014 
including the likely impact upon overall levels of housing delivery and aim of crea Ɵng mixed communi Ɵes. 
The work on viability involved the de ﬁniƟon of housing value areas which are areas where housing 
values/prices are broadly similar. These can be seen in ﬁgure 5.1. The rela Ɵonship of postcode areas to 
Housing Value Areas can be found in Appendix 7. 
119119 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
 Figure 5.1 - Housing Value Areas 
General Policies
 
120120 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
  
 
 
 
   
  
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
 
    
   
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
    
  
   
   
 
  General Policies
5.1.10 	 The ﬁndings of the Local Housing Market Assessment 2013  (LHMA) have also been taken into account so 
that the resultant policies on a ﬀordable housing are locally relevant and viable. The suppor Ɵ ng evidence 
will be maintained by upda Ɵng the housing market assessment work and viability and housing value areas 
on a three yearly basis. 
5.1.11 	 The LHMA indicates that there remains a signi ﬁcant need for social housing across the county. However 
the viability of housing schemes also has to be taken into account in determining both the required percentage and an appropriate mix of tenures of a ﬀordable housing. Overall target percentages have 
been established for di ﬀerent parts of the county and are set out in Policy H1. In loca Ɵ ons where 
achieving high levels of social rented housing would impact upon the viability of new housing schemes, increasing the percentage of intermediate housing will be considered where the overall a ﬀ ordable 
housing target can be maintained. Evidence to jus Ɵfy this would need to be demonstrated as part of the 
 considera Ɵon of a development proposal. 
5.1.12 	 A supplementary Planning Document will provide addi Ɵonal guidance and set out the details of how the 
aﬀordable housing policies will be implemented. The guidance will include:
 • advice regarding the need for a ﬀ ordable housing;
 • aﬀordable house prices and rents in Herefordshire; 
• the negoƟaƟ on process;
 • securing a ﬀordable housing and controlling occupancy; and
 • contribuƟons to o ﬀ -site provision. 
5.1.13 	 There is a need to ensure that planning policy provides for a mix of a ﬀordable housing to re ﬂ ect diﬀ ering 
household needs and future demographic trends. There are a number of intermediate housing products, including shared ownership, which is likely to be par Ɵcularly appealing to would-be ﬁ rst-Ɵme buyers who 
do not have su ﬃcient funds to access the open market.  
5.1.14 	 The council recognises that the provision of a ﬀordable housing is more di ﬃ  cult in rural areas where o Ōen 
the scale and loca Ɵon of new development is more restricted. Policy H2 enables the provision of 
aﬀordable housing outside of villages, in areas where there is generally a restraint on open market 
housing, so as to help meet a ﬀordable housing needs in rural areas in perpetuity. 
Policy H2 - Rural excep Ɵ on sites 
Proposals for a ﬀordable housing schemes in rural areas may be permi Ʃed on land which would not normally be 
released for housing where:
 1. 	 the proposal could assist in mee Ɵng a proven local need for a ﬀordable housing; and
 2. 	 the aﬀordable housing provided is made available to, and retained in perpetuity for local people in need 
 of a ﬀordable housing; and
 3. 	 the site respects the characteris Ɵcs of its surroundings, demonstrates good design and o ﬀ ers reasonable 
access to a range of services and facili Ɵes normally in a se Ʃ lement iden Ɵﬁed in Policy RA2. 
In order to enable the delivery of a ﬀordable housing some market housing may be permi Ʃed as part of the 
development to subsidise a signi ﬁ cant propor Ɵon of aﬀordable housing provision. However, evidence will be 
required – by way of a ﬁnancial appraisal, in order to demonstrate that the proposed scale of market housing is 
that required for the successful delivery of a ﬀ ordable housing. 
121121 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
     
 
  
  
 
  
   
  
 
   
    
  
   
  
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
 5.1.15 	 Rural excep Ɵon schemes need to take full account of environmental considera Ɵons including design, 
siƟng and materials and avoid sensi Ɵ ve locaƟons where development would not be permi Ʃ ed for 
reasons of landscape or visual impact. Similarly a site’s loca Ɵon should not place addi Ɵonal ﬁnancial 
burdens upon households occupying the scheme such as through isola Ɵon or increased costs in gaining 
access to local services and facili Ɵes, for example schools and employment. Given that these schemes 
may be located in or around small villages, the scale of development should re ﬂect the locality. 
5.1.16 	 NaƟonal planning policy indicates that considera Ɵon should be given to whether allowing some market 
housing on excep Ɵon sites would facilitate the provision of signi ﬁ cant addi Ɵ onal aﬀordable housing to 
meet local needs. Open market housing should be limited to an absolute minimum in such schemes and only in order to make the scheme viable.  The prepara Ɵon of Neighbourhood Development Plans and/or 
other Development Plan Documents will also provide an opportunity to iden Ɵfy sites for a ﬀ ordable 
housing. 
Range and mix of housing 
5.1.17 	 There is a clear need to provide for balanced and sustainable communi Ɵes in Herefordshire. Housing 
aﬀordability issues in the county are compounded by the housing o ﬀer, with a high propor Ɵ on of 
detached housing and proper Ɵes in higher council tax bands. The supply of proper Ɵes which younger 
households might be able to a ﬀord to buy is limited; only 13.5% of housing is in social sector ownership 
(aﬀordable) compared to 19.5% across the West Midlands. General Policies
 
Policy H3 – Ensuring an appropriate range and mix of housing 
ResidenƟal developments should provide a range and mix of housing units which can contribute to the crea Ɵon 
of balanced and inclusive communi Ɵes. In par Ɵcular, on larger housing sites of more than 50 dwellings 
developers will be expected to:
 1. 	 provide a range of house types and sizes to meet the needs of all households, including younger single 
people;
 2. 	 provide housing capable of being adapted for people in the community with addi Ɵonal needs; and
 3. 	 provide housing capable of mee Ɵng the speci ﬁc needs of the elderly popula Ɵ on by:
 -	providing specialist accommoda Ɵon for older people in suitable loca Ɵons;
 -	ensuring that non-specialist new housing is built to take account of the changing needs of an ageing 
populaƟon;
 -	ensuring that developments contain a range of house types, including where appropriate, bungalow 
        accommoda Ɵon. 
The latest Local Housing Market Assessment will provide evidence of the need for an appropriate mix and range of housing types and sizes. 
5.1.18 	 The Local Housing Market Assessment 2013  (LHMA) recommends that planning policies are not overly 
 prescrip Ɵve with regard to requiring a speci ﬁc mix of housing sites. Speci ﬁc policies for the strategic sites 
refer to mee Ɵng needs iden Ɵﬁed in the LHMA. The range of house types provided across the county will 
be monitored to ensure an appropriate mix of housing is provided, however it is recognised that meeƟ ng 
specialist needs is more likely to be achievable on sites of 50 dwellings and above. 
5.1.19 	 The Herefordshire Older People’s Survey 2012  outlined that there is an increasing requirement for new 
housing to cater for older people. Addressing this need will be met through a combina Ɵon of measures 
122122 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
    
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
   
 
 
        
    
  
 
   
 
 
   General Policies
including the provision of specialist accommoda Ɵon in loca Ɵons where the principle of residen Ɵal 
development is accepted; and by ensuring that general housing provision is designed in such a way that enables easy adapta Ɵon to meet the requirements of all households. 
Traveller sites 
5.1.20 	 It is important that the accommoda Ɵon needs and requirements of all sec Ɵons of the community are 
considered in developing planning policies. Government planning policy is increasingly favouring the 
idenƟﬁcaƟon of sites for travellers. Herefordshire Council recognises these requirements which will be 
taken forward in the prepara Ɵon of a new Travellers’ Sites Document. In the interim however, the 
following policy is required in order to consider the merits of planning proposals. 
5.1.21 	 For the purposes of this policy the de ﬁniƟon of “travellers” means “gypsies and travellers” and “travelling 
show people” as de ﬁned in Planning Policy for Traveller Sites, CLG 2015. 
Policy H4 – Traveller sites 
The accommoda Ɵon needs of travellers will be provided for through the prepara Ɵon of a Travellers’ Sites 
Document (DPD) which will include site speci ﬁ c allocaƟons. 
In the absence of an adopted DPD, or where proposals for sites are brought forward on non-allocated land, proposals will be supported where: 
1. 	 sites aﬀord reasonable access to services and facili Ɵes, including health and schools 
2. 	 appropriate screening and landscaping is included within the proposal  to protect local amenity and the 
 environment
 3. 	 they promote peaceful and integrated co-existence between the site and the local community
 4. 	 they enable mixed business and residen Ɵ al accommoda Ɵon (providing for the live-work lifestyle of 
 travellers) 
5. 	 they avoid undue pressure on local infrastructure and services
 6. 	 in rural areas, the size of the site does not dominate nearby se Ʃ led communi Ɵ es and
 7. 	 they are capable of accommoda Ɵng on-site facili Ɵes that meet best prac Ɵce for modern traveller site 
requirements, including play areas, storage, provision for recycling and waste management. 
In rural areas, where there is a case of local need for an a ﬀordable traveller site, but criterion 1 above cannot be 
fulﬁlled, then an excep Ɵon may be made and proposals permi Ʃed, provided such sites can be retained for that 
purpose in perpetuity. 
5.1.22 	 The approach to planning for travellers through the prepara Ɵon of a Travellers’ Sites Document will re ﬂect 
the increased involvement of traveller and se Ʃ led communi Ɵes in determining the loca Ɵ on of 
development. Traveller sites include those considered necessary to meet the residen Ɵal needs of gypsies 
and travellers who will remain in a loca Ɵon permanently or for substan Ɵal periods, transit sites for those 
moving through the area as well as plots for travelling show people. 
5.1.23 	 The Travellers’ Sites Document, which is programmed in the Council’s Local Development Scheme (2015), 
 for adop Ɵon in spring 2016, will include the following: 
•	   an assessment of current need for permanent residen Ɵal pitches with an indica Ɵon of the process 
          for upda Ɵng need on a regular basis; 
123123 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
       
       
          
 
        
       
 
        
  
          
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
    
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  •	   pitch targets for travellers; 
•	   deliverable sites for residen Ɵal pitches for the period 2014-19 to set against targets; 
•	 idenƟﬁcaƟon of broad loca Ɵons for further developable residen Ɵal sites for travellers over the 
period 2019-2031;
•	 idenƟﬁcaƟon of need for, and approach to, the provision of transit sites for the plan period; 
•	   considera Ɵon of the need for, and approach to, provision for travelling showpersons within the 
          county for the plan period; 
•	   considera Ɵon of the need for a rural excep Ɵons policy to enable sites to be brought forward solely 
as aﬀordable gypsy and traveller sites; and 
•	   considera Ɵon of support for the authorisa Ɵon of long-term uno ﬃcial sites where they meet the 
          criteria in policy H4 above or the making available of alterna Ɵve provision where they are lost for 
          whatever reason. 
5.1.24 	 A pitch is de ﬁned as the ’area of land on a gypsy and traveller caravan site developed for a single family.’ 
A plot means a pitch on a “travelling showpeople” site (o Ōen called a “yard”). This terminology 
diﬀ erenƟates between residen Ɵal pitches for “gypsies and travellers” and mixed-use plots for “travelling 
showpeople”, which may/will need to incorporate space or to be split to allow for the storage of 
 equipment. 
5.1.25 	 As at January 2015*, there are 114 authorised residen Ɵal pitches within Herefordshire with a further 21 
pitches on unauthorised, but tolerated sites. Numbers of caravans on these sites have ﬂuctuated over the 
past two years from 148 to 161 and averaging 157. Some pitches accommodate more than one caravan. 
* Caravan count conducted by Herefordshire Council (January 2015) 
5.1.26 	 The private sector may need to provide for further residen Ɵal site needs un Ɵl the Travellers’ Sites 
Document is adopted in 2016 and policy H4 sets out the basis upon which planning permission will be 
granted during this period. The criteria in this policy may also apply when the de ﬁned need for residen Ɵal 
gypsy and traveller sites has been met, yet further need is accepted.  
5.1.27 	 In the same way that a rural excep Ɵon policy is applied to housing development, rural excep Ɵ on sites 
can also be applied to a ﬀordable traveller sites and the Travellers’ Sites Document will consider this issue. 
A rural excep Ɵon site policy enables small sites to be used, speci ﬁcally for a ﬀordable traveller sites in 
perpetuity, in small rural communi Ɵes, that would not normally be used for traveller sites. 
5.1.28 	 The assessment of need for transit sites or plots for travelling show people will be reviewed as part of the 
work for the Travellers’ Sites Document. Should any need arise in the interim; proposals will need to
 sa Ɵsfy the criteria set out in Policy H4.    
5.1.29 	 In bringing proposals forward it will be important to ensure that sites are appropriately landscaped in 
order to limit their visual impact and should provide access to local facili Ɵes and services such as shops, 
schools and healthcare. It is also important to recognise that provision is included to meet the live-work nature of gypsies and travellers and adequate provision is made for play space for children. 
Social and community facili Ɵes 
5.1.30 	 The Core Strategy aims to achieve sustainable communi Ɵes across Herefordshire and improve the 
well-being of its people. This requires an e ﬀecƟve balance between the provision of new housing and 
employment and providing the social and community facili Ɵes required to support growth. There is a 
need to support and seek improvements to local services and facili Ɵ es; parƟcularly in rural areas where General Policies
 
124124 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
    
  
   
  
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
    
  
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 General Policies
 facili Ɵes have been in decline since the post-war period. Less prosperous groups in remote rural areas are 
arguably in a worse posi Ɵon than similar income groups in towns, because their access to services, 
employment, leisure and shopping facili Ɵes is severely limited. For people living in the rural areas, access 
 to essen Ɵ al faciliƟes and services depends on access to a car or living close to a public transport route. 
5.1.31 	 The lack of local services and facili Ɵes in rural areas and their increasing concentra Ɵon in the towns has 
 been iden Ɵﬁed as a key issue in Herefordshire. Included within the ambi Ɵons of the Herefordshire 
Community Strategy, are the reten Ɵon and improvement of services and facili Ɵes and the provision of 
excellent training and learning opportuni Ɵes - for people of all ages within the county. 
5.1.32 	 Social and community facili Ɵes can be de ﬁned as physical facili Ɵes for di ﬀerent individuals and 
 communi Ɵes, which are provided by a range of organisa Ɵons (public, private and voluntary). They provide 
for the health, welfare, social, educa Ɵonal, spiritual, recrea Ɵonal, leisure and cultural needs of the 
community. These facili Ɵes play an important role in the development of a vibrant community by crea Ɵng 
a sense of place and providing a place for people to meet and interact socially. They also o ﬀ er services 
that are essen Ɵal for educa Ɵon, health and well-being; and support community cohesion and bene ﬁ t the 
general quality of life of residents. 
5.1.33 	 Social and community facili Ɵes can include: public services, community centres and public halls, arts and 
 cultural facili Ɵes including theatres, public art and heritage centres; policing and criminal jus Ɵce 
 facili Ɵes, ﬁre and ambulance services, health and educa Ɵ on faciliƟes including GP surgeries and NHS 
walk-in centres; public houses, local shops, public toilets, youth centres, social care facili Ɵes including day 
centres and child care facili Ɵes; places of worship, and services provided by the community and voluntary 
sector - for example scout and guide premises. 
Policy SC1 – Social and community facili Ɵes 
Development proposals which protect, retain or enhance exis Ɵng social and community infrastructure or ensure 
that new facili Ɵes are available as locally as possible will be supported. Such proposals should be in or close to 
seƩlements, have considered the poten Ɵal for co-loca Ɵon of facili Ɵes and where possible be safely accessible by 
foot, by cycle and public transport.  
New development that creates a need for addi Ɵonal social and community facili Ɵes that cannot be met through 
exisƟng social facili Ɵes - will be expected to meet the addi Ɵonal requirements through new, or extension of 
exisƟng, provision or by developer contribuƟons which meet the relevant tests of paragraph 204 of the NPPF .  
Proposals involving the provision or expansion of social and community facili Ɵes will be expected to provide 
publicly accessible toilets (including facili Ɵes for disabled people and baby changing). 
ExisƟ ng faciliƟes will be retained, unless it can be demonstrated that an appropriate alterna Ɵve facility is 
available, or can be provided to meet the needs of the community a ﬀected; or it can be shown that the facility is 
no longer required, viable or is no longer ﬁt for purpose; and where appropriate, it has been vacant and 
marketed for community use without success. Viable alterna Ɵ ve faciliƟes must be equivalent to those they 
replace, in terms of size, quality and accessibility. The provision or improvement of higher educa Ɵ on faciliƟes and the con Ɵnuing enhancement of exis Ɵ ng, or 
provision of new, training and skills facili Ɵes will be ac Ɵ vely promoted. 
125125 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
   
 
   
 
  
   
  
    
 
 
  
   
  
 
  
  
    
  
  
 
 
  
  
    
   
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
   5.1.34 	 PopulaƟon growth will generate a range of service needs throughout Herefordshire, par Ɵcularly 
concentrated within the major growth loca Ɵons, and it is essen Ɵal that these service needs are supported 
by appropriate levels of social and community infrastructure. This should come forward either as an 
integral part of the development (adaptable, mixed use and made available at an early stage), or by way of a developer contribu Ɵon/Community Infrastructure Levy monies which meet the relevant tests of 
paragraph 204 of the NPPF. 
5.1.35 	 Notwithstanding the diverse spa Ɵal requirements of local clubs, socie Ɵes and faith communi Ɵ es, the 
council is moving towards the co-loca Ɵon of community premises such as mee Ɵng halls, places of worship 
and schools - for example, a mix of community uses/resources at one loca Ɵon to encourage e ﬃ  cient 
use of space and integrated provision to meet the needs of all sectors of our community. The council recognises however, that whilst shared space will be a suitable way forward for some, there are many who require their own space for acƟ viƟes, including worship and teaching. 
Loss of exis Ɵ ng faciliƟes 
5.1.36 	 Local retail premises, village halls, churches and public houses, par Ɵcularly in the rural areas are o Ōen 
at the heart of the community and provide a place for the local community to meet, to use func Ɵon 
rooms, to socialise and to ful ﬁl the day to day convenience needs of the local community. In some 
 loca Ɵons it is becoming increasingly di ﬃcult to retain services, shops and public houses; however it is 
essenƟal that support is given to enable businesses to con Ɵnue to serve the local community. In such 
 cases, ﬂexibility should be given to enable local shops, services or public houses to diversify into ancillary 
retail and tourism opportuni Ɵes or community ownership through the ‘Community Right to Bid’ process. 
This ﬂexibility may enable the business to con Ɵnue to serve the local community. Where a business is 
shown to be no longer viable, the ﬁ rst alterna Ɵve should be to inves Ɵgate whether an alterna Ɵve 
community use is possible. In order to demonstrate that alterna Ɵve community uses have been 
considered, evidence of marke Ɵng for a period of at least 12 months should be provided with any 
proposals involving the loss of community facili Ɵes. 
EducaƟon and skills 
5.1.37 	 Some of the main socio-economic outcomes of the Sustainable Community Strategy are to improve 
 educa Ɵ onal aƩainment, increase the number of young people entering educa Ɵon or training at 16 and 
create a highly skilled workforce. These are also wider regenera Ɵ on objec Ɵves of various agencies and 
important components of delivering the economic vision for Herefordshire. The council is therefore exploring the poten Ɵal for a university gateway at Hereford in order to provide opportuni Ɵes for local 
people to access jobs in growth sectors, including green technologies and help the city become a magnet for businesses in knowledge intensive industries. In doing so, the skills of the current labour market will be improved and the knowledge and research infrastructure aligned with par Ɵ cular growth 
sectors of the economy. 
Culture 
5.1.38 	 The council also acknowledges the contribu Ɵon that culture can make to the economy. Culture is 
fundamental to the character of Herefordshire, with na Ɵonal and local research showing that it is 
important to people, and has the poten Ɵal to make us happier and healthier; as well as providing 
opportuni Ɵes for social interac Ɵon and learning. However, the rural nature of Herefordshire, with its 
 dispersed communi Ɵes and limited public transport, means that access to cultural facili Ɵes can be 
diﬃcult. One of the aims of Herefordshire’s Cultural Strategy 2008-18 is to facilitate easy and a ﬀ ordable 
access to high quality cultural ac ƟviƟes and facili Ɵes for all. General Policies
 
126126 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
   
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
   
  
  
   
  
  
   
  
   
  
       
  
        
       
   
 
   
 General Policies
Reducing the need to travel 
5.1.39 	 The provision of community facili Ɵes in local areas across the county will ensure be Ʃer access for people, 
which in turn reduces the need to travel; while the co-loca Ɵon of some facili Ɵes and services will help 
to ensure the e ﬀecƟve use of resources, and encourage joined-up service delivery and shared 
maintenance and management costs. In this respect, the council aims to support the delivery of new 
services and facili Ɵes, through partnership working with service providers and the local community; and 
through development opportuni Ɵes that arise from local authority and private sector regenera Ɵon 
projects. Furthermore, the council is working with local communi Ɵes to develop Neighbourhood 
Development Plans, to ensure that community needs and priori Ɵes are matched to the services that are 
oﬀered in their local areas. 
Provision of public toilets 
5.1.40 	 A lack of toilet facili Ɵes can have an impact on the lives of older people, parents and carers with young 
children, disabled people and people with chronic health problems; by preven Ɵng or restric Ɵ ng their 
opportuni Ɵes to take part in everyday ac ƟviƟes like shopping and leisure pursuits. The council is 
developing a community toilet scheme to enable local businesses like pubs, restaurants and shops, to 
work together with the council to make more clean, safe and accessible toilets available to the public. 
Co-locaƟon of services and facili Ɵes 
5.1.41 	 Co-locaƟng public and community services in shared buildings or on shared sites provides a number of 
bene ﬁts for both the community, as users of the services and for the council and its partners, as providers 
of services. The popula Ɵon of Herefordshire is forecast to con Ɵnue to grow, with an ageing popula Ɵon 
structure and this will put increasing pressure on exis Ɵng services. At the same Ɵme, the current 
economic climate and compe Ɵng demands for space and resources means that a di ﬀ erent approach 
 towards loca Ɵng services and facili Ɵes may be needed, especially if we want to ensure that infrastructure 
is provided in the most sustainable and accessible loca Ɵons in the county. In prac Ɵce this could mean 
linking nurseries, schools and colleges; widening the range of health and social care services available at health centres, or by providing educa Ɵon, training or IT services in libraries. 
Open space, sports and recrea Ɵon 
5.1.42 	 Open space, sports and recrea Ɵ on faciliƟes are an essen Ɵal part of sustainable communi Ɵes. They need 
to stand the test of Ɵme, be where people want to live, and enable people to meet their spor Ɵ ng and 
 recrea Ɵ onal aspira Ɵons and poten Ɵal. Planning policies for open space, sport and recrea Ɵon are  
fundamental to delivering the broader objec Ɵves of achieving: 
•	   networks of accessible, high quality open spaces and sport and recrea Ɵ on faciliƟes in both urban 
          and rural areas, which meet the needs of residents and visitors, are ﬁt for purpose and are 
          economically and environmentally sustainable; 
•	   an appropriate balance between new provision and the enhancement of exis Ɵng provision; and 
•	   reasonable certainty for developers and land owners in rela Ɵon to the requirements and 
          expecta Ɵons of local planning authori Ɵes in respect of open space, sport and recrea Ɵ on provision. 
5.1.43 	 Herefordshire is fortunate to have a broad range of open space, sports and recrea Ɵ on faciliƟes which are 
both in public and private ownership. Open space, sports and recrea Ɵon typology de ﬁniƟons include (but 
are not limited to) formal and informal parks and gardens, school sports grounds, public rights of way, 
127127 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
  
 
   
  
   
 
  
  
  
 
 
       
   
  
   
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
   allotments, semi-natural areas (including orchards), sports playing ﬁelds, cemeteries and churchyards, 
amenity areas, indoor sports halls, children’s play facili Ɵes, village halls, civic spaces, country parks, green 
infrastructure corridors and canals. 
5.1.44 	 Unfortunately, not all communi Ɵes within Herefordshire are su ﬃciently catered for in terms of quan Ɵ ty, 
quality and accessibility of open space; so it is essen Ɵal that new developments within the county meet 
the needs of new communi Ɵes as well as protect and enhance exis Ɵ ng faciliƟes which are valued by 
 exis Ɵ ng communi Ɵes. 
Policy OS1 - Requirement for open space, sports and recrea Ɵ on faciliƟes 
The provision of appropriate open space, sports and recrea Ɵ on faciliƟes will arise in the following proposals for 
planning applica Ɵons: 
1. 	 all new residen Ɵal dwellings; or
 2. 	 retail and employment proposals where there is need to provide informal areas of amenity greenspace 
for the use of employees and visitors; and
 3. 	 residenƟ al insƟtuƟons, student accommoda Ɵon, assembly and leisure, hotels or hostels. 
5.1.45 	 The need for open space, sports and recrea Ɵ onal facili Ɵes will be considered on a site by site basis. Open 
space, sports and recrea Ɵ on faciliƟes will need to be placed on site and be integral to the func Ɵ oning of 
the development. Oﬀ  -site contribu Ɵons will be sought, where appropriate, on an equally bene ﬁ cial basis 
for the local community and will include provision for appropriate maintenance (as de ﬁned by the local 
planning authority) of the open space, sports or recrea Ɵ on facility. 
5.1.46 	 For employment and/or retail proposals, formal open space, sports and recrea Ɵ on faciliƟ es (see 
Glossary) will not be required. However appropriate informal areas of amenity greenspace may be required for the use of employees and visitors for breaks, and will be assessed on a site by site basis. If there is a nearby open space within safe walking distance which would cater for the needs of the employees, a contribu Ɵon of the equivalent cost of providing the on-site area as iden Ɵﬁed above to
 improve exis Ɵ ng oﬀ-site provision, may also be considered. Users of residen Ɵ al insƟtuƟons e.g. care 
homes will also require the provision of on-site amenity greenspace, par Ɵcularly where the facility hosts 
families and children. For residen Ɵ al accommoda Ɵon providing for the needs of people with severe 
mobility impairments, a reduc Ɵon of required provision will need to be provided (on a pro-rata basis) 
according to the needs of the residents using the accommoda Ɵon. General Policies
 
Policy OS2 – Mee Ɵng open space, sports and recrea Ɵ on needs 
In order to meet the needs of the community, provision for open space, sports and recrea Ɵ on faciliƟes will be 
sought, where appropriate, taking into account the following principles:
 1. 	 any new development must be in accordance with all applicable set standards of quan Ɵty, quality and 
accessibility as de ﬁ ned; and
 2. 	 provision of open space, sports and recrea Ɵ on faciliƟes should be located on-site unless an o ﬀ -site or 
parƟ al oﬀ -site contribu Ɵon would result in an equally bene ﬁcial enhancement to an exis Ɵng open space, 
sports and/or recrea Ɵon facility which is of bene ﬁt to the local community. 
128128 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
   
  
  
    
  
  
      
  
 
 
  
  
  
 General Policies
5.1.47 	 In order to iden Ɵ fy shorƞalls against a local standard of provision and set out future requirements, 
Herefordshire Council has undertaken a local assessment of exis Ɵng provision of open space, sports and 
 recrea Ɵon needs which is in accordance with the Na Ɵonal Planning Policy Framework, and standards set 
by relevant organisa Ɵons such as Fields in Trust, Sport England and Natural England. The council is 
updaƟng its evidence base in order to incorporate local standards into either a supplementary planning 
document, other Development Plan Document and/or Neighbourhood Development Plans. This evidence base will be used to secure appropriate planning contribu Ɵons to aid development of open space, sports 
 and recrea Ɵ on faciliƟes throughout Herefordshire.    
5.1.48 	 Wherever possible, the new provision of open space, sports and recrea Ɵ on faciliƟes should help 
strengthen the link with green infrastructure corridors. New provision which repairs any previous 
 fragmenta Ɵon or isola Ɵon of sites as part of green infrastructure corridors will be looked upon favourably. 
Policy OS3 – Loss of open space, sports or recrea Ɵ on faciliƟes 
In determining the appropriateness of proposals which results in the loss of an open space, sports or recrea Ɵon 
facility, the following principles will be taken into account:
 1. 	 clear evidence that the open space, sports or recrea Ɵon facility is surplus to the applicable quan ƟtaƟve
 standard; 
2. 	 the loss of the open space, sports or recrea Ɵon facility results in an equally bene ﬁcial replacement or 
 enhanced exis Ɵng facility for the local community; 
3. 	 the loss of the open space, sports and recrea Ɵon facility is for the purpose of providing an ancillary 
development which improves the func Ɵoning, useability or viability of the open space, sport and 
 recrea Ɵon use, e.g. changing rooms, toilets, grandstand accommoda Ɵon, assembly and func Ɵ on uses;
 4. 	 the loss of the open space, sports or recrea Ɵon facility will not result in the fragmenta Ɵon or isola Ɵ on of 
a site which is part of a green infrastructure corridor. 
5.1.49 	 Any proposals resul Ɵng in a loss of an open space, sports or recrea Ɵon facility should be able to clearly 
demonstrate that the facility is not only surplus currently, but taking into account the populaƟ  on needs 
of the community over the plan period. Proposals which also lead to the ‘thinning out,’ isola Ɵ on or 
 fragmenta Ɵon of green infrastructure networks will also be resisted. “Equally bene ﬁcial replacements” of 
open space refers to quan Ɵty and quality in a suitable loca Ɵon. 
5.1.50 	 In some cases, the loss of an open space sports and recrea Ɵon facility may be appropriate where a 
proposal is for the purpose of providing ancillary open space, sports and recrea Ɵon uses which are 
necessary to enable the con Ɵnued viability, func Ɵonality or useability of the facility. Ancillary facili Ɵ es will 
also need to meet applicable policies regarding appropriateness and si Ɵng of the development. 
5.1.51 	 Open space, sports and recrea Ɵ on faciliƟes not only bene ﬁt the health and well-being of the community, 
but can also bring great bene ﬁts to exis Ɵng and new species-rich habitats suppor Ɵng local biodiversity. 
A number of open space, sports and recrea Ɵ on faciliƟes are located in green infrastructure corridors and 
act as important green links throughout the county. It is therefore important that we keep providing a range of open space areas such as semi-natural areas alongside open space, sports and recrea Ɵon 
 facili Ɵes to support their use and protec Ɵon for future genera Ɵons to enjoy. 
129129 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
 
 
 
      
        
      
 
       
 
      
  
     
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
   
   
 
  
 
  Traﬃ  c management 
5.1.52 	 In order to deliver the strategic objecƟves outlined in Policy SS4 in the Spa Ɵal Strategy, development 
proposals will be expected to demonstrate how they have incorporated the tra ﬃ  c management and 
safety criteria set out in Policy MT1. 
5.1.53 	 Herefordshire Council’s Local Transport Plan 2013-2015  (LTP) de ﬁnes the following road hierarchy across 
 the county:
•	   the strategic highway network - comprising the M50, A49, A465, and A40.  The strategic highway 
          links Hereford with the market towns and provides the principal routes into and throughout the 
          county;  
•	   main distributor roads which comprise mainly A class routes that supplement the strategic network; 
•	   secondary distributor roads which comprise mainly B and C class roads that link movements to and 
          from the main distributor network; and 
•	   local distributor roads that facilitate movement between rural se Ʃlements and parishes. 
Policy MT1 – Tra ﬃc management, highway safety and promo Ɵ ng acƟ  ve travel 
Development proposals should incorporate the following principle requirements covering movement and transporta Ɵon: 
1. 	 demonstrate that the strategic and local highway network can absorb the tra ﬃc impacts of the 
development without adversely a ﬀecƟng the safe and e ﬃ  cient ﬂow of tra ﬃc on the network or that 
 tra ﬃc impacts can be managed to acceptable levels to reduce and mi Ɵgate any adverse impacts from 
the development;  
2. 	 promote and, where possible, incorporate integrated transport connec Ɵons and suppor Ɵng 
infrastructure (depending on the nature and loca Ɵon of the site), including access to services by means 
other than private motorised transport;
 3. 	 encourage acƟve travel behaviour to reduce numbers of short distance car journeys through the use of 
travel plans and other promo Ɵonal and awareness raising ac ƟviƟes;
 4. 	 ensure that developments are designed and laid out to achieve safe entrance  and exit, have appropriate
 opera Ɵonal and manoeuvring space, accommodate provision for all modes of transport, the needs of 
people with disabili Ɵes and provide safe access for the emergency services;
 5. 	 protect exis Ɵng local and long distance footways, cycleways and bridleways unless an alterna Ɵ ve route 
of at least equal u Ɵlity value can be used, and facilitate improvements to exis Ɵng or provide new 
 connecƟons to these routes, especially where such schemes have been iden Ɵﬁed in the Local Transport 
Plan and/or Infrastructure Delivery Plan; and
 6. 	 have regard to with both the council’s Highways Development Design Guide and cycle and vehicle 
parking standards as prescribed in the Local Transport Plan - having regard to the loca Ɵon of the site and 
need to promote sustainable travel choices. 
Where tra ﬃc management measures are introduced they should be designed in a way which respects the 
character of the surrounding area including its landscape character. Where appropriate, the principle of shared spaces will be encouraged. General Policies
 
5.1.54 Development proposals should not inhibit the safe and eﬃ   cient ﬂow of the strategic network. The use of 
controls on access can posi Ɵvely contribute to the integra Ɵon of sustainable modes of transport (walking, 
130130 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
    
 
 
  
   
 
      
        
        
   
  
      
        
       
      
         
  
       
  
       
 
       General Policies
cycling and public transport), and development proposals will be expected to demonstrate how the criteria in Policy MT1 have been incorporated within the design of the scheme in order to increase ac Ɵve 
travel across the county. 
5.1.55 	 Alongside the above, development proposals should have regard to the council’s LTP while promo Ɵng 
the principles set out in Herefordshire Council’s Highway Development Design Guide for New Developments and the Department for Transport’s Manual for Streets and Manual for Streets 2 – Wider 
 Applica Ɵon of the Principles (2010) or subsequent documenta Ɵ on. Considera Ɵon will also be given to the 
Department of Transport Circular 02/2013 and Design Manual for roads and bridges or subsequent 
 documenta Ɵon. 
5.1.56 	 Traﬃc management schemes should respect the local area including landscape character by providing an 
appropriate design solu Ɵ on, siƟng of infrastructure and use of materials as well as taking opportuni Ɵes 
to improve the quality of the public realm as part of an integrated approach. This may include 
opportuni Ɵes for ra Ɵonalising the exis Ɵng infrastructure and ‘de-clu Ʃering’ the streetscape to the bene ﬁt 
of its appearance as well as func Ɵoning. 
5.1.57 	 In appropriate loca Ɵons, the use of shared space can provide an approach which can reduce delays and 
allow pedestrians to move more freely within the space. Shared space is a design approach that seeks to change the way streets operate by reducing the dominance of motor vehicles, primarily through lower speeds and encouraging drivers to behave more accommoda Ɵngly towards pedestrians and other 
vulnerable road users. 
Delivery and monitoring of social progress policies 
5.1.58 	 These policies will be delivered by: 
•	   the development management process; 
•	   prepara Ɵon and implementa Ɵon of the Hereford Area Plan, Neighbourhood Development Plans and 
          other Development Plan Documents; and 
•	   developer contribuƟons and the Community Infrastructure levy. 
Social Progress Monitoring Indicators 
5.1.59 	 The following indicators (in addi Ɵon to those set out at the end of the spa Ɵal strategy) will be used to 
monitor the e ﬀecƟveness of the policies through the Annual Monitoring Report: 
•	   life expectancy of residents – O ﬃ  ce for Na Ɵ onal StaƟsƟ cs (ONS); 
•	 aﬀordable housing comple Ɵons split by social and intermediate occupancy; 
•	   rural excep Ɵon site comple Ɵon; 
•	   house type and number of bedrooms (aspira Ɵonal);
•	   assessment of traveller site provision against the need iden Ɵﬁed in the council’s Assessment of  
          Accommoda Ɵon Needs of Gypsies and Travellers; 
•	   recommenda Ɵons of the Open Space Study and Playing Pitch Assessment which includes surveys of 
          open space, sports and recrea Ɵ on faciliƟes to assess useability, supply, access and maintenance; 
•	   number of planning applica Ɵons proposing the loss of an open space, sports or recrea Ɵ on faciliƟes; 
and 
•	   number of planning applica Ɵons proposing new open space, sports and recrea Ɵ on faciliƟes. 
131131 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
 
  
 
  
   
  
  
  
   5.2 Economic prosperity 
IntroducƟon 
5.2.1 	 Ensuring a strong and diverse economy will help give people in Herefordshire more opportuni Ɵ es for 
work within the county (which could reduce the number of people needing to travel outside of it), retain 
a skilled labour force, par Ɵcularly in rural areas, as well as help to reduce carbon emissions. Herefordshire 
is currently very reliant on agricultural and manufacturing industries being a centre for food and drink 
 produc Ɵon and a home to large manufacturing opera Ɵons. However, it is acknowledged that although 
we need to help strengthen these industries, that generally these types of industries are in decline and 
that some employment uses will need to diversify, par Ɵcularly to environmental technologies, knowledge, 
tourism and service based industries in order to address this economic imbalance and enable the county to grow into the future. 
5.2.2 	 The following policies relate to the theme of economic prosperity and include policies for the provision 
of employment land; safeguarding exis Ɵng employment land; home working, tourism, town centres and 
primary shopping areas and frontages. They supplement the Spa Ɵal Strategy policy SS5 and the 
Place-Shaping policies. In par Ɵcular, they address relevant Core Strategy objec Ɵves set out in the spa Ɵal 
 strategy sec Ɵon. 
General Policies
 
132132 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
     
  
   
 
    
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
   
   
  
   
  
   
  
    
    
    
      General PoliciesPolicy E1 - Employment provision 
The focus for new employment provision in Herefordshire is to provide a range of loca Ɵons, types and sizes of 
employment buildings, land and o ﬃces to meet the needs of the local economy. Larger employment proposals 
will be directed to the strategic employment sites of Hereford, the market towns and rural industrial estates where appropriate. 
Development proposals which enhance employment provision and help diversify the economy of Herefordshire 
will be encouraged where: 
• the proposal is appropriate in terms of its connec Ɵvity, scale, design and size; 
• the proposal makes be Ʃer use of previously developed land or buildings; 
• the proposal is an appropriate extension to strengthen or diversify an exis Ɵng business opera Ɵon; 
• the proposal provides for opportuni Ɵes for new o ﬃce development in appropriate loca Ɵons. 
The provision of viable live/work units as part of mixed use developments will also be encouraged. Provision of employment land 
5.2.3 	 In line with the objec Ɵves of the Na Ɵonal Planning Policy Framework, building a strong and compeƟƟ ve 
economy is an objec Ɵve that resonates in each of the policies concerning economic prosperity. Over the 
plan period, Herefordshire will con Ɵnue to diversify employment opportuni Ɵes, encourage the expansion 
of local business and reduce the need for travel. Already many employment areas in Herefordshire u Ɵlise 
links with the A49 trunk road, including sites in Hereford city centre, Ross on Wye, Leominster, Marlbrook and Moreton-on-Lugg. There will be a greater emphasis on extending and enlarging enterprise parks in Hereford and the market towns and allowing more ﬂexibility in the rural areas for employment 
development such as home working and live/work units. 
5.2.4 	 It is important that plan policies enable new, sustainable provision of employment land in loca Ɵ ons and 
of a scale that is appropriate. Whilst Herefordshire has a rela Ɵvely high employment rate, it is important 
to make sure that adequate opportuni Ɵes exist to improve the quality and range of employment 
available, so addressing the issue of low wages in the county. 
5.2.5 	 A major element of the strategy for genera Ɵng new and be Ʃer paid jobs will be the provision of a 
deliverable range of land supply in appropriate loca Ɵons and in the right amounts. ‘Employment land’ in 
this instance refers to those uses falling within the planning B use classes, that is, o ﬃ  ces (B1), 
manufacturing (B2) and warehousing and distribu Ɵon (B8). In addi Ɵon, employment land is considered an 
 appropriate loca Ɵon to accommodate waste facili Ɵes and similar sui-generis employment uses. 
5.2.6 	 The following is a summary of the main new and exis Ɵng strategic loca Ɵons which will provide for local 
and inward investment and contribute to the future employment provision in the county over the plan period. There is also poten Ɵal for smaller sites to come forward throughout the plan period away from 
these strategic loca Ɵons, which will also be encouraged where appropriate. 
Hereford 
5.2.7 	 The city of Hereford will con Ɵnue to provide a large propor Ɵon of the county’s employment supply. 
133133 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  Hereford Enterprise Zone (HEZ) 
The Rotherwas industrial estate is located south-east of Hereford and is over 120 hectares (ha) in size and has 
over 125 companies opera Ɵng within it. 
Wesƞields Trading Estate 
The Wesƞields trading estate is a 25 ha site located in the northern part of Hereford. 
Three Elms Trading Estate 
Three Elms Trading Estate is located north of Hereford and occupies 3 ha of land. Holmer Road, Hereford The industrial precinct on Holmer Road is located to the north of Hereford and is approximately 16 ha in size. Market towns 5.2.8 	 The market towns of Leominster, Bromyard, Kington, Ross-on-Wye and Ledbury will also con Ɵ nue to 
support employment development through the rest of the county at exis Ɵng and/or new strategic 
employment sites, which will be the primary loca Ɵon of a range of employment premises providing a 
series of enterprise hubs to complement the Hereford Enterprise Zone. The main strategic employment 
 loca Ɵons in the market towns are as follows: 
Leominster Enterprise Park, Leominster 5.2.9 	 The Leominster Enterprise Park is located to the south-east of Leominster and is designated by the 
Employment Land Study 2012  as of ‘best quality.’ The site is 15 ha in size and caters for B1, B2 and B8 
uses. It is envisaged to be fully developed during the ﬁrst half of the plan period. Given housing growth 
in Leominster, it is likely that during the second half of the plan period, an addi Ɵonal 5-10 ha of 
employment land will be required by extending the Leominster Enterprise Park to the south. 
Southern Avenue, Leominster 5.2.10 	 This site is adjacent to the Leominster Enterprise Park and is 33 ha in size and is rated by the Employment 
Land Study 2012  as ‘good.’ The site has limited opportuni Ɵes to provide addi Ɵ onal employment 
opportuni Ɵes, however it is a signiﬁcant contributor to exis Ɵng employment provision. 
Land between LiƩle Marcle Road and Ross Road, Ledbury 5.2.11 	 This locaƟon is to the south-west of Ledbury and will comprise approximately 12 ha of employment land 
which will come forward to support the exis Ɵ ng popula Ɵon and proposed growth of Ledbury. The land 
 adjoins exis Ɵng employment land and is rated as ‘moderate’ and will cater for a mix of employment uses, 
parƟcularly smaller based business which may help to reduce the need to travel for the local community. 
Model Farm, Ross-on-Wye 5.2.12 	 This site, carried forward from the Unitary Development Plan 2007, is approximately 10 ha in size and is 
located to the east of Ross-on-Wye. The site is envisaged to deliver innova Ɵve knowledge based General Policies
 
134134 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
   
 
  
 
  
  
   
   
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 General Policies
industries and a high quality mix of B1, B2 and B8 employment. The site has excellent access to the A40/ A49 and is classed as ‘good.’ 
Rural areas 
5.2.13 	 The areas outside of market towns are also supported for con Ɵnuing economic growth, par Ɵ cularly in 
areas which allow for the diversi ﬁcaƟon of uses either through strengthening food and drink produc Ɵon, 
adding to new environmental technologies or those that allow for home based start-up businesses. Policy 
RA6 and its explanatory text guide employment development within these areas. 
5.2.14 	 There is however a small number of larger employment loca Ɵons outside of Hereford and the market 
towns which will also con Ɵnue to contribute to the provision of Herefordshire’s employment needs, 
including: 
Moreton Business Park, Moreton-on-Lugg 
5.2.15 	 Moreton Business Park is a large employment site of 60 ha which is located on the A49 between Hereford 
and Leominster. The business park includes a mineral extrac Ɵon site and other employment units which 
contain all employment classes. However it has recently seen an increase of B1 o ﬃce use and B8 storage 
 and distribu Ɵon uses. There is also possibility to enhance rail infrastructure into the site for business use. 
The site is rated as ‘good’ with poten Ɵal to be rated as ‘best.’ 
Safeguarding exis Ɵng employment land 
5.2.16 	 ‘Best and Good’ quality employment land in the county, as de ﬁned in the Employment Land Study 2012
 will con Ɵnue to be safeguarded for employment genera Ɵng uses and general industry. In circumstances 
where other employment land and sites are no longer viable, su ﬃ  cient jus ƟﬁcaƟon and evidence will 
need to be submi Ʃed - for example structural surveys demonstra Ɵng that the building is not ﬁ t for 
 conƟnued employment use, and redevelopment of the site for employment use is not viable or feasible. 
 Where possible, ﬂexibility will be given to enable the business the opportunity to diversify to other 
ancillary and complementary uses to enable the business to con Ɵnue. Uses such as ﬁtness centres, child 
care centres, residen Ɵal and retail uses are generally not appropriate to be located within an employment 
site, unless they serve for the day-to day convenience needs of the site’s employees and any residen Ɵal 
use is part of a live/work scheme. 
5.2.17 	 It is important that a range of employment land con Ɵnues to be available within Herefordshire. Means by 
which this can be achieved include: safeguarding exis Ɵng supply, enabling extensions to exis Ɵng 
employment land and the development of addi Ɵonal employment land where appropriate. 
Policy E2 – Redevelopment of exis Ɵng employment land and buildings 
Employment land and buildings rated as ‘best’ and ‘good’ using the methodology in the Employment Land Study 2012 (or successor document) will be safeguarded from redevelopment to other non-employment uses. 
Proposals which would result in the loss of employment land rated as ‘moderate’ will be permi Ʃ ed where:
 1. 	 the development of the site for other uses would not result in an overall shortage in the quality and  
quanƟty of employment land supply in the area; or
 
135135 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
    
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
 
   
     
   
   Policy E2 – Redevelopment of exis Ɵng employment land and buildings con Ɵnued
 2. 	 there would be a net improvement in amenity through the removal of a non-conforming use from within 
 a residen Ɵal area, and where an alterna Ɵve use would o ﬀer amenity bene ﬁts. For sites in exis Ɵng 
employment use, considera Ɵon should also be given to the ability to relocate exis Ɵng occupiers where 
this is necessary; or
 3. 	 the proposal would not result in a piecemeal loss of employment land where there is poten Ɵal for a 
more comprehensive scheme;
 
In all cases:
 -	 the viability of the development proposal must be con ﬁrmed through a comprehensive assessment; and
 -	 there must be evidence of appropriate and acƟ  ve marke Ɵng of at least 12 months for a change of use of 
a B Class employment use and it can be shown that this markeƟng has been unsuccessful. 
The provision of ancillary and complementary uses which help meet the day-to-day needs of employment sites 
and their employees and improve the sites’ a Ʃ racƟveness to businesses, will be permi Ʃed where they are of a 
scale which does not impact on the overall supply of employment land. 
5.2.18 	 Policy E2 seeks to protect the best quality employment land in Herefordshire from being lost to other 
uses. The Employment Land Study 2012 undertaken as part of the evidence base classi ﬁ es employment 
land across Herefordshire in respect of its quality. The recommenda Ɵons from this study provide the basis 
for the development of Policy E1 on Employment provision. Applica Ɵons for the change of use of exis Ɵng 
employment land and buildings not currently included in the Employment Land Study 2012 will be assessed using the same methodology as if they were included.  
Home working 
5.2.19 	 In addiƟon to employment sites in predominately Class B employment areas; Herefordshire Council also 
encourages the development of live/work units and some material change of use in surrounding 
 residen Ɵal areas to allow for a small scale occupa Ɵon to be carried out at a person’s principal place of 
residence. Live/work units and allowing ﬂexibility for home working enable small enterprises which are 
 compa Ɵble with the residen Ɵal environment to become established. If the business seeks to expand 
beyond what could be described as home working or a live/work unit, then larger facili Ɵes in surrounding 
 areas, par Ɵcularly in enterprise parks in surrounding towns should be u Ɵlised. General Policies
 
Policy E3 – Homeworking 
The value of home working will be recognised by allowing some material change of use to part of a dwelling, where the dwelling remains as the principle place of residence for the home worker; and recognising the potenƟal to encourage and expand home working, by allowing small extensions or conversions where the 
proposed use and opera Ɵon would be compa Ɵble with its loca Ɵon and heritage value, and where it would not 
adversely a ﬀect the amenity of the neighbourhood by any of the following: 
• changes to the appearance of any building; 
• noise disturbance from the use or any increased  tra ﬃc and parking generated; 
• unsociable hours of opera Ɵ on; and 
• the storage of hazardous materials or emissions from the site. 
136136 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
  
  
   
 
 
 
   
   
  
 
     
   
   
  General Policies
Tourism 
5.2.20 	 The Herefordshire STEAM Report 2011  shows that tourism makes an important contribu Ɵon to the 
county’s economy. Herefordshire has many historic and natural assets which are of na Ɵonal interest for 
example the Mappa Mundi and the Wye Valley and Malvern Hills Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty. Hereford, the market towns and rural areas are popular des ƟnaƟons for a range of di ﬀerent types of visits 
 and ac ƟviƟes. Tourism in Herefordshire can help to strengthen the economy through diversi ﬁcaƟ on and 
new business development in both urban and rural areas. 
Policy E4 – Tourism 
Herefordshire will be promoted as a des ƟnaƟon for quality leisure visits and sustainable tourism by u Ɵ lising, 
conserving and enhancing the county’s unique environmental and heritage assets and by recognising the intrinsic character and beauty of the countryside. In par Ɵcular, the tourist industry will be supported by a 
number of measures including:
 1. 	 recognising the unique historic character of Hereford and the market towns  as key visitor a Ʃ racƟons 
and as loca Ɵons to focus the provision of new larger scale tourist development;
 2. 	 the development of sustainable tourism opportuni Ɵes, capitalising on assets such as the county’s 
landscape, rivers, other waterways and a Ʃ racƟve rural se Ʃlements, where there is no detrimental 
impact on the county’s varied natural and heritage assets or on the overall character and quality of the 
 environment. ParƟcular regard will be had to conserving the landscape and scenic beauty in the Areas of 
Outstanding Natural Beauty;
 3. 	 retaining and enhancing exis Ɵng, and encouraging new, accommoda Ɵon and a Ʃ racƟons throughout the 
county, which will  help to diversify the tourist provision, extend the tourist season and increase the number of visitors staying overnight. In par Ɵcular proposals for new hotels in Hereford will be 
encouraged. Applicants will be encouraged to provide a ‘Hotel Needs Assessment’ for any applica Ɵons 
for new hotels;
 4. 	 ensuring that cycling, walking and heritage tourism is encouraged by facilita Ɵng the development of long 
distance walking and cycling routes, food and drink trails and heritage trails, including improvements to public rights of way, whilst having special regard for the visual amenity of such routes and trails, and for the se ƫng of heritage assets in their vicinity; and
 5. 	 the safeguarding of the historic route of the Herefordshire and Gloucestershire Canal (shown on the 
Policies Map), together with its infrastructure, buildings, towpath and features. Where the original alignment cannot be re-established, a corridor allowing for devia Ɵons will be safeguarded. New 
developments within or immediately adjoining the safeguarded corridor will be required to incorporate land for canal restora Ɵon. Development not connected with the canal that would prevent or prejudice 
 the restora Ɵon of a con Ɵnuous route will not be permi Ʃed. 
5.2.21 	 By encouraging more overnight stays and associated increased expenditure, there is poten Ɵal for revenue 
from tourism to make a greater contribuƟon to the county’s economic well-being. The provision of new 
 accommoda Ɵon and the enhancement of exis Ɵ ng accommoda Ɵon will help achieve this goal. Many 
visitors to the county come to enjoy the beau Ɵful countryside and there is likely to be a demand for new 
 facili Ɵes and accommoda Ɵons associated with this. Whilst some small scale tourism associated 
development may be appropriate in rural areas, any signi ﬁcant new development for accommoda Ɵ on and 
 facili Ɵes should be focused in Hereford and the market towns to maximise sustainable transport 
opportuni Ɵes and to protect environmental amenity. Applicants will be encouraged to provide a ‘Hotel 
Needs Assessment Report’ to support their proposals. This assessment will inform whether the right standard of hotel is proposed with respect to market demand and need, so demonstra Ɵng its economic 
bene ﬁt to the area. 
137137 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
  
   
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
    5.2.22 	 The disused Herefordshire and Gloucestershire canal corridor is the subject of a long term restora Ɵon 
project with the aim of re-opening the canal link between Hereford and the Severn at Gloucester,
 termina Ɵng in a canal basin in Hereford. Some sec Ɵons have already been restored. The recrea Ɵon, 
tourism and economic poten Ɵal of the project are recognised and the canal corridor will con Ɵ nue to
 receive protec Ɵon from development through Policy E4. 
5.2.23 	 Policy E4 recognises the contribu Ɵon that tourism makes to the Herefordshire economy and seeks to 
ensure that this con Ɵnues and is enhanced through new developments which are of an appropriate scale, 
type and loca Ɵon. 
Town centres 
5.2.24 	 Policy E5 encourages appropriate town centre investment in Hereford and the market towns of Bromyard, 
Ledbury, Leominster, Kington and Ross-on-Wye which will contribute to and enhance the vitality and viability of these centres. 
Policy E5 – Town centres 
Town centres will be the focus for retail, commercial, leisure, cultural and tourism uses. Proposals for such uses which contribute to the vitality and viability of the town centres of Hereford and the market towns will be supported provided that they:
 1. do not adversely a ﬀect the primary func Ɵon of the town centres as shopping des ƟnaƟ ons; and 
2. are of a scale and design appropriate to the size, role, character and heritage of the centre. 
Proposals for development outside the town centres will only be permi Ʃed if it can be demonstrated that the 
requirements of the sequen Ɵal test, as set out in paragraph 24 of the NPPF, have been met and that the 
proposal would not have a signi ﬁcant adverse impact on the vitality and viability of the centres. An applica Ɵon 
will be refused if it fails the sequen Ɵal test or an impact assessment. 
The sequen Ɵal test requires the above men Ɵoned uses to be located within town centres. Where it is proven 
there are no available and suitable town centre sites, preference will be given to edge of centre sites before any out of centre site is considered. Where a sequen Ɵal test adequately demonstrates that the only suitable and 
available site is an edge of centre or an out of centre loca Ɵon, preference will be given to sites that are well 
connected to the town centre and are easily accessible by sustainable transport modes.  
An impact assessment for retail, leisure and commercial proposals outside of the town centres to assess their 
impact on investment in the area and on vitality and viability of the town centre may be required depending on the scale and loca Ɵon of the proposal, as speci ﬁed in the policies in the Place Shaping sec Ɵon. 
The use of upper ﬂoors within town centres for residen Ɵal and o ﬃce uses will be supported. 
Within town centres, retail uses will be concentrated within the primary shopping areas (Policy E6). General Policies
 
5.2.25 	 The town centre boundaries are de ﬁned in the Place Shaping sec Ɵons of this document. A review of these 
boundaries will be undertaken as part of Neighbourhood Development Plans and the Hereford Area Plan. 
5.2.26 	 Policy E5 has been informed by the ﬁndings of the Town Centres Study Update 2012 which outlines 
the retail, oﬃ ce and leisure needs of Hereford and the ﬁve market towns to 2031. The report iden Ɵﬁes 
138138 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
    
  
  
    
   
 
   
  
   
  
  
 
 
 
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
    
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
   
  
  General Policies
limited requirement for further retail and leisure development and advises that there is no need for out of centre retail alloca Ɵons in Hereford or in the market towns. Where town centre uses are proposed in 
edge of centre or out of centre loca Ɵons, a sequen Ɵal approach to selec Ɵng sites will be adopted in 
accordance with the Na Ɵonal Planning Policy Framework. Evidence will be required to demonstrate that 
all available town centre opportuni Ɵes have been thoroughly assessed, and transparent reasons 
provided as to why the town centre sites are not suitable and available, before land and/or buildings in edge of centre and then out of centre loca Ɵons are considered. The sequen Ɵal approach will also apply 
to large scale extensions to exis Ɵng retail and town centre uses, as well as proposals to vary or remove
 condi Ɵ ons restricƟng the range of goods that can be sold, where the site is located in an edge of centre or 
out of centre loca Ɵon. In considering the suitability and availability of sites, applicants will be required to 
demonstrate how they have adopted a ﬂexible approach to the size, design and format of the proposal. 
5.2.27 The Na Ɵonal Planning Policy Framework requires local planning authori Ɵes to set thresholds to 
determine the requirement for an impact assessment for applica Ɵons for retail, leisure and o ﬃce 
development outside of town centres. Individual thresholds have been set for Hereford and the market towns as follows, and are included within the individual Place Shaping policies:
 Hereford 700 m
2
 Bromyard 200 m2
 Kington  200 m2
 Ledbury 400 m2
 Leominster 400 m2
 
Ross-on-Wye  400 m2
 
5.2.28 	 The council will seek to agree the scope of any impact assessment with the applicant in advance to ensure 
that the assessment is propor Ɵonate to the proposal under considera Ɵon. Impact assessments will be 
expected to meet the requirements as set out in the Na Ɵonal Planning Policy Framework paragraph 26 
and will also apply to extensions and proposals to vary or remove condi Ɵ ons restricƟng the range of 
goods that can be sold. Impact assessments should balance any iden Ɵﬁ ed bene ﬁts in terms of job 
 crea Ɵon, highways and accessibility improvements and so on against likely counter e ﬀects that may occur 
in the town centre as a result of the proposal. 
5.2.29 	 The vitality and viability of town centres may also be enhanced by the use of upper ﬂoors over exis Ɵng 
shops, for residen Ɵal and o ﬃ  ce accommoda Ɵon; and uses that assist in suppor Ɵng the vibrancy of the 
town centres in the evenings such as restaurants and leisure facili Ɵes. Such uses will assist in increasing 
 the foo ƞall and general ac Ɵvity in the town centre. 
Retail 
5.2.30 	 A successful retail func Ɵon contributes to the vitality and viability of the town centre, the maintenance 
of its historic fabric and its role as a tourist des ƟnaƟon. The aim of the policy is to improve vitality and 
viability of the centres by improving the variety, choice and quality of shops and other services, and enhancing the overall a Ʃ racƟon, safety, convenience and ambience of a town centre. Within the town 
centres, retail uses will be focused in the “primary shopping areas”. These will be de ﬁned in the Hereford 
Area Plan, Neighbourhood Development Plans or Development Plan Documents.  
5.2.31 	 For edge of centre and out of centre retail loca Ɵons that have sa Ɵsﬁed the sequen Ɵal test and impact 
 assessments, condi Ɵons may be imposed where necessary to restrict the range of goods to be sold to 
bulky goods only and/or restrict the net ﬂoorspace that can be devoted to non-bulky goods. Condi Ɵons 
139139 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
      
  
 
 
 
   
  
  
   
     
 
 
   
  
   
     
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  may also be imposed se ƫng a minimum size of unit and restric Ɵng the poten Ɵal for further verƟ  cal 
or horizontal sub division. This is to prevent the prolifera Ɵon of smaller shop units outside of the town 
centre without seeking permission from the local planning authority and will protect the vitality and viability of exis Ɵ ng centres. 
5.2.32 	 Regular markets in town centres can a Ʃ ract addi Ɵonal shoppers and enhance the vibrancy to town 
centres bringing addi Ɵ onal bene ﬁts for the exis Ɵng retailers.  Most of these are of a temporary nature 
and use public spaces. They generally complement the character of the town centres and their reten Ɵon 
and enhancement will be encouraged.  
Oﬃces 
5.2.33 	 The Employment Land Study Update 2012  found that the majority of demand for o ﬃces in Hereford is 
for small o ﬃce premises (less than 100 m2) and in the market towns is generally from local companies 
in the town centres. In all places demand was found to be low and therefore it is expected that this can be met through exis Ɵng provision and the conversion of upper ﬂoors of proper Ɵes. 
Leisure 
5.2.34 	 The Town Centres Study Update 2012 recommended that no further alloca Ɵons for leisure facili Ɵ es and 
other town centre uses are made in Hereford or in the market towns. However the provision of new 
 leisure facili Ɵes in loca Ɵons within town centres will be encouraged where they serve an iden Ɵﬁed 
community need or meet a shorƞ all in exisƟ ng provision. 
Primary shopping areas and primary and secondary shopping frontages 
5.2.35 	 Primary shopping areas will be made up of primary and secondary shopping frontages (except in 
Bromyard and Kington) and will be reviewed in the Hereford Area Plan (including the Old Market Area) or Neighbourhood Development Plans/Development Plan Documents. Un Ɵl their review, the primary and 
secondary frontages as shown in the Place Shaping policies are carried forward from the Unitary Development Plan 2007 for development management purposes. Primary and secondary frontages will not be de ﬁned for Bromyard and Kington given the size of their centres and the distribu Ɵon of uses within 
them. In these towns retail uses will be focused in the primary shopping areas when de ﬁned. General Policies
 
Policy E6 - Primary shopping areas and primary and secondary shopping frontages 
The retail trading character of the primary shopping areas and primary and secondary shopping frontages will be protected and enhanced. Primary shopping frontages will con Ɵnue to be dominated by retail shops (Class A1) 
whilst secondary frontages may include a greater mix of uses. 
Proposals for uses within Classes A2- A5 (non-retail) in ground ﬂoor premises in primary and secondary shopping 
frontages will be permi Ʃed where the proposed use will not result in:
 1. a con Ɵnuous frontage of more than two non-retail units; and the overall propor Ɵon of non-retail uses 
exceeding 25% in primary shopping frontages and 50% in secondary shopping frontages. 
ExcepƟons to the above thresholds may be considered where: 
• in primary and secondary frontages the proposal would lead to the appropriate use of vacant or 
underused premises where it can be demonstrated that the premises are unlikely to be used for retailing and that a business case can be demonstrated for requiring such a loca Ɵ on; or 
140140 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
     
 
 
 
  
   
     
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
   
 
  
   
       
    
 
  
 
 General PoliciesPolicy E6 - Primary shopping areas and primary and secondary shopping frontages 
conƟnued. 
• in secondary frontages, the proposal results from an expansion of an exis Ɵng non-retail use or would fall  
within Class D1-D2; or 
• it is demonstrated in the Hereford Area Plan and/or Neighbourhood Development Plans that an 
 alterna Ɵve threshold would be appropriate.
 2. detracƟon from the character of the shopping frontage concerned, for reasons of  loca Ɵon, unit size or 
frontage width. The reinstatement of historic frontages will be encouraged. 
5.2.36 	 The overall emphasis on retail trading should be retained in order to maintain character and to protect 
the vitality and viability of the primary shopping areas of Hereford and the market towns. The 
 concentra Ɵon of retail trading ac Ɵvity within a limited area, with substan Ɵal runs of ac Ɵve retail frontage 
will contribute to the busy and vibrant character of the county’s primary shopping areas. A variety of 
non-retail uses already exist within shopping areas and these can add to the diversity of uses in town 
 centres. Diﬀ erent but complementary uses during the day and evening can reinforce each other, making 
town centres more a Ʃ racƟve to local residents, shoppers and visitors. Non-retail uses include building 
socieƟes, banks, estate agents, insurance and be ƫ  ng oﬃces (uses falling within Use Class A2, ﬁnancial 
and professional services), together with restaurants and cafes (Class A3), drinking establishments (Class A4) and hot food takeaways (Class A5). However whilst one non-retail use alone may not detract from the vitality of a street, the cumula Ɵve impact of such changes will do so. A concentra Ɵon of non-retail uses 
can have the e ﬀect of breaking up the shopping area, isola Ɵng some shop units to the detriment of the 
centre as a whole. The further introduc Ɵon of non-retail uses in the primary shopping areas therefore 
needs to be carefully balanced against the need to protect retail trading character. 
5.2.37 	 The Hereford Area Plan and Neighbourhood Development Plans or Development Plan Document for 
Ledbury, Leominster and Ross-on-Wye will review the boundaries of the primary and secondary shopping frontages. However as stated above, only a primary shopping area will be de ﬁned in the Neighbourhood 
Plans/Development Plan Document for Bromyard and Kington as recommended in the Town Centre Study 
 Update 2012 . 
5.2.38 	 The introduc Ɵon of non-retail uses falling outside Class A of the Use Classes Order will normally be 
opposed on the ground ﬂoor level of primary shopping areas so as to protect the combina Ɵon of retail 
and associated services which characterise these frontages in the interest of protec Ɵng vitality and 
viability. However, secondary shopping frontages may provide an opportunity for some non-retail uses in Classes D1 and D2 in accordance with the Na Ɵonal Planning Policy Framework, subject to the criteria of 
 Policy E6. 
5.2.39 	 Proposals will also be considered in terms of noise, appearance, tra ﬃ  c genera Ɵon, servicing, parking and 
any other factors which may have a detrimental e ﬀect on the shopping street and residen Ɵ al amenity. 
Reference should be made to the Herefordshire Shop Front Design Guide 2011. Where historic frontages 
have been lost or degraded their repair and/or reinstatement will be encouraged. This can help to improve the quality and a Ʃ racƟveness of the centre and this contributes to its vitality and viability. 
141141 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
       
      
 
       
   
  
        
       
      
      
        
       
       
      
       
       
       Delivery and monitoring of economic prosperity policies 
5.2.40 	 These policies will be delivered by:
•	   the development management process 
•	   the Hereford Area Plan, Neighbourhood Development Plans and other Development Plan 
          Documents and 
•	   developer contribuƟons and the Community Infrastructure Levy. 
Economic Prosperity Monitoring Indicators 
5.2.41 	 The following indicators (in addi Ɵon to those set out at the end of the Spa Ɵal Strategy sec Ɵon) will be 
used to monitor the e ﬀecƟveness of the policies through the Annual Monitoring Report: 
•	   the amount of employment land commitments, comple Ɵons and realloca Ɵons, as monitored 
          through the council’s annual Employment Land Survey including expansions and reloca Ɵons; 
•	   the amount of vacant land and premises for employment use in the county; 
•	   the amount of new employment development occurring in rural areas; 
•	   new business registra Ɵ on rates; 
•	   the amount of retail, o ﬃce and leisure development completed within the monitoring period; 
•	   the amount of retail, o ﬃ  ce and leisure ﬂ oorspace permiƩ ed outside of city and town centres; 
•	   the amount of permissions granted for change of use from A2 to residen Ɵal or oﬃces; 
•	   the number of vacant units within town centres; 
•	   the number of conversions of upper ﬂoors of retail and commercial premises to residen Ɵ al and 
oﬃ  ce use; 
•	   the number and type of visits to Herefordshire, and associated expenditure; and 
•	   the number of people employed in the di ﬀerent tourism sectors. General Policies
 
142142 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
  
   
   
 
   
  General Policies
5.3 Environmental quality 
5.3.1 	 The role of this sec Ɵon is to aid the delivery of environmental objec Ɵves 10-12 of Herefordshire Council’s 
Core Strategy and supplement spa Ɵal strategy policies SS6 and SS7 and the place-shaping policies. This 
will be achieved through incorpora Ɵng and enhancing important locally dis ƟncƟve assets within future 
developments while comba Ɵng climate change and mi ƟgaƟng its impacts. There are clear links as shown, 
between all the four elements below; for example water management, geodiversity and renewable energy are all integral ‘natural resources’ and each policy should not be read in isola Ɵon. The way water, 
energy and minerals are uƟ  lised aﬀects all developments. 
143143 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
    
 
 
  
 
    
   
 
  
 
    
   
  
  
   
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
    
    
   Local disƟncƟ veness 
5.3.2 	 To successfully deliver the Core Strategy vision in respect of environmental quality and local 
disƟncƟveness, this secƟon provides a proacƟve strategy for the conserva Ɵ on, restora Ɵ on and 
enhancement of environmental assets and the delivery of new green infrastructure to support policies SS6 and SS7. 
5.3.3 	 Locally dis ƟncƟve assets both natural and man-made, are ﬁnite and irreplaceable and any detrimental 
impacts can carry cultural, environmental, economic and social costs. A number of assets bene ﬁ t from 
 statutory designa Ɵons within na Ɵonal and interna Ɵ onal legisla Ɵon. Statutory designa Ɵons range from 
large areas conserved for landscape, geodiversity or biodiversity importance, such as the Wye Valley and Malvern Hills Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty and River Wye Special Area of Conserva Ɵ on, to 
individual statutory listed buildings which are protected for their architectural or historical signi ﬁ cance. 
Appendix 8 lists the designated sites in Herefordshire at the Ɵme of adop Ɵon. 
5.3.4 	 Non-statutory designa Ɵons and locally determined features are equally important to Herefordshire’s local 
disƟncƟveness. Working with partner organisa Ɵons, Herefordshire Council has iden Ɵﬁed important assets 
such as local wildlife sites, local geological sites and areas and buildings of local interest which contribute to Herefordshire’s unique character.  Non-statutory locally dis ƟncƟve buildings and green spaces will be 
idenƟﬁed through forthcoming Development Plan Documents or Neighbourhood Development Plans. 
5.3.5 	 Conserving local dis ƟncƟveness is central to the purposes of designa Ɵons at all levels and achieved 
 substan Ɵally through the produc Ɵon and implementa Ɵon of management plans, conserva Ɵ on strategies 
 and objec Ɵves and guidance resul Ɵng from best pracƟce and local assessments. 
Landscape and townscape 
5.3.6 	 The European Landscape Conven Ɵ on de ﬁnes landscape as “ an area, as perceived by people, whose 
character is the result of the ac Ɵon and interac Ɵon of natural and/or human factors” . Herefordshire has a 
disƟncƟve and varied landscape. Much of the area is rural in nature but varied in landscape character, 
including high hills, forest, commons and river meadows. Herefordshire contains a wide range of 
seƩ lement pa Ʃ erns, diﬀ erent types of farmland and evidence of ancient landscape features. This diverse 
landscape is an integral element of Herefordshire’s local dis ƟncƟ veness. 
5.3.7 	 Landscape is important, not just as scenery but because it links culture with nature, and the past with 
the present. It has many values, not all of them tangible (such as sense of place); and it ma Ʃers to people 
– it is people who create and value landscape. All landscapes ma Ʃer, not only those with na Ɵonal 
designaƟons. They provide a range of services such as food, water, climate regula Ɵon and aesthe Ɵc 
 enjoyment. 
5.3.8 	 The concepts of conserva Ɵ on, restora Ɵon and enhancement have been set out as a strategic approach 
to landscape and townscape management. The principles are relevant when considering the 
management of individual sites where the landscape character may be dependent upon unique landscape features. Landscape survey and analysis are proac Ɵve tools for allowing new build 
developments to address the three principles. For development proposals there are o Ō en opportuni Ɵes 
for measures to conserve landscape features such as trees, to restore features such as boundary hedges and to enhance the landscape character by other means such as woodland plan Ɵ ng, creaƟon of wetland 
areas or restora Ɵon of historic features. The prepara Ɵon of landscape schemes and management plans General Policies
 
144144 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
  
 
   
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
    
 
 
  
 
   
  
 
  
    
      
   
   
  
  
 
   
 
    
  should address these three aspects in rela Ɵon to the local landscape character and the relevant landscape 
type. Designated areas are detailed on the Policies Map. Speci ﬁ c conserva Ɵon area boundaries can be 
found on the council’s website at the planning/conserva Ɵ on pages. General PoliciesPolicy LD1 – Landscape and townscape 
Development proposals should: 
• demonstrate that character of the landscape and townscape has posi Ɵ vely in ﬂuenced the design, scale, 
nature and site selec Ɵ on, protecƟon and enhancement of the se ƫ  ng of seƩlements and designated 
 areas; 
• conserve and enhance the natural, historic and scenic beauty of important landscapes and features, including Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty, na Ɵonally and locally designated parks and gardens and 
 conserva Ɵon areas; through the protecƟon of the area’s character and by enabling appropriate uses, 
design and management; 
• incorporate new landscape schemes and their management to ensure development integrates 
appropriately into its surroundings; and 
• maintain and extend tree cover where important to amenity, through the reten Ɵon of important trees, 
appropriate replacement of trees lost through development and new plan Ɵng to support green 
 infrastructure. 
5.3.9 	 A number of landscape and townscape character assessments have been prepared supported by a 
Historic Landscape Characterisa Ɵon and completed conserva Ɵon areas appraisals. The Landscape 
Character Assessment Supplementary Planning Guidance 2009  (SPD) will be reviewed during the plan 
period. The SPD will build upon the detailed evidence base documentaƟon; including Natural England’s 
Character Areas as well as more recently produced Urban Fringe Sensi Ɵvity Analysis January 2010 , Rapid 
 Townscape Assessments (various), Green Infrastructure Strategy February 2010  and other local studies 
covering the architectural and historic environment. In conjunc Ɵon with the above, relevant Areas of 
Outstanding Natural Beauty Management Plans and associated guidance also provide more place-speci ﬁc 
guidance which should inform development proposals from the outset.  
5.3.10 	 The parƟcular importance of trees is recognised within the planning system and the extent of tree cover 
is important to the county’s landscape and townscape. Tree surveys and arboricultural impact 
assessments may be necessary where it is important to assess and protect exis Ɵng trees on or adjacent to 
sites where development proposals are being advanced. 
Biodiversity and geodiversity 
5.3.11 	 Biodiversity can be de ﬁned as the variety of sites, habitats and species within a speci ﬁed locality and is 
inﬂuenced by factors such as geology, topography and climate. Geodiversity refers to the natural 
processes and cons Ɵtuent parts that have shaped the landscape and includes minerals, soils and water. 
Geodiversity is the variety of rock, minerals, fossils, soils, landforms and natural processes that have 
shaped the landscape. 
5.3.12 	 Biodiversity and geodiversity assets provide an important contribu Ɵon to the dis ƟncƟveness of an area. 
Herefordshire has a diverse range of geological features and wildlife habitats such as the Malvern Hills, the River Wye, ancient woodlands and tradi Ɵonal orchards. Wildlife is not conﬁned to designated sites 
and many features serve as wildlife corridors, links and stepping stones. Ecological networks are vital to 
145145 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
    
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
    
     
  
    
   
    
 
  
  
    
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 the survival and dispersal of species. Herefordshire’s biodiversity and geodiversity make a major 
 contribu Ɵon to the economy, suppor Ɵng the tourism sector and providing a healthy and a Ʃ racƟve 
environment for its residents. 
Policy LD2 – Biodiversity and geodiversity 
Development proposals should conserve, restore and enhance the biodiversity and geodiversity assets of Herefordshire, through the:
 1. 	 retenƟon and protec Ɵon of nature conserva Ɵon sites and habitats, and important species in accordance 
with their status as follows: a) Development that is likely to harm sites and species of European Importance will not be permi Ʃed; 
b) Development that would be liable to harm Sites of Special Scien Ɵﬁc Interest or na Ɵonally protected  
species will only be permi Ʃed if the conserva Ɵon status of their habitat or important physical 
       features can be protected by condi Ɵons or other material considera Ɵons are su ﬃ  cient to outweigh 
       nature conserva Ɵ on considera Ɵons; 
c) 	Development that would be liable to harm the nature conserva Ɵon value of a site or species of local 
                     nature conserva Ɵon interest will only be permi Ʃed if the importance of the development outweighs 
       the local value of the site, habitat or physical feature that supports important species. d) 	Development that will poten Ɵally reduce the coherence and e ﬀecƟveness of the ecological network 
       of sites will only be permi Ʃed where adequate compensatory measures are brought forward.
 2. 	 restoraƟon and enhancement of exis Ɵng biodiversity and geodiversity features on site and connec Ɵvity 
to wider ecological networks; and
 3. 	 creaƟon of new biodiversity features and wildlife habitats. 
Where appropriate the council will work with developers to agree a management strategy to ensure the protecƟon of, and preven Ɵon of adverse impacts on, biodiversity and geodiversity features. General Policies
 
5.3.13 	 Areas of biodiversity and geological importance and sensi Ɵvity should be protected and development 
should enhance local habitats and ecological networks.  Development within close proximity to
 interna Ɵ onally, na Ɵonally and locally designated sites will need to incorporate sympathe Ɵ c design 
components to enhance their nature conserva Ɵon interests and to avoid or mi Ɵgate any adverse impacts. 
 Interna Ɵonally important sites present within the county include Special Areas of Conserva Ɵ on (SACs); 
naƟonally important sites include Sites of Special Scien Ɵﬁc Interest (SSSIs) and Na Ɵonal Nature Reserves 
(NNRs); and locally important sites include Local Wildlife Sites and Local Geological Sites. 
5.3.14 	 Dependent upon the scale and proximity of development proposals a ﬀecƟng biodiversity or geodiversity 
features, Herefordshire Council may require developers to produce a management strategy to ensure the 
 conƟ  nued protec Ɵon of the features of interest. Such management strategies may include monitoring 
 informa Ɵon. This will provide up-to-date informa Ɵon which will shape future policy reviews as well as 
inform future site speci ﬁ c plans. 
5.3.15 	 The Core Strategy objecƟves will be delivered through suppor Ɵng development proposals that add to 
Herefordshire’s biodiversity. During the plan period Herefordshire Council will review its Biodiversity Supplementary Planning Guidance u Ɵlising in par Ɵcular the principles, opportuni Ɵes and constraints 
detailed within the Building Biodiversity into Herefordshire Council’s Local Development Framework 2009 . 
Further areas of local biodiversity or geodiversity importance may be designated or extended during the 
 plan period. 
146146 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
    
   
  
 
   
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  General Policies
5.3.16 	 Details of the county’s biodiversity and geodiversity assets and features, some of which traverse the local 
 authority’s administra Ɵve boundaries, are listed in Appendices 8e-k and further informa Ɵon is held at the 
Herefordshire Biological Records Centre. Core areas have been iden Ɵﬁed where there are clusters of 
biodiversity and geodiversity features of high conserva Ɵon value as detailed in the Herefordshire 
Ecological Network Map 2012 . Development within and adjacent to these core areas and associated 
buﬀer zones will need to be sympathe Ɵcally designed to ensure there are no adverse impacts upon them. 
Alongside this, Herefordshire Council will seek contribu Ɵons to enhance and link such core areas. 
Green infrastructure 
5.3.17 	 Green infrastructure is a mul Ɵ -funcƟonal network of green spaces, links and assets within and 
surrounding the built environment, and providing connec Ɵon to the wider countryside. As a major 
component of sustainable design it includes and contributes to health and wellbeing as well as biodiversity, culture and heritage across the county. It is not limited to urban areas and can be seen at
 di ﬀerent strategic levels as shown in the table below and the accompanying concept diagram, Figure 5.3. 
Figure 5.2: Hierarchy of Green Infrastructure Assets 
Geographic Ɵer Example of green infrastructure asset 
County/Regional Strategy •   Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty 
•   Sites of na Ɵonal and interna Ɵonal nature conserva Ɵon 
     importance (e.g. SAC, SSSI) 
•   Verges of trunk roads, motorways and railways 
District •   Rivers and large streams and their ﬂ oodplains 
•   Local wildlife sites. Scheduled ancient monuments •   Designed landscapes 
Local •   Public and private parks and gardens •   Recrea Ɵonal grounds, cemeteries, playing ﬁelds and public                   
     green spaces 
•   Public rights of way and cycle paths 
147147 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
 
  
 
  
   
    Figure 5.3:  Green infrastructure concept diagram General Policies 
Source:  Herefordshire Green Infrastructure Strategy, February 2010 
5.3.18 Herefordshire Council’s Green Infrastructure Strategy 2010  sets out a vision for green infrastructure 
across the county. It also provides a local framework around Hereford and the ﬁve market towns by 
deﬁning strategic corridors, enhancement zones and fringe zones. These are areas where through 
 sympathe Ɵc design and planning, a func Ɵ onal rela Ɵonship between the urban and rural environments 
can be created and enhanced. 
5.3.19 The development of new green infrastructure and preserva Ɵon of exis Ɵng assets will provide a variety of 
economic, environmental and social bene ﬁts. Economic bene ﬁts can be achieved through food 
 produc Ɵon and produc Ɵve landscapes, diversi ﬁcaƟon of farming ac ƟviƟes and a Ʃ racƟ ng tourism. 
148148 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
   
  
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
  
  
  
     
 
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
   
    
 
 
 
  General Policies
 Environmental bene ﬁts include habitat provision and connec Ɵvity, landscape protecƟ  on, energy 
 conserva Ɵon and mi ƟgaƟon of climate change impacts. Social bene ﬁts of green infrastructure include 
places for leisure, garden food produc Ɵ on, recrea Ɵon, sport and exercise, all of which make a major 
 contribu Ɵon to health and wellbeing. Development can include corridors for movement through foot and 
cycle paths. It provides opportuni Ɵes for improving the management of and interpre Ɵng natural and 
heritage assets and how they contribute to local dis ƟncƟveness. Increased access to green infrastructure 
can promote physical and mental health and well-being. 
5.3.20 	 Green infrastructure can provide energy producƟ on, ﬂ ood aƩenuaƟon, maintenance of water quality, 
water resource management, cooling e ﬀects and many other bene ﬁts encompassed under the concept 
of ecosystem services. The council is commi Ʃed to working with Herefordshire Local Nature Partnership 
to bring forward a shared vision using green infrastructure to improve ecological networks and wider economic and social bene ﬁts as part of an “ecosystems approach”. 
Policy LD3 – Green infrastructure 
Development proposals should protect, manage and plan for the preserva Ɵon of exis Ɵng and delivery of new 
green infrastructure, and should achieve the following objec Ɵ ves:
 1. 	 idenƟﬁcaƟon and reten Ɵon of exis Ɵng green infrastructure corridors and linkages; including the 
 protecƟon of valued landscapes, trees, hedgerows, woodlands, water courses and adjoining ﬂ ood plain;
 2. 	 provision of on-site green infrastructure; in par Ɵcular proposals will be supported where this enhances 
the network; and
 3. 	 integraƟon with, and connec Ɵon to, the surrounding green infrastructure network. 
5.3.21 	 Development proposals should iden Ɵfy and protect exis Ɵng green infrastructure. The Green 
Infrastructure Strategy 2010 and associated Study iden Ɵfy those features that contribute to the green 
infrastructure network. Proposals should take account of features within the site and also on adjacent sites as integra Ɵon and connec Ɵon with the surroundings is a key objec Ɵve.  Proposals should incorporate 
 the reten Ɵon and enhancement of features such as trees and hedgerows, together with long term 
 management. 
5.3.22 	 The inclusion of new plan Ɵng, wildlife enhancement, crea Ɵon and links, links to the countryside and river 
ways, green transport corridors, open spaces and recrea Ɵ onal facili Ɵes and sustainable drainage systems 
within or associated with development proposals are important and valuable contribu Ɵons to green 
infrastructure. Landscaping of development sites should feature plan Ɵng of appropriate na Ɵ ve species 
wherever possible, ensuring there is su ﬃcient space for plants to grow to maturity. Opportuni Ɵ es for 
new elements include establishing grasslands, wild ﬂower meadows, wetlands, orchards or woodland. 
New green infrastructure features could include promo Ɵng and extending the public rights of way 
network, increasing public access and providing interpre Ɵ ve informa Ɵon. 
Historic environment and heritage assets 
5.3.23 	 The historic environment is de ﬁned as all aspects of the environment resul Ɵng from the interacƟ on 
between people and places through Ɵme, including all surviving physical remains of past human ac Ɵ vity, 
whether visible, buried or submerged, and landscaped and planted or managed ﬂora. Those elements of 
signiﬁcance with statutory protec Ɵon are referred to as designated heritage assets. Policy LD4 is 
applicable to heritage assets throughout Herefordshire whether formally designated e.g. listed buildings 
149149 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
   
   
 
  
   
  
   
  
  
   
    
      
  
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
   and conserva Ɵon areas, or not, ranging from individual structures and their se ƫ  ngs, archaeological 
remains, to larger neighbourhoods of historic value, parks, gardens and other green spaces of local 
 interest. 
5.3.24 	 The historic environment and heritage assets are signi ﬁcant contributors to sustainable development. 
Important local buildings have a social value and can act as focal points for local communi Ɵes. The historic 
environment is of cultural value as it illustrates the historical development of Herefordshire. Heritage 
assets also bring economic bene ﬁts as Herefordshire’s well preserved historic environment is a major 
factor in its tourism industry and the county’s quality of life can also serve to a Ʃract and retain 
investment. The sustainable re-use of exis Ɵng buildings can also help mi Ɵgate climate change through 
reducing development pressures on green ﬁeld sites, reducing demand for construc Ɵon energy and 
materials and by minimising construc Ɵ on waste. 
Policy LD4 – Historic environment and heritage assets 
Development proposals a ﬀecƟng heritage assets and the wider historic environment should: 
1. 	 Protect, conserve, and where possible enhance heritage assets and their se ƫngs in a manner 
appropriate to their signi ﬁcance through appropriate management, uses and sympathe Ɵc design, in 
parƟcular emphasising the original form and func Ɵon where possible;
 2. 	 where opportuni Ɵes exist, contribute to the character and local dis ƟncƟveness of the townscape or 
wider environment, especially within conserva Ɵ on areas; 
3. 	 use the reten Ɵon, repair and sustainable use of heritage assets to provide a focus for wider regenera Ɵon 
schemes; 
4. 	 record and advance the understanding of the signi ﬁcance of any heritage assets to be lost (wholly or in 
part) and to make this evidence or archive generated publicly accessible and
 5. 	 where appropriate, improve the understanding of and public access to the heritage asset. 
The scope of the works required to protect, conserve and enhance heritage assets and their se ƫ  ngs should be 
proporƟonate to their signi ﬁcance. Development schemes should emphasise the original form and func Ɵ on of 
any asset and, where appropriate, improve the understanding of and public access to them. General Policies
5.3.25 	 Where important heritage assets are at risk or underuƟlised, development proposals for alterna Ɵ ve uses 
which are sympathe Ɵc and contribute to the conserva Ɵon of the heritage asset and its wider 
environment will be supported. Due to the site-speci ﬁc nature of heritage assets, the Core Strategy does 
not seek to s Ɵ pulate par Ɵcular uses and each proposal will be evaluated on its individual merits. 
5.3.26 	 During the Core Strategy plan period, Herefordshire Council will review the Archaeology and 
Development Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) in par Ɵcular in the light of any changes to the 
 exis Ɵng evidence base, the Historic Landscape Characterisa Ɵon, emerging farmstead assessment 
guidance and growing knowledge of heritage assets contained within the council’s historic environment record. This exis Ɵng data and evidence base together with the Rapid Townscape Assessments 2010 for 
the market towns and the Hereford Streetscape Design Strategy 2009 should be used to shape 
development proposals from the outset. The evidence base will also guide forthcoming Development Plan Documents and Neighbourhood Development Plans which should be supported where necessary, with careful appraisal of sites within or adjacent to those villages where development may be proposed - in terms of e ﬀect on archaeological remains and the se ƫng of historic assets. 
150150 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
     
  
    
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
   
   
  
    
  
  
    
 
     
    
   
   
  
    
    
  
    
 
       
    
  
 
    General Policies
5.3.27 	 Large scale developments should embrace the historic environment rather than regard it as a constraint. 
UƟ lising exis Ɵng locally dis ƟncƟve heritage assets within wider regenera Ɵon proposals can help create 
new developments that integrate posi Ɵvely with their surroundings, and can reinforce exis Ɵ ng cultural 
and social characteris Ɵcs. Where the loss of or substan Ɵal harm to a heritage asset or its signi ﬁcance  is 
outweighed by the public bene ﬁts of a development proposal which is allowed to proceed, developers 
shall, in a manner propor Ɵonate to its importance, record and advance understanding of the heritage 
asset. This evidence shall be made publicly accessible normally through Herefordshire Historic Environment Record, a museum or other local archive as appropriate. 
Sustainable design 
5.3.28 	 Good design embraces more than simply the aesthe Ɵcs of new development and includes how buildings 
are used, accessed and constructed. Equally, for development to be considered sustainable, it must embrace the move to a low carbon future through designing buildings that are more energy and water 
eﬃcient and increase the use and supply of renewables. Herefordshire Council will seek to ensure that 
future developments are designed to enhance local dis ƟncƟveness but without s Ɵﬂ ing innova Ɵ on and 
 crea Ɵ vity, parƟcularly with regard to energy e ﬃ  ciency. 
5.3.29 	 High quality design and well planned developments can enhance community cohesion through 
maintaining or crea Ɵng a sense of place. New development should be designed to preserve and enhance 
 locally dis ƟncƟ ve characteris Ɵcs and posi Ɵvely contribute to the appearance of the locality. To achieve 
this, it is important that new development is successfully integrated into the exis Ɵng built, natural and 
historic environment; however recognising that architectural styles change over Ɵme. Policy SD1 does not 
seek to sƟﬂe architectural innova Ɵon, contemporary design or reject advances in design and technology. 
Policy SD1 – Sustainable design and energy e ﬃciency 
Development proposals should create safe, sustainable, well integrated environments for all members of the community. In conjunc Ɵon with this, all development proposals should incorporate the following requirements: 
• ensure that proposals make e ﬃcient use of land - taking into account the local context and site 
 characteris Ɵcs; 
• new buildings should be designed to maintain local dis ƟncƟveness through incorpora Ɵ ng local 
architectural detailing and materials and respec Ɵng scale, height, propor Ɵons and massing of 
surrounding development, while making a posi Ɵ ve contribu Ɵon to the architectural diversity and 
character of the area including, where appropriate, through innova Ɵ ve design; 
• safeguard residen Ɵal amenity for exis Ɵng and proposed residents; 
• ensure new development does not contribute to, or suﬀ er from, adverse impacts arising from noise, 
light or air contamina Ɵon, land instability or cause ground water pollu Ɵon; 
• where contaminated land is present, undertake appropriate remedia Ɵon where it can be demonstrated 
that this will be e ﬀecƟ ve; 
• ensure that dis ƟncƟve features of exis Ɵng buildings and their se ƫng are safeguarded and where 
 appropriate, restored; 
•  uƟlise physical sustainability measures that include, in par Ɵ cular, orienta Ɵon of buildings, the provision 
of water conserva Ɵon measures, storage for bicycles and waste including provision for recycling, and 
enabling renewable energy and energy conserva Ɵ on infrastructure; 
• where possible, on-site renewable energy genera Ɵon should also be incorporated; 
151151 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
   
  
  
 
    
  
    
    
     
   
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
       
   
   
  
    
 
  
 General Policies Policy SD1 – Sustainable design and energy e ﬃ  ciency con Ɵnued 
• create safe and accessible environments, and that minimise opportuni Ɵes for crime and an Ɵ-social 
behaviour by incorpora Ɵng Secured by Design principles, and consider the incorpora Ɵ on of ﬁ re safety 
 measures; 
• ensuring designs can be easily adapted and accommodate new technologies to meet changing needs throughout the life Ɵme of the development; and 
•  uƟlise sustainable construc Ɵon methods which minimise the use of non-renewable resources and 
maximise the use of recycled and sustainably sourced materials; 
All planning applica Ɵons including material changes of use, will be expected to demonstrate how the above 
design and energy e ﬃ  ciency considera Ɵons have been factored into the proposal from the outset. 
5.3.30 	 High quality design can signi ﬁcantly enhance the environment and amenity for new residents. Equally, 
the amenity and quality of life for exis Ɵng residents can be adversely a ﬀected by insensiƟ  ve, poorly 
considered design. To address this, buildings, extensions and spaces must be designed with regard to overlooking, overshadowing and overbearing impacts. Addi Ɵonally, ensuring that new development is 
 compa Ɵble with the surrounding locality requires more than simply scale and aesthe Ɵ c qualiƟ es, and 
 includes considera Ɵon of the impacts of noise and ar Ɵﬁcial light, ground condi Ɵons and air quality. 
5.3.31 	 All developments must demonstrate how they have been designed and how they have incorporated 
measures to make them resilient to climate change in respect of carbon reduc Ɵon, water e ﬃ  ciency and 
ﬂood risk. Carbon reduc Ɵon should in ﬂuence design from the outset by ensuring the fabric of the building 
is as energy e ﬃcient as possible, for example, a Ʃaining thermal e ﬃ  ciencies through construc Ɵ on that 
achieves low U values and fuel e ﬃciencies through the use of services such as e ﬃcient boilers. Good site 
planning can also aid greater energy e ﬃciency in new development, for example, by seeking to maximise 
solar gain.  
5.3.32 	 Revisions to the Building Regula Ɵons are introducing progressive increases in the energy e ﬃciency 
requirements for new buildings. In terms of energy conserva Ɵon, developments in sustainable loca Ɵons 
that achieve accredited standards of energy conserva Ɵon which cover a range of sustainability criteria 
will be supported, par Ɵcularly where the level achieved materially exceeds the relevant Building 
 Regula Ɵons and other relevant standards in place at the Ɵme. 
5.3.33 	 Large-scale developments should demonstrate how opportuni Ɵes for on-site renewable energy 
 genera Ɵon and sustainable waste management have also been considered and addressed within the 
design of the scheme. Such details should include an appraisal of all suitable renewable energy technology. Other developments will also be encouraged to consider whether on-site renewable energy 
opportuni Ɵes might be available. Alongside this, the council supports the provision of renewable and low 
carbon technologies within exis Ɵng developments, subject to such proposals according with other 
policies of the Core Strategy. 
5.3.34 	 The eﬃcient use of land is encouraged in the design policy; however it does not specify minimum 
 development densi Ɵes; these are referenced in Policy SS2. It is recognised that in highly accessible 
 loca Ɵons development proposals may be more sustainable and viable if constructed to higher densi Ɵes 
than usually found elsewhere in the county, provided there is no detrimental impact upon exis Ɵ ng local 
amenity. However in most instances, appropriate density will primarily be informed by the local context as well as site opportuni Ɵes and constraints. 
152152 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
   
  
  
  
    
 
   
   
  
 
 
   
  
    
  
   
   
 
 
 
  
  General Policies
5.3.35 	 Accessibility for all members of society is fundamental to achieving sustainable development and 
inclusive design, and must be carefully considered in all development proposals. Development layouts 
should be designed to provide a high degree of permeability par Ɵcularly for sustainable modes of travel 
within the site, and provide safe connec Ɵons to adjoining land uses and local community facili Ɵes. 
5.3.36 	 Sustainable design principles can also contribute to reducing crime and the fear of crime. Developers 
should consider whether the loca Ɵon and form of their development should adopt the principles set out 
in the document ‘Secured by Design 2010 (Associa Ɵon of Chief Police O ﬃ  cers)’ incorpora Ɵ ng design 
measures such as ensuring a high level of natural surveillance, sensi Ɵ ve considera Ɵon of boundary 
treatments and clear delinea Ɵon of public and private spaces, in order to aid the crea Ɵon of a safer and 
more inclusive environment. In addi Ɵon, provision should be made to allow ease of access for emergency 
 services. 
5.3.37 	 Council Direc Ɵve 96/82/EC (the Seveso II Direc Ɵve) requires that the objecƟves of the preven Ɵ on of 
major accidents involving hazardous substances and limi Ɵng their consequences for man and the 
environment are taken into account in land use planning. Within the county, certain industrial sites and 
associated infrastructure fall within the scope of hazardous substances controls by virtue of the nature 
 and quan Ɵty of substances used or stored; in considering applica Ɵons for development in the vicinity of 
such sites regard will also be had to the risks arising. It is important that the presence of hazardous substances is compa Ɵble with the exis Ɵng and proposed uses of the site and of land in the vicinity. In 
parƟcular, appropriate distances should be maintained between establishments where hazardous 
substances are present or proposed and exis Ɵng or proposed residen Ɵal areas, areas of public use and 
areas of parƟcular natural sensi Ɵvity or interest. Full account will be taken of advice from the Health and 
 Safety ExecuƟve and the Environment Agency in dealing with applica Ɵons for both hazardous substances 
consent and for development at or in the vicinity of land where such substances are present. 
5.3.38 	 The age structure of the county is rapidly changing with an increasing elderly popula Ɵon. Increasing fuel 
prices is resul Ɵng in residents, par Ɵcularly in rural areas, reviewing their home to work travel pa Ʃerns, 
 furthermore con Ɵnual advances in technology means costly refurbishments of exis Ɵng buildings is o Ōen 
required to meet modern requirements. It is therefore important that developments are ﬂ exibly designed 
to be adaptable to di ﬀerent and future occupa Ɵonal and technological needs and demands. This can 
include measures such as mee Ɵ ng lifeƟme homes and equivalent standards in residen Ɵ al design, 
providing infrastructure to meet the growth in demand for electric vehicles, providing adequate space for internal and external plant and facilita Ɵng home working and live/work opportuni Ɵes. 
5.3.39 	 Design guidance will be prepared as a Supplementary Planning Document to provide baseline standards 
across Herefordshire; expanding on the above design principles and to inform the prepara Ɵ on of 
masterplans, other Development Plan Documents, Neighbourhood Development Plans, parish plans, village design statements and planning applica Ɵons. 
Renewable and low carbon energy genera Ɵon 
5.3.40 	 An overarching principle of the planning system is to support the transi Ɵon to a low carbon future. A 
signiﬁcant means of achieving this goal is through the use of renewable energy sources. Renewable 
energy covers energy generated directly from natural sources, be it sun, wind or water, or indirect sources such as biomass and geothermal heat. The Climate Change Act makes the UK the ﬁrst country in 
the world to have a long term legally binding commitment to cut greenhouse gas emissions. The Act commits the UK to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 80%, from a 1990 baseline, by 2050. The UK 
153153 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
  
  
   
   
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
  
   
 
 
  
   
 
     
     
 Renewable Energy Strategy (2009) sets a target for 15% of the UK’s energy to come from renewable resources by 2020, which represents a seven fold increase from 2008. In respect of wind energy, 
NaƟonal Planning Policy Guidance indicates that in order to gain planning permission suitable areas for 
wind energy development will need to have been allocated clearly in a Local or Neighbourhood Plan.  Therefore, Herefordshire Council will consider whether to iden Ɵfy suitable areas for wind energy through 
 the prepara Ɵon of the Rural Areas Site Alloca Ɵon Development Plan Document or other appropriate 
development plan document. Neighbourhood Development Plans also have the ability to consider 
idenƟfying suitable sites for wind energy development. 
5.3.41 	 Herefordshire is predominantly a rural county which bene ﬁts from the presence of many interna Ɵonal 
 and na Ɵ onal designa Ɵons, alongside highly valued local landscapes. While these designa Ɵons limit the 
 poten Ɵal for strategic renewable and low carbon energy genera Ɵ on, opportuni Ɵes are present in 
Herefordshire to support such measures and the excep Ɵonal circumstance for such provision needs to 
be recognised. For example, farm diversi ﬁcaƟon schemes can provide opportuni Ɵes for the 
 implementa Ɵon of renewable or low carbon energy projects. Neighbourhood Development Plans 
 promo Ɵng community-led micro-genera Ɵon schemes will be supported where they are in accordance 
with policy SD2 and other relevant policies of the Core Strategy. 
Policy SD2 – Renewable and low carbon energy genera Ɵon 
Development proposals that seek to deliver renewable and low carbon energy will be supported where they meet the following criteria:
 1. the proposal does not adversely impact upon interna Ɵonal or na Ɵonal designated natural and heritage 
 assets;
 2. the proposal does not adversely a ﬀ ect residen Ɵ al amenity;
 3. the proposal does not result in any signi ﬁcant detrimental impact upon the character of the landscape 
and the built or historic environment and
 4. the proposal can be connected e ﬃ  ciently to exis Ɵ ng naƟonal grid infrastructure unless it can be 
demonstrated that energy genera Ɵon would be used on-site to meet the needs of a speci ﬁc end user. 
In the case of energy genera Ɵon through wind power developments, permission will only be granted for such 
proposals where: 
• the proposed site is iden Ɵﬁed in a Neighbourhood Development Plan or other Development Plan 
Document as a suitable site for wind energy genera Ɵ on; and 
• following consulta Ɵon with local residents, it can be demonstrated that the planning impacts iden Ɵﬁed 
can be fully addressed, and therefore the proposal has the backing of the local community. General Policies
 
Sustainable water management 
5.3.42 	 Sustainable water management means minimising our impact on the healthy func Ɵoning of the water 
cycle. Changes occurring to the climate mean that we are likely to experience an increase in the intensity, severity and frequency of extreme weather events such as droughts, storms and ﬂoods, which could 
 drama Ɵcally impact on the way we need to manage water in the development of sustainable 
 communi Ɵes. There is a ﬁnite capacity within the environment, and it cannot simply provide more and 
more water as a result of increased consump Ɵon rates or overall demand. Equally there is a limit to the 
amount of waste water that can be safely returned to rivers without having a detrimental e ﬀect. 
154154 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
      
   
   
  
   
 
  
 
   
 
    
  
 
   
  
 
 
  
   
    
 
  
  
  
 
 
   
  
   
    
   
   
 
   
   General Policies
5.3.43 	 The issue of water management is especially important in Herefordshire with a number of watercourses 
bene ﬁƟng from di ﬀerent levels of protec Ɵon. The en Ɵre lengths of the River Wye and River Lugg are 
designated as Sites of Special Scien Ɵﬁc Interest, while the Wye and the Lugg from Hampton Court Bridge 
to its con ﬂuence are designated as a Special Area of Conserva Ɵon under European legisla Ɵ on. Alongside 
this, all watercourses and groundwater, are covered by the European Water Framework Direc Ɵve and are 
recognised as providing signi ﬁcant biodiversity, health and recrea Ɵ onal bene ﬁts. Delivery of the Water 
 Framework Direc Ɵve is proposed through a “Catchment Based Approach” and the Local Plan should play 
a part in achieving its objec Ɵves.    
5.3.44 	 Changes in rainfall pa Ʃerns, land management and land use, combined with more frequent occurrence 
of extreme weather events will present increased ﬂood risk. Although ﬂooding cannot be wholly 
prevented, its impacts can be avoided or reduced through good planning and land management. To this end the suscep Ɵbility of land to ﬂooding and surface water management are material considera Ɵons 
when assessing planning applica Ɵons. Accordingly Herefordshire Council will support development 
proposals that accord with the principles of the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 2009 (SFRA), as well as 
naƟonal technical guidance on the sequen Ɵal test and the excep Ɵon test, and ensure that surface water 
drainage is also properly managed. Where ﬂood risk assessments are undertaken they should include all 
 sources of ﬂ ooding, including ﬂuvial ﬂooding from ditches and water courses across the site. 
5.3.45 	 The SFRA aims to ensure that planning policies and development land alloca Ɵons will not increase the risk 
of ﬂooding both within the development and the surrounding area, and to idenƟfy and promote 
measures that will minimise ﬂood-risk and/or enhance ﬂood resilience. The SFRA for Herefordshire 
reﬁnes the county’s ﬂood risk areas by taking into account other sources of ﬂooding and other strategies, 
such as the Wye and Usk Catchment Flood Management Plan and the River Severn Catchment Flood 
 Management Plan. 
Policy SD3 – Sustainable water management and water resources 
Measures for sustainable water management will be required to be an integral element of new development in order to reduce ﬂood risk; to avoid an adverse impact on water quan Ɵty; to protect and enhance groundwater 
resources and to provide opportuni Ɵes to enhance biodiversity, health and recrea Ɵon. This will be achieved by 
ensuring that:
 1. 	 development proposals are located in accordance with the Sequen Ɵal Test and Excep Ɵon Tests (where 
appropriate) and have regard to the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) 2009 for Herefordshire;
 2. 	 development is designed to be safe, taking into account the lifeƟme of the development and the need 
to adapt to climate change by se ƫ  ng appropriate ﬂoor levels, providing safe pedestrian and vehicular 
access, where appropriate, implemen Ɵ ng a ﬂ ood evacua Ɵon management plan and avoiding areas 
idenƟﬁed as being subject to Rapid Inunda Ɵon from a breach of a Flood Defence;
 3. 	 where ﬂooding is iden Ɵﬁed as an issue, new development should reduce ﬂood risk through the inclusion 
of ﬂood storage compensa Ɵon measures, or provide similar be Ʃerment to enhance the local ﬂ ood risk 
 regime; 
4. 	 development will not result in the loss of open watercourse and culverts should be opened up where 
possible to improve drainage and ﬂood ﬂows.  Proposals involving the crea Ɵon of new culverts (unless 
essenƟal to the provision of access) will not be permi Ʃed;
 5. 	 development includes appropriate sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) to manage surface water 
appropriate to the hydrological se ƫng of the site.  Development should not result in an increase in 
runoﬀ and should aim to achieve a reduc Ɵon in the exis Ɵ ng runoﬀ rate and volumes, where possible;
 
155155 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
    
   
  
  
 
  
  
   
 
     
 
 
   
            
  
  
    
           
      
   
    
    
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 General Policies Policy SD3 – Sustainable water management and water resources con Ɵnued
 6. water conserva Ɵon and e ﬃciency measures are included in all new developments, speci ﬁ cally: 
•   residen Ɵal development should achieve Housing - Op Ɵonal Technical Standards - Water e ﬃciency 
                    standards. At the Ɵme of adop Ɵon the published water e ﬃciency standards were 110 litres/person/
     day; or 
•   non-residen Ɵal developments in excess of 1,000 m2 gross ﬂoorspace to achieve the equivalent of 
     BREEAM 3 credits for water consump Ɵon as a minimum;
 7. the separa Ɵon of foul and surface water on new developments is maximised;
 8. development proposals do not lead to deteriora Ɵon of EU Water Framework Direc Ɵve water body 
 status; 
9. development should not cause an unacceptable risk to the availability or quality of water resources; and 10. in par Ɵcular, proposals do not adversely a ﬀect water quality, either directly through unacceptable 
polluƟon of surface water or groundwater, or indirectly through overloading of Wastewater Treatment 
 Works. 
Development proposals should help to conserve and enhance watercourses and riverside habitats, where 
necessary through management and mi ƟgaƟon measures for the improvement and/or enhancement of water 
quality and habitat of the aqua Ɵc environment. Proposals which are speci ﬁcally aimed at the sustainable 
management of the water environment will in par Ɵcular be encouraged, including where they are required to 
support business needs such as for agriculture.  Innova Ɵve measures such as water harves Ɵng, winter water 
storage and acƟve land use management will also be supported. In all instances it should be demonstrated that there will be no signi ﬁcant adverse landscape, biodiversity or visual impact. 
5.3.46 	 The ‘Sequen Ɵal Test’ is set out in paragraphs 100-104 of the NPPF.  This aims to ensure inappropriate 
development does not take place in areas at high risk of ﬂooding by direc Ɵng it away from areas at 
highest risk. Areas at risk of ﬂooding are those falling within Flood Zones 2 and 3 as deﬁned on the 
Environment Agency’s website. Flood Zone 1 is the area of low probability of ﬂooding and should 
generally be used in preference to land in other zones. However land in Flood Zone 1 may also have
 criƟcal land drainage problems which can be ascertained through Herefordshire Council’s Land Drainage 
team. Where no reasonable sites are available within Flood Zone 1 the ‘ExcepƟon Test’ may be applied. 
Where this test needs to be applied certain forms of development may be permi Ʃed in Flood Zones 2 and 
3 depending upon their level of vulnerability. These are iden Ɵﬁed in Technical Guidance to the Na Ɵonal 
Planning Policy Framework. 
5.3.47 	 Policy SD3 also provides criteria for developers to consider when proposing development within areas 
idenƟﬁed as being at risk of ﬂooding within the district. The policy iden Ɵﬁes the need for development 
 proposed within ﬂood risk areas to take account of a number of measures to ensure that the 
development is safe and remains safe, in Ɵ  mes of ﬂ ood including:
 -	seƫ  ng appropriate ﬂoor levels which should be above the 1% predicted plus climate change design 
ﬂood level, incorpora Ɵng an allowance for freeboard. Development should also consider in the 
         design the risk from more extreme events. Where it is not feasible or prac Ɵcable to set the ﬂoor 
         levels, then other forms of ﬂood resilience and resistance techniques may be considered as an 
         alterna Ɵ ve;
 -	where overnight accommoda Ɵon is included, the development should include a safe pedestrian  
         access route which would be available during a 1% plus climate change design ﬂood event. In 
         considering this, regard should be given to the evidence in the SFRA and for ‘defended areas’          including an assessment of Flood Defence breach/overtopping scenarios. Other development should          consider this as a residual risk; 
156156 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
   
 
 
  
 
   
  
  
    
   
   
  
 
  
   
   
  
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
   
    
   
  
 General Policies
-	considera Ɵon of safe vehicular access; and
 -	for developments implemen Ɵ ng a ﬂ ood evacua Ɵon management plan, where appropriate, to
         manage the risk to the development site itself and future users/occupiers during all ﬂ ood events 
         along with any remaining residual risks. 
5.3.48 	 A key component to reducing the risk of ﬂooding is the implementa Ɵon of Sustainable Drainage Systems 
(SuDS) in all developments. Such systems can also assist in improving water quality. The Flood and Water 
Management Act 2010 introduces the mandatory inclusion of SuDS within developments alongside the ability for the se ƫ  ng of na Ɵonal standards. Development proposals are to accord with these standards 
and where appropriate be accompanied by surface water management plans detailing the drainage proposals. Advice is contained within the SFRA. 
5.3.49 	 Government legisla Ɵon sets out the statutory introduc Ɵon of Sustainable Drainage Advisory Bodies 
(SABs). SABs are designed to appraise and grant approval or refusal on proposed Sustainable Drainage Systems. Herefordshire Council will work in partnership with the SAB as well as the Environment Agency, to ensure that development proposals do not have adverse ﬂood impacts. 
5.3.50 	 With respect to water conserva Ɵon and e ﬃciency of use, Policy SD3 sets out targets for reduced 
 consump Ɵon in associa Ɵon with new development, which in turn will result in decrease ﬂow entering the 
sewer system. This approach will also help to reduce ﬂows entering waste water treatment infrastructure, 
 thereby assis Ɵng to manage the level of nutrients in the River Wye Special Area of Conserva Ɵ on (see 
Policy SD4). The Department for Communi Ɵes and Local Government has published a ‘water e ﬃciency 
calculator’ that applicants can use to demonstrate the water e ﬃciency of proposed developments.  
5.3.51 	 For employment development a standard of BREEAM 3 credits equivalent for water consump Ɵ on is 
required. This equates to 40% reduc Ɵon in water consump Ɵon over current building regula Ɵ ons. The 
Environment Agency has stated that all new non-residen Ɵal development should meet the ‘Good 
 Prac Ɵce’ level of the AECB (Associa Ɵon for Environment Conscious Building) Water Standards. These 
measures will complement the measures set out in Policy SD4 - Wastewater treatment and river water 
 quality. 
5.3.52 	 The availability of water resources to meet demand during the plan period has been examined and Dwr 
Cymru-Welsh Water’s Water Resource Management Plan iden Ɵﬁes that there are su ﬃ  cient water 
resources available to meet demand during this plan period. 
5.3.53 	 While agricultural water use lies largely outside planning control, it is a signi ﬁcant contributor to the 
water cycle condiƟons within Herefordshire and its impacts need to be taken into account in the Core 
Strategy and other Development Plan Documents and Neighbourhood Development Plans. There is 
 considerable poten Ɵal for farmers to capture and store surplus water for future use thereby reducing the 
need to abstract water from other sources, while enhancing biodiversity. However, reservoirs in par Ɵcular 
will alter landscapes and habitats on a permanent basis and care on si Ɵng and design is essen Ɵal. 
5.3.54 	 Land management prac Ɵces can also play a vital role in managing ﬂood risk and water quality at a local 
level; for example, the crea Ɵon and restora Ɵon of wetlands and woodlands can reduce the level of 
ﬂooding, and in some cases remove the risk of local ﬂooding altogether. These prac Ɵces also improve 
water quality in addi Ɵon to producing wider environmental bene ﬁts, including encouraging an increase in 
wildlife species and habitats and reducing carbon. 
157157 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
  
  
   
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
    
   
   
  
 
  
  
  
 
      
      
    
  
    
 
  5.3.55 	 A Herefordshire Water Steering Group was established and a Ʃended by Herefordshire Council, Dwr 
Cymru-Welsh Water, the Environment Agency and Natural England, in order to inves Ɵ gate how 
development might be accommodated within the limits set by the Habitats Regula Ɵons. It is expected 
that this group will be expanded in order to address issues arising from the prepara Ɵon of a Nutrient 
Management Plan. One of the areas that it might consider is iden Ɵfying best prac Ɵce in the reducƟ  on of 
 water use. 
Wastewater treatment and river water quality 
5.3.56 	 The water quality of Herefordshire’s main rivers and their tributaries is of strategic importance and in 
parƟcular, current unacceptable levels of nutrients along part of the rivers need to be addressed. This is 
important to the overall environmental objec Ɵves of the Core Strategy. 
5.3.57 	 The Rivers Wye, Lugg, Teme and Clun are Sites of Special Scien Ɵﬁc Interest (SSSIs), designated under the 
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981  (as amended). Furthermore, the River Wye, including part of the River 
Lugg (downstream from Hampton Court Bridge), part of the River Clun (downstream of Marlow, Shropshire) and Downton Gorge on the River Teme are also designated as Special Areas of Conserva Ɵon 
 (SACs). 
5.3.58 	 Both levels of designa Ɵon require e ﬀorts to be made to ensure the whole system, or catchment, achieves 
and then remains resilient in terms of suppor Ɵng river habitats consistent with policy LD2 (Biodiversity 
and geodiversity). The Environment Agency has responsibility for water quality and ecological objec Ɵ ves 
set by European Direc Ɵve 2000/60/EC, the ‘Water Framework Direc Ɵve,’ which applies to surface waters 
and groundwater, and is preparing a River Basin Management Plan to deliver these. Natural England has 
responsibility for ensuring SSSIs and SACs achieve ‘favourable condi Ɵon.’ Currently all parts of the river 
SSSIs are in unfavourable condi Ɵon although some are recovering. All public bodies have a duty to 
contribute towards mee Ɵng these targets. General Policies
 
Policy SD4 - Wastewater treatment and river water quality 
Development should not undermine the achievement of water quality targets for rivers within the county, in parƟcular through the treatment of wastewater. 
In the ﬁrst instance developments should seek to connect to the exis Ɵng mains wastewater infrastructure 
network. Where this op Ɵon would result in nutrient levels exceeding conserva Ɵ on objec Ɵves targets, in 
parƟ cular addi Ɵonal phosphate loading within a SAC designated river, then proposals will need to fully mi Ɵ gate 
the adverse e ﬀects of wastewater discharges into rivers caused by the development. This may involve: 
• incorpora Ɵng measures to achieve water e ﬃciency and/or a reduc Ɵon in surface water discharge to the 
mains sewer network, minimising the capacity required to accommodate the proposal, in accordance 
with policy SD3; 
• phasing or delaying development un Ɵl further capacity is available; 
• the use of developer contribu Ɵons/community infrastructure levy funds to contribute to improvements 
to waste water treatment works or other appropriate measures to release capacity to accommodate
 new development; 
• in the case of development which might lead to nutrient levels exceeding the limits for the target
 conserva Ɵ on objec Ɵves within a SAC river, planning permission will only be granted where it can be 
demonstrated that there will be no adverse e ﬀect on the integrity of the SAC in view of the site’s 
 conserva Ɵ on objec Ɵ ves; and 
158158 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
   
    
  
  
  
   
  
 
       
  
  
  
    
   
 
     
 
      
  
      
  
 
  General Policies Policy SD4 - Wastewater treatment and river water quality con Ɵnued 
• where the nutrient levels set for conserva Ɵ on objec Ɵves are already exceeded, new development should 
not compromise the ability to reduce levels to those which are de ﬁned as favourable for the site. 
Where evidence is submi Ʃed to the local planning authority to indicate connec Ɵon to the wastewater infrastruc­
ture network is not pracƟ  cal, alterna Ɵve foul drainage op Ɵons should be considered in the following order: 
• provision of or connec Ɵon to a package sewage treatment works (discharging to watercourse or 
 soakaway); 
• sep Ɵc tank (discharging to soakaway). 
With either of these non-mains alterna Ɵves, proposals should be accompanied by the following: 
• informa Ɵon to demonstrate there will be no likely signi ﬁ cant eﬀ ect on the water quality, in par Ɵ cular of 
 designated na Ɵonal and European sites, especially the River Wye SAC and the River Clun SAC; or 
• where there will be a likely signi ﬁ cant eﬀ ect upon a SAC river, informa Ɵon to enable the council, in its 
role as a competent authority, to ascertain that the development will have no adverse e ﬀect on the 
integrity of the SAC; 
• in rela Ɵon to water courses with na Ɵonal or European nature conserva Ɵ on designa Ɵons, the inclusion 
of measures achieving the highest standard of water quality discharge to the natural drainage system including provision for monitoring.  
The use of cesspools will only be considered in excep Ɵonal circumstances and where it can be demonstrated 
that suﬃ  cient precauƟonary measures will ensure no adverse e ﬀect upon natural drainage water quality 
objecƟ  ves. 
5.3.59 	 There is a duty upon Herefordshire Council, so far as it is able, to further the conserva Ɵ on and 
enhancement of the river SSSIs within its area. Each SSSI has its own ‘conserva Ɵ on objec Ɵ ves,’ which 
include targets that form the baseline against which its favourable condi Ɵon is judged. The decisions the 
council takes can in ﬂuence whether a site meets its targets or not. With respect to the river SSSI’s, this 
includes decisions on foul and surface water drainage from development. Developers can assist by 
 contribu Ɵng to the resilience of ecological networks through their e ﬀorts to deliver green infrastructure 
under policy LD4. Maintaining a high quality environment will assist marke Ɵng of homes and the 
aƩ racƟon of employment. 
5.3.60 	 Herefordshire Council is a competent authority under the Conserva Ɵon of Habitats and Species 
 Regula Ɵons 2012 and there is a duty upon it to have regard to the requirements of the Habitats Direc Ɵve 
in exercising any of its func Ɵons. Furthermore, the LPA can only permit development which would have 
a likely signi ﬁ cant eﬀ ect (either alone or in combina Ɵon with other plans or projects) upon European sites 
aŌer having undertaken an Appropriate Assessment. Subject to certain deroga Ɵon tests, only 
development which can be shown to have no adverse e ﬀect on the integrity of European sites can be 
permiƩed. 
5.3.61 	 In addiƟon, there is also a duty on the council to help deliver Water Framework Direc Ɵ ve (WFD) 
objecƟves. It is impera Ɵve that proposals for growth do not adversely a ﬀect river water quality, and this 
includes that within associated watercourses ﬂowing into the rivers and other ‘controlled waters’ (lakes, 
ponds and groundwater etc). Wastewater from most new development within the county will connect to sewage treatment works. Such treatment works are poten Ɵally point sources of pollu Ɵon especially if 
159159 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
    
  
  
   
 
 
  
 
 
     
 
   
  
  
   
  
 
  
   
    
 
  
    
  
   
  
  
  
 
   
 
 they are unable to achieve acceptable standards of discharge, either directly or indirectly into rivers. 
SepƟc tanks and other ac ƟviƟes such as agricultural prac Ɵces form more diﬀuse sources of poten Ɵal 
polluƟon. 
5.3.62 	 The county’s rivers have a ﬁnite capacity to accommodate discharges arising from development before 
their water quality is adversely a ﬀected, and improvements to the management of waste water will be 
required to ensure both the achievement of the watercourses conserva Ɵ on objec Ɵves and the ability to 
deliver the scale of growth set out in the Core Strategy. 
5.3.63 	 The Environment Agency and Natural England have prepared a Nutrient Management Plan aimed to 
control and reduce phosphate within the River Wye SAC and in doing so seek to iden Ɵ fy acƟons to enable 
addiƟonal development. The Core Strategy will play a vital role in delivering the requirements of the 
Nutrient Management Plan, along with other mechanisms and measures. The Nutrient Management Plan and associated Ac Ɵon Plan iden Ɵﬁes the management ac Ɵons required to achieve the conserva Ɵon 
objecƟves target for phosphate by 2027. Planning guidance will be prepared where necessary to cover 
relevant measures included within the Nutrient Management Plan, or any revisions to it, comprising the need for planning advice, detailed phasing requirements, opƟons that might be funded through 
 developer contribu Ɵons, water quality and ecological condi Ɵon of stretches along the SAC rivers, and 
 monitoring arrangements. 
5.3.64 	 SecƟons of the River Wye SAC where the water quality targets are already exceeded will be subject to 
measures to reduce nutrients in line with the targets. New development must not compromise the ability 
of the Nutrient Management Plan to deliver the necessary overall reduc Ɵons along these stretches. 
5.3.65 	 SecƟons that are currently mee Ɵng their phosphate targets will be subject to measures to ensure that 
future inputs of nutrients will not lead to failures.   
5.3.66 	 Figure 5.4 iden Ɵﬁes river sub-catchment areas within Herefordshire, set by the Water Framework 
 DirecƟve. Development within these areas has the poten Ɵal to detrimentally a ﬀect water quality 
standards. High levels of phosphates have been iden Ɵﬁed as parƟcular problems with concentra Ɵon 
levels exceeding targets. 
5.3.67 	 Herefordshire Council will expect developments to connect to exis Ɵng sewage infrastructure. However, 
when this would compromise the ability to achieve favourable condi Ɵon, and poten Ɵally be contrary to 
the Habitats Regula Ɵ ons, miƟgaƟon measures would be required if the development is to proceed.  
5.3.68 	 Local water companies are responsible for providing and maintaining sewage treatment works at a 
standard to meet permiƩ  ed condi Ɵons. Their asset management programmes will set out capital works to 
ensure compliance with discharge licences. Should such works be required then it may be necessary to 
phase new development within Ɵmescales set by these programmes. However, there may be an 
addiƟonal requirement for developer contribuƟons or community infrastructure levy funding to make 
 further improvements. 
5.3.69 	 Increases in ﬂows to sewage treatment works lead to increases in nutrients in watercourses, as discharges 
have set nutrient concentra Ɵons. Reducing ﬂows to sewage treatment works through measures referred 
to in Policy SD3 can therefore contribute to reducing nutrient levels in the receiving watercourses. The 
 separa Ɵon of foul and storm water will have similar bene ﬁts. General Policies
 
160160 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
 
 
  
    
   
   
   
   
 
  
 
  
  
  General Policies
5.3.70 	 Development seeking to use non-mains drainage solu Ɵons will need to explain why this is necessary in 
the light of the Government advice on mains drainage and Herefordshire Council’s planning applica Ɵon 
requirements in respect of non-mains drainage (see Herefordshire Council website). Herefordshire Council will wish to be assured that such proposals will not adversely a ﬀect the quality of water within 
watercourses and in par Ɵcular, will have no nega Ɵ ve eﬀ ect upon SAC rivers and, in this regard, will 
undertake Habitat Regula Ɵon Assessments where necessary using informa Ɵon required from and 
provided by developers. Measures proposed to mi Ɵgate any e ﬀect will be rigorously scru Ɵ nised; and 
monitoring arrangements may need to be put in place to ensure the chosen system is e ﬀecƟ ve. 
Sustainable forms of water treatment such as reed beds may be used as alterna Ɵves to or in combina Ɵon 
with foul water treatment and disposal. Full details should be provided to show these will achieve the required standard of discharge into the natural drainage system. The sensi Ɵvity of Herefordshire’s 
environment is such that the use of cesspools should be avoided, however if this is deemed to be the only 
opƟon then a rigorous assessment of poten Ɵ al eﬀects will be required. 
5.3.71 	 A number of rivers have water quality problems arising from sedimenta Ɵon. Where opera Ɵ ons requiring 
planning permission may cause or add to the problem then mi ƟgaƟon works such as trenches, wetlands, 
 reten Ɵon ponds, bu ﬀers, swales and other forms of sediment traps may need to be considered as part of 
sustainable water prac Ɵces under policy SD3. 
161161 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
 Figure 5.4 - River sub catchments General Policies 
162162 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
        
      
      
 
  
 
       
 
         
       
        
       
        
       
 
       
        
       
      
         
      
       
 General Policies
Delivery and monitoring of the environmental quality policies 
5.3.72 	 These policies will be delivered by: 
•	   the Infrastructure Development Plan and developer contribu Ɵons/Community Infrastructure Levy 
•	   the development management process 
•	   other Development Plan Documents, Supplementary Planning Documents and Neighbourhood 
Plans. 
Environmental quality monitoring indicators: 
5.3.73 	 In addiƟon to the indicators listed in previous sec Ɵons, the following indicators will be used to measure 
 the e ﬀecƟveness of the general policies (some are aspira Ɵonal): 
•	   changes in the areas of designated nature conserva Ɵon sites as a consequence of planning 
permission;
•	   proporƟon of local sites where posi Ɵ ve conserva Ɵon management has or is being implemented; 
•	   number of listed buildings and scheduled ancient monuments on buildings at risk register (Historic  
England);
•	   net change in condi Ɵon of SSSI’s (Natural England); 
•	   number of applica Ɵons granted planning permission contrary to the advice of statutory agencies 
          (e.g. English Heritage, Natural England or the Environment Agency); 
•	   percentage of river length assessed as good biological or chemical quality (EA) in par Ɵcular so far as 
          they relate to the measures within the Nutrient Management Plan; 
•	   phosphate levels within the River Wye SAC and adjoining tributaries that receive increased 
          phosphates from Core Strategy growth; 
•	   completed development that has resulted in loss/restora Ɵ on/creaƟon of Habitats of Principal 
          Importance (Priority Habitats); 
•	   percentage of total residen Ɵ al applica Ɵons at below 30 dwellings per hectare; 
•	   number of residen Ɵ al applica Ɵons at less than 1.5 parking spaces per unit; 
•	   the need for, frequency and outcomes of planning enforcement inves ƟgaƟ ons/planning appeals 
          concerning the aspects of local loss of locally important buildings within a conserva Ɵ on area; 
•	   number of developments mee Ɵng and surpassing na Ɵonal design standards; 
•	   maintaining Herefordshire Council’s County Site and Monuments Register; and 
•	   summary of proposals contribu Ɵng to the Green Infrastructure Strategy from the above and any 
          other measures. 
163163 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
 
 
 
   
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
 
   
  
  
  
 
  
 
   
  
 
 
  
  
  
     
  
    Delivery, Implementa Ɵon and Monitoring 
Infrastructure contribu Ɵons 
6.1 	 New development can place addiƟonal demands upon physical, social and green infrastructure, such as 
roads and sewers, community buildings and parks. It is a well-established principle, in na Ɵ onal guidance 
 and legisla Ɵon, that new development should contribute towards the provision of such infrastructure, 
to ensure exis Ɵ ng communi Ɵes are not disadvantaged by any increased pressure on facili Ɵes from new 
 development. 
6.2 	 Planning legisla Ɵon provides for the funding of infrastructure from developers. The legisla Ɵ ve framework 
is set out in sec Ɵon 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990, as amended by sec Ɵon 12 of the 
1991 Planning and Compensa Ɵon Act, Part 11 (Community Infrastructure Levy) of the Town and 
Country Planning Act 2008 and the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) Regula Ɵons 2010 (as amended 
2011, 2012 & 2013). Government policy on planning obliga Ɵons is also set out in paragraphs 203 to 205 
of the Na Ɵonal Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) 2012. 
6.3 	 Previously, Government made provision for a Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) to be introduced in 
 Regula Ɵons that came into force in April 2010, now amended by the Community Infrastructure Levy
 (Amendment) Regula Ɵons 2011, the Community Infrastructure Levy (Amendment) Regula Ɵ ons 2012 
and the Community Infrastructure Levy (Amendment) Regula Ɵons 2013. Local authori Ɵes will be 
empowered to charge a levy on new developments to help ﬁnance the infrastructure needed to support 
growth. However, local authori Ɵes should have clear evidence about planned infrastructure, its cost, 
Ɵming and other likely sources of funding, to underpin their development strategies. This will be provided 
through an Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) which will sit alongside the Core Strategy.  
6.4 	 The IDP will need to be accompanied by a Charging Schedule for how the levy is calculated, which will be 
independently examined. In addi Ɵon, a list of community infrastructure projects that the council has 
prioriƟsed, for the infrastructure levy to be spent on, will be prepared (a CIL 123 list).  
6.5 	 The use of planning obliga Ɵons, known as secƟon 106 contribu Ɵons, (which Herefordshire has 
 tradiƟonally used) will s Ɵll remain, but will only relate to those infrastructure requirements required as a 
direct result of the development and where they meet the following statutory tests:
 1. necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms; 
2. directly related to the development; and 
3. fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the development. 
6.6 	 For clarity, CIL is a ﬁ xed tariﬀ intended to be used for general infrastructure contribu Ɵons whilst s106 
 obliga Ɵons will be for site-speci ﬁ c miƟ gaƟon. For the avoidance of doubt, infrastructure is de ﬁ ned as; 
those physical, social and green infrastructure projects required as a result of growth in the county. This includes housing, transport, sport and recrea Ɵon, community facili Ɵes including educa Ɵon, health and 
emergency services, water and sewerage facili Ɵes, ﬂood risk management, renewable energy genera Ɵon, 
waste management, built environment and public realm improvements and green infrastructure. Delivery, Implementa Ɵon and Monitoring
 
164164 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
    
   
  
  
   
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
       
   
  
 
      
  
 
 
   
    
 
   
 
 
 
 Delivery, Implementa Ɵon and Monitoring
Policy ID1- Infrastructure Delivery 
Provision for new and/or the enhancement of exis Ɵng infrastructure, services and facili Ɵes to support 
development and sustainable communi Ɵes, will be achieved through a co-ordinated approach. 
Where necessary, in addi Ɵon to planning condi Ɵons for essen Ɵal on-site design requirements and cri Ɵ cal 
infrastructure, developer contribu Ɵons towards strategic infrastructure through s106 agreements and/or a 
future Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL), will be secured in accordance with na Ɵonal planning policies and 
other relevant legisla Ɵon. 
A Planning Obliga Ɵons Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) will provide details of the type and scale of 
obligaƟons that may apply. 
6.7 	 All new development can impact on exis Ɵng services and facili Ɵes in its local area, whether individually 
 or cumula Ɵvely. This can have a direct impact on the need for new facili Ɵes either locally or on a larger, 
strategic scale. For example, new development on a single large site or on lots of smaller sites will have the same overall impact on the demands placed on the exis Ɵng sewerage network. In this respect it is 
right to expect all new development to contribute to making communi Ɵes safe, healthy and a Ʃ racƟve 
places to live. Policy ID1 addresses this issue and will help to deliver a whole range of other policies in the Local Plan - Core Strategy. 
6.8 	 The policy proposes that all new development is required to contribute to infrastructure needs. This will 
be achieved through a combined approach of using a set Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) and 
 planning obliga Ɵ ons (secƟon 106) for  all development types to bring forward a ﬀordable housing (in 
 conjunc Ɵon with Policy H1) and other site speci ﬁc infrastructure necessary for the development to take 
place. 
6.9 	 Individual developments will not be charged for the same items of infrastructure through both CIL and 
 planning obliga Ɵons. 
6.10 	 The CIL has been introduced to provide a fair and consistent mechanism for pooling contribu Ɵons from all 
eligible developments towards infrastructure. It provides certainty, so that developers can calculate in advance of submi ƫng a planning applica Ɵon, the level of contribu Ɵon required. Although the tari ﬀ will 
usually be a ﬁ nancial contribu Ɵon, there is also the op Ɵon of transfer of land in lieu of a ﬁnancial 
 payment. 
6.11 	 The levy is a ﬁxed rate charge, based on square metres of net addiƟ  onal built ﬂoor space and is 
 non-nego Ɵable. The charge is levied on one or more dwellings and developments of more than 100m
2 of 
ﬂoor space. Exemp Ɵons include; a ﬀordable housing and chari Ɵes. The CIL regula Ɵons allow the council 
to introduce charge varia Ɵons by geographical zone within its area, by land use, or both. These are set 
out in the Charging Schedule. Some uses may be set at zero in some zones, as the varia Ɵ ons re ﬂect 
diﬀerences in viability. 
6.12 	 The proceeds of the CIL will be spent on strategic and local infrastructure to support the development of 
the county. Developer contribu Ɵons on their own will not be able to meet the en Ɵre cost of a major 
infrastructure project. Core public funding will con Ɵnue to contribute. 
165165 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
 
   
  
 
   
  
  
 
  
  
 
   
   
    
  
  
   
 
 
 
  
    
  
 
 
 6.13 	 The type of infrastructure that the tari ﬀ will be used to service is set out in an Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan (IDP). The IDP provides robust evidence of infrastructure requirements through to 2031, but the 
focus is on the measures that are needed within the ﬁrst 5 years from the date of adop Ɵon, in the context  
of the longer term plan set out in the Core Strategy. The IDP schedule and required infrastructure is set out on an area basis to include Strategic County-wide, The Hereford Area, the Market Towns and the Rural 
 Areas. 
6.14 	 It is acknowledged that the IDP schedule cannot specify the en Ɵre infrastructure that will be provided 
in the county to 2031. Changed requirements may become apparent as new areas of development are 
designed in more detail and or ways of delivering services or facili Ɵes are reviewed. The IDP schedule is 
not intended as a one-o ﬀ document. Through the life of the Core Strategy, changes to the policies and 
strategies of service providers and the introducƟon of new technology will have implica Ɵ ons for 
infrastructure requirements and their costs. Public funding levels are also likely to vary over the life Ɵme 
of the Plan. The informa Ɵon contained in the IDP schedule will be kept under review and updated. The 
council, together with its partners, will need to look for innova Ɵve ways to fund and provide the 
necessary infrastructure. This is why it is called a “live document”. 
6.15 	 A list of priori Ɵsed infrastructure projects, which the council have commi Ʃed to, will be adver Ɵsed on the 
council’s website in the form of a Regula Ɵon 123 list. This list will have been veri ﬁed in terms of 
achievability and phasing of delivery through a separate evidence base dealing with Economic Viability, which will ensure that a balance is struck between the required infrastructure projects and the ability of the strategic sites to be delivered by the development industry. 
6.16 	 Monies received in respect of the tari ﬀ and planning obliga Ɵons will be monitored and reported on 
through the LDF Annual Monitoring Report. Joint working with internal and external delivery partners will be necessary to keep the Charging Schedule and Infrastructure Delivery Plan up to date and relevant. 
6.17 	 The council accepts that there are may be occasions where development proposals are unable to meet all 
the relevant policy requirements and s Ɵll remain viable. Where the council is sa Ɵsﬁed that an otherwise 
desirable development cannot be fully compliant and remain viable, a reduced package of planning 
 obliga Ɵons may be recommended. 
6.18 	 In order to enable the council to assess the viability of a proposal, the applicant will be required to 
provide any necessary cost and income ﬁgures to the council and pay the council’s full costs in appoinƟ ng 
an independent assessment of the viability proposal. 
6.19 	 In all cases, the council requires viability to be undertaken using a residual land value approach. This 
means that the starƟng point for a viability assessment is to be the exis Ɵng use value (i.e. what the site is 
worth in its current condi Ɵon for the use that it has planning consent for). Viability claims based on an 
 over in ﬂated price that has been paid for a site will not be accepted. 
6.20 	 A Planning Obliga Ɵons Supplementary Planning Document will be prepared to give more details of the 
council’s requirements which are to be met through planning obliga Ɵons. Delivery, Implementa Ɵon and Monitoring
 
166166 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
       
      
      
      
      
            
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
       
  
       
          
 
 
   
  
   
  Delivery, Implementa Ɵon and Monitoring
 Delivery 
6.21 	 The policy will be delivered through: 
•	   the development management process; 
•	   the neighbourhood planning process; 
•	   partnership working with infrastructure providers; 
•	   an Infrastructure Delivery Group to administer project proposals and propose priori Ɵes; 
•	   a s106 Supplementary Planning Document;  
•	   a CIL Charging Schedule; and 
•	   a CIL 123 List. 
Implementa Ɵon and monitoring of the Core Strategy 
6.22 	 The conƟnuous monitoring of policies and proposals is essenƟal to ensure that the Core Strategy achieves 
 its objec Ɵves. The policies will be monitored principally through the Annual Monitoring Report (AMR), in 
the manner described at the end of each sec Ɵon of this document and in Appendix 3 – the 
 Implementa Ɵon, Monitoring and Delivery Plan. The AMR report will set out the basic achievements of the 
main policies and contain details about the implementa Ɵon of the housing policies in par Ɵ cular. 
6.23 	 If it appears that the policies are not being e ﬀecƟve, the following acƟons will be taken: 
•	   review of the policy or policies concerned and of the implementa Ɵon mechanisms which may 
include a full or par Ɵal review of the plan; and 
•	 acƟons to speed up the delivery of land for development; and/or 
•	 idenƟﬁcaƟon of alterna Ɵve or addi Ɵonal land through further Development Plan Documents and/or 
          Neighbourhood Development Plans. 
6.24 	 The policies and proposals will also be assessed against key objec Ɵves and targets included in the 
Sustainability Appraisal to assess their contribu Ɵon towards promo Ɵng sustainable development. There 
will be a sec Ɵon in the AMR dealing with this aspect. 
6.25 	 Clearly, the Core Strategy must be able to respond to changing needs and circumstances. This will include 
assessing the poten Ɵal impacts of new or updated na Ɵonal and local policy and guidance. There will be a 
secƟon in the AMR dealing with this aspect. 
167167 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Glossary of Terms
 
Term Meaning 
A 
AcƟ ve travel An approach to travel and transport that focuses on physical ac Ɵ vity (walking 
and cycling) as opposed to motorised means. 
AECB The Sustainable 
Building Associa Ɵon The Associa Ɵon of Environment Conscious Building. 
An independent not for pro ﬁ t organisa Ɵon which promotes sustainable building. 
Aﬀ ordable Housing Social Rented, A ﬀordable Rented and Intermediate housing provided to eligible 
households whose needs are not met by the market. Eligibility is determined with regard to local incomes and local house prices. 
Aﬀordable Rented Housing Rented housing usually owned and managed by housing associa Ɵons but not 
subject to the na Ɵonal rent regime, but is subject to other rent controls. 
Air Quality Management Areas (AQMA) An area that a local authority has designated for ac Ɵon, based upon a predic Ɵon 
that naƟonal air quality objec Ɵves will not be met. 
Anaerobic diges Ɵon The process by which biodegradable material is broken down in the absence of oxygen in an enclosed vessel, yielding carbon dioxide, methane and solids / liquors, which can be used as fer Ɵliser or compost. 
Annual Monitoring Report (AMR) This assess whether targets and indicators in rela Ɵon to a range of policy areas 
are being met. 
Area Plan A detailed development plan document se ƫng out proposals for a speci ﬁ c part 
of the county (e.g. Hereford), including site alloca Ɵons. 
Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) A statutory landscape designa Ɵon, which recognises that a par Ɵ cular landscape 
is of naƟonal importance. The special quali Ɵes of the AONB encompass natural 
beauty, amenity, heritage and landscape assets. The primary purpose of the designaƟon is to conserve and enhance the natural beauty of the landscape. 
Parts of the Wye Valley and Malvern Hills AONBs lie within Herefordshire. 
B 
Belmont Transport Package The emerging Belmont Transport Package seeks to improve travel condiƟ ons 
along the A465 in Belmont, Hereford. When ﬁnalised, the package of measures 
will include a combina Ɵon of both road and non-road transport improvements. 
Best and most versa Ɵle 
agricultural land Land in grades 1, 2 and 3a of the Agricultural Land Classi ﬁcaƟon. 
Biodiversity The variety of plants and animal life on earth, encompassing the diversity of habitats, species and gene Ɵ c variaƟon. Biodiversity provides our life support 
system as well as having social and economic value. 
Biodiversity AcƟ  on Plan 
(BAP) Local BAPs iden Ɵ fy naƟonal and local targets for species and habitats 
conservaƟon and ac Ɵons. 
Borders Broadband Project A project to enable all rural areas within Herefordshire and Gloucestershire to gain access to at least 2Mbps (megabits per second) broadband speeds, with many people receiving much higher speeds. The project is a partnership between Herefordshire and Gloucestershire County Councils and telecoms provider BT. Glossary of Terms
 
168168 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
  
 Glossary of Terms
Term Meaning 
B ConƟnued 
BREEAM Building Research Establishments Environmental Assessment Method is the 
most widely recognised method of assessing the environmental quality of a building design. 
Brown ﬁ eld Land Both land and premises are included in this term, which refers to a site that has previously been used or developed.  It may be vacant, derelict or contaminated. This excludes open spaces and land where the remains of previous use have blended into the landscape, or have been overtaken by nature conserva Ɵon 
value or amenity use. 
C 
Capacity (transport) A measure of the volume of tra ﬃc that a point or link in transport infrastructure 
can accommodate, and o Ōen an evalua Ɵon of the extent to which that 
infrastructure is coping with the tra ﬃc that makes use of it; for example, 
underused, at or near capacity etc. 
Carbon footprint A measure of the impact human ac ƟviƟes have on the environment in terms of 
the amount of greenhouse gases produced, measured in units of carbon dioxide. 
Catchment Flood Management Plan Produced by the Environment Agency; these give an overview of the ﬂ ood risk 
across each river catchment and recommend ways of managing those risks now and over the next 50-100 years. They consider all types of inland ﬂ ooding, from 
rivers, ground water, surface water and Ɵdal ﬂooding and also take into account 
the likely impacts of climate change, the e ﬀects of how land is used and 
managed, and how areas could be developed. 
Census An oﬃcial count or survey of a popula Ɵon, typically recording various details of 
individuals. Last undertaken in 2011. 
Climate Change The term climate change is generally used when referring to changes in our climate, which have been iden Ɵﬁed since the early parts of the 1900’s. The 
changes that we have seen over recent years, and those which are predicted over the next 80 years, are thought by many to be mainly as a result of human behaviour, rather than due to natural changes in the atmosphere. 
Community facili Ɵes Land and buildings uses to help meet health, educa Ɵon and social needs in 
terms of developing and maintaining the health and wellbeing of all. 
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) A mechanism that empowers local authori Ɵes to apply a levy or charge on new 
developments in their areas to support community infrastructure delivery. 
Community Strategy This is a prac Ɵcal tool for promo Ɵng or improving the economic, social and 
environmental wellbeing of the local authority area. Such strategies are prepared allowing for local communi Ɵes to iden Ɵfy and share their aspira Ɵons, 
needs and priori Ɵes. 
Comparison retail Clothing materials and garments, shoes and other footwear, materials for maintenance and repair of dwellings, furniture and furnishings, major household texƟles, books, audio visual equipment, hardware and DIY supplies, chemist 
goods, jewellery, watches and clocks, bicycles and recrea Ɵ on goods. 
169169 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
 
 
 
   
  
   
   
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   Term Meaning 
C conƟnued 
CondiƟon (of SSSIs) The condi Ɵon of SSSIs is a repor Ɵng system for land with that designa Ɵon, 
assessed by Natural England and established by the Joint Nature Conserva Ɵon 
CommiƩee. There are six reportable condiƟons: favourable, unfavourable 
recovering, unfavourable no-change, unfavourable declining, part destroyed, and 
destroyed. 
Connect2 The Hereford Connect2 Greenway proposal is for a shared use footway/cycleway 
between Hereford city centre, and the B4399 Holme Lacy Road via a new river crossing. 
ConservaƟ on Areas An area de ﬁned in the Town and Country Planning Act (1990) as being of special 
architectural or historical interest, requiring extra protec Ɵon in planning terms, 
the character and appearance of which it is desirable to preserve or enhance. 
ConservaƟ on Objec Ɵ ves ConservaƟ on objec Ɵves in rela Ɵon to Special Areas of Conserva Ɵon are those 
referred to in the Conserva Ɵon of Habitats and Species Regula Ɵons 2010 (The 
Habitats Regula Ɵons) and Ar Ɵcle 6(3) of the European Union Habitats Direc Ɵve 
1992. They are used when either the appropriate nature conserva Ɵ on body 
(here Natural England) or competent authority (e.g. Herefordshire Council; the Environment Agency) is required to make an Appropriate Assessment under the relevant parts of the respec Ɵ ve legisla Ɵ on. Conserva Ɵ on objec Ɵves for relevant 
sites can be viewed on the Natural England website. 
ConservaƟon status (of 
EU Natura 2000 sites and species) ConservaƟ  on status  is a de ﬁniƟon from the EU Habitats Direc Ɵve for repor Ɵng 
on the condi Ɵon of habitats and species iden Ɵﬁed as being of European 
Importance. In rela Ɵon to habitats these form part of the ‘Natura 2000 Network’ 
and in Herefordshire are represented by Special Areas of Conserva Ɵon. For both 
habitats and species various parameters are assessed and there are four levels of 
status: Favourable; Unfavourable – Inadequate; Unfavourable – Bad; and 
Unknown. 
Convenience retail Goods bought frequently or out of necessity, requiring minimum e ﬀ ort in 
selecƟon and buying e.g. food, tobacco, newspapers and other goods of a 
standardised type for which there is a wide market. 
CurƟlage The area, usually enclosed, encompassing the grounds and buildings 
immediately surrounding a home that is used in the daily ac ƟviƟes of domes Ɵc 
life. A slightly di ﬀ erent de ﬁniƟon relates to listed buildings – please check with 
the planning department. 
Custom Build Custom build is when an individual or group of people work closely with a developer to build new homes. This could include fully commissioned homes or 
ﬁƫng out a previously constructed shell. (also see Self Build) 
D 
Demand management The applica Ɵon of strategies and policies to reduce or redistribute travel by road. 
A demand management approach has the poten Ɵal to deliver be Ʃer 
environmental outcomes, improved public health and stronger and more 
prosperous communi Ɵes. 
DesƟnaƟ on Hereford A project promoƟng sustainable travel choices for ge ƫng to, or around, 
Hereford. Glossary of Terms
 
170170 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
    
  Glossary of Terms
Term Meaning 
D ConƟnued 
Developer Contribu Ɵons This includes sec Ɵon 106 agreements and the Community Infrastructure Levy 
(CIL) 
Development Plan 
Documents (DPD) Component parts of the Local Plan which makes up the Development Plan. 
E 
Economic output Output in economics is the quan Ɵty of goods or services produced in a given 
Ɵme period, by a ﬁrm, industry, county, region or country. 
Edgar Street Grid (ESG) Masterplan This sets out the principles for layout and design of the regenera Ɵon area. It 
shows the rela Ɵonship between buildings and space; the connec Ɵ ons between 
streets, squares and open spaces; the movement pa Ʃerns; the height, massing 
and bulk of buildings; the distribu Ɵon of uses; the loca Ɵon of street furniture 
and landscaping; and how well the new urban neighbourhood is integrated with the surrounding urban context. 
Edge of centre (retail) For retail development: a loca Ɵon that is well connected and up to 300 metres 
away from the primary shopping area. For all other main town centre uses, a locaƟon within 300 metres of a town centre boundary. For o ﬃ  ce development, 
this includes loca Ɵons outside the town centre but within 50 metres of a public 
transport interchange. 
Employment land Land used for o ﬃce, industrial and warehousing purposes. 
Energy eﬃciency Making the best or the most e ﬃcient use of energy in order to achieve a given 
output of goods or services, and of comfort and convenience. This does not necessitate the use of less energy, in which respect it di ﬀers from the concept of 
energy conserva Ɵon. 
Environmental assets Features in the physical environment that are valued for a variety of cultural and scienƟﬁ c reasons. 
Environmental capacity The limit of acceptable environmental change within a deﬁ  ned area. 
Enterprise Zone An area in which incen Ɵves such as tax and planning concessions are o ﬀ ered to 
encourage investment and provide jobs. 
European Landscape ConvenƟ on (ELC) Is a treaty produced by the Council of Europe and voluntarily signed and ra Ɵﬁed 
by the UK government in 2006; the provisions of the ELC came into e ﬀ ect in 
March 2007. Ar Ɵcles 5 and 6 of the ELC highlight the need to develop policies 
and recognise in law the protec Ɵon, management and planning of all landscapes. 
Evidence base The informa Ɵon and data gathered by local authori Ɵes to jus Ɵfy the ‘soundness’ 
of the policy approach set out in Development Plan Documents, including physical, economic and social aspects of the area. 
ExcepƟ on sites A locaƟon where development would not otherwise be granted planning 
permission under normal circumstances 
ExcepƟon test ( ﬂooding) In respect of ﬂooding, if following the applica Ɵon of the sequen Ɵal test, it is 
not possible for development to be located in zones with a lower probability of ﬂooding, the excep Ɵon test can be applied. NPPF paragraph 102 outlines the 
elements that have to be passed for development to be allocated or permi Ʃed. 
171171 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
 
    
  
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
      
 Term Meaning 
F 
Favourable condi Ɵon 
(conserva Ɵon) When designated nature conserva Ɵon sites (e.g. Sites of Special Scien Ɵﬁc 
Interest) are managed in a way which maintains their nature conserva Ɵ on value, 
determined by reference to their ‘conserva Ɵ on objec Ɵves’, they are said to be in 
‘favourable condi Ɵ on’. 
Floodplain This is iden Ɵﬁed as the area of land at risk of ﬂooding, when water ﬂowing into a 
watercourse channel overtops its banks. 
Flood zone An area iden Ɵﬁed by the Environment Agency as being at risk of ﬂ  ooding, ﬂood 
zone 3 having the greatest risk. 
Formal open space This refers to sites which have a clearly de ﬁned boundary, and which are 
‘gardened’ frequently. Usually these are high pro ﬁle or important sites and o Ōen 
accommoda Ɵng high, or higher than average visitor usage. 
Food web A local network of links between people who buy, sell, produce and supply food. 
FuncƟonal Need Test A requirement for the occupier to be present  with close and con Ɵnual 
supervision at the business for the majority of the Ɵme and essen Ɵal for the 
economically sustainable enterprise. Businesses should be established for at 
least three years and be currently ﬁ nancially sound. 
G 
Geodiversity The range of rocks, minerals, fossils, soils and landforms. 
Green ﬁeld land Land that has not been previously developed, o Ōen in agricultural use. 
Green infrastructure A planned and delivered network of green spaces and other environmental features designed and managed as a mul ƟfuncƟonal resource providing a range 
of environmental and quality of life bene ﬁts for local communi Ɵ es. Green 
infrastructure includes parks, open spaces, playing ﬁelds, woodlands, allotments 
and private gardens. 
Green space A collecƟve term used to describe all parks, public gardens, playing ﬁelds, 
children’s play areas, woodlands, nature reserves, allotment gardens, linear and other open spaces. 
GVA (Gross Value Added) A measure of the value of goods and services produced in Herefordshire, used as an indicator of the state of the county’s economy. 
Gypsies and Travellers When used in combina Ɵon this means persons of a nomadic habit of life 
whatever their race or origin, including such persons who, on the grounds only of their own or their family’s or dependents’ educa Ɵonal or health needs or old 
age, have ceased to travel temporarily or permanently, but excluding members of an organised group of travelling showpeople or circus people travelling together as such. 
H 
Habitats Regula Ɵon 
Assessment A Habitats Regula Ɵons Assessment is the assessment of the impacts of 
implemen Ɵng a plan or policy on a Natura 2000 site. Its purpose is to consider 
the impacts of a land use plan against conserva Ɵ on objec Ɵves of the site and to 
ascertain whether it would adversely a ﬀect the integrity of the site. Where 
signiﬁ cant nega Ɵ ve eﬀ ects are iden Ɵﬁ ed, alterna Ɵ ve opƟons should be 
examined to avoid any poten Ɵal damaging e ﬀects. Glossary of Terms
 
172172 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 Glossary of Terms
Term Meaning 
H conƟnued 
Hereford Futures A partnership of public and private sector organisa Ɵons leading and 
co-ordina Ɵng a range of regenera Ɵon projects in Hereford. 
Herefordshire Biological 
Records Centre The local centre for the colla Ɵon, management and dissemina Ɵon of biodiversity 
data necessary for the considera Ɵon of development proposals. 
Herefordshire Economic Assessment A comprehensive analysis of the local economy, including future prospects that may generate and a Ʃract inward investment into the county. 
Herefordshire Learning Village A purpose-built state of the art learning centre. The Learning Village will provide a co-ordinated range of courses that are speci ﬁcally targeted to meet the needs 
of local employers, a business development unit and high technology engineering and cra Ō workshop. 
Herefordshire Local Nature Partnership A partnership of organisa Ɵons working together to implement and review the 
Biodiversity AcƟ  on Plan. 
Heritage asset A building, monument, site, place, area or landscape iden Ɵﬁed as having a 
degree of signiﬁ  cance meri Ɵ ng considera Ɵon in planning decisions, because of 
its heritage interest. Heritage asset includes designated assets and assets idenƟﬁed by the local planning authority. 
Historic Landscape Characterisa Ɵon Historic Landscape Characterisa Ɵon is a new GIS-based archaeological method 
for de ﬁning the historic and archaeological dimension of the present-day 
landscape. 
Historic parks and gardens Gardens, parks and designated landscapes which are of na Ɵ onal historical 
interest and which are included in English Heritage’s Register of Parks and Gardens of special historic interest in England. 
Home & Communi Ɵes 
Agency A public body that supports and funds new a ﬀordable housing and regenera Ɵon 
projects in England.  Established by the Housing and Regenera Ɵon Act 2008 as 
one of the successor bodies to the Housing Corpora Ɵon. 
Housing a ﬀ ordability The ability of families and individuals to qualify for the purchase of a house which is especially dependent on wage levels and housing market prices in an area. 
Housing Market Area Areas iden Ɵﬁed as local housing markets within Herefordshire, through an 
analysis of key indicators such as; tenure and housing type pro ﬁ le, incomes, 
aﬀordability, house prices, geographical proximity and travel to work pa Ʃerns. 
Housing quality indicators A system used by the Homes & Communi Ɵes Agency to measure the quality of 
housing schemes it funds. There are ten indicators which are used to assess the individual housing units and their design in detail, as well as assessing their context and surroundings. 
Housing trajectory This idenƟﬁes how much poten Ɵal housing can be provided and at what point in 
the future. 
I 
Informal open space Areas for unsupervised and unstructured outdoor play. These can consist of casual or informal playing space within housing estates, including safe shared space such as play streets or kick about areas. It includes outdoor equipped play areas for children of all ages, and play facili Ɵes that o ﬀ er speciﬁ  c opportuni Ɵes 
for outdoor play, such as BMX tracks. 
173173 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
     
     
      
  
  
 
 Term Meaning 
I conƟnued 
Infrastructure A collecƟve term for services such as roads, electricity, sewerage, water, social 
services, health facili Ɵes and recycling and refuse facili Ɵes. 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan This sets out details of the infrastructure required to support development in the future. 
Intermediate housing Homes for sale and rent provided at a cost above social rent, but below market levels. 
L 
Land bank A means of implemen Ɵng proposals that involves the acquisi Ɵon, leasing or 
other method of land access; by which required parcels of land are assembled unƟl development can proceed. 
Landﬁ ll sites The place where controlled waste is deposited. References to land ﬁll may also 
refer to land raising and waste disposal. 
Landscape Character Assessment (LCA) Grouping landscape into areas with similar character, based on physical and human in ﬂuences. The assessment describes the physical, cultural and 
perceptual character of the landscape and iden Ɵﬁes important or sensi Ɵve 
features. LCAs o Ō en idenƟ fy objecƟves in respect of landscape planning, design 
and management of the areas. 
Lapse rates An esƟmate of the levels of planning permission which will expire without being 
implemented based upon an analysis of historic records. 
LifeƟ me Homes LifeƟme Homes are ordinary homes designed to incorporate 16 design criteria 
that can be universally applied to new homes at minimal cost. Each design feature adds to the comfort and convenience of the home and supports the changing needs of individuals and families at di ﬀerent stages of life. 
See hƩ p://www.life Ɵ mehomes.org.uk/ 
Listed Buildings Buildings that are iden Ɵﬁed for their special architectural or historic interest. 
Listed building consent is required to ensure that these features are protected. There are three categories of lis Ɵng depending on the importance and special 
interest of the building: Grade l, Grade ll* and Grade II. 
Locality Working This involves Herefordshire Council working at a local level, in partnership with communi Ɵes, in order to: 
•   gain a fuller understanding of local needs and resources; 
•   encourage service providers to work be Ʃ er together; 
•   develop local solu Ɵons to improve the lives of residents. 
Local Development Scheme (LDS) This is a public statement of a local authority’s programme for the produc Ɵ on of 
Local Development Documents. 
Local Enhancement Zone Areas iden Ɵﬁed in the Green Infrastructure Strategy 2010, which would bene ﬁt 
from improvement in terms of green infrastructure 
Local Geological Sites Local Geological Sites are selected on a local or regional basis using na Ɵonally 
agreed criteria. These are based on the value of a site for educa Ɵ onal purposes 
as well as historical and aesthe Ɵc value, parƟcularly in promo Ɵ ng public 
awareness and apprecia Ɵon of earth sciences. 
Local Housing Market Assessment (LHMA) An area-wide analysis of housing demand and housing need. Glossary of Terms
 
174174 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 Glossary of Terms
Term Meaning 
L conƟnued 
Herefordshire Local Housing 
Requirement Study A study undertaken as an addendum to the Herefordshire Local Housing Needs Assessment to inform the developments for the Core Strategy including demographic projec Ɵons for popula Ɵon, households and dwellings, taking 
account of past trends and forecasted economic performance. 
Local Needs Local needs housing is the housing developed to meet the needs of exis Ɵ ng and 
concealed households living within the parish and surrounding parishes which is evidenced by the Housing Needs Survey for the parish, the Housing Register and the Local Housing Market Assessment. 
Local Strategic Partnerships (LSP) These are non-statutory, mul Ɵ-agency partnerships, within local authority 
boundaries, bringing together di ﬀerent parts of the public, private, community 
and voluntary sectors; allowing di ﬀ erent iniƟaƟves and services to work together 
more eﬀecƟ vely. 
Local Transport Plan 3 A ﬁve-year integrated transport strategy being prepared by the council as highway authority, in partnership with the community; which seeks funding to help provide local transport projects. 
Local Wildlife Site Previously known as Sites of Importance for Nature Conserva Ɵon or County 
Wildlife Sites these are areas of land with signi ﬁcant wildlife value in a county. 
M 
Market housing Housing sold or rented at full market value. 
MiƟgaƟon Measures taken to reduce adverse impacts; for example, changing the way development is carried out to minimise adverse e ﬀects through appropriate 
methods or Ɵming. 
Monitoring Process where outcomes of policies and proposals are checked on a con Ɵnuous 
or periodic basis in order to assess their e ﬀecƟveness and impact. 
MulƟ ple depriva Ɵon Where people are deprived in respect of a number of a Ʃributes such as income, 
housing, healthcare and educa Ɵon. 
N 
NHS Herefordshire In 2008, Herefordshire Council and NHS Herefordshire became the ﬁ rst local 
authority and primary care trust to form a new kind of partnership to achieve more eﬃ  cient and be Ʃer value for money services Herefordshire residents. 
NaƟonal Nature Reserve Designated by Natural England these are sites for wildlife and/or geology naƟonal importance with legal protec Ɵon. 
NaƟonal Planning Policy 
Framework This sets out the Government’s planning policies for England and is the framework within which Herefordshire Council has produced the Local Plan – Core Strategy. 
Neighbourhood Development Plan The development plan wri Ʃen by a community which has come together 
through a local parish council to shape new development by saying where a development should be located and what it should look like. Introduced via the Localism Act 2011. 
175175 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
  Term Meaning 
O 
Open space All open space of public value, including not just land, but also areas of water 
(such as rivers, canals, lakes and reservoirs), which o ﬀer important opportuni Ɵes 
for sport and recrea Ɵon and can act as a visual amenity. 
P 
Park and Choose FaciliƟes which seek to reduce town centre conges Ɵon and support more 
sustainable and ac Ɵve travel modes by encouraging motorists to leave their 
vehicles on the edge of the urban area, and con Ɵnue their journey by a range of 
sustainable travel op Ɵons. This may be by regular bus service, walking, cycling or 
car-sharing. 
Passivhaus A standard where the hea Ɵng requirement is reduced to the point where a 
tradiƟ  onal hea Ɵng system is no longer considered essen Ɵal. Cooling is also 
minimised by the same principles and through the use of shading and in some cases via the pre-cooling of the supply air. The Passivhaus standard can be applied to residen Ɵal dwellings, commercial, industrial and public buildings. 
PermiƩ ed development 
rights Rights to carry out certain limited forms of development without the need to make an applica Ɵon for planning permission. 
Perpetuity Meaning ‘forever’ regardless of changes in circumstances including land ownership. 
Planning obliga Ɵons See secƟon 106 Agreements. 
Previously developed land (PDL) See Brown ﬁ eld land. 
Primary shopping areas These will be de ﬁned in the Area Plans and will include the primary and 
secondary shopping frontages. 
Primary shopping frontages Deﬁned areas in town centres; likely to include a high propor Ɵon of retail uses 
which may include food, drinks, clothing and household goods. 
Public transport interchange A place where there are facili Ɵes to allow people to change their method of 
transport from and to walking, cycling, buses and trains. 
R 
Rain garden A rain garden is a shallow depression, with absorbent, yet free-draining soil and planted with vegeta Ɵon that can withstand occasional temporary ﬂooding. 
Regenera Ɵon The redevelopment of decaying or run-down parts of older urban or rural areas, in order to bring them new life and economic vitality. 
Registered social housing providers Either not for pro ﬁt or proﬁt making organisa Ɵons (subject to the same 
standards and address the same housing priori Ɵes) providing social housing and 
regulated by the Homes and Community Agency. 
Renewable energy Power derived from a source that is con Ɵnually replenished, such as wind, 
wave, solar, hydroelectric and energy from plant material, but not fossil fuels or nuclear energy. Although not strictly renewable, geothermal energy is generally included. 
Residual land value In the context of this plan this is de ﬁned as the di ﬀerence between the total 
value of a development scheme and all the costs of the development, including land acquisi Ɵon. Glossary of Terms
 
176176 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
 
 
  
 
   
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
 Glossary of Terms
Term Meaning 
R ConƟnued 
Retail hierarchy A hierarchy of shopping centres ranging from regional and sub-regional centres 
through to town centres, district and local centres. 
River Wye SAC Nutrient Management Plan Prepared by Natural England and the Environment Agency the Plan for the River Wye, this will aim to control and reduce phosphates in the SAC to facilitate the delivery of the proposed development. 
Rural housing market area (HMA) A term used in rural housing sec Ɵon to describe the rural element of each 
housing market area. 
Rural Regenera Ɵ on Zone A vehicle for bringing together partners from the public, private and voluntary sectors to develop and implement a programme of economic regenera Ɵ on for 
the area. 
S 
Scheduled Ancient Monument A naƟonally important archaeological site or monument given legal protec Ɵon. 
Secondary shopping frontages Deﬁned areas within town centres where there is greater opportunity for a 
wider mix of uses than in primary shopping frontages such as restaurants, cinemas and businesses. 
SecƟon 106 agreements An agreement by the local authority with a landowner/developer restric Ɵ ng or 
regulaƟng the development or use of land either permanently or temporarily, in 
accordance with the Town and Country Planning Act (1990). 
Self-build housing Self-build projects are where an individual or group of people directly organise and commission the design and construc Ɵon of their new homes. (also see 
Custom Build) 
Self-suﬃ  ciency (waste 
management) The European Community (EC) Framework Direc Ɵve on Waste and the EC 
Landﬁ ll DirecƟve set out a common framework for ac Ɵon on waste. Waste 
management should protect human health and the environment by establishing an integrated network of waste facili Ɵes. Member States should 
promote self-su ﬃciency by dealing with waste as close as possible to its point 
of origin and promo Ɵng waste avoidance by recycling, reclama Ɵon and energy 
recovery. 
SequenƟ al approach A planning principle that seeks to iden Ɵfy, allocate or develop certain types of 
locaƟons of land before others. For example, town centre retail sites before 
out-of-centre sites. In terms of employment a sequen Ɵal approach would favour 
an employment use over mixed use and mixed use over non-employment uses. 
SequenƟ al test In relaƟ on to ﬂooding, this aims to steer new development to areas with the 
lowest probability of ﬂooding. 
SeƩ lement hierarchy SeƩ lements de ﬁned by their role and func Ɵon in a speci ﬁ ed list. 
Signiﬁcant urban extensions Large-scale housing growth on the periphery of towns. 
Sites of Special Scien Ɵﬁc 
Interest (SSSI) These are legally protected sites, designated by Natural England in view of their wildlife and geological value. 
Social well-being The provision of development to assist with medical or social support 
Social rented housing Subsidised housing provided by a Registered Provider or local authority allocated on the basis of need. 
177177 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
   
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
  Term Meaning 
S ConƟnued 
Soundness LegislaƟon does not de ﬁne the term ‘sound’, however, the Planning Inspectorate 
consider it in the context of its ordinary meaning - ‘showing good judgement’ 
and ‘able to be trusted’, and within the context of ful ﬁlling the expecta Ɵ ons of 
legislaƟon. 
Special Areas of ConservaƟ on (SAC) SACs are sites designated under the Habitats Direc Ɵ ve (Direc Ɵve 92/43/EEC on 
the conserva Ɵon of natural habitats and of fauna and ﬂora). Together with 
Special ProtecƟon Areas they form the Natura 2000 network of sites. 
Stakeholders Groups, individuals or organisa Ɵons that may be a ﬀected by, or have a key 
interest in, a development proposal or planning policy. They may o Ō en be 
experts in their ﬁeld or represent the views of many people. 
Statement of Community Involvement (SCI) This sets out the standards to be achieved by the local authority in involving the community in the prepara Ɵ on, altera Ɵon and con Ɵnuing review of all Local 
Development Documents and planning applica Ɵons. This SCI is a clear public 
statement enabling the community to know how and when they will be involved in the prepara Ɵon of Local Development Documents, and how they will be 
consulted on planning applica Ɵons. 
Strategic loca Ɵons For this Core Strategy de ﬁned as around 500 homes in Hereford, around 100 
homes in the market towns and around 5ha of employment land. 
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) A formal environmental assessment of certain plans and programmes which are likely to have signi ﬁ cant eﬀ ects on the environment. Local authori Ɵ es who 
prepare and adopt such a plan or programme must prepare a report on its likely environmental e ﬀects. They must consult environmental authori Ɵes and the 
public, and take the report and the results of the consulta Ɵon into account 
during the prepara Ɵon process, before the plan or programme is adopted. 
Strategic Highway Network A categorisa Ɵon of the road network into di ﬀerent categories determined by the 
funcƟons they perform. 
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment 
(SHLAA) A key component of the evidence base to support the delivery of su ﬃ  cient land 
for housing to meet the community’s need for more homes. The Herefordshire SHLAA assesses the poten Ɵal availability of land for housing across the county 
up to the end of the plan period, and explores any constraints that might a ﬀect 
their suitability, achievability or availability for development. 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment Sub regional market analysis of housing demand and housing need which idenƟﬁed the key drivers in the West Housing Market Area which covers 
Shropshire, Telford & Wrekin and Herefordshire. 
Supplementary Planning Documents (SPD) AddiƟonal planning documents to provide further details on selected policy 
areas. These are not subject to examina Ɵon but will be available for public 
consultaƟon before being adopted. These can take the form of design guides or 
area development briefs and will be clearly cross-referenced to the relevant plan policy or proposal that it supplements. 
Sustainable development In broad terms, this means development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future genera Ɵons to meet their own needs. 
Sustainable drainage systems (SUDS) Measures introduced in developments which aim to minimise surface water run-oﬀ and the level of waste water generated by the development. These can 
include use of reed beds to ﬁlter water and water storage areas. Glossary of Terms
 
178178 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 Glossary of Terms
Term Meaning 
S conƟnued 
Sustainability Appraisal (SA) The Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act (2004) requires Local Development 
Documents to be prepared with a view to contribu Ɵng to the achievement of 
sustainable development. Sustainability Appraisal is a systema Ɵc process that is 
used to appraise the social, environmental and economic e ﬀects of the strategies 
and policies set within a Local Development Document from the outset of the preparaƟon process. This will ensure that decisions are made that accord with 
sustainable development. 
South Hereford This comprises the two wards of Belmont and St Mar Ɵns & Hinton 
T 
Town Centre Uses Retail, leisure and commercial uses. 
Travellers When used on its own and for the purposes of planning policy ‘travellers’ means ‘gypsies and travellers’ and ‘travelling showpeople’ (see speci ﬁ c deﬁniƟ ons for 
each of these). 
Travelling showpeople Members of groups organised for the purposes of holding fairs, circuses or shows (whether or not travelling together as such). This includes such persons who on the grounds of their own or their family’s or dependents’ more localised pa Ʃern of trading, educa Ɵonal or health needs or old age have ceased 
to travel temporarily, but excludes Gypsies and Travellers (see speci ﬁ c deﬁniƟon 
for these). 
Traveller Sites Sites either for se Ʃ led occupa Ɵon, temporary stopping places, or transit sites for 
people of a nomadic way of life, such as Travellers. 
U 
Unfavourable Condi Ɵon See ‘Condi Ɵ on’. 
Unitary Development Plan Adopted on 23rd March 2007, it guides development within the county and will be in use with most of its policies ‘saved’ un Ɵl they are superseded by other 
emerging Local Plan documents. 
W 
Waste Management FaciliƟes These include facili Ɵes for waste treatment and disposal. 
West Midlands Region An oﬃ cial region of England, covering the western half of the area tradi Ɵonally 
known as the Midlands. It contains the second largest Bri Ɵsh city, Birmingham, 
and the larger West Midlands conurba Ɵon, which includes the city of 
Wolverhampton and large towns of Dudley, Solihull, Walsall and West Bromwich and a number of shire coun Ɵes including Herefordshire. 
Windfalls Sites which have not been speci ﬁ cally iden Ɵﬁed as available in the Local Plan 
process. They normally comprise previously-developed sites that have unexpectedly become available. 
Z 
Zero Carbon Development Development that achieves zero net carbon emissions from energy use on site, on an annual basis. 
179179 
Herefordshire Local Plan
 
Core Strategy 2011-2031
 If you want help to understand this document, or 
would like it in another format or language, please call the Strategic Planning team on 01432 383357 or send an email to ldf@herefordshire.gov.uk
