  
 Huntingdonshire 
DI STRI CT CO UN CIL 
Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
May 2019 r Document Information 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Document Information 
This version was produced on 16th May 2019. 
The main changes/ reasons for publishing this version are: 
Adoption at Full Council on 15th May 2019. 
For further information please contact: 
The Local Plans Team Planning Services, 
Huntingdonshire District Council, Pathfinder House, St.
 Mary's Street, 
Huntingdon, PE29 3TN. 
local.plan@huntingdonshire.gov.uk 
Maps 
All maps are reproduced from the Ordnance Survey Mapping with the permission of the Controller of Her Majesty's Stationery Office. © Cro
wn copyright and database rights 2019. 
Unauthorised reproduction infringes Crown Copyright and may lead to prosecution or civil proceedings.  Ordnance Survey HDC 100022322. 
Links to Websites 
The Local Plan includes a range of links to websites providing supporting information, data or guidance.  Every effort has been made to ensure that these links are up to date.
  As websites change these links can become 
invalid.  In circumstances where links have become invalid please use a suitable search term for an internet search.  Links to the latest supporting evidence and updated research can be found from the Council's Planning 
& Buildings pages.  Alternatively please contact the Local Plans team at the email address above for guidance. 
Cross reference links 
Cross references have been included in the text. These provide a clickable internal link to the reference in electronic versions (pdf and web). 
Important Note: 
This plan should be read as a whole in conjunction with other relevant national and local planning policies. 
Cross references between policies within this plan are not exhaustive; applicants should satisfy themselves that they have identified the policies which are relevant to their proposal for development. 
i I 
I 
I Contents 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Section A: Introduction 
A Introduction 1 
1 What is this Plan and what does it do? 2 
What is the Local Plan? 2 
What does the Local Plan do? 2 
What was involved in preparing the Local Plan? 4 
2 Huntingdonshire District 7 
Main Characteristics 7 
Settlement Portraits 10 
Huntingdon 11 
St Neots 12 
St Ives 13 
Ramsey and Bury 14 
Largest villages 15 
3 Issues Shaping the Local Plan 19 
Key Issues 20 
Summary of Key Issues 24 
The Spatial Vision and Objectives 25 
Section B: The Strategy 
B The Strategy 29 
4 The Development Strategy 30 
Amount of Development 31 
Strategy for Development 31 
Green Infrastructure 37 
Delivering the Strategy 40 
Delivering Infrastructure 42 
Flood Risk 44 
Waste Water Management 47 
The Key Diagram 49 
Built-up Areas definition 53 
Spatial Planning Areas 55 
Key Service Centres 58 
Small Settlements 59 
The Countryside 62 
Section C: Development Management 
C Development Management 64 
5 Requiring Good Design 65 
Design Context 65 
Design Implementation 67 
Placemaking 69 
Amenity 70 
Surface Water 73 
Sustainable Travel 75 
Parking Provision and Vehicle Movement 77 Contents 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
6 Building a Strong, Competitive Economy 80 
Established Employment Areas 81 
Rural Economy 84 
Homes for Rural Workers 86 
Town Centre Vitality and Viability 88 
Local Services and Community Facilities 91 
Tourism and Recreation 92 
7 Strengthening Communities 95 
Affordable Housing Provision 95 
Housing Mix 98 
Specialist Housing 100 
Gypsies,Travellers and Travelling Showpeople 102 
Rural Exceptions Housing 105 
Health Impact Assessment 107 
8 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 110 
Biodiversity and Geodiversity 111 
Trees, Woodland, Hedges and Hedgerows 114 
Protection of Open Space 116 
Rural Buildings 117 
Heritage Strategy 119 
Heritage Assets and their Settings 120 
Renewable and Low Carbon Energy 124 
Air Quality 126 
Ground Contamination and Groundwater Pollution 128 
Water Related Development 131 I 
• 
• 
• Contents 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Section D: Allocations 
D Allocations 134 
9 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 136 
Strategic Expansion Location: Alconbury Weald 136 
Former Alconbury Airfield and Grange Farm 137 
RAF Alconbury 142 
Huntingdon 146 
Ermine Street, Huntingdon 147 
Former Forensic Science Laboratory, Huntingdon 150 
Former Police HQ site, Huntingdon 152 
West of Railway, Brampton Road, Huntingdon 154 
Edison Bell Way, Huntingdon 156 
Gas Depot, Mill Common, Huntingdon 158 
California Road, Huntingdon 160 
Hinchingbrooke Country Park Extension, Huntingdon 162 
Huntingdon Racecourse 163 
Brampton 165 
Dorling Way, Brampton 166 
Brampton Park 168 
Brampton Park Golf Club Practice Ground 170 
Park View Garage, Brampton 171 
Godmanchester 172 
RGE Engineering, Godmanchester 173 
Wigmore Farm Buildings, Godmanchester 175 
Bearscroft Farm, Godmanchester 177 
10 St Neots Spatial Planning Area 179 
Strategic Expansion Location: St Neots East 180 
St Neots 185 
St Mary's Urban Village, St Neots 185 
Loves Farm Reserved Site, St Neots 187 
Cromwell Road North, St Neots 189 
Cromwell Road Car Park, St Neots 191 
Little Paxton 193 
North of St James Road, Little Paxton 193 
11 St Ives Spatial Planning Area 194 
St Ives 194 
St Ives West 195 
St Ives Football Club 198 
Giffords Farm, St Ives 199 
12 Ramsey Spatial Planning Area 200 
Ramsey 200 
Ramsey Gateway (High Lode) 201 
Ramsey Gateway 203 
West Station Y ard and Northern Mill, Ramsey 205 
Field Road, Ramsey 207 
Whytefield Road, Ramsey 209 
94 Great Whyte, Ramsey 211 
East of Valiant Square, Bury 213 
Former RAF Upwood and Upwood Hill House, Bury 215 I Contents 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
13 Key Service Centres 218 
Buckden 218 
East of Silver Street and South of A1, Buckden 219 
Luck's Lane, Buckden 221 
Fenstanton 223 
Former Dairy Crest Factory, Fenstanton 224 
Cambridge Road West, Fenstanton 226 
Cambridge Road East, Fenstanton 228 
Kimbolton 230 
West of Station Road, Kimbolton 231 
North of Station Road/ Stowe Road, Kimbolton 233 
South of Bicton Industrial Estate 234 
Sawtry 235 
East of Glebe Farm, Sawtry 236 
South of Gidding Road, Sawtry 238 
Somersham 240 
College Farm, West of Newlands Industrial Estate, Somersham 241 
Newlands, St Ives Road, Somersham 243 
The Pasture, Somersham 245 
Somersham Town Football Ground 246 
North of the Bank, Somersham 248 
Warboys 250 
West of Ramsey Road, Warboys 251 
Manor Farm Buildings, Warboys 253 
South of Stirling Close, Warboys 255 
South of Farrier's Way, Warboys 257 
Extension to West of Station Road, Warboys 259 
Yaxley 261 
Askew's Lane, Y axley 262 
Y ax Pak, Y axley 264 
Appendices 
A Replacement of Development Plans 265 
B Developed Sites 266 
Glossary 267 I Contents 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Policies 
LP 1 Amount of development 31 
LP 2 Strategy for Development 32 
LP 3 Green Infrastructure 37 
LP 4 Contributing to Infrastructure Delivery 42 
LP 5 Flood Risk 45 
LP 6 Waste Water Management 47 
LP 7 Spatial Planning Areas 56 
LP 8 Key Service Centres 59 
LP 9 Small Settlements 60 
LP 10 The Countryside 62 
LP 11 Design Context 65 
LP 12 Design Implementation 67 
LP 13 Placemaking 69 
LP 14 Amenity 70 
LP 15 Surface Water 73 
LP 16 Sustainable Travel 75 
LP 17 Parking Provision and Vehicle Movement 77 
LP 18 Established Employment Areas 81 
LP 19 Rural Economy 84 
LP 20 Homes for Rural Workers 86 
LP 21 Town Centre Vitality and Viability 88 
LP 22 Local Services and Community Facilities 91 
LP 23 Tourism and Recreation 93 
LP 24 Affordable Housing Provision 95 
LP 25 Housing Mix 98 
LP 26 Specialist Housing 100 
LP 27 Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople 102 
LP 28 Rural Exceptions Housing 105 
LP 29 Health Impact Assessment 107 
LP 30 Biodiversity and Geodiversity 111 
LP 31 Trees, Woodland, Hedges and Hedgerows 114 
LP 32 Protection of Open Space 116 
LP 33 Rural Buildings 118 
LP 34 Heritage Assets and their Settings 121 
LP 35 Renewable and Low Carbon Energy 124 
LP 36 Air Quality 126 
LP 37 Ground Contamination and Groundwater Pollution 128 
LP 38 Water Related Development 131 • 
• • 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• Introduction Section A: 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Section A: Introduction 
A.1 Huntingdonshire’s Local Plan to 2036 sets out the Council's approach to securing sustainable development 
from 2011 to 2036 in order to meet identified needs. The Local Plan is str
uctured as follows: 
Section A: Introduction 
This section sets out: 
the purpose of the Local Plan; 
an overview of Huntingdonshire district; 
the key issues that have influenced the Plan; and 
the vision and objectives which define the Plan, derived from the key issues identified above. 
Section B: Strategy 
This section sets out: 
the housing and jobs targets which the Local Plan aims to meet; 
the geographical distribution of future development in the district, focusing the highest levels of growth in 
locations with best access to services and facilities; and 
the Council's requirements for how development should contribute to infrastructure delivery. 
Section C: Development Management Policies 
This section contains policies which set out the Council's detailed requirements f or planning applications.  It 
includes policies relating to: 
design; 
economy; community; environment. 
Section D: Allocations for Development 
This section identifies sites considered to be the most suitable for delivering the Local Plan's strategy for 
sustainable growth. The site allocation policies highlight the key issues for each site. 
Section E: Policies Map 
The Policies Map is provided in a separate document to the Local Plan itself. It shows the extent of land that 
is affected by all policies of this Local Plan that are specific to a particular piece of land, including all of the Allocations policies. 
1 • 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 1 What is this Plan and what does it do? 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
1 What is this Plan and what does it do? 
What is the Local Plan? 
1.1 The Huntingdonshire Local Plan to 2036 is the plan for future sustainable development in the district 
(known as the dev
elopment plan). The Local Plan performs two specific roles: 
it identifies key areas of land for development (known as allocations) to deliver the homes, jobs and 
services needed in the district, and 
includes policies against which all planning applications are considered. 
1.2 The development plan for Huntingdonshire comprises: 
This Local Plan document; 
The separate Policies Map, which shows the extent of land that is affected by all policies of this Local 
Plan that are specific to a particular piece of land; 
All 'Made' neighbourhood plans within the district (see  Page 3); and 
Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Minerals and Waste plans, available on the Cambridgeshire 
County Council website. 
What does the Local Plan do? 
Provides a flexible framework for sustainable development 
1.3 The Local Plan provides the basis for meeting the land use needs of Huntingdonshire's communities from 
2011 up to 2036.  
Achievement of the Local Plan's vision and objectives will primarily take place through 
the determination of planning applications. The Local Plan's success, therefore, is dependent on the actions of a wide range of organisations and individuals, and in particular those preparing development proposals.  All partners have an important role in delivering the vision and objectives of the Local Plan and contributing to the future success of Huntingdonshire. 
1.4 Huntingdonshire District Council (the Council) assesses the delivery of the Local Plan and its policies via the Council's Annual Monitoring Report (AMR). The AMR includes indicators which measure the 
performance 
of the Local Plan policies and assess its wider effects on the District, monitoring information 
on housing, business, retail and leisure completions, and the expected future housing trajectory.  If an indicator shows significant change, or monitoring indicates that the Local Plan's targets are not likely to be met, the Council may consider reviewing the Local Plan.There is a table below each policy in the Local Plan indicating how it will be delivered and monitored. 
1.5 The Local Plan has been written to try to allow sufficiently flexible responses to changing needs and circumstances. The 
evidence base will be kept up to date and specific studies regularly reviewed.  All of 
the policies are written to refer to national policy rather than repeat it and to refer to the evidence base. This allows them to remain robust even where there are minor changes to higher level policies or the evidence base. 
Applies national planning principles 
1.6 National context for the Local Plan is provided by the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF). The 
NPPF sets out the gover
nment's economic, environmental and social priorities for planning and provides 
a planning framework both for plan-making and development management decision making. 
2 What is this Plan and what does it do? 1 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Presumption in favour of sustainable development (1) 
A holistic approach to social, economic and environmental issues lies at the core of the Local Plan reflecting 
the presumption in favour of sustainable development established in paragraph 14 of the NPPF. 
When considering development proposals the Council will take a positive approach that reflects the 
presumption in fav
our of sustainable development.  It will seek to work with applicants, in particular through 
the pre-application process, to find solutions which secure development that improves the economic, social and environmental conditions in Huntingdonshire. 
1.7 The NPPF is supplemented by the National Planning Practice Guidance (NPPG). The Local Plan identifies 
guidance from the NPPG where it is considered to be relevant. 
1.8 The 
Local Plan is complementary to the NPPF and NPPG: it aims to apply national policy in a 
Huntingdonshire context. 
 In determining planning applications, the Council will use the Local Plan alongside 
the NPPF and the NPPG and will also take into account any other material considerations. 
Supports the Council's and partners' priorities 
1.9 The Local Plan supports the achievement of a range of strategic and local priorities belonging to the 
Council and its partners, 
such as those identified in the Great Fen master plan and those in the Council's 
Corporate Plan.   Chapter 3 'Issues Shaping the Local Plan' identifies the key issues which have shaped 
the Local Plan and references the most significant priorities of the Council and partners. 
Sets high-level policy requirements that are supplemented by more detailed guidance 
1.10 The polices in this Local Plan address many types of development in all parts of the district, and are therefore necessar
ily high-level. To supplement the Local Plan, the Council has produced Supplementary 
Planning Documents (SPDs) that address a range of topics in detail.  SPDs are produced in response to changing circumstances or where a need for more detailed guidance is identified. The Council has an on-going programme for reviewing and updating SPDs. The Council's website hosts information about 
current SPDs and detailed policy guidance for specific 
locations in the form of Urban Design Frameworks 
and Development Briefs. 
Sets the context for neighbourhood and community planning in the district 
1.11 The Localism Act 2011 empowers local communities to prepare their own neighbourhood development plan (commonly known as 
Neighbourhood Plans) to promote the types of development that they think are 
right for their area.  Once a neighbourhood plan is completed and has successfully passed its referendum it is 'made' by the Council, which means that it will formally become part of the district's development plan for the area which it covers.  In Huntingdonshire, town or parish councils can prepare a neighbourhood plan for land within their boundaries, or jointly prepare one for larger areas. 
1.12 In the same way that the Local Plan translates national policy principles in a Huntingdonshire context, neighbourhood plans should aim to be complementary to 
the Local Plan, providing additional local policy 
detail.  A particular requirement for neighbourhood plans is that they must be in 'general conformity' with the strategic policies of the Local Plan. 
1 The Local Plan was examined in the context of the NPPF 2012. At the time of adoption this had been 
superseded by the NPPF 2019. 
3 r 1 What is this Plan and what does it do? 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Strategic Policies in the Local Plan 
Strategic policies are those which are essential to the delivery of the Local Plan strategy. These include: 
1. All policies in 4 'The Development Strategy' of this Local Plan 
2. All policies that allocate land for development in Section D: 'Allocations'  as they are required to achieve 
the strategy as set out in 4 'The De
velopment Strategy' 
3. The policies on 'Design Context' and 'Affordable Housing Provision'. 
Legislation sets out ‘basic conditions’ which neighbourhood plans (and neighbourhood development orders) 
must satisfy
. To meet the basic conditions, neighbourhood plans must be prepared in general conformity 
with the strategic policies contained within the Local Plan as set out above. 
This is considered to be compliant with the distinction made in the NPPF between policies of a strategic 
nature and those that are not. 
1.13 Neighbourhood plans are not the only tool that can help achieve communities' aspirations; there are a 
range of community planning tools which may be more or less appropriate for different communities and the outcomes they want to achieve. Within the Local Plan, the 'Rural Exceptions Housing' policy in 
particular may be of use for communities who choose not to pursue the formal neighbourhood plan route. 
1.14 The Council provides support to town and parish councils in relation to community and neighbourhood planning initiatives.
  Further information is available on the Council's website. 
What does the Local Plan not do? 
1.15 As noted above, this Local Plan sets out a framework to inform decisions on planning applications. Planning permission is 
only needed if the work being carried out meets the statutory definition of 
‘development’ set out in section 55 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990.  In addition, some forms of development are allowed under national 'permitted development rights' that allow certain building works and changes of use to be carried out without having to make a planning application. This includes, for example, permitted development rights for some domestic extensions.  Other permitted development rights include changes of use such as for offices (class 'B1a') to homes (class 'C3') and shops (class 'A1') to homes (class 'C3'), which are dealt with through processes known as 'Prior Approval' or 'Prior Notification'.  In these cases the Council checks that specified elements of the development are acceptable before work can proceed.  More detail is provided in national guidance on 'When is permission required?'. 
Where the development 
proposal goes outside of the limitations of permitted development rights a planning 
application is required.  A number of policies in this Local Plan deal specifically with these types of development proposal. Where this is the case, the policy and supporting text are clear about the form of development proposals they deal with. 
Status of the Local Plan 
1.16 The Local Plan supersedes all the previous development plan documents adopted by the Council.  Full details are set out in Appendix A: 'Replacement of Development Plans'. 
What was involved in preparing the Local Plan? 
Evidence gathering 
1.17 The Local Plan is supported by a wide range of evidence sources, some of which are referred to in Chapter 3 'Issues Shaping the Local Plan'.  A full list of evidence sources relied upon by the Local Plan is available on the Council's website. 
4 What is this Plan and what does it do? 1 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Engaging with residents and other interested groups 
1.18 While preparing the Local Plan, the Council has consulted extensively with residents and other interested 
stakeholders.
  Detail on how the Council consulted, and how the Local Plan content evolved as a result 
of that consultation, is set out in the Statement of Consultation and the Statement of Representations under Regulation 20. 
Working with our neighbours and partners 
1.19 When preparing the Local Plan, the Council is required to work with neighbouring authorities and other 'prescribed bodies' 
on significant planning issues that cross administrative boundaries under the statutory 
duty to cooperate. 
1.20 The Cambridgeshire councils have a long history of working together and cooperating on a range of issues. 
 Arrangements have been put in place to ensure cooperation with the wider range of prescribed 
bodies, including the establishment of a Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Joint Strategic Planning Unit(2) . 
Individual arrangements have been made with neighbouring councils in Bedfordshire and Northamptonshire. Chapter 3 'Issues Shaping the Local Plan' sets out some of the most significant outcomes arising from 
working with partners; the Council's approach to the duty to cooperate is set out in full in the Statement of Consultation. 
Ensuring the Local Plan delivers sustainable development 
Sustainability Appraisal 
1.21 To ensure that the Local Plan promotes sustainable development and does not cause significant 
environmental, social 
or economic problems, its policies and allocations are subject to a system of appraisal 
known as Sustainability Appraisal (SA).  SA is an iterative process which has been undertaken alongside, and informed, preparation of the Local Plan. 
Habitats Regulations Assessment 
1.22 Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA) is a further requirement to ensure that there are no likely significant 
effects on 
internationally important sites and nature conservation through the Local Plan’s implementation. 
The Local Plan has been screened to consider the likely effects of all the policies cumulatively and of any individual policy on designated European sites in the district.  Both the SA and HRA report documents are available on the Council's website. 
Ensuring the viability of development 
1.23 The Council is required to assess the likely cumulative impacts on development; existing and proposed local standards, supplementar
y planning documents and policies that support the development plan, as 
well as nationally required standards.  In order to be appropriate, the cumulative impact of these standards and policies should not put implementation of the Local Plan at serious risk, and should facilitate development throughout the economic cycle. 
1.24 Detailed viability work has been undertaken as part of the Local Plan's preparation to consider the financial implications for de
velopment of the policies contained in this plan. This has helped to shape the policy 
requirements for new development, and in particular the proportion of affordable housing to be sought within development sites. 
2 Wound up in 2017 
5 r 1 What is this Plan and what does it do? 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Council approach to site-specific development viability 
A number of policies in this Local Plan acknowledge that in certain circumstances, there may be cause for 
the Council to negotiate a reduction in compliance with development standards or levels of infrastructure contribution, including affordable housing, in order to reach an economically viable solution to enable development to proceed.  In such cases, a developer may be required to provide a formal 'open book' viability assessment to support a proposal that does not comply with the Local Plan policy requirement. Where this is required, the developer must meet the costs of the Council's verification of this. 
6 Huntingdonshire District 2 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
2 Huntingdonshire District 
2.1 This chapter sets out what Huntingdonshire is like in 2017.  It considers the district's locational context, 
and describes the settlement pattern and the roles of the to
wns and larger settlements. 
Main Characteristics 
Context 
2.2 Huntingdonshire is situated approximately 100km (62 miles) north of London.  It has strong relationships with Cambridge to 
the east, Peterborough to the north and Bedford to the south-west. These provide 
employment, shopping, leisure and health services to complement those available within the district. Huntingdonshire benefits from excellent strategic communication links. The East Coast mainline railway bisects the district with stations in Huntingdon and St Neots.  Highway linkages are particularly good. East-west linkages are provided by the A428 and the A14 which facilitates access west to the Midlands and east to Europe via the East Coast ports. The A1 provides north-south linkages facilitating access southwards to London and northwards locally to Peterborough and then onwards to the East Midlands, Y ork and onto Scotland. 
Character 
2.3 Huntingdonshire is the largest district in Cambridgeshire, with a population of 169,500(3), and a land area 
of over 900 square km  (350 square miles). The district's predominantly rural nature is reflected in the sparse population density which averages just 1.9 people per hectare (4 per acre); in comparison the population density of East Cambridgeshire is 1.3 per hectare (3 per acre) and Cambridge City is 30.4 people per hectare (75 per acre).  Huntingdonshire has a relatively strong, stable economy with a high proportion of small to medium size enterprises. 
2.4 Huntingdonshire's population has grown by around 20% over the past 20 years
(4), partly in response to 
housing market pressures in and around Cambridge.  64% of the district's economically active residents live and work within Huntingdonshire.  Recent housing and employment growth has been concentrated in and around the district's main towns, and to a lesser extent at the larger villages.  Further information about the characteristics of the district as a whole is set out in Chapter 3 'Issues Shaping the Local Plan'. 
Settlement pattern 
2.5 Three of Huntingdonshire's main settlements are located in the Ouse Valley corridor which runs through the south and east of the district. The 
Roman road, now known as Ermine Street, provided focus for 
settlement along a north-south corridor crossing near the bridgehead at Godmanchester with the Via Devana which provided connections between Roman settlements near Cambridge and Corby. In contrast, Ramsey lying to the northeast in the Fens grew up focused around the Abbey which was founded in the late 10th century. The four historic market towns of Huntingdon, St Neots, St Ives and Ramsey are the largest centres of population and services in the district. These market towns have traditionally acted as service centres for nearby smaller settlements typically providing shopping, leisure, health and education services as well as being centres for employment. This arrangement has benefited both the market towns by increasing their catchment populations and the other settlements by providing residents with local access to services that would not be viable within individual settlements. The strength of this relationship varies according to proximity and accessibility with residents of some settlements looking to more than one market town for day-to-day services and all, including residents of market towns, looking outside the district to larger towns and cities for higher order services and greater choice. 
3 All population figures shown in this chapter are sourced from Census 2011. 4 Huntingdonshire's population g ro
wth between the 1991 and 2011 Censuses was 21%. 
7 2 Huntingdonshire District 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
2.6 Huntingdonshire contains one other town, Godmanchester, a large number of villages of varying sizes, 
hamlets and isolated dwellings in 
the countryside.  Outside the towns the larger settlements have a range 
of services such as a primary school, a range of shops, public transport services, a community meeting place, a general practitioner's surgery and a range of employment opportunities. These settlements often play a role in providing services for residents of nearby smaller villages and countryside areas. The settlements which most strongly perform this function are identified later in this chapter. 
2.7 Predominantly rural, Huntingdonshire includes many smaller villages scattered across the district which largely retain their historic f
orm.  Buildings clustered around a church or village green and linear patterns 
are both common settlement patterns. These patterns contribute to the distinctiveness and character of these settlements and the wider area. 
2.8 The countryside is strongly shaped by the agricultural heritage of the district.  Large swathes comprise high quality agricultur
al land used for arable crops. The north east of Huntingdonshire is heavily influenced 
by the fen landscape forming a strong contrast to the west which is dominated by gently rolling claylands with more wooded areas with Grafham Water and the Kym valley adding to the landscape character. The valley of the River Great Ouse dominates the landscape of the central and eastern parts of the district being an attractive landscape with a particular sense of enclosure and tranquillity providing many opportunities for quiet recreational use. 
8 March 
Ramsey 
Somersham 
Raunds 
Klmbohon 
cambourne 
Ml I to London 
Bedford 
A 1 (M)to London Huntingdonshire District 2 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Figure 1 : District Map 
9 w, 
£ 
Ila 
t 2 Huntingdonshire District 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Settlement Portraits 
2.9 The following pages provide summary portraits of the market towns and largest villages in Huntingdonshire. 
Each settlement's population is shown(5), followed by symbols showing what services that settlement 
contains. The key below defines the symbols used. 
Food shopping Library 
Non-food shopping Leisure Centre 
Service (e.g. hairdressers, Public Hall 
Food and drink (i.e. pub, cafe, 
restaurant) 
Bank 
Retail & Commercial services Community & Leisure 
Employment 
Education & Health Industrial estate 
Day nursery 
 Business park 
Primary School 
Secondary School 
Bus service (hourly or better) Further Education College 
(post-18) 
Train station GP Surgery 
Hospital 
Transport 
5 All population figures shown in this chapter are sourced from Census 2011 
10 ,Ill «!/ Jill 
_,. 
'' £ 1M ... - .. 
t , .. , ZS l~I Q (;) • Huntingdonshire District 2 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Huntingdon 
Community & Leisure Population 
23,732 
Employment Retail & Commercial 
Transport Education & Health 
1. Nightingale Mews 
2. Moorhouse Drive 
3. Victoria Square 4. Hartford Village Hall 5. Farmers market 
11 ,Ill «!/ Jill 
_,. 
'' £ 1M ... - .. 
t , .. , l~I (;) • 2 Huntingdonshire District 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
St Neots 
Community & Leisure Population 
30,870 
Employment Retail & Commercial 
Transport Education & Health 
1. St Neots Market Place 
2. Riverside 
3. Barford Road Pocket Park 4. Play area, Loves Farm 5. Town centre services 
12 ,Ill «!/ Jill 
_,. 
'' £ 1M ... - .. 
t , .. , l~I (;) Huntingdonshire District 2 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
St Ives 
Community & Leisure Population 
16,384 
Employment Retail & Commercial 
Transport Education & Health 
1. Town centre shops and services 
2. St Ives bridge 
3. St Ives business park 4. River frontage 5. The Broadway 
13 _,. -
t , .. , '' £ 
l~I 
··;1·• .. 
l .~•• 
·:'-i~.-· .. 
~ lrll d :•-
nJ,/ .. 
'00d .~-
Ill ,Ill «!/ 
1M 2 Huntingdonshire District 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Ramsey and Bury 
Community & Leisure Population 
8,479 
Employment Retail & Commercial 
Transport Education & Health 
1. Great Whyte 
2. Ramsey Abbey School 
3. Church Green 4. New homes 5. Edge of town supermarket 
14 t , .. IDI 
t , .. IDI 
.... 
Jill 
t , .. IDI Huntingdonshire District 2 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Largest villages 
Brampton 
Community & Leisure Population Brampton High Street 
4,862 
Employment Retail & Commercial 
Transport Education & Health 
Buckden 
Community & Leisure Population Buckden Towers 
2,805 
Employment Retail & Commercial 
Transport Education & Health 
Fenstanton 
Community & Leisure Population Church Lane 
3,242 
Employment Retail & Commercial 
Transport Education & Health 
15 ........... 
- llill 
Jill 
Jill 2 Huntingdonshire District 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Godmanchester (6) 
Community & Leisure Population Chinese Bridge 
6,711 
Employment Retail & Commercial 
Transport Education & Health 
Kimbolton 
Community & Leisure Population Kimbolton High Street 
1,477 
Employment Retail & Commercial 
Transport Education & Health 
Little Paxton 
Community & Leisure Population Samuel Jones Crescent 
3,244 
Employment Retail & Commercial 
Transport Education & Health 
6 (Designated as a town rather than a village due to a Royal Charter of 1212) 
16 I ~ l!ii Huntingdonshire District 2 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Sawtry 
Community & Leisure Population Sawtry Old Village School 
5,252 
Employment Retail & Commercial 
Transport Education & Health 
Somersham 
Community & Leisure Population St John the Baptist Church 
3,810 
Employment Retail & Commercial 
Transport Education & Health 
Warboys 
Community & Leisure Population Warboys Clock Tower 
3,994 
Employment Retail & Commercial 
Transport Education & Health 
17 2 Huntingdonshire District 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Yaxley 
Community & Leisure Population Yaxley Tea Shop 
9,174 
Employment Retail & Commercial 
Transport Education & Health 
18 • 
• 
• Issues Shaping the Local Plan 3 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
3 Issues Shaping the Local Plan 
3.1 This chapter describes the key issues(7) that the Local Plan needs to address, and shows how they have 
shaped 'The Spatial Vision and Objectives', which in turn shape the Section B: 'The Strategy' and the 
policies within the Plan. The diag
ram below sets out the structure of the Local Plan, showing the thread 
that runs from the key issues through to the Local Plan policies. 
Structure of the Local Plan 
Key issues: 
Economic 
Social 
Environmental 
Explanation of process 
Consideration of each theme is structured in the same way, 
including: 
Challenges; 
Opportunities; 
Relevant evidence sources. 
Partners' responses Partners' responses in response to the key issues identified 
above. These inform the Local Plan responses to the key issues. 
'Summary of Key Issues' Brings together the key issues and partners' responses. 
'The Spatial Vision and Objectives' 
Chapter 4 'The Development Strategy' 
Section D: 'Allocations' 
Policies Vision for Huntingdonshire to 2036 responding to the key issues 
identified above, and the objectives stemming from this. 
The strategy responds to the vision and objectives, and informs the scale and distribution of allocations. 
Allocations for development respond to the strategy. 
Policies guiding planning applications respond to the vision and 
objectiv es identified above 
. 
7 The themes discussed in this chapter are considered to be the most significant, and are not intended to be a comprehensive list of issues and evidence . 
  For a full list of the evidence that informed the Local Plan is 
available on Council's website. 
19 • • • 
• 
• 
• • • 
• 
• 
• 
• • 
• 3 Issues Shaping the Local Plan 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Key Issues 
Economic 
Key Issues 
Evidence Opportunities Challenges 
Improvements to key transport Location adjoining strategic 
infrastructure are critical to support transport links (A14, A1, east 
economic growth, including coast mainline) makes 
improvements to the A14, A1, A428 Huntingdonshire an attractive 
corridor, and East Coast mainline. location for business. The A14 in particular, which provides Location close to economic 
a vital road transport corridor between success of Cambridge forms 
the West Midlands and East Anglia an opportunity for providing 
and is of local, regional, national and complementary yet distinctive 
international significance, is frequently sector specialisms, supply 
highly congested and traffic is often chains and business 
disrupted by breakdowns, accidents accommodation. 
and roadworks. 
More jobs needed in high value Expansion of high speed 
industry sectors: Huntingdonshire’s broadband access enables 
larger businesses are concentrated in more people to live and work in 
more traditional industries where rural locations and reduces 
employment is in decline, although pressure on transport 
diversification into professional and infrastructure. 
scientific sectors has happened. 
Further diversification in these growth sectors is needed to attract highly skilled workers to the district. 
Decline in working age population 
as a proportion of total population: Ongoing growth in numbers of older people brings a corresponding decline in working age population as a proportion of total population. 
Partners' responses 
Make Alconbury Enterprise Zone successful: The Council is working with GCGP 
Local Enterprise Partnership(8)to ensure the success of the 150 hectare enterprise 
zone at Alconbury Airfield. When designated in 2011 it was envisaged that 
Alconbury Enterprise Campus would accommodate around 8,000 new jobs by 2036, with an emphasis on technology and innovation, advanced manufacturing and engineering, incubator space for start-up businesses and grow-on space for small and medium-sized businesses.  Alconbury's location between Cambridge and Peterborough should help to enhance the economic linkages between the complementary business clusters in and around those two cities. 
Cambridgeshire's 
Economic 
Assessment 2013, and Greater Cambridge Greater Peterborough (GCGP) Local Economic Assessment 
Huntingdonshire 
Employment Land Study 2014 
Huntingdonshire 
Retail, Leisure and Commercial Needs Assessment 2017 
Cambridge 
Sub-region Strategic Housing Market Assessment 2013 
Partners' strategies 
GCGP Strategic 
Economic Plan 
Huntingdonshire 
Economic Growth Plan 2013-23 
Connecting 
Cambridgeshire 
A14 Development 
Consent Order 
8 Responsibility transferred to the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Combined Authority in April 2018 
20 • 
• 
• • • 
• • • 
• • 
• • 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• Issues Shaping the Local Plan 3 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Upgrade the A14 trunk road: The Cambridge to Huntingdon A14 road scheme is 
 Highways England 
intended to reduce congestion, unlock economic growth, improve local connectivity Route Based 
and improve safety. The scheme includes a bypass of Huntingdon, on-line Strategies 
improvements towards Cambridge and the widening of the Cambridge northern 
 Cambridgeshire 
bypass. Following significant lobbying and funding commitments from local partners Local Transport Plan 
including the Council, Government approval for the scheme has been granted, and 
work star
ted in late 2016 with completion scheduled for 2020. 
Plan further strategic transport infrastructure improvements: A project to 
upgrade 
the section of the A428 trunk road between Black Cat and Caxton Gibbet 
junctions is currently being developed with the preferred route announced in February 2019. The scheme is anticipated to commence in 2021/22 for completion in 2025/26 subject to funding and approvals.  In addition, a number of other strategic transport improvement schemes are currently in earlier stages of consideration, including: an Oxford to Cambridge Expressway, improvements to the A1 between the M25 and Peterborough, and an East West Rail project. 
Social 
Key Issues 
Evidence Opportunities Challenges 
Significant requirement for housing 
of all types: 20,100 houses are 
required to meet forecast population growth between 2011 and 2036. 
Need for a range of attractive 
housing options for older people: 
The majority of household change between 2011 and 2036 is accounted for by households aged over 65. This creates a need for a range of accommodation types to meet the varying housing needs of this group. 
Need for housing suitable for 
smaller households: Demographic trends create a particular need over the next 20 years for housing suitable for smaller households. 
Need for more housing that is truly 
affordable: While housing in 
Huntingdonshire is relatively affordable compared to the rest of the Cambridge sub-region, a large number of people are still unable to afford a home in the district. 
Rural nature of district hinders 
access to key services: In parts of rural Huntingdonshire access to a GP 
New development provides 
an opportunity for positive design, creating a physical environment that: 
supports active lifestyles, 
including in particular the provision of accessible green space; 
is accessible to all, 
including those with physical, sensory and mental impairments. 
Positive health impacts of A14 
upgrade for key locations: 
The upgrade and re-routing of the A14 trunk road and section of the A1 present an opportunity to secure significant improvements in air quality in three of the four areas of the district currently designated as having poor air quality. This will make these locations healthier places to live and work. 
Opportunity for rural 
communities to deliver 
Huntingdonshire 
Objectively 
Assessed Housing Need April 2017 
Cambridge 
sub-region Strategic Housing Market Assessment 2013 
Cambridgeshire 
Joint Strategic Needs Assessments (2007-) 
Huntingdonshire 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan 2017 
Huntingdonshire Air 
Quality Updating & Screening Assessment Report 2014 
21 • 
• 
• 
• 
• • • 
• 
• 
• • 
• 3 Issues Shaping the Local Plan 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
practice or hospital is dependent upon 
private transport. 
Need for local infrastructure to 
support development: Local 
infrastructure, such as education, health social facilities and transport, will need to accompany future housing growth. A significant amount of funding will be required to provide this infrastructure. 
Partners' responses affordable housing: 
Neighbourhood Plans and 
exceptions housing policies provide opportunities for rural communities to identify sites for affordable housing development, meeting the needs of those with a local connection. 
Partners' strategies 
Huntingdonshire 
Housing Strategy 
2012-15 
Cambridgeshire 
Older People's Accommodation Strategy 
Cambridgeshire 
Health & Wellbeing Strategy 2012-17 
Environmental Partnership approach to addressing older people’s needs: Recognising the 
scale of the challenge of meeting the needs of older people over the next 20 years, 
local partners including the NHS, Cambridgeshire County Council and Huntingdonshire District Council are working together to identify solutions. 
Key Issues 
Evidence Opportunities Challenges 
Huntingdonshire 
Water Cycle Study 
2014 
Huntingdonshire 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 2016 
Huntingdonshire 
Landscape & Townscape Assessment 2007 
Situated in the driest region of the 
UK which receives only two thirds of the average annual rainfall in England and Wales. The rivers and aquifers that are the key sources of water locally are close to the limits of abstraction before which ecosystems reliant on them may be adversely affected. Climate change is likely to bring drier summers, exacerbating this issue. 
Areas at risk from flooding include 
the low lying fenland area in the north east of the district- an area managed by internal drainage boards and the Middle Level Commissioners, and areas in the south east of the district along the River Great Ouse.This latter area runs through the largest settlements in the district. Locations including St Neots are also at risk of surface water and other forms of flooding. Climate change is likely to 
Landscape suitable for 
renewable energy generation: 
The lack of rain and associated cloud cover, and relatively flat landscape, makes the district suitable for solar and wind renewable energy generation, helping to reduce the amount of carbon dioxide produced via energy generation. 
Ex-MOD sites offer 
opportunity to focus development on previously developed land, protecting the countryside and historic pattern of rural settlements. 
Existing biodiversity assets 
which could be enhanced: 
Huntingdonshire has a rich and varied ecology with a number of sites of significant biodiversity value, such as Woodwalton Fen and 
22 • 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• Issues Shaping the Local Plan 3 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
bring more intense rainfall, increasing Portholme Meadow. The 
flood risk. district's green spaces and 
Fertile farmland needs conserving: previously used land also 
Arable farming is the main land use in provide a variety of habitats for 
the district. The agricultural land is wildlife.There are opportunities 
almost entirely of good quality: 98% is to create more resilient and 
classed as grades 1, 2 or 3.  15% is better connected ecological 
grade 1 (excellent quality), is networks to enhance 
concentrated in the north east of the biodiversity and natural capital. 
district, mainly in the Fens with a few Tackling climate change and 
pockets along the Ouse Valley. reducing flood risk by Making 
Distinctive landscape and Space for Water in 
settlement characters need development sites and 
conserving: The district includes protecting land foreseeably 
several different topographic needed for flood water, and/or 
characters, from the low-lying fens to water supply. 
the upland areas (Wolds) areas. 
Scattered across these areas are around 100 smaller villages, many of which largely retain their historic form and character. 
Historic environment needs 
conserving: In addition to historic settlement patterns, Huntingdonshire includes a wealth of heritage assets which add to the district's identity and distinctiveness. 
Partners' responses 
Partners' strategies 
Cambridge Water and Anglian Water's Water Resource Management Plans 
 Anglian District River 
aim to ensure current and future water supplies through projects such as reducing Basin Management 
consumption, tackling leakage, and increasing the transfer of water from areas of Plan 2 (2015) 
surplus to areas of deficit. 
 Anglian Water's 
Water Resource 
The Great Fen wetland restoration project supports the aims of the Management Plan
Cambridgeshire Green Infrastructure Strategy: enhancing, increasing and joining 
Cambridge Water's up green spaces across the area. Located in the north of the district, the project Water Resource aims to restore more than 3,700 hectares of fenland habitat connecting Woodwalton Management PlanFen and Holme Fen National Nature Reserves. This will provide many conservation 
Cambridgeshire benefits for wildlife as well as recreational and educational benefits for residents. Green Infrastructure It will also contribute to agricultural diversification and the development of the local Strategy 2011 economy through increases in visitors and creation of new jobs and income streams. 
Great Fen initiative 
23 • • • 
• • 
• • 
• • 
• 
• • 
• 
• 
• • • 
• • • 
• 
• 
• 
• • • 
• • 
• 3 Issues Shaping the Local Plan 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Summary of Key Issues 
Environmental Social Economic Theme 
Partners’ 
responses 
Make Alconbury Enterprise Zone successful Partnership approach to addressing older people’s needs 
Upgrade the A14 trunk road 
Plan further strategic transport infrastructure improvements Challenges Improvements to key Significant requirement 
transport infrastructure for housing of all types 
are critical to support Need for a range of 
economic growth attractive housing for 
More jobs needed in older people 
high value industry Need for housing 
sectors suitable for smaller 
Decline in working age households 
population as a Need for more housing 
proportion of total that is truly affordable 
population Rural nature of district hinders access to key services 
Need for local 
infrastructure to support development 
Opportunities Location adjoining New development 
strategic transport links provides an opportunity 
Location close to for positive design 
economic success of Positive health impacts 
Cambridge of A14 upgrade for key 
Expansion of high locations 
speed broadband access 
Situated in the driest 
region of the UK 
Areas at risk from flooding Fertile farmland needs 
conserving 
Distinctive landscape and 
settlement characters need conserving 
Historic environment 
needs conserving 
Landscape suitable for 
renewable energy generation 
Ex-MOD sites offer 
opportunity to focus development on previously developed land. 
Existing biodiversity assets 
which could be enhanced 
Tackling climate change 
and reducing flood risk by using Making Space for Water agreements 
Water companies’ Water 
Resource Management Plans 
The Great Fen wetland 
restoration project 
24 
Issues Shaping the Local Plan 3 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
The Spatial Vision and Objectives 
3.2 The key issues and partners' responses inform the spatial vision and objectives which define this Local 
Plan. 
Vision 
By 2036 Huntingdonshire's physical environment will support the health and wellbeing 
of all its residents, by: 
Supporting a Providing sufficient Meeting the needs Working with our 
diverse, thriving infrastructure to of a changing climate, landscape 
economy support healthy population and heritage 
communities 
Objectives 
Principal responding policies(9) Objective 
Cross-cutting 
1. To maintain a good supply of suitable land for growth in 4 'The Development Strategy' 
sustainable locations and focusing on previously developed 
land, offering sites of a variety of sizes and types to meet a range of market demands. 
'Flood Risk' 2. To promote high quality, well designed, locally distinctive, 
sustainable development that is adaptable to climate change and resilient to extreme weather. 
'Design Context' 
'Design Implementation' 
'Placemaking' 
'Surface Water' 
'Parking Provision and Vehicle Movement' 
3. To provide better job opportunities and more affordable 'Strategic Expansion Location: Alconbury 
homes to help create a more balanced and diverse local Weald'  & 'Strategic Expansion Location: St 
population and encourage more young people to stay or move Neots East' 
here. 'Affordable Housing Provision' 
'Housing Mix' 
4. To facilitate opportunities for people to pursue a healthy 'Design Context' 
lifestyle, actively participate in their community and have a 'Health Impact Assessment' 
high quality of life. 'Design Implementation' 
9 In general specific allocations are not referred to in this table. Instead, where relevant, the Development 
Strategy is referred to, as this sets the framework for the scale and geographical distribution of allocations. 
25 3 Issues Shaping the Local Plan 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
7.To maximise the advantages offered by Huntingdonshire's strategic 
location to develop sector specialisms, supply chains and business accommodation that complement existing local growth sectors Supporting a diverse, thriving economy 
5. To promote economic growth and resilience and diversify the 
range of businesses active across the district that can add greater 'Established Employment Areas' 
value to the local economy. 
6. To maximise the benefits for Huntingdonshire of the Alconbury 
Enterprise Zone. 'Town Centre Vitality and Viability' 'Rural Economy' 
'Tourism and Recreation' 
8. To increase the proportion of economically active residents in the 
district and promote education and skills that meet the future needs 
of the local economy. 
9. To enhance the role of Huntingdon, St Neots, St Ives and 
Ramsey's town centres helping them to adapt to modern retail trends 
and focusing commercial developments towards the most accessible locations. 
10. To support agriculture, farm diversification, estate management 
and rural tour
ism that will sustain the function and character of the 
countryside and its communities. 
11. To protect the best and most versatile agricultural land from built 
development. 'Housing Mix' 
'Strategy for Development' 
'Spatial Planning Areas' 
'Town Centre Vitality and Viability' 
'Rural Economy' 
'Homes for Rural Workers' 
'Tourism and Recreation' 
'Rural Buildings' 
'Water Related Development' 
'Strategy for Development' 'Strategic Expansion Location: Alconbury 
Weald' 
'Delivering Infrastructure' 
'Strategic Expansion Location: Alconbury 
Weald' & 'Strategic Expansion Location: St Neots East' 
'Design Context' 
'Design Implementation' 'Sustainable Travel' 
'Delivering Infrastructure' 
'Strategy for Development' 'Local Services and Community Facilities' Providing sufficient infrastructure to support healthy communities 
12. To maintain an up-to-date Infrastructure Delivery Plan to 
identify the infrastructure needs of proposed developments and 
to prioritise investment to be provided by developer contributions and other identifiable sources. 
13. To focus investment on improving access in strategic 
expansion locations 
to make optimum use of available resources. 
14. To facilitate sustainable modes of travel and give high priority 
to providing access 
to public transport and provision of segregated 
routes for walking and cycling. 
15. To provide for adequate infrastructure to meet the needs of 
new gro
wth and facilitate active, cohesive communities and 
sustainable lifestyles. 
26 Issues Shaping the Local Plan 3 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Meeting the needs of a changing population 16. To ensure inclusive and accessible provision for community 'Delivering Infrastructure' 
needs including education, health, social care, policing, sports, 'Local Services and Community Facilities' 
libraries, play and open space, green infrastructure and integrated 'Protection of Open Space' 
community facilities. 
17. To provide for a quantity and quality of housing growth to 
support the economic aspirations of the district while contributing 
to sustainable patterns of development. 
18. To provide a range of market and affordable homes that 
enables choice 
between types, sizes and tenures as well as over 
lifetimes and within individual communities. 
19. To provide opportunities for vulnerable people to live 
independent lives with support to meet their needs. 
20. To promote attractive, safe and distinctive residential 
neighbourhoods in which people can meet their day-to-day social, 
health, educational, recreational and convenience shopping requirements with access to sustainable transport to meet other needs. 'Strategy for Development' 
'Housing Mix' 
'Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople' 'Rural Exceptions Housing' 
'Housing Mix' 
'Specialist Housing' 
'Key Service Centres' 
'Strategy for Development' 
'Delivering Infrastructure' 'Design Context' 'Design Implementation' 'Sustainable Travel' 'Local Services and Community Facilities' 
Working with our climate, landscape and heritage 
21. To maintain, enhance and conserve Huntingdonshire's 
historic environment, characteristic landscapes, natural habitats and biodiversity. 
22. To utilise sustainable design and construction techniques; 
as a minimum to meet national standards for building performance as they evolve and to exceed them where feasible and viable to do so. 
23. To take advantage of opportunities for minimising energy 
and water use and for securing carbon emissions reductions in 
all new development and transport choices. 
24. To encourage waste management and pollution control 
practices which minimise and reduce contributions to climate 
change and avoid adverse impacts on the local environment or human health. 'Small Settlements' 
'The Countryside' 
'Green Infrastructure' 'Design Context' 'Design Implementation' 'Biodiversity and Geodiversity' 'Trees, Woodland, Hedges and Hedgerows' 'Heritage Strategy' 'Heritage Assets and their Settings' 'Renewable and Low Carbon Energy' 
'Design Context' 
'Design Implementation' 
'Strategy for Development' 
'Design Implementation' 
'Sustainable Travel' 
'Waste Water Management' 
'Amenity' 
'Ground Contamination and Groundwater Pollution' 'Air Quality' 
27 3 Issues Shaping the Local Plan 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
25.To conserve and enhance Huntingdonshire's strategic green 'Strategy for Development' 
infrastructure, including the Great Fen and the belt of ancient 'Green Infrastructure' 
woodland north of Alconbury, the River Great Ouse and its associated landscape corridor, Grafham Water and its circle of ancient woodlands and the Nene Valley, and to promote a balance between conservation and public access to and enjoyment of these assets. 
28 • 
• 
• The Strategy Section B: 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Section B:The Strategy 
Section B: 'The Strategy' 
This section sets out: 
the housing and jobs targets which the Local Plan aims to address; 
the geographical distribution of future development in the district, focusing the highest levels of growth in 
locations with best access to services and facilities; and 
requirements for how development should contribute to infrastructure delivery. 
29 • • • 
• 
• 
• • 
• • 
• 
4 The Development Strategy 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
4 The Development Strategy 
4.1 This chapter sets out a series of policies that direct the distribution of future development in Huntingdonshire, 
to meet in full the identified housing and employment Objectiv
ely Assessed Needs (OAN) for the period 
2011 to 2036. This includes defining the amount and location of development to be achieved through allocations, as well as determining development proposals that may come forward on sites that are not allocated in this Local Plan. 
The Strategy Approach 
4.2 The Strategy Approach is the overarching principle that governs the amount and distribution of future development 
in the district. The Approach responds directly to the 'The Spatial Vision and Objectives', 
as shown below: 
Vision: 
By 2036 Huntingdonshire's physical environment will support the health and wellbeing of all its residents, by: Supporting a diverse, Providing sufficient Meeting the needs of a 
thriving economy infrastructure to support changing population 
healthy communities 
Summary of Objectives which directly inform the Strategy Approach 
Provide for an 
adequate economically active resident population to sustain employment development 
Enhance the role of 
existing town centres 
Support a diverse 
and thriving rural economy 
Maximise funding 
available for required infrastructure through developer contributions 
Sustain local 
services in villages 
Provide opportunities for 
comprehensive positive neighbourhood design, including: 
a range of types, 
sizes and tenures of housing that meets the needs of all 
neighbourhoods that 
promote walking and cycling 
Create a more balanced 
and diverse local population, including enabling young people to stay in the communities they grew up in Working with our climate and landscape 
Focus growth on 
previously developed land 
Protect the best and 
most versatile agricultural land from built development 
Enable 
comprehensive design that provides new and enhances existing green spaces and wildlife habitats, and makes wider links to the existing wildlife network 
Strategy Approach: 
Concentrate development in locations which provide, or have the potential to provide, the greatest 
access to services and facilities.  Encourage limited development for rural communities to support 
social and economic sustainability. 
30 r 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• The Development Strategy 4 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Amount of Development 
4.3 The NPPF requires local plans to identify and meet the objectively assessed development needs for their 
area. The objectiv
ely assessed need for development in Huntingdonshire which this plan seeks to address 
is for 20,100 homes (both market and affordable), within which there is a need for around 7,900 affordable homes. These figures correspond to an increase of 14,400 jobs. These development needs are derived from the Huntingdonshire Objectively Assessed Housing Need Update 2017, which forms an update to 
the Cambridge sub-region Strategic Housing Market Assessment 2013. 
LP 1 
Amount of development 
In Huntingdonshire in the period 2011-2036 provision will be made for: 
at least 20,100 new homes (both market and affordable), and 
approximately 14,400 additional jobs. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered providers Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans, design 
codes Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators 
 Number and % of housing completions by settlement and tenure type 
Amount and % of employment development by settlement type 
Amount and % of completed office, retail and leisure development in town 
centres 
Strategy for Development 
4.4 To meet the objectively assessed needs for development, the strategy aims to balance providing a 
deliverab
le, sustainable pattern of future development with ensuring choice and diversity in the market. 
To promote deliverability the strategy is complemented by a series of allocated sites, set out in Section D: 'Allocations'.  In addition to these, growth is expected to come forward through small and windfall sites 
which contribute additional div 
ersity and flexibility to the supply of new properties. 
4.5 This is reinforced by a series of complementary policies guiding unallocated development in different types of settlements and the countryside along 
with a policy guiding provision, protection and enhancement of 
green infrastructure. 
4.6 The purpose of this policy is to set out the distribution of growth that will help to achieve the strategic approach of concentrating de
velopment in locations which provide, or have the potential to provide, the 
most comprehensive range of services and facilities and encouraging limited development for rural communities to support social and economic sustainability. 
31 r 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 4 The Development Strategy 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
LP 2 
Strategy for Development 
The development strategy for Huntingdonshire is to: 
Concentrate development in locations which provide, or have the potential to provide, the most 
comprehensive range of services and facilities; 
Direct substantial new development to two strategic expansion locations of sufficient scale to form successful, functioning new communities; 
Provide opportunities for communities to achieve local development aspirations for housing, employment, commercial or community related schemes; 
Support a thriving rural economy; 
Protect the character of existing settlements and recognise the intrinsic character and beauty of the surrounding countryside; 
Conserve and enhance the historic environment; and 
Provide complementary green infrastructure enhancement and provision to balance recreational and biodiversity needs and to support climate change adaptation. 
Distribution of Growth 
Four spatial planning areas are designated reflecting their status as the district's traditional market towns 
and most sustainable centres. These are centred around: 
Huntingdon including Brampton and Godmanchester and the strategic expansion location of Alconbury Weald 
St Neots including Little Paxton and the strategic expansion location of St Neots East 
St Ives 
Ramsey including Bury. 
Approximately three quarters of the objectively assessed need for housing and the majority of employment and retail growth will be focused in the spatial planning areas. 
Seven key service centres are designated reflecting the concentration of services and facilities in these 
locations and their role in providing services to residents of other nearby communities. These are: 
Buckden 
Fenstanton 
Kimbolton 
Sawtry 
Somersham 
Warboys 
Y axley. 
All other settlements with a single built up area of 30 dwellings or more are defined as Small Settlements as 
set out in 'Definition of Small Settlements' . 
Approximately a quarter of the objectively assessed need for housing, together with a limited amount of 
employment growth, will be permitted on sites dispersed across the key service centres and small settlements to support the vitality of these communities and provide flexibility and diversity in the housing supply. 
In addition, rural exception, small and windfall sites will be permitted on sites which are in conformity with 
other policies of this plan providing further flexibility in the housing supply. 
32 The Development Strategy 4 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Reasoning 
4.7 National planning policy seeks to increase the supply of housing across the country and this policy is 
intended to help Huntingdonshire contribute 
to achieving this aim.  Huntingdonshire is an area of relatively 
high demand for growth from local households and people moving here to work in both the district and the wider area. There is also strong need generated within Huntingdonshire due to changing household size and the challenge of obtaining affordable properties. The development strategy aims to meet the NPPF's challenge to respond to expected climate change by concentrating the majority of new development in locations where people can choose to walk or cycle to local services, can create sufficient demand to make public transport services viable and are away from areas of greatest flood risk to protect against the increased frequency, extent and impact of flooding associated with climate change. 
4.8 The development strategy has been shaped by fundamental principles of sustainability aiming to achieve a balance between social, 
economic and environmental priorities.  Social and economic priorities have 
influenced the development strategy through concentrating new growth in areas accessible to services, facilities and employment opportunities.  Environmental priorities have influenced it through factors such as re-using previously developed land where it is sustainably located and through avoidance of grade 1 agricultural land.  However, the use of some greenfield land is necessary to deliver the scale of development required over the plan period.  Pragmatic factors such as the availability of land, deliverability of necessary supporting infrastructure and market attractiveness of proposals have also been taken into account to boost the likelihood of successful delivery of the required levels of development. 
4.9 The policy provides the overarching strategic framework for ensuring this Local Plan delivers sufficient new de
velopment in sustainable locations to meet identified needs.  It supports the overall provision of at 
least the 20,100 new homes identified as the objectively assessed need along with supporting infrastructure and services. It also supports 14,400 new jobs between 2011 and 2036. 
4.10 Since 1 April 2011 which was the beginning of the plan period and 31 March 2018 4,421 dwellings have been completed, equivalent to 
22% of the objectively assessed need up to 2036. Supply from the 1 April 
2018 to 31 March 2036 is estimated at 16,647 dwellings. This includes sites with planning permission, sites subject to S106 agreements, sites allocated in this Local Plan and estimated completions of additional small windfall sites, rural exceptions sites and prior approvals. The total estimated housing supply for the plan period equates to  21,068 new homes.This is equivalent to 105% of the Council’s objectively assessed need.Together these will help to achieve the distribution sought in the policy and support the sustainability of key service centres and small settlements by provision of appropriate scale developments. 
Summary of Housing Trajectory 
Total
 2018 -36 2035 
/36 2034 
/35 2033 
/34 2032 
/33 2031 
/32 2030 
/31 2029 
/30 2028 
/29 2027 
/28 2026 
/27 2025 
/26 2024 
/25 2023 
/24 2022 
/23 2021 
/22 2020 
/21 2019 
/20 2018 
/19 
Sites with planning permission 
(PP) as at 31 March 
2017 (1)(excluding those 
allocated in Plan) 329 153 104 19 605 
All sites allocated in Plan (with 
PP , subject to S106 and without PP) 812 710 
538 520 500 500 515 515 500 500 500 500 13,594 
Prior appro v
als 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 360 
Additional sites of 10 or more dwellings with PP/subject to S106 since March 2017 1,133 1,304 1,409 1,326 1,085 727 
48 50 75 75 75 40 363 
1,200 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 Windfall small sites (less than 10 
dwellings) 
525 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 Rural exception sites 
16,647 635 635 635 635 650 650 635 635 655 713 920 1,022 1,343 1,489 1,611 1,450 1,258 1,076 Total 
7,151 
1. Including 10% discount of small sites where not started 
33 4 The Development Strategy 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Total Supply in Plan Period 
Number of dwellings Supply status 
Completions 2011/12 -4,4212017/18 
Supply 2018/19 - 2035/36 16,647 
Total supply 2011 - 2036 21,068 
4.11 The increase in housing supply will help to support the delivery of additional affordable housing which 
comprises a 
substantial element of the district's overall housing requirement and is a key challenge, as 
evidenced through the Cambridge sub-region Strategic Housing Market Assessment. Together with 
developments 
completed and committed prior to adoption of this plan the proposed allocations will meet 
Huntingdonshire's objectively assessed need for housing development in full.  Small and windfall sites will be additional to this and provide flexibility for development in settlements across all levels of the development strategy. 
4.12 Designation of an enterprise zone at Alconbury Weald in 2011 is acting as a catalyst for significant investment 
in new employment opportunities within the area covered by the Greater Cambridgeshire 
Greater Peterborough Local Enterprise Partnership(10) The development strategy aims to ensure that 
Huntingdonshire maximises the potential for this site to cater for inward investment and indigenous business growth. To promote sustainability employment growth is supported throughout Huntingdonshire, focusing on the towns and larger villages, but also promoting opportunities for employment growth in small settlements and the countryside. 
4.13 Significant investment is being directed to the A14 and A428 to improve the reliability of journeys on these routes. The 
development strategy focuses development in locations with good access to the upgraded 
routes to maximise the local benefits of this investment. Huntingdon and St Neots also provide access to the East Coast mainline railway route which is benefiting from substantial investment improving services and providing greater diversity of destinations accessible from the towns' railway stations. Longer term proposals are being worked up for the Oxford-Milton Keynes-Cambridge corridor to promote infrastructure, housing and growth. These are likely to affect the southern part of the district, particularly St Neots. Any proposals may come forward through an integrated strategic plan and/or the next iteration of the Huntingdonshire Local Plan. 
4.14 The development strategy builds on the strengths of Huntingdonshire's established settlements together with its stock of 
previously developed land to promote opportunities to live, work and access services in 
sustainable locations. The policy recognises that Huntingdonshire contains a range of settlements broadly falling into the categories of historic market towns, large villages providing local services, small villages with limited or no service provision and a few hamlets situated within the wider countryside.  Each settlement type performs a different role and function and thus the scale and nature of growth at each should reflect their relative sustainability.  However, not all new development can, or indeed should, go to the district's four market towns or their intrinsic character could be damaged; some development is needed elsewhere to spread the potential benefits of growth and sustain the more rural parts of the district too as promoted through the government's Towards a one nation economy: A 10-point plan for boosting productivity in 
rural areas (2015). 
4.15 Four spatial planning areas are designated which fulfil a significant role as service, employment and transport 
hubs for their surrounding areas. These offer people the greatest levels of access to services 
and facilities within Huntingdonshire and will be further enhanced during the plan period. They vary in 
10 The GCGP LEP became The Business Board of the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Combined Authority 
on 1st April 2018. 
34 • The Development Strategy 4 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
size and function, complementing the roles of the wider area's other towns and cities. The spatial planning 
areas offer some of the best opportunities for promoting sustainable development in Huntingdonshire and meeting the everyday needs of residents in one place thereby reducing the need to travel. 
4.16 The strategy for development will predominantly be delivered through sites already completed in 2011-2016 and those allocated in this plan which together are sufficient to meet the outstanding objectively assessed need 
in full. This provision will be supplemented by appropriate small and windfall sites which will contribute 
to the flexibility and diversity of new housing delivery. 
4.17 A central part of the strategy of this plan is development in two areas known as Strategic Expansion Locations which offer oppor
tunities that are unprecedented in this district for sustainable development. 
One is focused on the former RAF Alconbury which is in close proximity to the market town of Huntingdon. The other continues the growth of St Neots east of the railway line which started with Loves Farm where the first homes were occupied in 2009.  Each is large enough to accommodate a new community with sufficient services and facilities to form attractive places to live and work whilst contributing to maintaining the character of the district's existing settlements by diverting pressure for growth which might otherwise need to be added to their outskirts. 
4.18 Seven key service centres are identified recognising their role in the provision of services and facilities across the district. 
 Housing and employment growth is promoted to reflect their roles, support the provision 
of services and help meet local needs, for instance of older residents seeking to move into more accessible housing within their established community.  A limited range of allocations for new development is made in key service centres which can benefit from the existing services available and help give service providers some certainty over future levels of demand. 
4.19 Much of Huntingdonshire's character is provided by its extensive rural area, numerous small dispersed settlements which are attractive 
places to live, work and visit and its high quality historic and natural 
environment. The level of services and facilities available in villages varies significantly with a few of the largest supporting a primary school, village shop and public hall but the smallest having no service provision at all. The development strategy responds to the government's Towards a one nation economy: A 10-point 
plan for boosting productivity in rural areas (2015) balanced with recognition of the desirability of avoiding 
detrimental impacts 
on village character. Average household size is forecast to decline by 2036 so some 
new dwellings will be needed in these communities simply to maintain their existing services. Thus, the policy allows for some growth in conformity with other policies of this plan to facilitate appropriate opportunities for villages to grow organically and to support a living, working countryside capable of adapting to changing needs. 
4.20 Together key service centres and small settlements have the capacity to accommodate around a quarter of Huntingdonshire's expected housing 
growth up to 2036. Whilst limited allocations are made for growth 
at the key service centres no site-specific allocations are made for small settlements. Thus, the majority of this growth will arise from the ongoing supply of rural exceptions, small and windfall sites expected to continue to come forward throughout the plan period.These will need to be in conformity with other policies of this plan. They should give preference to sites in flood zone 1; sites within flood zones 2 and 3 should be avoided, unless the proposal can clearly demonstrate that the location specific benefits of the scheme outweigh the impacts of flood risk to the site. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Responsible agencies Huntingdonshire District Council, Greater Cambridge Greater Peterborough LEP , landowners, 
developers, Cambridgeshire County Council (CCC), infrastructure and service providers 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans, design codes, 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), CIL, S106 Delivery mechanism 
Timescale Throughout the plan period 
Monitoring indicators 
 Amount and % of completed retail, office and leisure development in town centres 
35 • 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• • • • • • • • 4 The Development Strategy 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Amount and type of employment land available 
Number and % of housing completions by settlement and tenure type 
Amount and % of employment development by settlement type 
CIL receipts/expenditure monitoring 
S106 monitoring 
Gross number and % new dwellings on previously developed land 
Amount and % of employment floorspace developed on previously developed land 
Note on Wyton Airfield 
4.21 Throughout the preparation of this plan the redundant Wyton Airfield has also been explored as a potential 
strategic e
xpansion location. Wyton Airfield has been declared surplus to requirements by the Ministry 
of Defence and Crest Nicholson were appointed as the development partner in November 2014. 
4.22 Crest Nicholson have undertaken a substantial amount of work to prepare an initial master plan illustrating how the 
site could be redeveloped including public consultation and liaison with the Council and nearby 
parish councils. The initial master planning indicates the site has capacity for redevelopment comprising: 
Approximately 4,500 new homes of mixed tenures, including additional housing required to support the expansion of RAF W
yton 
10ha of employment land 
A local centre with retail and community uses Primary and secondary schools Green infrastructure and sports facilities Transport infrastructure improvements including linkages to the guided Busway 
4.23 The Council has consistently supported the principle of redevelopment of Wyton Airfield as it comprises 
over 250ha of pre
viously developed land in a relatively sustainable location. 
4.24 As part of the preparation of this plan, the Council commissioned a Strategic Transport Study to test the transport 
implications of a series of potential packages of development sites to ascertain their ability to 
deliver a sustainable development strategy for Huntingdonshire. The Strategic Transport Study included options with full redevelopment of Wyton airfield within the plan period to 2036, a slower rate of redevelopment to disperse the transport impacts over a longer period and no redevelopment. The Strategic Transport Study has demonstrated that the road infrastructure requirements to serve redevelopment of Wyton Airfield, and the current funding requirements for these in particular, are not deliverable at this time. The Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Combined Authority are exploring potential ways in which this could be overcome. The environmental constraints to the delivery of any transport solution are also very challenging and will need to be fully addressed before substantial redevelopment could be brought forward. 
4.25 The redevelopment of this site is, however, still considered to provide the opportunity to make a positive contribution 
to meeting the future housing needs of the district should it be possible to overcome the 
transport infrastructure challenges it currently faces. Proposals will need to address a wide range of infrastructure issues, ranging from surface water flooding and waste water disposal to secondary education provision. The Council will continue to work positively with the promoters of the site to secure appropriate sustainable, viable reuse of the site subject to resolution of the infrastructure challenges. 
36 The Development Strategy 4 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Green Infrastructure 
4.26 The purpose of this policy is to set out the role that provision and enhancement of strategic green 
infrastructure 
has in achieving the strategy. Green infrastructure is a key land use that provides a 
counterpoint to the need for development land. The policy also sets out the Council’s approach to protecting and enhancing Huntingdonshire’s green infrastructure for the benefit of biodiversity and local residents for recreation and leisure. 
LP 3 
Green Infrastructure 
A proposal will be expected to support green infrastructure and will therefore be supported where it 
demonstrates that it: 
a. incorporates open/ green space in accordance with the Council's Developer Contr ibutions Supplementar y 
Planning Document (2011) (SPD) , or successor documents; 
b. protects and where possible enhances existing green infrastructure, concentrating efforts on protecting, 
enhancing or creating links within, to and between green infrastructure priority areas and the Cambridgeshire Strategic Green Infrastructure Network; 
c. is consistent with the objectives of the 
Cambridgeshire Green Infrastructure Strategy (2011)  or successor 
documents; 
d. improves the accessibility, naturalness and connectivity of green spaces, assisting in achieving Natural 
England's Accessible Natural Green Space Standards (ANGSt); 
e. provides replacement provision where the proposal would result in harm to or loss of existing green 
infrastructure where the replacement provides a net benefit, judged in terms of the factors set out in the Cambridgeshire Green Infrastructure Strategy (2011); 
f. maintains and where appropriate enhances the rights of way network; and 
g. contributes to the re-naturalisation of water bodies such as rivers and lakes, where possible. 
Green Infrastructure Priority Areas Several Green Infrastructure Priority Areas have been identified, as indicated on 
'The Key Diagram'  and 
shown on the Policies Map. They have potential to consolidate and link important habitats and facilitate 
access improvements.  A proposal within a priority area will be supported where the requirements for that area will be achieved. 
The Great Fen Within the Great Fen a proposal will only be supported where it is clearly demonstrated that it will make a 
positive contribution towards the implementation of the Great Fen Master Plan (2010) or successor documents. 
A proposal that lies outside the designated Great Fen area, but within its Landscape and Visual Setting will 
be expected to demonstrate consideration of the landscape and visual impacts that the proposal could have on the Great Fen, such as how the proposal might affect the aims of the Great Fen project to establish an area where the experience gained by visitors will be one of a tranquil area of countryside unaffected by urban encroachment. 
Great Ouse Valley A proposal within the Ouse Valley Landscape Character Area, defined in the 
Huntingdonshire Landscape 
and Townscape Assessment Supplementary Planning Document  will be supported where it contributes to 
the landscape, wildlife, cultural and historical value of the area. 
37 4 The Development Strategy 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
A proposal at Paxton Pits will be supported where it helps to deliver the objectives of the Nature Reserve 
Management Plan (2017) and/ or the objectives of the Reserve Management Strategy for the planned extension to Paxton Pits Nature Reserve (2007) or successor documents. 
Nene Valley Within the Nene Valley Nature Improvement Area (NIA) a proposal will be supported where it can be 
demonstrated that it is compatible with the objectives of the NIA and where possible enables identified habitat opportunities to be realised. 
Grafham Water A proposal within the Grafham Water Landscape Character Area, defined in the 
Huntingdonshire Landscape 
and Townscape Assessment Supplementary Planning Document , will be supported where it enhances or 
creates ecological or landscape linkages between Grafham Water and woodland in the vicinity.  Enhanced 
access will also be supported subject to compatibility with the landscape and biodiversity. 
A proposal will be supported where it involves the role, function and continued operation or enhancement 
of Grafham Water Reservoir, its Treatment Works and associated networks. 
Associated facilities A proposal to provide facilities associated with strategic green infrastructure in the countryside will be 
supported where a countryside location is justified, the use is compatible with the green infrastructure in question and adverse effects are avoided. 
Reasoning 
4.27 Green infrastructure serves to balance built development.  It facilitates opportunities for people to access 
open space and provides habitats 
for wildlife.  Improving the ecological, visual, heritage and recreational 
value of the countryside brings environmental, social and health benefits.  It can also boost the local economy through increased visitor spending. Green infrastructure also helps to deal with the effects of climate change as trees and woodland provide important cooling, shading and filtering effects, store carbon dioxide and intercept rainfall thereby reducing flooding. However, a balance must be achieved to ensure improving public access to green infrastructure does not impact adversely on sensitive sites or adversely affect the ecosystem services that green infrastructure provides. Provision of sufficient quantities of appropriately located and designed green infrastructure helps to absorb increased recreational pressure from new development and can help divert pressure away from more sensitive sites. 
4.28 The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) requires local authorities to set out a strategic approach for the 
creation, protection, enhancement and management of networks of biodiversity and green 
infrastructure. This policy, supported by LP 30 'Biodiversity and Geodiversity', sets out that strategic 
approach. 
4.29 The Cambridgeshire Green Infrastructure Strategy 2011 is designed to assist in shaping and coordinating 
the delivery 
of green infrastructure in the county, to provide social, environmental and economic benefits 
now and in the future. Within the strategic green infrastructure network identified by the strategy it is important to ensure that development proposals contribute to the strategy's vision and objectives, particularly the opportunity to improve the network of green spaces where they are needed. 
4.30 The Great Fen is a strategically important project. The policy in respect of the Great Fen and its Landscape and Visual Setting, 
relates to the Great Fen Master Plan 2010, which has been endorsed as planning 
guidance and a material consider
ation for development management purposes by the Council. The Master 
Plan contains detailed advice on preferred proposals within the area that balance tourism and nature conservation requirements. The primary aim of the Landscape and Visual Setting is to protect the tranquillity of the Great Fen itself, particularly from visual intrusion (including obtrusive light) and noise intrusion from 
38 The Development Strategy 4 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
major structures such as wind turbines, telecommunications masts and any other development located 
in the landscape and visual setting.  Beyond this boundary major structures, although potentially visible from the Great Fen area, are less likely to impact on the setting of the Great Fen. The Great Fen is part of a wider Fens for the Future project; its vision is to promote connectivity in the Fens between sites, for example between the Great Fen and Wicken Fen along the Rothschild Way. The Fens for the Future 
Strategic Plan 2012 will help to deliver these aspirations. 
4.31 The area around the Great Ouse was identified in the  Huntingdonshire Landscape and Townscape 
Assessment Supplementary Planning Document. The landscape character area includes ancient habitat comprising flood 
meadows, woodland and lakes made from restored gravel pits. The area includes many 
sites designated for wildlife protection, including Portholme, with substantial areas of water and reed bed which will increase following further gravel extraction by 2036.  In 2013, an application was submitted to Natural England by a local interest group to designate an area of the Great Ouse valley and Ouse Washes as an Area of Outstanding Beauty (AONB). 
4.32 An area of particular importance within the Great Ouse area is Paxton Pits. This is a complex of gravel workings 
of varying ages, including some areas yet to be worked.  A reserve management plan was 
originally prepared in 1999 and updated in 2017. The management plan is centred around the 75ha extent of the Paxton Pits Local Nature Reserve (LNR). The LNR is managed by Huntingdonshire District Council, supported by a large group of volunteers.  In 2007 a County planning application was approved to expand the nature reserve to 285 hectares and a reserve management strategy put in place. This is expected to be implemented within the Local Plan timeframe and will include extra lakes and islands, and wildflower rich grassland, together with new footpaths and a circular cycleway. The boundaries of the enlarged area are similar to that shown on the green infrastructure diagram as a SSSI. 
4.33 The River Great Ouse and its tributaries follow in part into the Ouse Washes, an important area for birds and many other 
species, recognised through its designation as a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), 
Special Area of Conservation (SAC), Special Protection Area (SPA) and a Ramsar site.  As identified in the Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA) for the Local Plan the Ouse Washes is in unfavourable condition due to too frequent and prolonged flooding. Where possible proposals within the Great Ouse Valley should seek to contribute to wildlife value, as required by the policy, through the inclusion of green infrastructure, sustainable drainage systems and other measures that can store water in the catchment and contribute to alleviating this pressure on the site. 
4.34 The Nene Valley has been identified in recognition of the Nene Valley Nature Improvement Area (NIA) which was estab
lished in 2012. The NIA covers the area around the Nene river and its tributaries, largely 
within Northamptonshire, but including the most northerly parts of Huntingdonshire.  One of the objectives of the NIA is to improve various habitats. Development proposals within this area will be expected to be compatible with the objectives of the NIA and where possible enable identified habitat opportunities to be realised. 
4.35 Grafham Water is the third largest reservoir in England by area, covering some 600 hectares. The water body and adjoining and nearby nature 
reserves and park land attract significant recreational visitor numbers. 
There are opportunities to improve the links between Grafham Water and areas of woodland such as Brampton Wood, although care must be taken to ensure that improvements to public access do not impact adversely on areas of ancient woodland. 
4.36 There are a number of other important green infrastructure projects within or near the district that should be supported where 
possible.  Notably the West Cambridgeshire Hundreds is a strategic project focused 
on ancient woodlands mainly within South Cambridgeshire but including woodland in the southeast of the district, near Great Gransden. The scheme aims to enhance the unique biodiversity found in these woodlands through better management, maintaining or reinstating traditional coppicing, widening rides and providing better conditions for butterflies and other insects. 
4.37 Where public rights of way are part of green infrastructure affected by a proposal, enhancement should include provision f
or the widest possible range of non-motorised users wherever possible and support 
delivery of the Cambridgeshire Rights of Way Improvement Plan 2016 or successor documents. 
39 • 
• 
• 4 The Development Strategy 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
4.38 As indicated in the policy, proposals for facilities associated with strategic green infrastructure that by their 
nature need to be located in the countryside will 
be supported subject to their compatibility with the green 
infrastructure where adverse effects are avoided and subject to other relevant policies.  In particular reference should be made to policy LP 23 'Tourism and Recreation', 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, Cambridgeshire County Council, The 
Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Combined Authority, town and parish councils, environmental protection agencies, landowners, developers Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, Neighbourhood Plans Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators 
Losses to biodiversity habitat 
Additions to biodiversity habitat 
Total change in biodiversity habitat 
Delivering the Strategy 
4.39 To ensure successful delivery the development strategy needs to be resilient and able to cope with 
changing circumstances. 
 Flexibility is essential to enable the plan to adapt to updated government policy 
and priorities as well as to changing economic cycles and varying availability of public and private funding for infrastructure provision.  New technologies may evolve during the lifetime of the plan too which will affect best practice, for instance relating to transportation and energy production. 
4.40 In preparing the development site allocations the Council has worked with infrastructure providers, landowners, 
developers and environmental protection agencies to establish that the sites are developable 
within the plan period. The Council will work with partners to take a flexible and responsive approach to market conditions whilst safeguarding the future sustainability and prosperity of the district. 
4.41 The Cambridgeshire Research Group's report Objectively Assessed Need for Huntingdonshire (2017) 
indicates that the district's objectively assessed need is for 20,100 new homes between 2011 and 2036. This includes 7,897 affordable 
homes which equates to 39% of the total.The report also advises considering 
an uplift to this figure where it could help to deliver the required number of affordable homes. Delivery of 20,100 homes would require an average completion rate of 804 dwellings per year between 2011 and 2036. 
4.42 This Local Plan endeavours to address the need for affordable housing in three ways. Firstly, through the application of a target of 40% affordable 
housing provision on all qualifying sites. Secondly, through 
introduction of an enhanced 'Rural Exceptions Housing' policy to promote additional sites where homes 
are specifically targeted at meeting local needs.Thirdly
, application of policy LP 2 'Strategy for Development' 
in full should promote a higher level of growth than the objectively assessed need figure. In combination these should both assist with the national objective of 
boosting the supply of housing and provide an uplift 
in affordable housing provision. 
4.43 The Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Combined Authority 'Devolution Housing Fund' has a budget of 
£100million for the 
provision of affordable housing which could also provide a significant boost to the 
delivery of new affordable homes in Huntingdonshire. 
4.44 The White Paper 'Fixing our broken housing market' (February 2017) set out the government's intentions to consult on options for introducing 
a standardised approach to assessing housing requirements. A 
possible methodology was published for consultation in the summer of 2017 and no decision made on 
40 The Development Strategy 4 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
introduction as at November 2017. This put forward transition arrangements for local plans submitted 
before whichever is the latter of 31 March 2018 or publication of a revised NPPF to continue without using any new methodology that might be introduced through this. 
4.45 The level of delivery achieved will be monitored annually to ensure that sufficient housing is being brought forward.
The latest government procedures on any housing delivery test will be followed.Where significant 
under-delivery is demonstrated the Council will work through the following sequence until housing delivery is appropriately increased: 
1. Work with partners to overcome constraints and expedite the delivery of allocated sites; then 
2. Work with partners to overcome constraints and expedite the delivery of alternative sites identified 
as suitable within the Housing and Employment Land A
vailability Assessment (or successor 
documents); then 
3. Review the capacity of sites to ascertain whether additional homes could be delivered within sites already allocated within this Plan; then 
4. Commence a partial or full re
view of the Local Plan as appropriate. 
4.46 The Council works in partnership with landowners and developers to produce a housing trajectory each year which 
is published in the annual monitoring report.  No phasing is applied to any of the allocated 
development sites to avoid constraining delivery. 
4.47 Jobs growth is complex and very difficult to predict. For businesses, growth will be affected as much by successes in winning contracts, 
gaining investment or the availability of potential employees with the right 
skills as by the availability of land and buildings.  For the retail sector new trends can emerge quickly and can be influenced by decisions about investment at a national level. 
4.48 The enterprise zone will play a significant part in delivering the jobs growth over the plan period. The Council will continue to 
work in partnership with the site owners Urban & Civic and the Cambridgeshire 
and Peterborough Combined Authority to ensure the growth at the enterprise zone proceeds as planned. The Council will renew its 
employment land and retail studies on a regular basis and will continue to 
monitor delivery on an annual basis.  If monitoring shows that there will be insufficient land for business development over the next 5 years taking account of preceding development trends and all available land and buildings then a review of allocations will be triggered.  Should this situation arise the Council will follow the same sequence as listed above for housing delivery. 
4.49 Transport infrastructure is a major influence on the ability to deliver the development strategy within Huntingdonshire. W
ork began in 2016 on upgrading the A14 between Ellington and Cambridge. It is 
scheduled to be open to traffic in 2020. A 3 lane dual carriageway is being constructed between Huntingdon and Swavesey. The A14 viaduct which crosses the East Coast mainline rail and Brampton Road in Huntingdon is scheduled for demolition in 2021/22 and an additional link road provided from the downgraded A14 to Hinchingbrooke Park Road. The A14 project also includes widening the A1 between Brampton and Alconbury. A variety of junction and local road improvements accompany the scheme along with improvements to access and connections for cyclists, horse-riders and pedestrians. 
4.50 Improvements are also planned to the A428 between the Black Cat roundabout with the A1 and the Caxton Gibbet roundabout 
with the A1198. The preferred route was announced in February 2019. If consented 
the scheme is expected to commence in 2021/22 and provide additional road capacity, reduce congestion and delays and facilitate more reliable journey times. 
4.51 A scheme to upgrade the East Coast mainline railway is in preparation which aims to reinstate the fourth track 
on the east side of the railway between Huntingdon station and Woodwalton. This is expected to 
remove a bottleneck between London and the North allowing both more and faster train journeys on the line. Urban & Civic are also working with partners to bring forward a railway station at Alconbury Weald as part of a much wider investment programme in the East coast Mainline, Crossrail and Thameslink. 
41 4 The Development Strategy 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
4.52 The East-West Rail Consortium is working to secure a strategic railway connection between Oxford and 
Cambridge and 
on into Norfolk and Suffolk.Work has commenced on the western section between Oxford 
and Bedford. The central section lies between Bedford and Cambridge and a preferred route corridor 
around Sandy was identified in 2016 as offering the best value option; a preferred route within this corridor is expected in 2019/20. Subject to there being a case for investment, a successful application for development consent powers and the availability of funding construction may start in the mid-2020s with the first trains running in the early 2030s. 
4.53 The Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Combined Authority is investigating a range of potential schemes to improve 
transport connectivity within the area. Approval has been given for further consideration of the 
potential for rapid mass transport system between Cambridge and the surrounding travel to work area, A141 capacity enhancements around Huntingdon and a Huntingdon str ategic river crossing. 
4.54 Any future iteration of this Local Plan will consider progress on strategic transport infrastructure upgrades when preparing the future dev
elopment strategy. 
Delivering Infrastructure 
4.55 To ensure that Huntingdonshire is a safe and healthy place to live and work, new housing, employment and retail development 
needs to be supported by infrastructure, such as roads, schools, and health and 
community facilities.  Development can place additional demands upon infrastructure, the environment and the social sustainability of a community, and it is therefore essential to mitigate these impacts by providing adequate infrastructure and other services to meet economic, social and environmental needs. 
4.56 A prioritised list of infrastructure needs arising from the development proposed in this Local Plan has been prepared in the Huntingdonshire Infrastructure Delivery Plan (Part 3): Infrastructure Prioritisation, Funding 
and Programme Management (March 2018)  (IDP). The document, which will be regularly updated, also considers funding sources for this 
infrastructure, including the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) and 
planning obligations. 
4.57 The purpose of this policy is to set out the Council’s approach to securing developer contributions towards local infrastructure, 
facilities and services from sustainable development proposals, predominantly through 
the Community Infrastructure Levy and planning obligations. 
LP 4 
Contributing to Infrastructure Delivery 
Community Infrastructure Levy Applicable developments will be liable to pay the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) or subsequent local 
infrastructure tax, as set out in the Huntingdonshire 
Comm unity Infrastructure Levy Charging Schedule (2012) 
or subsequent revisions. 
Planning Obligations In addition to the CIL, contributions towards the provision of infrastructure, and of meeting economic, social 
and environmental requirements may be necessary to make a proposal acceptable in planning terms. Contributions that may be required include the following: 
a. Affordable housing; 
b. Recreation (including leisure and sports facilities); c. Green infrastructure and biodiversity enhancement/ mitigation; d. Transport; 
42 The Development Strategy 4 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
e. Community facilities; 
f. Education, health and social care and community safety; g. Utilities infrastructure and energy; h. Emergency and essential services; i. Environmental improvements; j. Drainage and flood prevention and protection; k. Waste recycling facilities; and l. Public art, heritage and archaeology. 
Such contributions will be calculated as set out in the De
veloper Contributions Supplementary Planning 
Document (2011) (SPD)  or successor documents and will be sought through a planning obligation. The 
nature and scale of planning obligations sought will depend on the form of development and the impact it is 
considered to have upon the surrounding area on the basis of documentary evidence.  Requirements may be provided on- or off-site as set out in the SPD. The timing of provision will be carefully considered in order to ensure that adequate infrastructure, support and facilities are in place before development is occupied or comes into use. 
All considerations and negotiations will be undertaken in a positive manner in order to come to the most 
appropriate solution and will, subject to such evidence being submitted, take viability and other material considerations including specific site conditions into account. 
Where particular requirements of sites allocated for development are known they are identified in the applicable 
allocation policy. 
Subdivision of allocated sites in order to avoid liability for contributions will not be accepted.  Contributions 
will be calculated on the complete developable area and apportioned appropriately. 
The delivery of development may need to be phased, and review mechanisms used, to ensure necessary 
infrastructure is provided to meet needs.  Conditions or a planning obligation may be used to secure this. 
Reasoning 
4.58 Infrastructure includes roads and transport, public rights of way, open space and social and community 
infrastructure 
such as education, recreation, public halls and electronic communications networks. 
Development can place additional demands upon infrastructure, the environment and the social sustainability of a community.  Adequate infrastructure and other provision to meet economic, social and environmental needs is essential to mitigate the impact of development and enable growing communities to be as sustainable as possible. 
4.59 The Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) is the main source of funding available through development management decisions for the 
majority of sites.  However, the provision of affordable housing lies outside 
the remit of CIL and will continue to be secured predominantly through planning obligations often known as Section 106 agreements. The CIL charging schedule sets out the charge per square metre that applies 
to each category of 
development where new floorspace is being created. The charging schedule will be 
monitored to ensure it remains up to date and will be revised as necessary. The CIL will generate funding to help deliver a range of districtwide and local infrastructure projects including those provided by other bodies.  A list of infrastructure that could benefit from CIL funding is set out in the Council's Regulation 
123 CIL list. 
4.60 The Localism Act (2011) requires CIL charging authorities to allocate a ‘meaningful proportion’ of receipts back to 
the neighbourhood in which they are raised for the town or parish council to spend on locally 
agreed and prioritised infrastructure.  Regulations for distributing this 'meaningful proportion' set out different arrangements depending on whether a neighbourhood development plan is in place. The Council will work with town and parish councils to try to ensure that essential infrastructure is delivered in a timely fashion. 
43 • 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 4 The Development Strategy 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
4.61 Planning obligations will be used for contributions towards local infrastructure requirements of a development 
site, such 
as site-specific local provision of open space, connection to utility services, habitat protection, 
access roads and archaeological investigations.  Contributions may be required for off-site services such as household recycling centres.   For large scale major developments, defined in the 'Glossary', additional 
obligations may be negotiated, for instance on-site provision of a primary school.  Guidance is set out in the Developer Contributions Supplementary Planning Document (2011) (SPD) or successor documents. 
The principle is 
that an eligible development must pay towards CIL as well as any site-specific requirement 
to be secured through a planning obligation. 
4.62 To avoid contributions to infrastructure being unduly burdensome to development, the Council will be flexible 
regarding timing and delivery of infrastructure and take site-specific considerations including 
viability into account. Review mechanisms may also be used. Potential additional funding streams should also be taken into account. Provision may be phased according to trigger points agreed with the developer. However, the Council will seek to ensure that adequate provision is in place before development is occupied or comes into use. If circumstances indicate that more specific guidance on viability is appropriate the Council may produce a supplementary planning document on viability. 
4.63 Subdivision of sites to avoid liability for contributions will not be accepted.  For example the requirement to provide aff
ordable housing, as set out in 'Affordable Housing Provision' will apply to incremental 
developments 
on sites which would result in the development above the applicable threshold, usually 11 
or more homes.  If large sites are divided up into smaller sites and proposals submitted for 10 dwellings or less on each site on a piecemeal basis in an attempt to avoid the policy requirement, affordable housing provision will be sought on a proportional basis. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, Cambridgeshire County Council, town and parish 
councils, landowners, developers, registered providers, infrastructure and service providers Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans, design codes, Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), Neighbourhood Plans, CIL, S106 Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators 
Annual CIL receipts/ expenditure monitoring 
S106 monitoring 
Rolling update of GIIDP 
Completion of A14 trunk road upgrade 
Completion of A428 trunk road upgrade between Black Cat and Caxton Gibbet 
junctions 
Provision of additional capacity at Huntingdon, Oldhurst, Ramsey, Somersham and St Neots Waste Water Treatment Works 
Flood Risk 
4.64 As three of the four Spatial Planning Areas are located within the Great Ouse valley and the other within 
the low lying Fen flooding is a significant issue f
or the Local Plan. 
4.65 The purpose of this policy is to set out the Council’s approach to ensuring that the users and residents of development are not put at unnecessar
y risk in relation to flooding. 
44 The Development Strategy 4 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
LP 5 
Flood Risk 
Location of development A proposal will only be supported where all forms of flood risk, including breaches of flood defences or other 
defence failures, have been addressed, as detailed in the 
National Planning Practice Guidance  and with 
reference to the Cambridgeshire Flood and Water Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) , such that: 
a. the sequential approach and sequential test are applied and passed, having regard to actual and 
residual flood risk and including consideration of the impact of climate change; 
b. if necessary the exception test is applied and passed; 
c. development has been sequentially located within the site to avoid flood risk; d. all reasonable opportunities to reduce overall flood risk have been considered and where possible 
taken; 
e. the integrity of existing flood defences is not adversely affected and any necessary flood mitigation and 
compensation measures have been agreed with relevant bodies and the Council; and 
f. the requirements relating to flood risk set out in the Cambridgeshire Flood and Water SPD have been 
applied. 
Any reliance on emergency services to make a proposal safe will not be acceptable.  Safety risks will be determined with reference to the 
Defra guidance on flood risk safety FD2320  or successor guidance, on the 
basis that development should be 'safe for all' for a 1:100 annual probability flood event, for the lifetime of 
the development, with appropriate climate change allowances. 
Previously developed land in defended areas Where a proposal for redevelopment of Previously Developed Land (as defined in the 
'Glossary' ) which 
benefits from flood defences is deemed appropriate following application of the sequential test and exception 
test it will be supported where: 
g. breach modelling has been completed to determine the residual risk in all instances for new vulnerable 
development; and 
h. safe access and egress can be provided with approval from the emergency planning authority that 
there is no additional reliance on their services as a result of the development. 
Managing flood water 
Where a proposal is considered to be acceptable within the 1% annual  probability flood extent (flood zone 
3), including an allowance for climate change for the lifetime of the development, the development must not result in a loss of flood storage capacity, reduced flow performance, increase the rate of flooding onset or result in an unsustainable form of flood storage requiring on-going silt removal, maintenance or renewal. 
Where a proposal would occupy functional flood plain (flood zone 3b), the developer must ensure that it does 
not impact upon the ability of the floodplain to store or convey water, and seek opportunities to provide floodplain betterment.  Development will only be support where it results in no loss of floodplain performance within the undefended floodplain. 
Where ground levels are proposed to be raised to bring the development out of the floodplain compensatory 
floodplain storage within areas that currently lie outside the floodplain must be provided to ensure that the total volume and performance of floodplain storage is not reduced or vulnerability to climate change impacts increased. 
Site-specific flood risk assessments 
45 • 
• 
• 
• 4 The Development Strategy 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
On a site that is at risk of flooding from any form, where there are critical drainage problems or on sites of 1 
hectare or more the proposal will only be supported where a site-specific flood risk assessment has been produced, appropriate to the scale and nature of the development and risks involved, including consideration of the impact of climate change, and is agreed with relevant bodies.  Such assessments will need to demonstrate that they comply with the requirements set out: 
i. in the Cambridgeshire Flood and Water SPD or successor documents; 
j. by any applicable responsible authority, including but not limited to the Environment Agency and 
Cambridgeshire County Council, as Lead Local Flood Authority; and 
k. by the Middle Level Commissioners or internal drainage boards, as may be applicable. 
Reasoning 
4.66 The National Planning Policy Framework sets strict tests to protect people and property from flooding. 
Where these tests are not met, national policy is clear that new de
velopment should not be allowed. The 
main steps to be followed are set out in the NPPG and are designed to ensure that if there are better sites 
in terms of flood risk, or a proposed de
velopment cannot be made safe, it should not be permitted. 
4.67 Development should be located in areas at the least risk of flooding. A Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 
(SFRA) for Huntingdonshire was published in 2017.  As set out in national planning policy the SFRA should be the basis for applying 
the sequential test.  Reference should also be had to the Environment Agency's 
Flood Map for Planning and to surface water flood risk information from Cambridgeshire County Council, the Lead Local Flood Authority 
for Cambridgeshire. The area to apply the sequential test over will typically 
be the whole of Huntingdonshire but will depend on local circumstances and the development proposed. Detailed guidance is set out in the Cambridgeshire Flood and Water SPD. 
4.68 In situations where there is a risk of flooding from any source, including from surface and groundwater, there are critical dr
ainage problems or the sites is 1 hectare or more a site-specific flood risk assessment 
is required. There is national guidance on the level of detail to be included in a site-specific flood risk assessment contained in the NPPG, which is expanded upon and given local context in the Cambridgeshire 
Flood and Water 
SPD.  Further requirements may be required by the Environment Agency or by the Middle 
Level Commissioners or other Internal Drainage Boards if the site is within the area they manage. 
4.69 The district is projected to have increased susceptibility to future climate impacts beyond the plan period. During the 
lifetime of most developments, the effectiveness of flood and surface water management assets 
is expected to reduce. 
4.70 Opportunities for developments to reduce flood risk in Huntingdonshire will vary depending on the site location and the nature of development.
 Flood risk assessments will be expected to show how the following 
potential opportunities have been explored: 
additional surface water attenuation through SuDS and rainwater harvesting; 
additional multifunctional flood storage or conveyance capacity within planned open space, or setting 
aside green space that could be used for water storage in the future; 
contacting local flood risk management authorities to explore the possibility of working in partnership 
to enhance flood risk management to and from the site; 
improving the sustainability of flood reduction assets that the development may rely upon at present, 
or in the future. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Responsible agencies Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered providers, 
Environment Agency 
46 • The Development Strategy 4 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators Number of planning permissions granted contrary to the advice of the 
Environment Agency on flooding or water quality grounds 
Waste Water Management 
4.71 The purpose of this policy is to set out the approach necessary to ensure that waste water capacity is 
maintained throughout the plan period. 
LP 6 
Waste Water Management 
Sewer Network A proposal for major scale development that would: a. require a new connection to the sewer network; 
b. involve significant increases to flows entering the sewer network; or c. involve development of a site identified by the 
Huntingdonshire Stage 2 Detailed Water Cycle Study 
or updated, successor or equivalent documents, to have potentially limited sewer network capacity 
(Amber or Red assessment); 
will only be supported where a sustainable foul/ used water strategy has been prepared and agreed with Anglian Water as the sewerage undertaker to establish whether any upgrades are necessary so that flows from the proposal can be accommodated.  If upgrades are necessary the proposal will need to include an agreed plan for delivery, including phasing of development as necessary. 
Water Treatment Capacity A proposal for any scale of development will be supported if: d. Anglian Water Services do not raise concerns relating to the ability of waste water infrastructure to 
accommodate waste water flows from the proposal; 
e. the Environment Agency and Natural England or another responsible authority do not raise concerns 
that the requirements of the Water Framework Directive and the Habitats Directive could be 
compromised; and 
f. the Middle Level Commissioners or other internal drainage board do not object on the basis of flood 
risk in the system they manage, as may be applicable. 
To achieve these requirements for proposals that would involve waste water flows to Waste water Treatment Works (WwTW) with constrained capacity, as currently identified in the Huntingdonshire Stage 2 Detailed Water Cycle Study, interim treatment measures are likely to be required until an acceptable permanent solution is put in place. Where temporary measures are not available or would be insufficient it may be necessary for development to be phased.  If acceptable permanent solutions are not possible proposals will not be supported. 
47 4 The Development Strategy 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Reasoning 
4.72 The Huntingdonshire Stage 2 Detailed Water Cycle Study (WCS) provides information about the capacity 
of the water en
vironment and water services infrastructure to accommodate required growth during the 
plan period. 
4.73 In order to ensure waste water from growth can be drained to the waste water treatment works (WwTW), 
an assessment of sewer 
capacity constraints was undertaken as part of the WCS. The assessment has 
determined where developers will need to contribute to upgrades to existing sewerage infrastructure (sewer mains or pumping stations) or towards new infrastructure and has highlighted concerns in several locations. 
4.74 The policy requires consultation with the Environment Agency (EA) and Anglian Water Services (AWS) to ensure that the waste w
ater flows from proposed development can be accommodated and that meeting 
the requirements of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised. Where upgrades are necessary proposals will need to include plans for them.  Such plans would be used as the basis for planning conditions as part of a planning permission. 
4.75 The study also looked at treatment capacity at WwTWs. The study identifies constrained water treatment capacity at the WwTWs at 
Oldhurst, Ramsey, Somersham and St Neots.  It also identified that without 
further capacity measures the WwTW at Buckden and Huntingdon would reach the constraints of water treatment capacity during the plan period, based on allocations contained in this plan. 
4.76 The Huntingdon WwTW serves Huntingdon, Godmanchester and Alconbury Weald, while the Buckden WwTW serves 
the village and surrounding area. The Huntingdon WwTW has available flow headroom 
in its existing discharge consent. The WCS assessed the capacity to be sufficient for growth up until around 2021/22, based on estimated growth trajectory information from 2013, or 5,100 homes.  After this unless additional headroom becomes available an increased discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be necessary. The Buckden WwTW was considered to have consented headroom for the very limited level of development envisaged at the time of the study.  However, since then additional sites have been identified and included within this plan. This indicates that unless additional headroom becomes available an increased discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be necessary within the plan period.  Current indications are that for both WwTW such process upgrades would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and would not impact on attainment of future WFD water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions may be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place. 
4.77 The Oldhurst WwTW serves a wide area including Warboys; Ramsey WwTW serves Ramsey and Bury; Somersham WwTW ser
ves Somersham and St Neots WwTW serves St Neots and Little Paxton. The 
WCS assessed these WwTWs as having no available headroom.  Unless additional headroom becomes available a change in discharge consent and process upgrades will be required for growth that would be served by these WwTWs.  Engineering solutions to increase treatment capacity are feasible for all of these treatment works but they will need to be implemented during the plan period. This would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and would not impact on attainment of future Water Framework Objective (WFD) water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions are likely to be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place.  Should temporary measures prove not to be viable or would be insufficient it may be necessary to place limits on the amount of development that can take place. 
4.78 Additionally the Ramsey High Lode drains into the Middle Level catchment, managed by the Middle Level Commissioners (MLC), specifically the St Germans P
ond section of the catchment. The MLC have advised 
that flood risk in the St Germans Pond section may be increased and have stated that their default position is no increase in flow volume will be accepted from any source. Therefore, if no further headroom is made available for all growth and an increase in the flow consent required, further discussion will be needed between AWS and the MLC to determine whether additional flow volumes will result in an increase in flood risk before the additional flow can be discharged.  In order to provide a definitive answer to whether flood risk would be increased, hydraulic modelling of the St Germans Pond section of the Middle Level 
48 • The Development Strategy 4 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
catchment would be required.  An existing model produced for the Middle Level catchment was not available 
for use in the WCS. Therefore the policy requires agreement from the MLC that they will not object on the basis of flood risk. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, Environment Agency, Natural England, Anglian 
Water, developers, infrastructure and service providers Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans, design codes Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators Number of planning permissions granted contrary to advice of Environment 
Agency on flooding or water quality grounds 
The Key Diagram 
4.79 The Key Diagram illustrates in a broad-brush way the key elements of the strategy.  It identifies the 
settlements of the Spatial Planning Areas and Key 
Service Centres and indicates the amount of development 
from allocations. The two Strategic Expansion Locations (SELs) are specifically identified.  For an accurate geographic view of allocations please see the individual location plans within each allocation policy and the Policies Map. 
49 4 The Development Strategy 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
This page is intentionally left blank. 
50 D 
D .. to Oundle 
. ,• . . . . . . . . 
Kimbolton 
() . . : . . . . Peterborough 
.... 
Br 
Grafham 
Water Great 
Fen 
"""- Great Staughton 
A1 to London •' 
A 141 to March p•msey 
Bury 
Somersham 
0 
G reen Infrastructu re Priority Areas 
Guided Busway 
A1 4 re-alignment Cambr idge Figure 2 : Key Diagram 
Key Service Centres 
Allocations: 
1,655 homes 5ha employment land 
Huntingdon 
Spatial Planning Area settlements 
SEL1 Alconbur
y Weald 
4,225 homes (6,680 in total including 2,455 
outside the plan period) 150ha employment land 
Allocations: 
3,369 homes (3,699 in total including 330 outside the plan period) 6.8ha emplo yment land 
St Neots Spatial Planning Area settlements 
SEL2 St Neots East 
3,265 homes (3,820 in total including 555 outside the plan per
iod) 
22ha employment land 
Allocations: 
220 homes 0ha employment land 
Ramsey 
Spatial Planning Area settlements 
Allocations: 895 homes 2ha employment land 
St Ives 
Spatial Planning Area settlements 
Allocations: 
430 homes 5.6ha employment land y • 
• 
• 
r The Development Strategy 4 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Built-up Areas definition 
4.80 The 'built-up area' definition below should be used to apply the 'Spatial Planning Areas', 'Key Service 
Centres', 'Small Settlements' and 'The Countryside' policies. 
4.81 The fundamental purpose of defining the built-up area is to provide guidance on interpretation of the 
boundary to 
inform the answer to the question ‘does a specific parcel of land situated on the periphery of 
a settlement relate more to the built environment of that settlement in its use, form, character and connectivity or does it relate more to the surrounding countryside? 
4.82 The distinction between settlements and areas of countryside is vital to interpretation of the Spatial Planning Areas, K
ey Service Centres and Small Settlements policies.  A criteria based definition is favoured as, 
among other benefits, it avoids the perception that any form of development on any land within a drawn boundary would be acceptable and the pressure for every piece of land within the boundary to be developed. This is undesirable as it could damage the loose knit character of many settlements in Huntingdonshire by creating harder, more regular edges to settlements. 
4.83 The settlement pattern of all parishes has been reviewed and three guiding principles determined: 
The built-up area does not need to be a single contiguous area; distinct areas of development may 
exist within a parish that are separated by areas of countryside; 
To be considered as a built-up area there must be a distinct group of 30 dwellings or more; clusters 
smaller than this are deemed to comprise isolated or sporadic development within the countryside; and 
A built-up area may extend across more than one parish; in such cases it will be considered as a 
single built-up area 
4.84 A few hamlets fall below this 30 dwelling threshold; however, these typically have a relatively dispersed 
settlement pattern comprising farms and one or more small groups of houses. The only parishes with no built-up area defined are Barham and Wooley, Denton and Caldecote, Haddon, Little Gidding, Morborne and Toseland. 
Built-up Areas definition 
A built-up area is considered to be a distinct group of buildings that includes 30 or more homes.  Land which 
relates more to the group of buildings rather than to the surrounding countryside is also considered to form part of the built-up area. 
4.85 The built-up areas definition is extensively used in other policies of this plan to shape where unallocated 
development proposals may or may not be considered appropriate.The following table provides guidance on interpretation of frequently arising situations. 
Implementation guidance Principle 
The built-up area will include: 
Residential, community, retail and The majority of buildings within the built up area boundary will fall within 
employment buildings which are this category. It is included for the sake of completeness as most 
predominantly surrounded by other attention is paid to determining where the edges of the built-up area buildings. are. 
Buildings on the edge of settlements Industrial and community buildings such as church and village halls are 
which relate closely to the economic an integral part of the social and economic success of a settlement and 
53 4 The Development Strategy 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
or social function of the settlement but 
excluding sports and recreational facilities addressed below. are considered as much part of the built-up area as residential properties. The buildings and any associated hardstanding such as surfaced car parking are part of the built-up area. 
Open space, sports and recreational 
facilities, allotments, caravan sites, churchyard and cemeteries which are predominantly surrounded by and integral to the built up area and defined by strong boundary features. Some greenfield uses such as recreational or amenity open space, churchyards, wide grass verges and allotments, can form an integral and valuable part of the built-up area and its character. These must have buildings on at least two sides and have a clear physical and visual relationship with the built-up area rather than any adjoining countryside. Examples of strong boundary features include a tree belt or substantial stone or brick wall. Principle Implementation guidance 
Existing commitments for residential, 
community, retail and employment uses on sites which are physically/functionally related to the settlement. 
Individual plots and minor scale 
development opportunities which would provide infill and rounding off opportunities on land which is physically, functionally and visually related to existing buildings, taking account of any environmental development constraints subject to the exclusions below. 
Open spaces and sports and 
recreational facilities, allotments, caravan sites, churchyards and cemeteries which extend into the countryside and are not well contained by strong boundary features, or primarily relate to the countryside in their use, form or character. 
The built up area will exclude: 
Undeveloped land that affords 
important views from a public vantage point to or from a listed building or conservation area connecting the building or area to its countryside setting. 
Isolated properties or areas of ribbon 
and fragmented development which are physically and visually detached from the main built form. Where development for residential, community, retail or employment 
use has commenced or has outstanding planning permission the principle of development has been approved. The precise boundary around such sites is determined with regard to the detailed guidance within this table. 
Pockets of undeveloped land exist in some locations which relate to 
nearby buildings. Often well contained by existing hedgerows or tree belts, the character of such land is influenced by the buildings such that it is not perceived to be part of the surrounding countryside but relates primarily to the built form of the settlement. Small parcels of land such as this can offer opportunities for organic growth of settlements. 
The built up area will include elements of the grounds of large curtilages that relate closely to the buildings, for instance formal gardens, ancillary parking and hard tennis courts. 
Areas of open space, sports and recreational facilities, paddocks, 
allotments, caravan sites, churchyards and cemeteries provide a visual buffer between the built form and the open countryside, softening the visual impact and linking the built-up area with its rural context. Such land is generally considered to primarily relate to the countryside where it is surrounded by built development on less than two sides. 
To protect the character of a settlement and maintain the integral 
relationship between the settlement and its countryside context land which offers or facilitates visual connections between designated heritage assets and their countryside setting is excluded from the built-up area to protect its role in providing a transition between the settlement and the countryside. 
To avoid areas of intervening countryside being included within the built-up area properties which are physically and visually detached should be excluded. 
54 The Development Strategy 4 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Implementation guidance Principle 
Farmyards and associated agricultural 
buildings which extend into the countryside or primarily relate to the countryside in their use, form, character or connectivity. 
Agricultural land, woodland, meadow, areas of water and natural habitats that penetrate the built form or sections of large residential curtilages where the character of the land primarily relates to the countryside. Agricultural buildings tend to relate more to the surrounding countryside 
when still in use for agricultural purposes. However, if the building comprises a long standing traditionally built building and is well-related in terms of scale and positioning to eligible properties with a defensible boundary it may be included where it is likely to be deemed suitable for reuse under permitted development rights. 
These spaces can provide a visual buffer between built development and the open countryside, softening the visual impact and linking the built up area with its rural context. 
Large curtilages with grounds stretching away from the rest of the built 
up area are excluded to prev
ent sub-division of the plot for new 
development. The built-up area will include elements of the grounds that relate closely to the buildings, for instance formal gardens, ancillary parking and hard tennis courts but not those parts with a more natural, rural character. 
Spatial Planning Areas 
4.86 The purpose of this policy is to set out the Council's approach for planning for a range of uses in the Spatial 
Planning Areas (SPAs) of Huntingdon, St Neots, St Iv
es and Ramsey, which are defined below. 
4.87 The relationship between the district's four larger towns and the settlements that surround them is important. While each settlement has its own distinctiv
e character and identity, there are strong functional, economic 
and social links between each group of settlements.  Smaller settlements benefit from their proximity to larger settlements through greater sustainability than they would otherwise have if they were more isolated. The range of services in the towns is also supported by people who live in the settlements that surround the towns. Within the areas of the market towns and their nearby settlements existing and future residents enjoy greater opportunities for a sustainable lifestyle. This relationship has led to four spatial planning areas defined below. These definitions should be used to interpret the policies of this plan. 
Definition of Spatial Planning Areas 
Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area: incorporates the whole parish of Huntingdon, and parts of the parishes 
of Brampton and Godmanchester including the settlements and the intervening land connecting them to 
Huntingdon.  It also covers small parts of Alconbury, Kings Ripton, Wyton on the Hill and Houghton and Wyton parishes where they closely relate to the built-up area of Huntingdon. The Spatial Planning Area includes a substantial part of The Stukeleys parish covered by the strategic expansion location of Alconbury Weald, but specifically excludes the villages of Great and Little Stukeley.  Huntingdon is the primary settlement within this Spatial Planning Area. 
St Neots Spatial Planning Area: incorporates the whole parish of St Neots and the part of Little Paxton 
parish lying east of the A1.  St Neots is the pr
imary settlement within this Spatial Planning Area. 
St Ives Spatial Planning Area: incorporates the parish of St Ives except for the land north of Marley Gap Brook.  
It also includes parts of the parishes of Hemingford Grey, Houghton and Wyton, Fenstanton, and 
Holywell-cum-Needingworth where the built-up area of St Ives extends into them and/ or development is allocated in this plan. The main built-up areas of the villages associated with these parishes do not form part of the Spatial Planning Area.  St Ives is the primary settlement within this Spatial Planning Area. 
55 4 The Development Strategy 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Ramsey Spatial Planning Area: as Ramsey parish is so extensive the Ramsey Spatial Planning Area is 
focused on the town of Ramsey and the built-up parts of Bury parish and the former RAF Upwood airfield 
that adjoin it.  It excludes the villages of Ramsey Forty Foot, Ramsey Heights, Ramsey Mereside, Ramsey St Marys and Upwood.  Ramsey is the primary settlement within this Spatial Planning Area. 
LP 7 
Spatial Planning Areas 
Each Spatial Planning Area to which this policy applies is defined above. Development Proposals on Unallocated Sites A proposal for development on a site which is additional to those allocated in this plan will be supported 
where it fulfils the following requirements and is in accordance with other policies: 
Residential Development A proposal for housing development (class 'C3') or for a residential institution use (class 'C2') will be supported 
where it is appropriately located within a built-up area of an identified Spatial Planning Area settlement. 
Business Development A proposal for business development (class 'B') will be supported where it is appropriately located within a 
built-up area of an identified Spatial Planning Area settlement.  An appropriate location will include an Established Employment Area defined in policy 
LP 18 'Established Employment Areas' ; a town centre defined 
in policy LP 21 'Town Centre Vitality and Viability' or the Alconbury Enterprise Zone. 
Main Town Centre Uses 
A proposal for a main town centre use, as defined in the 'Glossary' , will be supported where it is appropriately 
located within a built-up area of an identified Spatial Planning Area settlement.  An appropriate location will 
be determined through the application of the sequential approach as set out in the National Planning P olicy 
Framework . 
Outside a defined town centre a proposal including more than 600m2 of net internal retail floorspace will need 
to be accompanied by a proportionate and locally appropriate impact assessment as set out in the National 
Planning Policy Framework .  A proposal will not be supported where it is likely to have a significant adverse 
impact. 
Other uses A proposal for a non-residential institutional use (class 'D1') or an assembly and leisure facility (class 'D2') 
other than those defined as a main town centre use will be supported where it is appropriately located within the built-up area of an identified Spatial Planning Area settlement. 
Mixed use development A proposal which includes a mix of uses will be supported where each use accords with the applicable 
requirements detailed above. 
Relationship of settlements within a Spatial Planning Area 
56 l _____ J The Development Strategy 4 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
A proposal will be supported where it will not undermine the role of the primary settlement within the Spatial 
Planning Area or adversely affect the relationship between the settlements of the Spatial Planning Area whether this is through its scale or other impacts. 
Reasoning 
4.88 Allocations for new development reflect existing known opportunities within each spatial planning area. 
This policy is intended to guide the scale and nature of planning applications for the 
wide range of 
non-allocated potential development.  Further development is encouraged within the built-up area where there are suitable vacant plots or opportunities to redevelop land to maximise the potential for development in locations where people may be able to access shops, services and employment locally and so reduce the need to travel. 
4.89 In addition to allocated sites, residential development of any scale may be acceptable where it can be successfully integrated 
within the built-up area of the existing settlement.  Proposals should provide a mix 
of tenures, sizes and types to meet a wide range of housing needs. 
4.90 To reduce the need to travel, proposals for economic development are encouraged within the spatial planning areas (SPAs). The 
policy aims to encourage sustainable economic growth and support new 
investment within the SPAs.  Appropriate locations for proposals for development of business uses falling within class 'B' include established employment areas, town centres and the Alconbury Enterprise Campus. 
4.91 New investment in retailing is expected, particularly within Huntingdon and St Neots town centres, in order to ensure that they remain 
attractive centres for daily needs as well as specialist interests.  Restaurants, 
hotels and leisure uses are encouraged and should look to locate within the town centres.  Additional office space within town centres will help to ensure that services within the town centre are well used. Town centre uses will therefore be located in the town centre unless a sequential approach and impact assessment prove a different location is justified. The scale of retail development within town centres is not constrained other than by the physical capacity of the centre to accommodate proposals without detrimental impact on its character. 
4.92 Retail impact assessments demonstrate whether a retail proposal outside of a defined town centre will detrimentally aff
ect town centre vitality and viability. The NPPF sets a threshold of 2,500m2 gross retail 
floorspace above which a retail impact assessment is required, which applies if there is no locally set threshold.  Only the largest superstores reach this size in Huntingdonshire and shops much smaller than that could significantly affect the viability of others.  Huntingdonshire's town centres have few large retail premises; analysis of retail properties within Huntingdon, St Neots, St Ives and Ramsey town centres indicates a clear cut-off between a few large stores over 600m
2 and many below this. Therefore, a 600m2 
threshold has been set such that proposals outside a defined town centre that are larger than this will be required to conduct an impact assessment which is proportionate to the scale of the development proposed. This approach is endorsed by the Retail and Commercial Leisure Needs Assessment (2016). 
4.93 Brampton, Godmanchester and Little Paxton do not have clearly definable centres. Within these settlements and outside the defined town centres 
of the others, proposals for shops, offices, leisure and tourist 
accommodation facilities should be of a scale and type directly related to the role and function of the locality.  Proposals for such uses over 600m
2 of net floorspace will be required to provide an impact 
assessment demonstrating the impact on the nearby town centre and relevant retail businesses within the settlement. 
4.94 Non-residential institutions, which may include medical centres, day nurseries and schools, may be located on suitable sites 
anywhere within the built-up area.  Such sites will need to be large enough to cater for 
the use and associated car parking and well located on the transport network. 
57 r 
• 
• 
• 
• • 
• 
• • • 
• 
• • 
• 
• • 
• 
4 The Development Strategy 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered providers Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans, design 
codes Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators 
 Number and % of housing completions by settlement type 
Amount and % of employment development by settlement type 
Amount and % of completed office, retail and leisure development in town 
centres 
Key Service Centres 
4.95 The purpose of this policy is to set out the Council's approach for development proposals on sites in 
addition to those allocated in this plan where they are 
within the Key Service Centres, which are defined 
below. 
4.96 There are a number of large villages, outside of spatial planning areas, that offer a range of services and facilities to 
meet the daily needs of their residents and to some extent the residents of other villages 
nearby.  At the least these include a: 
primary school 
 bus service operating Monday to Saturday 
doctor's surgery 
 convenience shop and at least one other shop 
public hall 
 public house 
In addition, other shops, a library, a food and drink establishment and local employment opportunities are 
often available. 
4.97 These large villages are identified as Key Service Centres.  Each is considered capable of accommodating some development 
sustainably due to the level of services, facilities and infrastructure they contain. This 
is reflected in the allocation of sites for development in this plan.  Further sustainable development at Key Service Centres can contribute to the social and economic sustainability of these settlements and support a thriving rural economy. 
Key Service Centres 
The following villages are Key Service Centres: 
Buckden 
Fenstanton Kimbolton Sawtr
y Somersham Warboys Y
axley 
58 r 
• 
• The Development Strategy 4 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
LP 8 
Key Service Centres 
Each Key Service Centre to which this policy applies is defined above. Development Proposals within the Built-up Area A proposal for development on a site which is additional to those allocated in this plan will be supported 
where it is located within a built-up area of a Key Service Centre. 
Development Proposals on Land well-related to the Built-up Area A proposal for development on land well-related to the built-up area may be supported where it accords with 
the specific opportunities allowed for through other policies of this plan. 
Reasoning 
4.98 The 4 'The Development Strategy' recognises the range of services and facilities available in Key Service 
Centres (KSCs) that meet many of 
the day to day needs of residents and to some extent those of other 
nearby settlements.  KSCs have a role in meeting the development needs of the district through a series 
of allocations for development at these settlements. The strategy also sets out a role for further sustainable development at KSCs in contributing to the social and economic sustainability of these settlements and supporting a thriving rural economy.  Such development may be appropriate subject to recognition of the limitations of the services and facilities available and consideration of the impact development would have on the settlement concerned.  It is therefore considered appropriate to limit development primarily to sites within built-up areas, acknowledging the fact that opportunities for development within them will largely be limited to redevelopment opportunities, intensification of use and development of land which relates wholly to existing buildings rather than the surrounding countryside. 
4.99 Proposals for development on land well-related to the built-up area will be considered subject to the provisions of policies LP 10 'The Countryside', LP 19 'Rural Economy', LP 22 'Local Services and Community Facilities', LP 23 'Tourism and Recreation', LP 28 'Rural Exceptions Housing', LP 33 'Rural Buildings' and 
LP 38 'Water Related Development'. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered providers Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans, design 
codes Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators 
 Number and % of housing completions by settlement type 
Amount and % of employment development by settlement type 
Small Settlements 
4.100 The purpose of this policy is to set out the Council's approach to planning for development on sites in the 
Small Settlements, which are defined below
. 
59 r 4 The Development Strategy 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Definition of Small Settlements 
The following places are defined as Small Settlements: 
Abbotsley 
Alwalton Buckw
orth 
Colne Earith Farcet Great Gidding Great Staughton Hemingford Abbots Holywell Leighton Bromswold Offord Cluny Perry Ramsey Heights Spaldwick Stow Longa Wansford (part)
(1) 
Wistow Y elling Abbots Ripton Bluntisham Bythorn Conington Easton Folks
worth 
Great Gransden Great Stukeley Hemingford Grey Houghton and Wyton Little Stukeley Offord D’Arcy Pidley Ramsey Mereside Stibbington Tilbrook Waresley Woodhurst Alconbury Brington Catwor
th 
Covington Ellington Glatton Great Paxton Hail Weston Hilton Keyston Molesworth Oldhurst Pondersbridge (part)
(2) 
Ramsey St Mary’s Stilton Upton Water Newton Woodwalton Alconbury Weston Broughton Chesterton Diddington Elton Grafham Great Ra
veley 
Hamerton Holme Kings Ripton Needingworth Old Weston Ramsey Forty Foot Southoe Stonely Upwood Winwick Wyton on the Hill 
1. The greater part of this settlement lies within the neighbouring authority of Peterborough 
2. The greater part of this settlement lies within the neighbouring authority of Fenland 
LP 9 
Small Settlements 
Each Small Settlement to which this policy applies is defined abo ve. 
Development Proposals within the Built-up Area A proposal that is located within a built-up area of a Small Settlement will be supported where the amount 
and location of development proposed is sustainab
le in relation to the: 
a. level of service and infrastructure provision within the settlement; 
b. opportunities for users of the proposed development to access everyday services and facilities by sustainable modes of travel including walking, cycling and public transport; 
c. effect on the character of the immediate locality and the settlement as a whole. 
Development Proposals on Land well-related to the Built-up Area 
A proposal for development on land well-related to the built-up area may be supported where it accords with 
the specific opportunities allow
ed for through other policies of this plan. 
60 The Development Strategy 4 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Reasoning 
4.101 There are many settlements across Huntingdonshire that have limited or no services or facilities available. 
Such settlements are identified as Small Settlements. 
 Small Settlements are less sustainable than 
settlements in the Spatial Planning Area settlements and Key Service Centres due to the need to travel to access services and facilities elsewhere on a regular basis.  As such the Local Plan makes no allocations for development in Small Settlements.  However, the strategy does set out a role for a limited amount of sustainable development in contributing to the social and economic sustainability of Small Settlements and in supporting a thriving rural economy.  Given the variation in size and availability of services and facilities between Small Settlements it is recognised that varying levels of development could sustainably be accommodated depending on nature of the individual Small Settlement. 
4.102 The potential benefits of promoting some growth within Small Settlements include helping to create a more balanced and diverse local 
population; enabling young people to stay in the communities they grew 
up in; and providing opportunities for older people seeking to move into more accessible housing within the community.  It can also help sustain the available services and facilities by maintaining population numbers helping to address the particular challenge of declining rural populations relating to falling household sizes. Growth can help support a living, working countryside capable of adapting to changing needs.  Development in Small Settlements will typically comprise smaller sites providing a range of opportunities for small builders and those wishing to build or commission their own homes. 
4.103 It is recognised that opportunities for development within the built-up areas of Small Settlements will vary according to the scale and nature of the individual settlement .  
However, this is considered appropriate 
as it reflects the differing range of services, facilities and infrastructure available. A Small Settlement which offers a range of services such as a shop, village hall, public house and primary school offers far greater opportunities in principle for sustainable development than a Small Settlement with few or no services or facilities where only very small scale development opportunities are likely to be sustainable. 
4.104 The acceptable amount of development will be a balanced judgement between the sustainability of the Small Settlement over
all, the locational relationship of the proposed development site with local services 
and the impact of the proposed quantum of development on the character of the immediate locality and of the Small Settlement as a whole. The nature of Small Settlements means that development proposals, that might be supported in some Small Settlements would potentially constitute an unsustainable level of growth in others.  For this reason, all development proposals will be carefully considered in terms of their sustainability. 
4.105 The consideration of the level of service and infrastructure provision will reflect their availability, capacity and accessibility. This 
will be closely linked to consideration of the opportunities for users of the proposed 
development to travel by sustainable modes. This includes assessment of the practicalities for potential residents or other occupiers/ users walking or cycling to local services and whether the Small Settlement has a bus service. Sustainability weighting will vary depending upon the proposed use. For example, access to a primary school will be important where family housing is proposed but irrelevant where employment uses are put forward. 
4.106 The consideration of the effect on the character of the surroundings will look at how the proposal would fit in with the immediate environment around 
the proposal site, encompassing design and amenity issues. 
Consideration of the wider settlement character will be concerned with maintaining the nature of the settlement and its individual identity as well as preventing adverse landscape and visual impact. 
4.107 Proposals for development on land well-related to the built-up area will be considered subject to the provisions of policies LP 10 'The Countryside', LP 19 'Rural Economy', LP 22 'Local Services and Community Facilities', LP 23 'Tourism and Recreation', LP 28 'Rural Exceptions Housing', LP 33 'Rural Buildings' and 
LP 38 'Water Related Development'. 
61 r • 
• 4 The Development Strategy 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered providers Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans, design 
codes Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators 
 Number and % of housing completions by settlement type 
Amount and % of employment development by settlement type 
The Countryside 
4.108 For Huntingdonshire's rural areas, the strategy seeks to support a thriving economy while protecting the 
character of 
existing settlements and recognising the intrinsic character of the surrounding countryside. 
There are specific opportunities for sustainable development in the countryside, set out in other policies of this Local Plan, which support rural business growth and rural exceptions housing. Working alongside these other policies, the purpose of this policy is to ensure that development protects the resources and recognises the intrinsic character of the countryside. 
LP 10 
The Countryside 
Development in the countryside will be restricted to the limited and specific opportunities as provided for in 
other policies of this plan. 
All development in the countryside must: a. seek to use land of lower agricultural value in preference to land of higher agricultural value: 
i. avoiding the irreversible loss of the best and most versatile agricultural land (Grade 1 to 3a) where 
possible, and 
ii. avoiding Grade 1 agricultural land unless there are exceptional circumstances where the benefits of the proposal significantly outweigh the loss of land; 
b. recognise the intrinsic character and beauty of the countryside; and 
c. not give rise to noise, odour, obtrusive light or other impacts that would adversely affect the use and 
enjoyment of the countryside by others. 
Reasoning 
4.109 As an extensive rural district the countryside occupies a large area of Huntingdonshire and includes 
substantial areas of high quality agricultur
al land and important wildlife habitats, which need conserving. 
On the other hand, many Huntingdonshire businesses are based in rural areas (26% of Huntingdonshire's jobs are based outside of the Spatial Planning Areas(11)), and many of the district's residents live in small 
communities surrounded by the countryside (10% of Huntingdonshire residents live in parishes with a 
11 Calculated from Business Register & Employment Survey 2014 employment figures, taken from 
Cambridgeshire Insight 
62 • The Development Strategy 4 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
population of less than 1,000(12)). It is important that overly restrictive policies do not prevent 
Huntingdonshire's rural-based businesses and smaller communities from thriving.  A balance therefore 
needs to be struck between supporting a thriving rural economy and providing opportunities for communities to achieve local development aspirations, with protecting the character of existing settlements and recognising the character and beauty of the surrounding countryside. 
4.110 The aim of supporting a thriving rural economy recognises the need to support traditional agricultural and other land-based businesses, 
as well as the continued diversification of rural businesses into sectors such 
as tourism and recreation. The policies in this Local Plan which support this aim include LP 19 'Rural 
Economy', LP 20 'Homes for Rural Workers' and LP 23 'Tourism and Recreation'.  In addition, LP 22 'Local 
Services and Community Facilities' aims to protect the valued local services and community facilities which support the 
social and economic vitality of settlements. The 'Rural Exceptions Housing' policy 
provides opportunities for communities to achieve local development aspirations. 
4.111 Outside of the specific development opportunities provided for in the policies referred to above, development within the countryside is 
limited. This policy specifically reflects the importance of protecting the best and 
most versatile agricultural land, as well as recognising the rural character and landscape of Huntingdonshire's countryside. 
4.112 Agricultural land is a valuable asset in itself as it contributes to the local and national economy and assists with food secur
ity.  Huntingdonshire's agricultural land is almost entirely of good quality: 98% is classed 
as grades 1, 2 or 3.  15% is grade 1 (excellent quality) which is concentrated in the north east of the district, mainly in the Fens with a few pockets along the Ouse Valley.  A proposal involving built development on agricultural land should demonstrate that it is located on the lowest grade agricultural land suitable and available within the vicinity which is also compatible with other sustainability objectives.  Development should avoid use of grade one agricultural land. 
4.113 Development proposals should seek to minimise their potential impact and recognise the intrinsic character of the countryside through 
good design and careful location. Where development is proposed high quality 
design will be required.  A proposal should not adversely affect the character and tranquillity of the countryside and should ensure that it will not give rise to impacts that would reduce opportunities for others to use and enjoy the countryside, including for wildlife.  In particular, a proposal should not create artificial light in an area with a potentially high impact on wildlife or on intrinsically dark landscapes. Guidance on the characteristics of Huntingdonshire's countryside can be found in Huntingdonshire Landscape and 
Townscape Assessment SPD 2007 or successor documents. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered providers Responsible agencies 
Delivery mechanism Through the determination of planning applications, neighbourhood plans 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators 
 Number of planning permissions granted on unallocated sites on grade 1 & 2 
agricultural land 
12 Cambridgeshire Research Group Population and Dwelling Stock Estimates 2013 
63 • 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• Section C: Development Management 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Section C: Development Management 
Section C: Development Management Policies 
This section contains policies which set out the Council's detailed requirements for planning applications.  It 
includes policies relating to: 
design; 
economy; 
communities; and 
environment. 
C.1 This section contains policies that will help people making planning applications to understand the 
requirements of sustainable development in Huntingdonshire and to help the Council determine planning applications efficiently. 
C.2 The NPPF states in paragraph 2 that planning law requires that applications for planning permission must be determined in 
accordance with the development plan, unless material considerations indicate otherwise. 
The Planning Portal advises that material considerations can include (but are not limited to): 
Overlooking/loss of privacy 
Loss of light or overshado
wing 
Parking Highway safety Traffic Noise Effect on listed building and conservation area Layout and density of building Design, appearance and materials Government policy Disabled persons' access Proposals in the Development Plan Previous planning decisions (including appeal decisions) Nature conservation 
C.3 However, issues such as loss of view or negative effect on the value of properties are not material 
considerations. 
C.4 The 
National Planning Policy Framework itself is a material consideration in planning decisions.  Planning 
policies and decisions must also 
reflect and where appropriate promote relevant EU obligations and 
statutory requirements. 
C.5 National Planning Practice Guidance (NPPG) issued by the Department for Housing, Communities and Local Gover
nment provides a web-based resource giving detailed national guidance. The NPPG contains 
clear links to the National Planning Policy Framework and due consideration should be given to its contents. 
64 Requiring Good Design 5 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
5 Requiring Good Design 
5.1 The NPPF identifies good design as a key aspect of sustainable development and contends that it is 
indivisible from 
good planning. The choices made during the design stage of a development can affect 
a wide range of issues from the value of the development through to its longevity.  Good design helps to create distinctive places where people feel welcome and want to live, work and spend their free time.  It includes both the aesthetic - how a place looks and feels, and the functional - how a place works, with the overall aim of supporting the health and wellbeing of everyone affected by a development.  Investing in design also makes commercial sense as there is clear evidence that it can add value to development projects. 
5.2 'Design Context' identifies responding to context as the key principle to achieving well designed developments and ref
ers to the primary local documents which should inform the design of development 
proposals. 'Design Implementation' provides additional detailed policy requirements, promoting 
consideration of 
all elements of design to achieve successful new places. The placemaking requirements 
for larger developments are set out in 'Placemaking'. 'Amenity' seeks to ensure that the design of new 
development contributes to public health and provides for a high quality of life for residents, users and neighbours. 'Surface 
Water' seeks to ensure that, where feasible, new development incorporates design 
measures to reduce the flow of unregulated surface water into sewers and watercourses, thereby reducing the causes and impacts of flooding, alongside a number of other benefits. 
5.3 Residents 
and users of new developments generate additional journeys by vehicle, bicycle or foot. 
'Sustainable Travel' seeks to ensure that any negative impacts of these additional journeys, such as additional traffic, 
are mitigated, and that the proportion of journeys made by public transport, cycle and 
foot increases.  Providing sufficient, discreet parking for vehicles and cycles on a development can significantly influence the feel of a place, and can encourage the enjoyment and active use of public space. 'Parking Provision and Vehicle Movement' seeks to ensure appropriate levels of well designed parking provision for vehicles and cycles at residential and in non-residential developments. This is intended to support the 
overall aim of encouraging more people to use public transport or to travel by bicycle or foot, 
balanced with being realistic about the options available for achieving this in a rural district. 
Design Context 
5.4 The purpose of this policy is to set out the mechanisms for achieving high standards of design for all development, par
ticularly those that will significantly add to, or create new, communities. 
LP 11 
Design Context 
A proposal will be supported where it is demonstrated that it responds positively to its context and has drawn 
inspiration from the key characteristics of its surroundings, including natural, historic and built environment, to help create distinctive, high quality and well designed places.  In order to achieve this a proposal will need to have applied the guidance contained in the 
Huntingdonshire Design Guide SPD (2017) , the Huntingdonshire 
Landscape and Townscape Assessment SPD (2007)  or successor documents and applicable conservation 
area character statements .  A proposal should also have had regard to relevant advice or guidance that 
promotes high quality design, details the quality or character of the area or describes how the area should 
develop in the future. 
65 • 5 Requiring Good Design 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Reasoning 
5.5 For new development to be successful its integration into the local context is essential.  Good design 
addresses social and environmental concerns as w
ell as visual and functional ones.  New developments 
should create places that are attractive, safe and accessible, and respond well to the local environment. Development of all scales should make a positive contribution towards the quality of the built environment in Huntingdonshire, making it more attractive to residents, visitors and investors. 
5.6 The Huntingdonshire Design Guide SPD (2017) sets out important design principles to help create 
successful new de
velopment.  Its aim is to influence and raise the quality of design and layout of new 
development in Huntingdonshire, by providing practical advice to all those involved in the design and planning process on what the Council considers to be good, environmentally friendly and sensitive design. The Design Guide SPD is to be used alongside the Huntingdonshire Landscape and Townscape 
Assessment SPD (2007) (or successor documents) which details the typical townscape features of the towns, 
their structural traits, characteristic architectural styles and the locally used materials. Where 
proposals are located within a conservation area, the design must apply the requirements of the relevant conservation character statement.  In respect of landscape, there are nine character areas which will influence the scale and form of development across the district.  Development proposals should complement the existing built form, respect the fundamental character of the landscape and not introduce incongruous elements. 
5.7 Many documents and other resources are likely to be useful in informing the design of proposals. When seeking to understand the surroundings, a 
proposal should have regard to resources that detail the quality 
or character of the surroundings, including, but not limited to, neighbourhood plans, village design statements and parish plans. Where they exist, documents such as urban design frameworks, design briefs, design codes and master plans for nearby areas show how the quality and character of the surroundings is expected to develop in the future; these can also inform the design of a proposal. There may also be other advice and guidance available that promotes high standards or sets out best practice for design in certain situations, which should be referred to.  A very useful source of advice at the national level is the Design Council CABE. 
5.8 Relevant advice relating to movement through and around developments includes Manual for Streets and 
Manual for Streets 2.  Advice in these documents together with that within the Council's Huntingdonshire 
Design Guide SPD will enable successful new streets and public spaces to be created.  More detailed information 
is provided in specific documents for local areas.  Further guidance to support creative 
approaches to development is available at the national level. 
5.9 The Council offers a pre-application advice service. This can assist with establishing the key issues likely to influence the decision making process for a 
particular development proposal.  Detailed design aspects 
can also be considered and revisions suggested that may be necessary to make a scheme acceptable. The process can also provide an indication of the likelihood of support being forthcoming if the proposal is brought forward as a planning application. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Responsible agencies Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered providers 
Delivery mechanism Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans, design 
codes 
Timescale Throughout the plan period 
Monitoring indicators 
 Number of applications granted for large scale major development supported 
by an appropriate master plan or design code 
66 Requiring Good Design 5 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Design Implementation 
5.10 The purpose of this policy is to set out the Council’s approach to achieving high standards of design. 
LP 12 
Design Implementation 
New development and advertisements will be expected to be well designed based upon a thorough 
understanding of constraints and appraisal of the site's context, delivering attractive, usable and long lasting buildings and spaces.  A proposal will be supported, therefore, where it can be demonstrated that it: 
Response to context a. contributes positively to the area’s character and identity; 
b. successfully integrates with adjoining buildings, the routes and spaces between buildings, topography 
and landscape; 
Streets and spaces shaped by buildings 
c. creates attractive and appropriately scaled built frontages to positively enhance the townscape, avoiding 
the introduction of incongruous and/or intrusive elements into key views and vistas; 
d. delivers a balanced mix of compatible buildings and uses, promoting variety, choice and economic 
activity; 
e. enables the wider area to achieve a coherent and integrated built form including considering potential 
future development or redevelopment of adjoining sites; 
Ease of getting around 
f. promotes accessibility and permeability for all by creating safe and welcoming places that connect with 
each other and are easy to move through, putting people before traffic and integrating land uses and transport; 
g. provides recognisable and understandable places, routes and points of reference; 
Well designed public spaces h. promotes a sense of place to include attractive streets, squares and other public spaces with a defined 
sense of enclosure, with multi-functional green spaces and corridors; 
i. creates development that will function well and is safe and secure to use; 
Sustainable design and construction methods j. makes efficient use of energy, water and other resources, such that all new homes comply with the 
optional building regulation for water efficiency, as set out in 
Approved Document G  and non-residential 
uses meet Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method (BREEAM)  standards 
(or successor or equivalent standards) 'Good' as a minimum; 
k. secures a distinctive environment for the development through high quality hard and soft landscaping 
and boundary treatments; 
l. ensures that public and private amenity spaces are clearly defined and are designed to be inclusive, 
usable, safe and enjoyable; 
m. successfully integrates the functional needs of the development including refuse and recycling, cycle 
storage and car parking so that their dominance is minimised; 
67 l _____ J 5 Requiring Good Design 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
n. implements a cohesive design through the use of a limited palette of quality, durable materials with an 
attention to detail particularly where different elements and materials meet; and 
o. does not impede pedestrian and vehicular movements or impact on public safety. 
Reasoning 
5.11 Good design contributes positively to making places better for people.  It requires a thorough understanding 
of site context, as 
well as consideration of how to ensure that the buildings and spaces created on a site 
are attractive, usable and durable. 
5.12 The criteria in this policy promote consideration of the appropriate design response to issues starting with large scale character and 
landscape issues before addressing land uses and layout, and ending with 
smaller scale issues such as building design, parking, and materials. This is based on the key principles and the approach set out in more detail in the Huntingdonshire Design Guide SPD (2017). The Design 
Guide explains both 
why the issues raised in the criteria are important, and how they can be addressed 
successfully.  In this context, the reasoning below expands upon only those criteria where additional explanation to that provided in the Design Guide is considered helpful. 
5.13 The Cambridge sub-region Strategic Housing Market Assessment 2013 identifies that between 2011 and 
2031 the number of 
households aged 65 or over will grow as a proportion of Huntingdonshire's total 
population.  A significant proportion of this older population, and a smaller proportion of those aged under 65, will have a physical or mental disability which means that navigating and moving through a place can be difficult.  For this reason, criterion f. requires that a proposal should promote accessibility and permeability for all, whatever their mobility.  In addition, providing recognisable and understandable places, routes and points of reference can help everyone, including those with a mental disability such as dementia, to navigate through a place. 
5.14 Energy efficiency for residential buildings is managed through the Building Regulation system. There is still a role for planning 
to seek energy efficiency for residential development through aspects that fall 
outside the remit of building regulations.  A proposal for residential development should therefore seek to promote energy efficiency by adopting best practice in all aspects of design including but not limited to site layout, building orientation, the layout of rooms and uses within buildings and the use of landscaping for shelter and shade.  Such measures can be incorporated through the design process without adding to costs. 
5.15 The water efficiency of new homes is dealt with in the Building Regulations Approved Document G 
(requirement G2).  It has been established that the East of England is in water stress and the Detailed Water Cycle 
Study recommends that water use is minimised; both Anglian Water and Cambridge Water's 
Water Resource Management Plans promote water efficiency among their customers as one method of managing future demand.  
It is therefore considered necessary to apply the optional standard as set out 
in Approved Document G to all new residential development in Huntingdonshire. This will be controlled through conditions in planning permissions. 
5.16 The Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method (BREEAM) standards are widely accepted as the best way 
to improve standards for non-residential buildings moving towards a zero carbon 
target. The policy requires all new non-residential development to meet the BREEAM 'Good' standard, which is considered to be a challenging but achievable standard. The Council would support proposals that seek to achieve the higher 'Excellent' standard, but recognise that it is unrealistically challenging in some circumstances. Water use in non-residential developments is also addressed through BREEAM standards. 
5.17 In addition to promoting environmental efficiency measures new developments should be designed and built such 
that they will be durable and facilitate flexible usage for their anticipated lifetime.  Design should 
reflect the desirability of minimising maintenance costs both of buildings and landscaping. 
68 • 
• Requiring Good Design 5 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
5.18 Garages can provide parking and protection for cars as well as storage space that is attractive to prospective 
owners and 
residents. 'Parking Provision and Vehicle Movement' sets out the Council's policy requirements 
in relation to garaging and parking in more detail. The requirement to consider parking within this policy emphasises that discreet garaging and 
parking should be integrated into the overall design of a 
development. 
5.19 For advertisements requiring advertisement consent(13) relevant design criteria in this policy, particularly 
b, c, n and o, should be followed. The scale, materials and design should be in keeping with the architectural and scenic features of the local area.  Materials and colour should be carefully selected, in order that the advertisement becomes a functional, integral part of the overall design of the development, and not an ugly appendage. The impact, both individually and cumulatively, on visual amenity, light pollution, highway and public safety and functional need are key considerations.  Illuminated advertisements can have a particularly significant impact on the street scene, and a proposal for an internally illuminated fascia or projecting box sign will be carefully considered. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered providers Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans, design 
codes Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators 
 % of dwellings completed at specified densities 
Average household water consumption 
Placemaking 
5.20 The purpose of this policy is to set out the Council’s approach to achieving high standards of placemaking, 
which is considered to be particularly impor
tant for large developments. 
LP 13 
Placemaking 
A proposal for large scale development, defined in the 'Glossary' , will be expected to be supported by a 
master planning process proportionate to the scale and complexity of the site and development proposed. 
Such processes should include identification of options and objective reasoning for arriving at the selected approach.  Outputs from the process should include a strategy for how good design is to be achieved, including the general layout, mix and scale of all uses proposed as part of the development and the design principles that will need to be applied. 
The master planning process for a large scale major development, defined in the 
'Glossary' , will be expected 
to include production of a design code.  A design code will also be required where it is known from the outset 
that the site will be developed in more than one phase or by more than one developer. 
Where a proposal is to be accompanied by a master plan or design code the applicant should be prepared 
to engage positively with independent design review at an early stage if requested to do so by the Council. Applicants will be expected to implement recommendations from the process. 
13 Many advertisements do not require advertisement consent. The specification of what requires consent is 
provided in the Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007. 
69 • 5 Requiring Good Design 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Reasoning 
5.21 A master plan is a strategy for development in a defined area.  Master planning includes both the process 
by which 
organisations undertake analysis and prepare strategies, and the proposals forming the outputs 
from that process, which set out proposals for buildings, spaces, movement strategy and land use. The nature of the master planning process should be proportionate to the scale of development proposed, but should include setting a vision and design principles for the proposal, consideration of options, and justification for selecting a preferred option.  For larger schemes, consultation may be required to inform the master planning process.   For large scale major development, defined in the 'Glossary', the principles 
of Garden Cities may be appropriate as set out in a range of publications including Creating Garden Cities 
and Suburbs Today (2012). 
5.22 All large scale major development proposals should be supported by a design code, as an integrated part of the master planning process. 
 A design code is a tool which helps ensure that aspirations for high quality 
design are consistently realised across a development as a whole. The use of design codes can be applied where the detailed design of different parts of the overall development will be handled separately, or where development will be implemented over two or more phases or by more than one developer, such as sites for self-build homes. While the master planning process establishes the vision and design principles for the development, the design code should provide instructions to the appropriate degree or precision of the more detailed design work. The NPPG contains useful advice and guidance on design codes. 
5.23 The NPPF requires local planning authorities to have local design review arrangements in place to provide assessment and support to 
ensure high standards of design.  Arrangements for design review are available 
through the Cambridgeshire Quality Charter partnership.  Alternatively arrangements can be made with other bodies subject to verification of their independence and agreement with the Council. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered providers Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans, design 
codes Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators Number of applications granted for large scale major development supported 
by an appropriate master plan or design code 
Amenity 
5.24 The purpose of this policy is to ensure that the physical environment created by new development protects 
and promotes a standard of amenity for future occupiers and users, and surrounding uses
. 
LP 14 
Amenity 
A proposal will be supported where a high standard of amenity is provided for all users and occupiers of the 
proposed development and maintained for users and occupiers of neighbouring land and buildings.  A proposal will therefore be required to ensure: 
70 Requiring Good Design 5 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
a. adequate availability of daylight and sunlight for the proposed use, minimising the effects of 
overshadowing and the need for artificial light; 
b. the physical relationships arising from the design and separation of buildings are not oppressive or overbearing, and in particular will not result in overlooking causing loss of privacy; 
c. that predicted adverse noise impacts, including internal and external levels, timing, duration and character, will be acceptable; 
d. that predicted adverse impacts from the following sources will be made acceptable: 
i. obtrusive light; 
ii. contamination; 
iii. air pollution; 
iv. water pollution; 
v. odour; 
vi. dust; and 
vii. overheating 
e. adequate and accessible waste storage is provided, avoiding adverse impacts; 
f. the risk and perceived risk of crime is minimised, including through applying relevant guidance from Secured by Design; 
g. that all homes, businesses and main town centre uses are capable of being served by super-fast broadband through the integration of appropriate measures such as open access ducting to industry standards; and 
h. that there would be no adverse effect on safety near a notifiable installation and no increase in the number of people that would be put at risk in the vicinity of a notifiable installation. 
Reasoning 
5.25 Good design is not solely a visual concern; it contributes significantly to people's enjoyment of buildings 
and the spaces between them.
  Design also has important social and environmental dimensions, such as 
the potential for a high quality public realm to contribute to public health, a more inclusive environment, quality of life and sustainability. 
5.26 A common concern when development is proposed is that of its potential impact on neighbouring uses. More intensive f
orms of development make more efficient use of land and buildings, but have greater 
potential to impact on their surroundings.  A key role of the planning system is to ensure that new development does not have an adverse impact on the amenity of existing properties and that adequate levels of amenity will be enjoyed by future occupiers of the proposed development. This policy sets out the criteria that will be used to assess whether a proposal will have a significant impact upon amenity. Further guidance on how this can be achieved is contained in the Huntingdonshire Design Guide SPD 
(2017) or successor documents. 
5.27 Careful design, layout and orientation are essential to ensure proposals do not adversely affect others. To ensure 
the wellbeing of occupiers it is important to ensure that new developments do not materially 
alter light levels outside the development and/ or have the potential to adversely affect the use or enjoyment of nearby buildings or open spaces.  Aspects that will need careful consideration include whether the proposal will block daylight or affect the privacy of neighbouring buildings, particularly in the habitable rooms of a property. Where developments have an impact on the daylight or sunlight of adjoining buildings, a more detailed analysis will be required in accordance with BRE digest 209 Site Layout Planning for 
Daylight and Sunlight (2011, second edition) or successor documents. 
5.28 Development management decisions will consider noise impacts in an integrated manner alongside other potential impacts of the proposed development 
and will have regard to the Noise Policy Statement for 
England where appropriate.  Required mitigation may include considerations such as the siting of buildings, landscaping and building design. 
  Minimisation of disturbance through obtrusive light, poor air quality, 
71 • 5 Requiring Good Design 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
odour and dust emissions are also important in providing a reasonable quality of life for occupiers and to 
safeguard biodiversity and the quality of the environment.  Aspects that will need careful consideration include how the use of artificial light will impact on wildlife.  Such considerations apply equally to proposals to extend and alter existing buildings as they do to new developments. 
5.29 Huntingdonshire has been one of the best performing local authorities in the country for recycling.  In order to maintain this performance
, new buildings need to be designed to help residents and users to reduce 
waste generation and recycle more. This includes provision of convenient space for storage of recyclables and green waste awaiting collection, usually in wheeled bins.  Reference should be had to Building Regulations Approved Document H (section 6) which sets out requirements for waste storage as well as 
the RECAP Waste Management Design Guide SPD adopted by Cambridgeshire County Council and the 
Waste Collection Policies produced by the Council. 
5.30 Good design helps ensure the successful integration of new development into existing neighbourhoods through taking account of community and 
individual safety considerations and minimising opportunities 
for crime.  Building regulations include security standards (see Approved Document Q) that apply to new 
housing.  Aspects 
of Secured by Design that deal with the external environment such as the spaces 
between and around buildings should be incor
porated into the design process. 
5.31 A reliable internet connection is now widely accepted as an essential utility and is therefore part of a good standard of living. The Council 
supports the expansion and provision of high speed broadband technology 
in all parts of the district and is working in partnership to achieve this through the 'Connecting Cambridgeshire' initiative.  It will be important for all new residential, employment and commercial developments 
to provide the wherewithal to enable connection to be made to fibre optic broadband 
infrastructure as the main technology for delivering superfast connections. This should be designed and installed as an integral part of development to avoid the visual impact and future disturbance caused by retrofitting.  It is recognised that the availability of broadband infrastructure will vary across the district. The expectation is that where such infrastructure is not readily available nearby, provision is made for ducting and cabinets to enable easy connection at a later date.  In 2017 the Government defined superfast broadband as being at least 24Mbps therefore this is the minimum level of service that is considered acceptable. 
5.32 The storage of hazardous substances are referred to as notifiable installations and are covered by separate consenting processes. The 
policy requires that there would be no adverse effect on safety near a notifiable 
installation and that there would be no increase in the number of people that would be put at risk in the vicinity of a notifiable installation. The distances involved will depend on a number of factors including the details of the development proposed and the substances and potential hazard of the installation. Detailed advice should be sought from the Council's Environmental Heath service. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered providers Responsible agencies 
Delivery mechanism Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans, design 
codes 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators 
 Number of applications refused where grounds of refusal included detriment 
to neighbouring properties 
72 Requiring Good Design 5 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Surface Water 
5.33 The purpose of this policy is to set out the Council’s approach in relation to the management of surface 
water in a sustainable manner
. 
LP 15 
Surface Water 
A proposal will only be supported where surface water has been considered from the outset as an integral 
part of the design process and: 
a. the proposal incorporates sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) in accordance with the Cambr idgeshire 
Flood and Water Supplementar y Planning Document (SPD)  or successor documents and advice from 
Cambridgeshire County Council as Lead Local Flood Authority, unless demonstrated to be inappropriate; 
b. provisions are put in place to ensure that SuDS will be maintained; 
c. if the drainage system would directly or indirectly involve discharge to a watercourse that the Environment 
Agency are responsible for the details of the discharge have been agreed with them; 
d. if a road would be affected by the drainage system the details have been agreed with the relevant 
highway authority; 
e. if the drainage system would discharge water to systems controlled by the Middle Level Commissioners or an internal drainage board their standing advice or guidance has been taken into account and the details of the discharge have been agreed with them; 
f. if the drainage system would directly or indirectly involve discharge to the River Great Ouse the 
incorporation of water retaining features as part of the drainage system has been prioritised; and 
g. there is no adverse impact on, or unacceptable risk to, the quantity or quality of water resources or on meeting the objectives of the Water Framework Directive and the Habitats Directive. 
SuDS for hard-standing areas for parking of 50 or more cars, or equivalent areas will be expected to include appropriate additional treatment stages/ interceptors to ensure that any pollution risks are suitably addressed. 
In order to safeguard against the pollution of ground water the use of deep infiltration SuDS, such as deep 
borehole soakaways, will not be accepted in most circumstances.  Exemptions will only be made in exceptional circumstances if the proposal is for land uses that pose a very low pollution risk and are supported by an adequate risk assessment, conceptual site model and detailed design. 
Reasoning 
5.34 The use of SuDS to manage surface water is advocated in the NPPG for the opportunities they bring to 
reduce the causes and impacts of flooding, remove 
pollutants from urban run-off at source and combine 
water management with green space with benefits for amenity, recreation and wildlife. These and other 
benefits are explored in the Cambridgeshire Flood and Water Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) 
that was produced jointly by the local planning authorities in Cambridgeshire with support from a wide range of partners
. The guidance in the SPD, particularly the SuDS design principles, should be followed 
to ensure that SuDS are successfully integrated within the development. 
5.35 The Construction Industry Research and Information Association (CIRIA) has published guidance which should be used when designing and implementing SuDS. The 
SuDS Manual (reference C753) and the 
Site handbook for the construction of SuDS (reference C698), which are available from the CIRIA website. 
5.36 It is acknowledged that the geology in Huntingdonshire is relatively impermeable, consisting mainly of soils with properties similar 
to clay. These soil types are not generally conducive to infiltration, and this 
will mean that careful consideration in SuDS design will be needed.  In support of the Local Plan a Detailed 
73 5 Requiring Good Design 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Water Cycle Study has been completed. The study is principally concerned with waste water but also 
includes flood risk and 
surface water management. The study contains details of where ground conditions 
are such that infiltration may not be appropriate.  However, detailed site investigation should be undertaken as it can vary across small areas. 
5.37 The ongoing maintenance and upkeep of SuDS will need to be addressed. The Council needs to be certain that 
the function that SuDS perform will be maintained, which should be demonstrated through 
submission of an undertaking from a responsible body, such as the Environment Agency or LLFA, that they would take on the responsibility. Where it is not possible for a responsible body to adopt the SuDS then details of a management company or trust that would take on the responsibility and a management plan will be appropriate. 
5.38 The Council will also need to be sure that what happens to water once it leaves the site has been addressed satisfactorily
. Therefore, if water would directly or indirectly discharge to a main river or other watercourse 
that the Environment Agency have responsibility for then there needs to be agreement from the agency to the discharge.  Similarly if water would directly or indirectly discharge to an ordinary watercourse (within the meaning of section 72 of the Land Drainage Act 1991) within an internal drainage board's district then there needs to be agreement from the board.  If a road will be affected by the drainage system there will need to be agreement with the relevant highway authority, either Cambridgeshire County Council or Highways England. 
5.39 The standing advice of the Middle Level Commissioners (MLC) or the appropriate internal drainage board should be taken into account when designing drainage f
or new development. 
5.40 Protection of the quantity and quality of water resources is of critical importance. There are a number of groundwater 
Source Protection Zones (SPZs) designated in the district, mostly to the east of Huntingdon 
but also at Little Paxton. The use of SuDS in these ares will need to be carefully considered.  Reference should be had to 'Ground Contamination and Groundwater Pollution', Where water will discharge to a 
watercourse adv 
erse impacts on meeting the objectives of the Water Framework Directive (WFD) will not 
be acceptable.  Pre-application discussions or consultation with the Environment Agency can identify whether meeting the objectives of the WFD could potentially be an issue. 
5.41 Changes to the quality or quantity of water can have adverse impacts on sites that have been designated for their 
nature conservation value due to their relationship with water. Where a Special Area of 
Conservation (SAC), Special Protection Area (SPA) or Ramsar site would potentially be affected by changes in water quality or quantity as a result of a proposal this will need to be appropriately assessed in line with the Habitats Directive.  Huntingdonshire sits within the catchment of the River Great Ouse, which is linked to the Ouse Washes, designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest, Special Protection Area and Ramsar site. The Ouse Washes is currently in unfavourable condition due to too frequent and prolonged flooding. The use of SuDS to store water in the catchment will contribute to alleviating this issue and help address the unfavourable condition. Where SuDS discharge water to the River Great Ouse system they should include features that will help to address this issue.  SuDS such as swales and detention ponds can also provide habitat for wildlife and attractive features for communities.  Please also refer to 'Biodiversity and Geodiversity'. 
5.42 Areas for parking and servicing should be planned for in a comprehensive manner as part of surface water management. The Cambridgeshire 
Flood and Water SPD (2017) includes advice about how sustainable 
drainage systems 
can be used for such areas and the provisions that could be necessary to address 
contamination risks. 
5.43 In order to safeguard against the contamination of ground water the use of deep infiltration SuDS, such as deep borehole soakawa
ys, will not be accepted in most circumstances.  Exemptions will only be made 
in exceptional circumstances if the proposal is for land uses that pose a very low contamination risk and are supported by an adequate risk assessment, conceptual site model and detailed design.  Reference should also be had to the requirements of policy LP 37 'Ground Contamination and Groundwater Pollution'. 
74 • Requiring Good Design 5 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, Cambridgeshire County Council as Lead Local 
Flood Authority, landowners, developers, registered providers Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans, design codes Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators Number of planning permissions granted contrary to the advice of Environment 
Agency on flooding or water quality grounds 
Sustainable Travel 
5.44 The purpose of this policy is to ensure that developers fully consider how the opportunities and impacts 
of the range of tra
vel and transport modes are addressed in their proposals. 
LP 16 
Sustainable Travel 
New development will be expected to contribute to an enhanced transport network that supports an increasing 
proportion of journeys being undertaken by sustainable travel modes, defined in the 'Glossary' . A proposal 
will therefore be supported where it is demonstrated that: 
a. opportunities are maximised for the use of sustainable travel modes; 
b. its likely transport impacts have been assessed, and appropriate mitigation measures will be delivered, 
in accordance with National Planning Practice Guidance; 
c. safe physical access from the public highway can be achieved, including the rights of way network 
where appropriate 
d. any potential impacts on the strategic road network have been addressed in line with Department for 
Transport Circular 02/2013  and advice from early engagement with Highways England; and 
e. there are no severe residual cumulative impacts. 
Where a proposal would affect an existing public right of way or other formal non-motorised users' route, 
this route should be protected or enhanced within the proposed development. Where this is not possible it should be diverted to a safe, clear and convenient alternative route. The stopping up of paths/ routes will only be acceptable where all opportunities to provide a safe, clear and convenient alternative have been investigated and proved to be unsuitable. 
All routes will be provided to an adoptable standard and all pedestrian and cycle routes will be formalised 
as rights of way unless otherwise agreed with the Council and the Highways Authority. 
Reasoning 
5.45 Huntingdonshire's rural nature means that a significant proportion of journeys are made by car.  However, 
more than a quarter of 
all journeys to work in Huntingdonshire are less than 5km (3.1 miles)(14) in length. 
For many people, walking or cycling are a feasible alternative to using the car for journeys such as these. 
14 Census 2011 
75 5 Requiring Good Design 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Even for longer trips there is the opportunity to make part of the journey by walking or cycling.  Chapter 
4 'The Development Strategy' seeks to reduce the need to travel long distances by directing development to locations which have, or have the potential to provide, the greatest access to services and facilities and where sustainable tr
avel modes and public transport are well provided for. This should enable a greater 
proportion of trips to be made by foot or bicycle. 
5.46 To support further use of sustainable travel modes, defined in the 'Glossary', development proposals 
should seek to utilise and where possible pro
vide safe, coherent and easy to use footpaths and cycle 
routes, including linking to or providing new sections for the existing network.  Provision should be appropriate to the character of the area so linking to or providing new bridleways will be required where appropriate.   Particular attention should be paid to the requirements relating to movement in 'Design 
Implementation' and the Huntingdonshire Design Guide SPD (2017). Where appropriate, routes for 
non-motorised users 
(NMU) provided in development proposals should seek to support and connect with 
wider programmes for sustainable transport routes, such as those set out in Market Town Transport 
Strategies, the Long Term Transport Strategy for Cambridgeshire, or any successor documents. 
5.47 Development proposals should also provide opportunities for people to use public transport (and community alternatives 
to public transport) both for local journeys, and to access the wider public transport network. 
For example, this may involve agreements to facilitate new bus stops or designing a development so that there is a short pedestrian path to the nearest bus stop. The guided busway was opened in 2011, with a dedicated route running from St Ives to the north of Cambridge and linking services elsewhere. The potential for further route expansion and additional services will be investigated in conjunction with new developments. The Strategic Expansion Location at 'Strategic Expansion Location: Alconbury Weald' is 
likely to have significant opportunities in this regard.  Physical features within developments to support greater use 
of public transport should be prioritised over revenue funding for enhanced services, the 
impact of which can be short term. 
5.48 All proposals will need to be accompanied by an assessment of their likely transport impacts, describing any required 
mitigation measures.  In particular, proposals for development that will generate significant 
amounts of transport movements will need to be accompanied by a Transport Assessment or Transport Statement, and potentially also a Travel Plan, in accordance with National Planning Practice Guidance. 
A Transpor 
t Assessment provides detailed information on the likely transport impact of a proposed 
development and is submitted in support of a planning application; a Transport Statement is a lower level of assessment for smaller developments. Travel Plans are long-term management strategies for integrating sustainable travel proposals into the planning process, and are often required where the proposal is required to be supported by a full Transport Assessment. The implementation of the Travel Plan will be secured as part of a planning permission. 
5.49 The need for a Transport Assessment, Transport Statement, or Travel Plan will be determined on a case by case 
basis.  Initial guidance on the need for and scope of Transport Statements and Assessments is 
available in the Council's planning application validation requirements.  Further Transport Assessment 
Guidance is provided by Cambr
idgeshire County Council, the local highways authority.  For Travel Plans, 
detailed advice and links to further guidance is available from Travel for Cambridgeshire.  Prior to submitting 
any planning 
application for a development that may have a transport impact, applicants are encouraged 
to contact a Transport Assessment Officer at Cambridgeshire County Council to agree the scope of work on transport matters required to accompany any planning application. The County Council operates a system of pre-application charging for such advice. Where proposals could potentially impact upon the strategic road network early engagement with Highways England and reference to the Department for 
Transport Circular 02/2013 will be expected. 
5.50 A basic requirement for the successful development of any proposal is provision of safe physical access from the public highw
ay to ensure that pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles have access as required.  For 
tourism, leisure and recreation proposals in particular this should include access to the public rights of way network to promote access to facilities for non-motorised users; provision of linkages into the wider public rights of way network will be encouraged. 
76 • 
• Requiring Good Design 5 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
5.51 Huntingdonshire contains several Air Quality Management Areas (AQMA) designated as a result of poor 
air quality associated with motor vehicles.  
 Reference should be had to policy LP 36 'Air Quality' and to 
the Council's website for relevant advice. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered providers Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans, design 
codes Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators 
 Number and % of housing completions by settlement type 
Number and % of planning permissions granted for major development 
supported by a Transport Assessment, Transport Statement and/or Travel Plan 
Parking Provision and Vehicle Movement 
5.52 The purpose of this policy is to ensure that new development provides sufficient space and parking provision 
to meet the needs of users and residents and minimise impacts on neighbour ing uses. 
LP 17 
Parking Provision and Vehicle Movement 
A proposal will be supported where it incorporates appropriate space for vehicle movements, facilitates 
accessibility for service and emergency vehicles and incorporates adequate parking for vehicles and cycles. These should all comply with design and security guidance set out in the 
Huntingdonshire Design Guide 
SPD (2017)  or successor documents. 
A clear justification for the space for vehicle movements and level of vehicle and cycle parking proposed will 
need to be provided taking account of: 
a. highway safety and access to and from the site; 
b. servicing requirements; c. the accessibility of the development to a wide range of services and facilities by public transport, cycling 
and walking; 
d. the needs of potential occupiers, users and visitors, now and in the future; 
e. the amenity of existing and future occupiers and users of the development and nearby property; and f. opportunities for shared provision, where locations and patterns of use allow this. 
Minimum levels of car parking for disabled people as set out in national guidance
(15) will be required. 
A proposal that includes residential development will be expected to provide at least one clearly identified 
secure cycle space per bedroom for all dwellings (C3 Use Class), unless it can be demonstrated that this is unachievable. 
15 Traffic Advisory Leaflet (TAL) 05/95 – Parking for Disabled People, Department for Transport (1995), Inclusive 
Mobility: A guide to best practice on access to pedestrian and transport infrastructure, Department for 
Transport (2005) and BS 8300: 2009 Design of Buildings and their approaches to meet the needs of disabled people, British Standards Institute (BSI) (2010) or successor documents 
77 5 Requiring Good Design 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
A proposal that includes new main town centre uses of 600m2 or more net internal floorspace will be expected 
to provide and identify the location of at least one cycle space for every 25m2 of net internal floorspace or 
part thereof, or otherwise demonstrate why a different level of provision is appropriate. 
A proposal for a new non-residential building over 2,500m2 of net internal floorspace should provide dedicated 
changing and showering facilities for cyclists. 
Reasoning 
5.53 The level of car ownership in Huntingdonshire is high compared with the national average as the area is 
both relatively prosperous 
and predominantly rural.  Many of Huntingdonshire's villages and countryside 
areas have no, or very limited, public transport services.  Even in the market towns public transport outside of weekday business hours can be limited. Therefore reliance on private cars as the main mode of travel is likely to continue through the plan period; provision of parking in new development needs to reflect this reality while also promoting the national aim of a shift towards travel by sustainable modes. 
5.54 Provision of space for vehicles and parking should be an integral part of the design process, having regard to the character of 
the area and the appearance of the proposed development. The design criteria set 
out in the Huntingdonshire Design Guide SPD (2017) or successor documents should be followed. When 
deciding upon the level 
of parking provision to include developers should consider the potential impact 
on highway safety.  Insufficient parking or reliance on unallocated spaces can lead to drivers parking on roads or in other locations which may impede the flow of traffic or accessibility for service and emergency vehicles.  Provision should also be considered in relation to how the needs of users may change over time, including the predicted shift to low and ultra low emission vehicles that will require charging points. 
5.55 New development should facilitate access for service and emergency vehicles that is appropriate to the nature of the use. 
 Residential developments should meet the Council's refuse collection requirements as 
set out in the Huntingdonshire Design Guide SPD (2017) or successor documents, including providing 
sufficient space for the 
Council's refuse freighters to access and service the development.  For commercial 
buildings, servicing should be designed such that it does not dominate the street scene or provide a barrier to movement through the wider area.  Given the likelihood that care or nursing homes may receive relatively frequent visits from a wide range of healthcare staff and vehicles including ambulances, such developments should incorporate appropriate space for vehicle movements and parking. 
5.56 Residential developments should provide adequate car parking to meet expected needs for both residents and visitors. Proposed 
provision should be supported by evidence on the local level of car ownership and 
the availability of alternative modes of transport, but should take account of available evidence that would inform the level of provision that will be necessary, such as expected household sizes for the development. Consideration should also be given to the inclusion of measures that would encourage people to use sustainable travel modes, particularly walking and cycling, but also low and ultra low emission vehicles, car sharing and public transport.  Applicants should, however, be realistic about the impact such measures can have in supporting modal shift.  Locations where provision of less than one car space per home may be considered are likely to be limited to designated town centres but even in these locations accessibility and alternative modes may not be sufficient for completely car-free development to be successful. Reference should be had to policy LP 25 'Housing Mix', with regards to the accessibility standards required by that policy when designing residential parking provision. 
5.57 Parking provision for non-residential uses should be considered carefully. The nature of the use and availability 
of non-car transport alternatives will inform the appropriate level of car parking provision for 
non-residential development.  Consideration of the level of alternative travel choices that are available and the level of parking provision can help to reduce the dominance of the car in the built form and may influence car use, particularly when combined with effective travel planning.  However, it is important to ensure adequate parking provision for people with impaired mobility for whom parking in convenient locations is essential. 
78 • 
• Requiring Good Design 5 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
5.58 Areas for parking and servicing should be planned for in a comprehensive manner including as part of 
surface w
ater management.   Reference should be had to policy LP 15 'Surface Water' and to the 
Cambridgeshire Flood and Water SPD (2017), which includes advice about how sustainable drainage systems can be used for such areas. 
5.59 In 
order to promote a shift in priority away from motorists and towards pedestrians, cyclists and public 
transport 
users, new development should also provide cycle parking and encourage travel by sustainable 
modes. For residential uses, secure cycle spaces can be provided within garages if they are large enough (see Huntingdonshire Design Guide SPD (2017) or successor documents for guidance on garage sizes). 
For non-residential 
uses a combination of spaces should provide appropriately for the differing short term 
needs of visitors and longer term needs of employees. Main town centre uses over 600m2 net internal 
floorspace are considered to have sufficiently common characteristics in terms of their location and likely numbers of staff and visitors to justify a requirement for at least one cycle space for every 25m
2 of net 
internal floorspace.  Other non-residential uses have much more varied characteristics, and will therefore be required to justify the level of cycle parking proposed. 
5.60 Consideration of the level of parking provision should include facilities for charging plug-in and other low and ultra-low 
emission vehicles.  It is suggested that at least one charging point for an electric vehicle 
should be provided where a proposal includes 20 or more parking spaces and that 1 charging point is provided for every 50 spaces.  Proposals for specialist housing for older people and residential care and nursing homes should consider providing secure parking and charging space for mobility scooters. Further measures such as ducting and underground servicing which would allow additional charging points to be easily installed in future should be considered.  It is also suggested that charging points are provided as part of a national or regional network to enable ease of use. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered providers Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans, design 
codes Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators 
 Number of new homes permitted with no off-street parking 
Number and % of planning permissions for new main town centre uses of over 
600m2 net internal floorspace achieving at least one cycle space for every 25m2 
of net internal floorspace 
79 6 Building a Strong, Competitive Economy 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
6 Building a Strong, Competitive Economy 
6.1 Huntingdonshire has a high proportion of small and medium sized businesses with many residents working 
within the district. The 
local economy is closely linked to that of Cambridgeshire as a whole with Cambridge 
and Peterborough being particularly significant as commuting destinations.  Huntingdon has the greatest concentration of jobs in the district, as shown in the 2011 Census, benefiting from net in-commuting. Out-commuting remains a challenge for Huntingdonshire and the Council is committed to securing positive and sustainable economic growth to facilitate job creation and prosperity. 
6.2 Alconbury Enterprise Zone was designated in 2011 and offers trend breaking opportunities for businesses of all sizes to 
contribute to expanding and diversifying Huntingdonshire's thriving economy. The 
Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Combined Authority started work in summer 2017 on the first phase of a market town regeneration strategy to explore how an integrated investment programme for education and skills, commercial and industrial development and new transport systems can stimulate growth and create more employment in market towns, starting with St Neots. 
6.3 Maintaining a supply of employment land and premises is crucial to enhance the district's economic competitiveness. 
The Huntingdonshire Economic Growth Plan 2013-2023 has strong aspirations to 
increase both the value of jobs in the district and Huntingdonshire's role in the wider economy.  In particular, it targets growth in specific sectors: chemicals, pharmaceuticals, metals manufacturing, electronics, waste and remediation, telecoms, computer related activity, professional services and research and development. The Council will plan proactively to meet the development needs of business. Sectoral growth needs to be complemented by skills growth. Cambridgeshire Regional College (Huntingdon Campus) provides a wide range of technical courses. Within the Alconbury Enterprise Campus iMET provides advanced technical skills training in manufacturing, engineering and technology. 
6.4 The professional and scientific sector and financial and professional services sector play an increasing role in the local economy. 
The manufacturing, warehousing and distribution sectors remain important as 
does the rural economy including agriculture, food processing and tourism.  Although much emphasis is placed on Alconbury Enterprise Campus the continued distribution of employment opportunities across the district is essential to its sustainable economic future.  Employment growth and protection of existing sites throughout Huntingdonshire is important in delivering the development strategy and ensuring opportunities for people to minimise the distances travelled between home and work. 
6.5 As well as the need to allocate land for economic development it is important to safeguard land and buildings that 
are already in use for employment purposes as they offer ongoing opportunities for economic 
growth and have a critical mass that makes them an attractive location to operate business from. The strategy of reinvigorating and protecting existing employment sites is consistent with the principles of sustainable economic growth.  However, the Council recognises that the incorporation of complementary services and facilities, such as childcare, within employment areas can support their success and encourage prospective occupiers. The Employment Land Study (2014) highlighted the importance of ensuring a range of additional small to medium size (up to 1,000m
2) high quality industrial units on new development 
sites for small and growing businesses. 
6.6 The rural parts of Huntingdonshire also play an important role in the economy of the district.  A wide range of activities make up 
our rural economy including agriculture, tourism, leisure, home based businesses 
such as professional services, village shops and other services.  All of these contribute to the quality of life in our rural areas and boost the sustainability of villages and the countryside providing local services and employment opportunities.  A wide range of businesses need a rural location particularly those associated with agriculture, renewable energy and minerals extraction and waste disposal.  Ensuring opportunities for diversification into new agricultural and commercial ventures are increasingly important to assist with protecting farms' viability and strengthen the rural economy. 
6.7 Town centres are the hubs of economic activity in the form of retail, service provision, leisure and office uses; the
y are also important as the focus for the social and cultural life of our towns. The Council is 
committed to promoting and enhancing the vitality and viability of the town centres of Huntingdonshire. 
80 r Building a Strong, Competitive Economy 6 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Huntingdon, St Neots and St Ives provide reasonably vibrant centres; Ramsey has limited provision.  As 
shopping trends change and competition from surrounding centres increases all will require continued investment to maintain their role as successful town centres. 
6.8 Tourism in Huntingdonshire focuses primarily on quiet recreation, much relating to walking, wildlife and water-based activities
. Visitors are encouraged but the Council recognises that a balance needs to be 
maintained between attracting visitors and protecting the district's environmental, historic and cultural assets. The district's heritage assets, in the form of listed buildings and conservation areas, are key contributors to the vibrancy and attractiveness of the towns and villages. The promotion of economic investment and tourism therefore needs to conserve and enhance the historic environment which contributes to its continued economic success. 
Established Employment Areas 
6.9 The purpose of this policy is to safeguard and enhance existing areas of established employment uses across Huntingdonshire to help maintain a thriving econom
y. These are often subject to pressure from 
higher value uses such as retail or housing development.  Established Employment Areas are identified on the policies map. 
LP 18 
Established Employment Areas 
Areas of land and buildings that contribute to the local economy and provide on-going employment 
opportunities have been identified as Established Employment Areas.  A proposal for business development (class 'B') will be supported on land within an Established Employment Area or on land immediately adjoining and capable of being integrated with an Established Employment Area. 
A proposal for a use other than business (class 'B') within an Established Employment Area will only be 
supported where it demonstrates that: 
a. it will be compatible with surrounding employment uses taking account of amenity and public safety 
issues; 
b. it will not adversely affect the role and continuing viability of the Established Employment Area as an 
attractive and suitable location for employment uses; 
c. it will not significantly reduce the range, availability and suitability of land and buildings for employment 
uses in the nearest Spatial Planning Area or Key Service Centre; and 
d. the sequential approach to site selection, as set out in the National Planning Policy Framework, has 
been followed if the proposal includes main town centre uses. 
Where any proposal for any use within an Established Employment Area has potential to impact on Portholme, the Ouse Washes, Woodwalton Fen or Orton Pits it should be demonstrated that there will be no adverse impact on the protected site. 
Reasoning 
6.10 The protection and enhancement of Established Employment Areas supports the economic vitality and 
diversity of 
Huntingdonshire. They also have a key role in contributing to the balance between residential, 
employment and other uses which is essential in the promotion of sustainable communities. The Council is committed to promoting sustainable economic growth and is supportive of measures and proposals that enable employment areas to provide land and premises for businesses. This policy is intended to ensure that businesses have choices to help make investment decisions. The Employment Land Study (2014) judged all the Established Employment Areas designated in this plan to be viable for commercial or industrial purposes and so worthy of retention. 
81 6 Building a Strong, Competitive Economy 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
6.11 Proposals for 'B' class uses will be supported within Established Employment Areas and on land immediately 
adjoining them where it can be successfully integrated 
with the existing site. These may include a wide 
range of businesses including offices, general industry, storage and distribution and some waste management processes.  A protective stance towards Established Employment Areas is necessary as the Employment Land Study (2014) indicated that levels of vacant industrial floorspace across the district were lower than ideal for the property market to function effectively.  Protecting the supply of existing floorspace is important, particularly in the short to medium term, to meet the needs of new and expanding businesses that may not require or be able to afford newly built premises.  Employment sites are vulnerable to pressure from alternative higher value uses such as housing and retail but their cumulative loss would have an adverse impact on the ability of businesses to establish, expand or relocate.  Areas which the Employment Land Study (2014) deemed no longer to be of value for employment use are now excluded from the list of designated Established Employment Areas. 
6.12 Land and buildings that remain vacant for extended periods of time can detract from the vitality and viability of an employment area, 
they can fall into disrepair attracting vandalism and other antisocial behaviour 
thereby reducing its attractiveness.  A balance is required between maintaining a stock of land and buildings to enable a growing economy and trying to preserve land and buildings when there is no real prospect of their economic reuse.  During periods of lower economic activity the retention of employment sites will be important to assist with long-term recovery. 
6.13 Determining whether a proposal for uses other than business would adversely affect the role and continuing viability of the Established Emplo
yment Area is a matter of judgement.  Consideration should focus on 
whether, if the proposal were to be granted, the Established Employment Area would retain a 'critical mass', defined in the Huntingdonshire Employment Land Study 2014 as "a sufficient supply of existing premises, and occupiers, to encourage further businesses to locate within the area and (potentially) encourage further expansion". 
6.14 In all cases where alternative uses are proposed they should be compatible with the established surrounding uses. When 
considering this, amenity and public safety will be important issues.  Industrial estates and 
business parks may have significant numbers of large vehicle movements, they can be noisy and working patterns may involve 24 hours a day operations.  New uses that would be sensitive to impacts from existing businesses will not be supported unless adequate safeguards can be put in place to ensure the new use does not jeopardise the continued operation of an existing use. The Council will therefore seek to resist a new use which might result in complaints about noise, odour or other amenity issues emanating from existing uses. 
6.15 The addition of complementary uses can support the operation of an Established Employment Area by providing ser
vices and facilities which assist the functioning of other businesses such as a café or childcare 
nursery. These will be supported where the proposal demonstrates that adequate amenity and safety levels can be achieved. 
6.16 To protect sites designated under European Directive 92/43/EEC or future replacement legislation any proposal which has potential to impact on the integrity 
of any such site should demonstrate that the 
proposed development will not give rise to an adverse impact.  Potential adverse impacts from development within Established Employment Areas are most likely to arise from airborne pollution, changes in hydraulic conditions, pollution of ground water or reduction in water quality. 
6.17 Established Employment Areas have been designated in the following locations: 
Established Employment Areas Location (parish) 
Crossways Distribution Centre Alconbury Hill 
Minerva Business Park Alwalton 
Earith Business Park Earith 
82 Building a Strong, Competitive Economy 6 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Established Employment Areas Location (parish) 
Lakeside Technology Park Fenstanton 
Cardinal Park 
Chord Business Park/ Roman Way Centre Godmanchester 
Hardwicke Road Industrial Estate Sand Road Industrial Estate Great Gransden 
Harley Industrial Park Great Paxton 
Airfield Industrial Estate (Little Staughton) Great Staughton 
Upland Industrial Estate Houghton Hill Industries Houghton and Wyton 
Ermine Business Park Hinchingbrooke Business Park St Peter's Road Industrial Area Stukeley Meadows Industrial Estate Huntingdon 
Bicton Industrial Park/ Harvard Industrial Estate Kimbolton 
Needingworth Industrial Estate Needingworth 
Highlode Industrial Estate, Upwood Air Park Ramsey 
Black Horse Business Park Brookside Industrial Estate Sawtry 
West Newlands Industrial Estate Somersham 
Compass Point Business Park Marley Road Industrial Area Meadow Lane Business Park Parsons Green Business Park Somersham Road Industrial Area St Ives 
Colmworth Business Park Cromwell Road Industrial Estate Howard Road Industrial Estate Little End Road/ Alpha Drive Business Park Station Road Industrial Area St Neots 
Alconbury Enterprise Zone The Stukeleys 
Warboys Airfield Industrial Estate (N.B. 
Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Minerals and Waste 
Site Specific Proposals Plan  identifies an Area of Search for waste recycling and recovery in 
this location.) Warboys 
Broadway Business Park 
Eagle Business Park Yaxley 
6.18 The policy seeks to maintain the role of established employment areas in providing substantial local 
employment opportunities but does not apply to other smaller areas of employment or single user sites. Such sites provide employment across Huntingdonshire and are a valuable part of the economy.  A proposal involving smaller areas of employment or single user sites will be considered against the relevant development strategy policy. 
83 • 
• 6 Building a Strong, Competitive Economy 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans, design 
codes Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators 
 Amount of floorspace developed for employment by type in Established 
Employment Areas 
Losses of employment floorspace in Established Employment Areas to non-employment uses 
Rural Economy 
6.19 The purpose of this policy is to promote a vibrant rural economy within the district's extensive countryside 
to support b
usinesses with a genuine need to be located in the countryside, to assist farms to maintain 
their viability and to set out the Council's approach to proposals f or other businesses in the countryside. 
LP 19 
Rural Economy 
In the countryside there are limited and specific opportunities for sustainable development related to 
maintaining a healthy rural economy.  A proposal for business development in the countryside will only be supported where it fulfils the requirements of one of the following categories. 
New business development A proposal for business uses (class 'B') will be supported where it: a. is within a defined Established Employment Area; 
b. immediately adjoins and is capable of being integrated with an Established Employment Area; c. involves the reuse of land in use or last used for business uses (class 'B'); or d. 
involves the reuse or replacement of existing buildings as set out in policy LP 33 'Rural Buildings' . 
In all cases office uses (class 'B1a') will be limited to a total of 600m2 floorspace. 
Expansion of an existing business 
A proposal for the expansion of an established business within its existing operational site will be supported. A proposal for the expansion of an established industrial or rural business on land outside of its existing 
operational site in the open countryside will be supported where it is demonstrated that: 
e. opportunities to reuse existing buildings have been fully explored; and replacement or new build are 
only proposed where it can be demonstrated that no suitable reuse opportunities are available; 
f. any opportunities to make more efficient use of land within the existing site boundary are not suitable 
for the proposed use; 
84 Building a Strong, Competitive Economy 6 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
g. it avoids the irreversible loss of the best and most versatile agricultural land (Grade 1 to 3a) particularly 
Grade 1 where possible and should use land of lower agricultural value in preference to land of higher agricultural value; and 
h. the scale, character and siting of the proposal will not have a detrimental impact on its immediate 
surroundings and the wider landscape. 
A rural business is one which has a legitimate reason to be located in the countryside, including but not limited to agriculture, horses, horticulture or forestry. 
Farm diversification A proposal for farm diversification will be supported where it is demonstrated that it is complementary and 
subsidiary to the ongoing agricultural operations of the farm business, and that it meets criteria e-h above. 
Reasoning 
6.20 Huntingdonshire's rural economy makes a significant contribution to the district's success.  It encompasses 
a range of 
businesses particularly in industrial, agricultural, tourism and service sectors. The Council 
supports the principle of more varied employment opportunities in rural areas to help sustain the local economy. There are several Established Employment Areas which provide relatively low cost business accommodation and support a wide range of employment opportunities. The policy looks to ensure their continued success tempered with recognition that their location in the countryside is somewhat less sustainable than those within established settlements. 
6.21 Individual businesses in countryside settings also provide valuable employment in rural areas.  Industrial, commercial or office use of outbuildings is 
a frequent form of diversification which can be successful 
subject to the accessibility of the buildings to potential employees, therefore locations which are more accessible to public transport will be more appropriate.  Proposals involving offices, defined in the NPPF as a main town centre use, are subject to a maximum floorspace reflecting the sequential preference for them not to be in countryside locations and their employment density and hence likely traffic generation. 
6.22 The primary justification for employment related development in the countryside is where either a rural location is essential to the successful operation of 
the business or the business is dependent upon natural 
resources only available in limited locations. 
6.23 Agriculture is a significant part of Huntingdonshire's economy and is important in protecting UK food production.  
Local agricultural production, processing and sale helps to reduce food miles and maintains 
the working character of the countryside. Well-managed, active farming is also a cost-effective means of achieving environmental and landscape management objectives.  It is recognised that Huntingdonshire has large areas of the best and most versatile agricultural land which is of high value for food production and in most cases agricultural activity should be retained on those higher quality soils. Therefore, when considering the sustainability of the proposal, the value of the land for agriculture will be considered and areas of high grade agricultural land should preferably be avoided. The importance of wildlife habitats will also be considered and increased recreational use should only be facilitated where no significant environmental damage will result. 
6.24 The Council is conscious that some farmers may need to diversify their activities to ensure the continued economic viability of their farm 
enterprise.  Farm diversification schemes should bring long-term benefits, 
including employment, to individual farm operations and the wider rural economy.  Farm diversification schemes may consist of non-agricultural commercial activity, schemes relating to new forms of agriculture or food processing of crops produced on the farm enterprise, however, agricultural operations should remain the dominant land use. Well conceived farm diversification projects will be of an appropriate scale for the location and fit into the landscape.  A proposal for a farm shop will be assessed to ensure that it is intended to be a genuine retail outlet for goods produced on the holding or a group of local holdings; conditions will be applied to limit the type of goods sold and the propor tion of externally sourced goods. 
85 • 
• 6 Building a Strong, Competitive Economy 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
6.25 Diversification will, in most cases, involve changing the use of land and/ or re-using (or redeveloping) 
existing b
uildings.  All opportunities to reuse existing buildings should be explored before redevelopment 
or new build may be justified particularly where redevelopment of a building of historic or architectural value is proposed. Development on new sites will be discouraged unless it enables the clearance and replacement of a badly-sited or inappropriate structure or is small in scale and carried out in an exceptionally environmentally sensitive manner.  Agricultural buildings generally do not require planning permission and therefore the policy is not directed at them. The Council is supportive of farm diversification schemes that are being promoted on a comprehensive basis to retain a viable agricultural unit by seeking additional incomes from other sources which still relate to the countryside. 
6.26 Tourist facilities and visitor attractions are considered by the NPPF to be primarily a 'main town centre use'.  A development proposal for tourist related development will be considered under policy LP 21 'Town 
Centre Vitality and Viability', policy LP 22 'Local Services and Community Facilities' and policy LP 
23 'Tourism and Recreation' where appropriate.  A proposal for development adjacent to or involving use of a water body or river will also be considered in the context of policy LP 38 'Water Related Development'. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans, design 
codes Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators 
 Amount of floorspace developed for employment by type (gross and net in m2) 
in the countryside 
Number of planning permissions granted for tourism, sport and recreation in 
the countryside 
Homes for Rural Workers 
6.27 The purpose of this policy is to set out the Council's approach to proposals for new homes for workers 
where they are required to live at or near their place of w
ork in the countryside. 
LP 20 
Homes for Rural Workers 
A proposal for a home for a rural worker in the countryside will be supported where: a. it is for a worker who is or will be mainly employed for the purposes of the proper functioning of an 
economically viable agricultural or other land-based rural business; 
b. no suitable alternative accommodation is available or could be made available in the immediate vicinity 
or nearest settlement, taking into account the requirements of the work; 
c. opportunities to convert an existing building or, where this is not possible, to replace an existing building have been explored and proved to be unachievable; and 
d. the home is of permanent and substantial construction, unless the rural business has been established for less than three years in which case accommodation will only be supported on a temporary basis to allow time for the business to prove it is viable. 
86 Building a Strong, Competitive Economy 6 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Where a home for a rural worker is permitted it will be subject to a planning condition ensuring that occupation 
is limited to a qualifying person or the continuing residence of the surviving partner of a qualifying person and any resident dependants.  A qualifying person is someone who is solely, mainly or was last working in a land-based rural business. 
A proposal to remove a rural business related occupancy condition will only be supported where evidence 
demonstrates that the home is not needed for the business to which it relates and it has been appropriately marketed at a value reflecting the occupancy condition with no reasonable offer to purchase from a qualifying person; or an assessment demonstrates that the home would not meet the needs of another qualifying person. 
Reasoning 
6.28 To recognise the countryside's intrinsic character and protect high quality agricultural land the NPPF 
discourages the 
construction of isolated new homes in the countryside without special justification. 
Residential development in the countryside may be justified when accommodation is required to enable agricultural and certain other workers to live at or near their place of work due to the nature and demands of the work concerned.  Security issues can contribute to this functional need, but this factor cannot be used to justify a dwelling on its own.  Given the dispersed nature of Huntingdonshire's villages and hamlets the Council will require a proposal to demonstrate that the need cannot be met through, for example, a call out system allowing residence within a nearby settlement or seasonal casual overnight accommodation. 
6.29 It may be possible to avoid the need for a new building through the reuse or replacement of a building nearby.
  Opportunities to convert an existing building or, where this is not possible, to replace one will 
need to have been explored.   Policy LP 33 'Rural Buildings' should be considered when looking at the 
reuse or replacement of existing buildings.  Proposals for new buildings should identify any existing buildings nearb
y that could potentially be reused or replaced to provide adequate accommodation for the 
worker and detail the reasons why they have been discounted. 
6.30 Where the business has been established for less than three years accommodation will only be permitted on a temporary 
basis, to allow time for the enterprise to prove its viability.  In such cases the dwelling must 
be of a temporary character. 
6.31 Permissions will be subject to a condition ensuring the occupation will be limited to essential need and to a person solely or mainly working 
(based on the number of hours) in the locality in agriculture, forestry, 
horticulture or other land-based rural business or subsequently to a person last working in those occupations or a surviving partner of such a person and to any resident dependants. 
6.32 When considering the removal of occupancy conditions appropriate marketing is essential but it has to be recognised that the market 
for such occupancy controlled accommodation is limited by the number of 
rural businesses nearby that have workers that would qualify for such accommodation.  A tailored approach to marketing directly to qualifying businesses in the area or use of specialist agricultural land and property agents are likely to be the most successful in finding out whether there is a need for such accommodation rather than non-targeted advertising even for a long period of time.  Such targeted marketing will, however, need to be long enough to enable nearby qualifying businesses to respond properly; it must refer to the existence of the agricultural occupancy condition and the property should be priced accordingly.  Details will be required of the marketing carried out as well as all viewings and offers made. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications Delivery mechanism 
87 • 6 Building a Strong, Competitive Economy 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators Number of housing completions for rural workers 
Town Centre Vitality and Viability 
6.33 The purpose of this policy is to ensure that the town centres of Huntingdon, St Neots, St Ives and Ramsey 
retain their roles as the focus f
or local communities attracting people in for retail, entertainment, office, 
leisure, cultural and tourist facilities.  Such uses are referred to as main town centre uses, defined in the 'Glossary'. 
LP 21 
Town Centre Vitality and Viability 
Town centre hierarchy boundaries Each town centre, primary shopping area and primary shopping frontage to which this policy applies is defined 
on the policies map. 
Primary shopping frontages A proposal for a shop (class 'A1'), restaurant/ café (class 'A3') or drinking establishment (class 'A4') will be 
supported within a primary shopping frontage to encourage uses which support the vitality and viability of the location whilst maintaining its essential retail nature. 
A proposal for any other main town centre use at ground floor level may be supported where it will: a. make a positive contribution to vitality and viability by enhancing the existing quality, diversity and 
distribution of retail, leisure, entertainment, arts, heritage, cultural facilities, community facilities or tourist 
attractions; and 
b. continue to provide an active frontage where there is an existing shopfront. 
A proposal for any non-main town centre use will not be supported at ground floor level within a primary 
shopping frontage. 
Primary shopping areas Within a primary shopping area but beyond the primary shopping frontage a proposal for a new retail use 
(class 'A1-A5') will be supported at ground floor level where it reflects the role, function and distinctive qualities of the centre. 
A proposal for any other town centre use at ground floor level may be supported where it will make a positive 
contribution to vitality and viability by enhancing the existing quality, diversity and distribution of retail, leisure, entertainment, arts, heritage, cultural facilities, community facilities or tourist attractions. 
Retail uses outside a defined primary shopping area A proposal for a retail use involving over 600m
2 net internal floorspace outside of a primary shopping area 
will be supported where it is in accordance with the sequential approach from town centre to edge of centre 
and then out of centre as set out in the National Planning Policy Framework.  A proportionate impact 
assessment will be required in accordance with policy LP 7 'Spatial Planning Areas' . 
88 Building a Strong, Competitive Economy 6 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Town centres 
The town centres of Huntingdon, St Neots, St Ives and Ramsey will be supported as sustainable locations 
for shopping, working, service and leisure uses which attract a wide range of people throughout the day and evening to strengthen the centre's role as a vibrant, accessible focus for meeting local needs. 
Beyond the primary shopping frontage and primary shopping area a development proposal for a main town 
centre use will be supported where the scale and type of development reflects the centre's size, role and character. 
The Council will use urban design frameworks and development briefs as appropriate to inform development 
within town centres to support their ongoing vitality and viability. 
Other main town centre uses outside a defined town centre A proposal for a main town centre use involving over 600m
2 net internal floorspace outside of a town centre 
will be supported where it is in accordance with the sequential approach giving preference to town centres, 
then edge of centre and then out of centre as set out in the National Planning Policy Framework.  A 
proportionate impact assessment will be required in accordance with policy LP 7 'Spatial Planning Areas' . 
Markets 
Markets add diversity and interest to the town centres of Huntingdon, St Neots, St Ives and Ramsey and 
contribute to their vitality and viability.  A proposal which provides an additional market or enhances the role of an existing market in its respective town centre economy will be supported. 
Reasoning 
6.34 The role of town centres is evolving rapidly with trends in online shopping and the concentration of 
investment 
in larger centres posing acute challenges to traditional market town centres. The renewal and 
strengthening of Huntingdonshire's town centres is critical to support sustainable lifestyles for residents and local workers with the provision of retail, commercial, entertainment and services. Town centres offer the most accessible destinations for those who choose to travel by public transport or to walk or cycle. 
6.35 The success of town centres is typically measured by their vitality which reflects their general liveliness as a place and their viability which reflects the strength of their commercial property mar
ket. The quantity 
and diversity of shops and other services present, vacancy rates and pedestrian flows all contribute to a town centre's success. Huntingdonshire's Retail and Commercial Leisure Needs Assessment (2017) 
recognises Huntingdon and St Neots as the district's pr 
imary retail centres in terms of floorspace and 
presence of national multiple retailers.  Both serve wider catchments and proposals which enhance their town centres' roles as primary destinations within the district will be supported.  St Ives and Ramsey are both dominated by independent retailers serving more localised catchments particularly for retail and food and drink uses.  Proposals will be supported which enhance their town centres' roles as the local retail centre of choice for those living and working in each town and its surrounding settlements for day to day shopping and for food and drink services. 
6.36 Customer behaviour evolves rapidly in the retail market, thus the policy aims to maximise opportunities for in
vestment to boost the town centres' capacity to respond positively.  For example, promoting flexible 
use of floorspace to blend retail, working and social opportunities to cater for those working remotely by providing spaces such as coffee shops, cafés, libraries and more flexible shared spaces to meet changing demands.  Promoting facilities for omni-channel retailing would allow shoppers to combine the choice of online shopping with the convenience of local collection of goods. 
6.37 The NPPF requires the definition of town centres and primary shopping areas based on clearly defined primary 
and secondary frontages to support their continuing vitality and viability.  In Huntingdonshire this 
is only practicable for the four market towns. Within each town centre a primary shopping area is defined 
89 • 
• 6 Building a Strong, Competitive Economy 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
which covers a smaller area generally comprising a mixture of retail and service uses. Within this are 
primary shopping frontages which form the retail core of each town centre.  All other streets within the primary shopping area are defined as secondary shopping frontages. The town centres, primary shopping areas and primary shopping frontages are identified on the policies map. 
6.38 For retail purposes, edge of centre sites are defined as within 300m of the primary shopping area and for other main town centre 
uses within 300m of the town centre boundary.  For office development, edge of 
centre includes locations outside the town centre but within 500m of a public transport interchange. However, the definition is not a fixed distance as account will be taken of local circumstances - for example where there is a river, development on the other side of the river may not be considered to be edge of centre. 
6.39 The purpose of the sequential test is to protect the primary shopping areas and town centres from competing edge or out of centre development 
that could detrimentally affect their vitality and viability.  Reference 
should be made to the Strategy for Development for the threshold for retail impact assessments. The Council will require applicants to demonstrate flexibility in relation to issues such as format and scale. 
6.40 The policy only relates to the ground floor of properties within these areas and frontages.  Separate uses of upper floors of premises, f
or example as flats or office space, are common and development proposals 
should not prejudice their effective use.  Reference should be made to the Huntingdonshire Design Guide 
SPD (2017) or successor documents for advice on how best to incorporate a mix of uses in development proposals in town centre 
locations.  All four of the town centres in Huntingdonshire are within conservation 
areas and so policy LP 34 'Heritage Assets and their Settings' will also be relevant to development 
proposals. 
6.41 Mark
ets add vitality and diversity to the town centres and bring in additional customers and visitors.  All 
four of 
Huntingdonshire's market towns support a traditional market one or two days a week.  Farmers' 
markets are also held fortnightly in Huntingdon, St Neots and St Ives.  Specialist markets, such as continental markets, are held on an occasional basis.  Enhancements to markets will be supported where they add to the quality and diversity of opportunities available. 
6.42 Below town centres in the retail hierarchy are local centres, typically a village high street or neighbourhood centre, which 
provide limited shopping opportunities to local catchments.  Local shopping centres have 
not been defined due to the dispersed nature of shopping facilities in the majority of the Key Service Centres and Small Settlements.  A development proposal for retail and other town centre uses in a Key Service Centre or Small Settlement will be considered under policy LP 22 'Local Services and Community 
Facilities' and should accord with the floorspace threshold set out in policies LP 8 'Key Service Centres' and LP 9 'Small Settlements'. 
6.43 There are permitted development rights that affect some aspects of this policy, this is set out in  Page 4. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers Responsible agencies 
Delivery mechanism Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators Total amount of completed retail, office and leisure development 
Amount and % of completed retail, office and leisure development in town 
centres 
90 
r Building a Strong, Competitive Economy 6 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Local Services and Community Facilities 
6.44 The purpose of this policy is to maintain the sustainability, vitality and viability of settlements, and individual 
neighbourhoods within market 
towns, to support local facilities and services to provide for the needs of 
the local community. 
LP 22 
Local Services and Community Facilities 
Local services and community facilities include, but are not limited to, shops, public houses, places of worship, 
cemeteries, health centres, libraries, fuel filling stations and public halls. 
A proposal for a new local service or community facility within a built-up area, or the extension of an existing 
local service or community facility on land immediately adjoining the built up area, will be supported where it: 
a. is of a scale to serve local needs; 
b. comprises up to a maximum of 600m
2 net internal floorspace for a main town centre use; and 
c. provides for a new service or facility or it retains or enhances an existing service or facility, including 
through the provision of premises suitable for mixed use or multiple community functions. 
Where permitted development rights do not apply a proposal which involves the loss of a local service or 
community facility will only be supported where: 
d. an equivalent service or community facility will be provided in a location with an equal or better level 
of accessibility for the community it is intended to serve; or 
e. it demonstrates that there is no reasonable prospect of that service or facility being retained or restored 
because either: 
i. there is insufficient community support for its continuation; or 
ii. reasonable steps have been taken to effectively market the property for its current use without 
success. 
A proposal will not be supported where the proposed loss is within a Key Service Centre and it would 
undermine the settlement's role in provision of services. 
Reasoning 
6.45 Good local services and community facilities are an essential element of a successful and inclusive society 
as they help 
to meet local needs and can provide opportunities for social and cultural interaction. 
Community facilities can include, but are not limited to, community halls, local shops, public houses, theatres, cultural buildings, places of worship, schools, higher education facilities, childcare providers, health centres, sports venues, cemeteries and allotments. 
6.46 Provision of multi-purpose community buildings is encouraged as these can make efficient use of space and resources and provide oppor
tunities for different elements of a community to interact.  Provision of a 
new service or community facility should be of an appropriate scale to meet the needs of the community where it is proposed.  Commercial provision of a defined main town centre use is limited to a maximum of 600m
2 of net internal floorspace to ensure there is no detrimental impact on the vitality and viability of 
the defined town centres. This can, however, form part of a larger proposal for a mixed use scheme. 
91 • 
• 6 Building a Strong, Competitive Economy 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
6.47 The loss of local services or community facilities can have a serious impact upon people's quality of life 
and the over
all vitality of communities. With an increasing proportion of older people in the population 
access to locally based services may become more important reducing the need to travel.  It is important to consider the extent to which the local population can support local services, particularly in small settlements, and how realistic it is to seek to retain all existing provision. The policy cannot prevent local services or community facilities from closing but provides a window of opportunity for provision of a similar or alternative local service or community facility where local support exists. 
6.48 Provision of local services will continue to evolve in response to changing needs and delivery mechanisms. The policy allows f
or loss of an existing service or facility where this is to be provided in an alternative 
location giving equal or better accessibility to the community than the existing facility.  Alternative provision may not be in the same format.  In such instances there is no requirement for marketing the property for its current use. Inevitably community needs change, as does funding and the ability of organisations to continue to operate. The policy is intended to be flexible and promote potential for dual use of buildings where this can better serve viability and to allow change of use where this can help fund new provision in a more appropriate or viable location. 
6.49 Assessing the level of community support for a local service or facility is a matter of judgement, but could be informed 
by information such as evidence of the level of recent usage, as well as the number and 
nature of comments made on an application by members of the local community.  For commercially run facilities such as local shops and pubs, the Council considers that a robust marketing exercise is the most transparent way of demonstrating that such facilities are no longer viable. This should be of sufficient duration to allow the local community time to consider making a bid to run or acquire premises of value through the Community Right to Bid.  In seeking to justify the loss of local services or community facilities, applicants will also be required to consider whether existing premises or sites can be adapted to retain a viable community facility or service.  Effective marketing will in most cases need to be for a continuous period of 12 months at a value reflecting its permitted use with details kept of any offers received and detailed reasoning for declining them.  However, in particular circumstances it may be appropriate for alternative arrangements to establish if there is any realistic prospect of maintaining the service or facility. 
6.50 There are permitted development rights that affect some aspects of this policy, this is set out at  Page 4. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, town & parish councils Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans, list of 
Assets of Community Value Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators 
 Amount and % of completed retail, office and leisure development (gross and 
net) 
Amount of completed floorspace for other use classes (net) 
Tourism and Recreation 
6.51 The purpose of this policy is to set out the Council's approach to development proposals for recreation 
and tourism uses in the countryside
. 
92 r Building a Strong, Competitive Economy 6 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
LP 23 
Tourism and Recreation 
A proposal for a new or expanded tourism, sport or leisure use in the countryside will be supported where it 
can be demonstrated that: 
a. it is well-related to a defined settlement unless there are robust operational or sustainability reasons 
why it needs to be located elsewhere; 
b. it does not cause harm to, and where appropriate, enhances the ecological, landscape and heritage 
significance of the proposed location; 
c. the impact of the scale, character and location of the development on both its immediate surroundings 
and the wider landscape are minimised as far as possible; 
d. adequate servicing can be provided, including water supply, electricity and for sewage and waste 
disposal; and 
e. it will not have an adverse impact on any internationally or nationally designated wildlife site through 
increased visitor pressure. 
Where tourist accommodation is approved appropriate planning conditions will be used to prevent occupation as a person's permanent sole or main residential use. 
A proposal for tourist accommodation, including touring caravan and camping sites, should be supported by 
a robust business plan demonstrating that it is viable in the long term. 
Reasoning 
6.52 Huntingdonshire has a limited tourism sector primarily focused on its wildlife viewing opportunities, 
countryside, 
heritage assets and water-based pursuits. The Council seeks to enhance the benefits to be 
obtained from tourism, sport and leisure development and will support proposals for high quality tourism development, particularly that promoting year round activities where they protect the natural or heritage assets of the district. Tourism investment and visitor spending can support the management and conservation of historic and natural sites and may benefit local communities by supporting local shops and services.  Both tourist accommodation and attractions can also support direct and indirect employment. 
6.53 A proposal may be supported where a countryside location is justified such as a direct relationship to a heritage asset, 
a landscape or water feature or within an area of woodland.  Proposals should therefore 
demonstrate why a countryside location is necessary. The greatest concern when considering proposals for tourism or recreation related development within the countryside is the potential impact on the surrounding area.  It is critical that any proposal conserves the natural beauty, wildlife and heritage value of the area as these represent the district's primary tourist assets. When considering the sustainability of the proposal, the value of the land for agriculture will also be considered as areas of high grade agricultural land should be avoided to protect their role in food production. 
6.54 A high proportion of trips to the district are from day visitors and one of the greatest challenges is to encourage o
vernight stays and longer breaks. Tourist accommodation, including touring caravan and 
camping sites, facilitates longer visitor stays with potential to increase the contribution of visitors to the local economy.  However, a proposal should demonstrate that it expects to be viable and is supported by well thought out research and a business plan, particularly for new build tourist accommodation. Where tourist accommodation is proposed in locations where new dwellings would not normally be acceptable planning conditions will be imposed restricting the use to holiday accommodation. 
6.55 This policy is intended to guide the smaller scale, lower impact proposals which may be appropriate within a countryside setting.
  Proposals for development in association with strategic sites such as the Great 
Fen and Grafham Water will be considered under policy LP 3 'Green Infrastructure'. 
93 • 6 Building a Strong, Competitive Economy 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
6.56 Tourist facilities and visitor attractions are considered by the NPPF to be primarily a 'main town centre 
use'; larger 
tourist attractions or events which may generate significant visitor numbers are more 
appropriately located in towns or key service centres where there are public transport opportunities. Within built-up areas a proposal for tourist related development will be considered under policy LP 21 'Town 
Centre Vitality and Viability' and policy LP 22 'Local Services and Community Facilities' as appropriate. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers Responsible agencies 
Delivery mechanism Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators 
 Number of permissions granted for tourism, sport and recreation in the 
countryside 
94 Strengthening Communities 7 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
7 Strengthening Communities 
7.1 Strengthening communities is at the core of this Local Plan.  A strong community is one that is both mixed 
and integrated, 
where there is a choice of housing, where people feel that they can influence decision 
making and where people have a sense of pride in their community. They involve places where people want to live, work and enjoy themselves and where their needs are met.  Empowering people to be actively engaged in their communities helps to strengthen community spirit, contributes to a good quality of life, can reduce disadvantage and promote personal well-being. 
7.2 The NPPF's ambition of creating sustainable, inclusive and mixed communities can be supported by providing a 
mix of housing to meet the current and future needs of residents. The Cambridge sub-region 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) and related documents provide a comprehensive picture of housing needs for Huntingdonshire 
in the period 2011-36. 'Affordable Housing Provision' seeks to help 
address the need identified in the SHMA for some 8,000 affordable homes (defined in the 'Glossary') in Huntingdonshire between 2011-36 by requiring all new housing developments of over 10 houses to include affordable 
homes. The Huntingdonshire Objectively Assessed Housing Need (April 2017) refined this 
figure to around 7,900. Also responding to evidence in the SHMA and related documents, 'Housing Mix' includes, among other things, a requirement for homes to meet optional accessibility standards.  Given the increasing number of 
older people in Huntingdonshire, 'Specialist Housing' supports the delivery of a 
range of specialist housing and residential institutions, setting out broad location and design requirements. Gypsy and Tr
aveller sites and Travelling Showpeople yards are a form of specialist housing provision 
meeting specific cultural accommodation needs. 'Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople' supports 
the provision of such sites in locations with good access to education and health, whilst seeking to protect the countryside. 
7.3 A 
strong community is one that is empowered to address local issues and aspirations. As set out in chapter 
1  Page 3 is one way to help achieve this, but may not be the best route to achieving specific local 
development 
aspirations. 'Rural Exceptions Housing' is a well established way for communities to get 
much needed affordable housing development prioritised for people with a local connection. 
7.4 Collectively, the policies in this Local Plan support the achievement of the vision that by 2036 Huntingdonshire's physical en
vironment will support the health and wellbeing of all its residents. To focus 
attention on achieving this, 'Health Impact Assessment' requires that larger proposals should be informed 
by an assessment of the health impacts of the proposed development. 
Affordable Housing Provision 
7.5 The purpose of this policy is to ensure that proposals for market housing development in Huntingdonshire contribute to the delivery of affordable housing, defined in the 'Glossary' to help meet identified housing needs. 
LP 24 
Affordable Housing Provision 
In order to assist in meeting the identified local need for additional affordable homes, a proposal which 
includes housing development will be required to provide a range of affordable housing types, sizes and tenures. These should be appropriate to meet the requirements of the local community taking into account the latest evidence from the Housing Register, the Cambridge sub-region Strategic Housing Market Assessment and other local sources. The affordable housing provision may include specialist or supported housing where an identified need exists.  A proposal will be supported where: 
95 7 Strengthening Communities 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
a. it delivers a target of 40% affordable housing on a site where 11 homes or 1,001m2 residential floorspace 
(gross internal area) or more are proposed(16); 
b. it provides approximately 70% of the new affordable housing units as social or affordable rented 
properties with the balance made up of other affordable tenures; 
c. affordable housing is dispersed across the development in small clusters of dwellings; and 
d. it ensures that the appearance of affordable housing units is externally indistinguishable from that of 
open market housing. 
Where it can be demonstrated that the target is not viable due to specific site conditions or other material 
considerations affecting development of the site an alternative dwelling or tenure mix or a lower level of provision may be supported.  Preference will be given to amending the tenure mix; only if this is still demonstrated not to be viable will consideration be given to reducing the affordable housing requirement. A development viability assessment may be required to support an alternative mix or level of affordable housing provision. 
In exceptional circumstances it may be appropriate to accept off-site provision and/or commuted payments 
where this would offer an equivalent or enhanced provision of affordable housing. 
Reasoning 
7.6 There is a significant need for affordable housing within Huntingdonshire as demonstrated through the 
Cambridge sub-region Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA).  Although Huntingdonshire's house prices are 
amongst the lower end within the housing market area, affordability issues are highlighted when 
lower quartile prices are compared to lower quartile incomes.  In September 2018 the lower quartile price to income ratio for Huntingdonshire was 9.3 clearly demonstrating that local housing is unaffordable for low income households. This substantial gap between average earnings and housing costs, a limited supply of new affordable properties and the historic loss of social housing through right to buy and right to acquire provisions have all contributed to the shortage of affordable housing.  It is important that the Council maximises all opportunities to meet housing need and the planning system has a key role to play in this. 
7.7 Maximisation of affordable housing provision is one of the greatest challenges the district faces and is a key 
priority for this Plan. Affordable housing is defined in the NPPF (replicated in the 'Glossary') and 
includes social rented, affordable 
rented and intermediate housing which are provided to eligible households 
whose needs are not met by the market(17) .  Eligibility is determined with regard to local incomes and local 
house prices.Where the Right to Acquire does not apply, affordable housing should remain at an affordable price for future eligible households or the subsidy be recycled for alternative affordable housing provision. 
7.8 The majority of affordable housing is likely to need to be delivered without any public subsidy.  Potential developers should be mindful of this when purchasing land and 
considering the development economics 
of a site they intend to bring forward for development. The costs incurred in delivering a high quality development appropriate to the specific location should be anticipated and taken into account in the price paid for the land. 
7.9 The Council has carried out a Local Plan Viability Assessment (2017) to analyse the economic capability of development 
proposals to provide affordable housing, taking into account market conditions, development 
economics and the requirements for other planning contributions including S106 contributions and Community Infrastructure Levy. This concludes that an affordable housing target of 40% is viable and deliverable on the majority of types and locations of sites based on testing with 70% affordable rent and 
16 Calculated to the nearest whole unit 
17 The Glossary contains the definition set out in the NPPF 2012 as the Local Plan was examined against this version. The NPPF 2019 has amended this definition. 
96 Strengthening Communities 7 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
30% shared ownership.  It is acknowledged, however that market conditions vary, and that, in particular 
the two strategic expansion locations bear exceptional infrastructure costs such as the cost of new schools, roads and other facilities which may affect the viability of a 40% target. 
7.10 Ideally, affordable housing should be 'pepper-potted' around a development scheme, but where it is more sustainable f
or construction and ongoing management, it may be provided in small clusters, proportionate 
to the scale of development.  In large scale major developments, such clusters should be small enough such that the tenure of the housing cannot be distinguished from the market housing element of the scheme. 
7.11 Where a developer can demonstrate that delivery of 40% affordable housing within a site is not viable with the dwelling and 
tenure mix set out in the policy the Council will negotiate to reach a viable solution 
to enable development to proceed.  A developer may be required to provide a formal 'open book' viability assessment to support a change in tenure or a lower level of provision. Where this is required the developer will also be required to meet the costs of the Council's verification of this.  In some exceptional cases it may be appropriate to accept an off-site contribution towards the delivery of affordable housing on alternative sites. 
7.12 Allocated sites will deliver a high proportion of the total new affordable housing. These are concentrated in the district's more 
sustainable locations.  In considering whether a development meets the threshold of 
11 homes or 1,001m2 residential floorspace(18) or more for providing affordable housing, the Council will 
consider the net increase in dwellings, which takes into account any loss through demolition or conversion. In deciding whether a particular site meets the size thresholds the Council will consider not only the proposal submitted but the potential capacity of the site and whether a larger site has been artificially sub-divided. Where this applies, affordable housing requirements will reflect a reasonable capacity on the whole site. 
7.13 The Council will use evidence in housing register statistics, the Cambridge sub-region SHMA, and other local sources of information 
(including parish or neighbourhood surveys) to agree with the developer a 
mix of house types, sizes and tenures on specific development schemes.  In order to ensure a balanced supply and contribute to sustainable, mixed and inclusive communities approximately 70% of all new affordable housing provided should be for affordable rent to meet identified needs in the district. The balance of affordable housing should be other affordable products as defined in the NPPF. The mix of affordable housing may include specialist housing such as that required by older or disabled people. 
7.14 Again to contribute to sustainable, mixed and inclusive communities, affordable housing should be dispersed throughout the development 
either as individual units or small clusters of about 15 dwellings made up of 
an agreed mix of affordable housing types and tenures. The size of the overall development should be taken into account when integrating affordable homes.  On smaller sites a cluster of 15 affordable dwellings could be too large and a correspondingly smaller cluster size and distribution appropriate to the size of the site will be sought. Affordable housing should be properly integrated into each new development and be indistinguishable in character from market housing. Where a development site is to be built out in separate phases developers must take account of the location of affordable homes within neighbouring parcels of land to ensure the distribution of affordable housing across the wider development minimises social exclusion. The Council will seek to agree a programme of affordable housing completions which broadly aligns with delivery of the market housing. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Responsible agencies Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered providers, 
Homes England 
Delivery mechanism Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans 
18 Measured as gross internal floorspace 
97 • 7 Strengthening Communities 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators Number and % affordable housing completions (gross) 
Housing Mix 
7.15 The purpose of this policy is to ensure that all housing development in the district offers a genuine choice 
of different sizes and types of homes that meet the requirements of residents
. 
LP 25 
Housing Mix 
A proposal for major scale development that includes housing will be supported where it provides a mix of 
sizes, types and tenures which help achieve sustainable, inclusive and mixed communities. 
A proposal should set out how it responds to the evidence and guidance provided by: a. the Cambridge sub-region Strategic Housing Market Assessment; 
b. the Peterborough Strategic Housing Market Assessment where applicable; c. the Council's 
Housing Str ategy and Tenancy Str ategy; 
d. local assessments of housing need and demand; and 
e. other local housing and demographic studies and strategies. 
A proposal for wholly affordable housing will be supported where it contributes positively to the mix of tenures 
available in the local area. 
Accessible and adaptable homes A proposal that includes housing will be supported which meets the optional Building Regulation accessibility 
standards (or replacement standards) as set out below, unless it can be demonstrated that site-specific factors make achieving this impractical or unviable: 
f. ensuring 100% of new dwellings, across all tenures provided, meet Building Regulation requirement 
M4(2) ‘accessible and adaptable dwellings’ (or replacement standards); and 
g. within a large scale development proposal the construction standards of a proportion of new market 
dwellings should be further enhanced to meet Building Regulation requirement M4(3) ‘wheelchair 
adaptable dwellings’ (or replacement standards); and 
h. for all affordable housing an appropriate proportion meeting Building Regulation requirement M4(3) 
‘wheelchair adaptable dwellings’ (or replacement standards) should be negotiated with the Council's Housing Strategy team. 
Self and custom-build homes 
Where appropriate, the Council will work with developers, registered providers, landowners and relevant 
individuals or groups to address identified local requirements for self and custom-build homes as identified in the Huntingdonshire self and custom-build register. 
98 Strengthening Communities 7 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Reasoning 
7.16 A diverse mixture of housing sizes, types and tenures is essential to help develop and maintain inclusive 
sustainable comm
unities suitable for people with differing needs.  Reference should be made to the mix 
of housing indicated as needed. This evidence is set out in Cambridge sub-region SHMA (2013) or Peterborough SHMA (2014) and ongoing reviews, as applicable(19), which are key evidence documents 
that should be taken into account to ensure that new housing meets the needs of potential residents. The full texts can be viewed at the Cambridgeshire Insight website and the Peterborough SHMA website 
respectively. 
7.17 Further indications on appropriate housing supply may be found in a wide range of documents and consideration should 
be given to relevant elements. Neighbourhood development plans, parish plans and 
village design statements may set out local aspirations for housing supply and provide a useful indication of local opinion on a desirable mix of housing sizes and types. These will form a material consideration in determining a planning application with greater weight accorded depending upon the level of public participation in their preparation. 
7.18 The Local Plan does not include a policy requirement for new housing to meet the nationally described 
space standard.  However, developers may wish to refer to these standards to evidence how their proposal meets the broader policy requirement of providing housing 
of sizes which help achieve sustainable, 
inclusive and mixed communities.  In relation to this, particularly for affordable housing for rent and in contrast to much market housing, it should be recognised that such homes are likely to be fully occupied. 
7.19 The SHMAs highlight that the need for appropriate housing for single or older people is expected to increase significantly up to 2036. The Cambr
idge sub-region SHMA (2013) forecasts that by 2031 over 
a third of Huntingdonshire's households will comprise people aged 65 and over. These factors influence the size and type of properties required. 
7.20 The majority of older people live in general housing as opposed to specialist housing.  Certain general housing types and sizes, 
such as smaller bungalows, can play a role in providing appropriate 
accommodation into old age.  Using the SHMA and other documents identified in the policy as a guide, proposals should demonstrate how the types and sizes of homes being proposed will address the changing age structure of Huntingdonshire’s population. 
7.21 Homes meeting M4(2) accessible and adaptable dwellings standards include design features that enable mainstream housing to be flexible 
enough to meet the current and future needs of most households, 
including in particular older people and those with disabilities, and also families with young children. Homes meeting M4(3) wheelchair dwellings include further design features so that homes are capable of meeting or being adapted to meet the needs of most wheelchair users . 
7.22 Huntingdonshire Accessible and Specialist Housing Evidence Paper evidences the requirement for all new mar
ket homes to meet Building Regulation M4(2). It also indicates that to meet anticipated needs a 
further 9% of new market homes are required to meet Building Regulation M4(3).The proportion indicated in the policy should seek to achieve this percentage where its delivery is viable. The level of need for affordable homes which meet Building Regulation M4(3) is anticipated to be around 30% overall but precise levels of need will vary in response to circumstances at the time a planning application is submitted.Where proposals state that meeting such requirements would be impractical or unviable, such as may be the case where floor levels need to be raised due to flood risk and this would necessitate significant ramping to comply with the standards, they should provide evidence supporting this conclusion.  See 'Council 
approach to site-specific development viability' for more information. 
7.23 Development of self and custom-build homes, defined in the 'Glossary', is growing in popularity as an 
alternative 
way for individuals and community groups to provide housing to meet particular needs either 
individually or for local communities.  Under the Self-build and Custom Housebuilding Act 2015, the Council 
19 The Cambridge sub-region SHMA is applicable in all of Huntingdonshire. The Peterborough SHMA is also 
applicable to 
parishes in the north of the district that share a boundary with the Peterborough Council area. 
99 • 
• 
• 7 Strengthening Communities 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
maintains a custom and self-build homes register to establish the level of demand for housing of this type, 
and must ha
ve regard to this in fulfilling its planning and housing functions. The Council will work with 
partners to establish how serviced plots may be effectively provided to meet the identified demand.  In 
particular, proposals for large scale major residential development, defined in the 'Glossary', will be 
encouraged to 
provide plots for sale for self and custom-build housing serviced with access to water, 
waste, electricity and telecoms/ broadband. There is no requirement for plots to be made available at below market value but they should be reasonably priced reflecting prevailing market values for such plots.  Reference should also be had to advice from the National Custom and Self Build Association and 
developing best pr
actice. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered providers Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, masterplans, design 
codes Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators 
 Dwelling completions by number of bedrooms 
Number of self build and custom build dwellings completed 
Number, % and tenure of affordable housing completions (gross) 
Specialist Housing 
7.24 The purpose of this policy is to ensure that specialist housing development contributes to a range of 
attractive housing options f
or older people and those with specific needs. 
LP 26 
Specialist Housing 
Self-contained specialist housing A proposal for self-contained specialist housing (class 'C3') will be supported where it will: a. be easily accessible to shops, services, community facilities, public transport and social networks 
appropriate to the needs of the occupiers; 
b. be integrated with the wider community; 
c. 
incorporate a mix of tenures including affordable homes in accordance with policy LP 24 'Affordable 
Housing Provision' ; and 
d. facilitate a high quality of life for residents. 
Residential institutions A proposal for a new residential institution or replacement or extension of an existing one (class 'C2') will be 
supported where: 
e. it is easily accessible to shops, services, community facilities, public transport and social networks 
appropriate to the needs of the intended occupiers, staff and visitors; 
100 Strengthening Communities 7 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
f. the design meets or exceeds the standards set by the Care Quality Commission (or successors) 
regarding the safety and suitability of premises; and 
g. in the case of existing care homes the proposal will lead to an improvement in the quality of care facilities 
provided. 
Reasoning 
7.25 The need for appropriate housing for older people is expected to increase significantly up to 2036.  Projected 
increases in the number of 
Huntingdonshire households comprising people aged 65 and over, evidenced 
in the Cambridge sub-region SHMA (2013), informs an indicative need in Huntingdonshire in the period 2016-36 for around 4,000 units of specialist housing for older people, and 2,000 care home beds(20) . 
There will also be an additional need for specialist housing for people aged under 65, increasing roughly in line with the overall population growth.  Given the clear and substantial need for specialist housing for older people established in the Huntingdonshire Accessible and Specialist Housing Evidence Paper, 
development proposals will not be expected to provide additional evidence to demonstrate this need. The housing needs of other more specific groups within the overall population are not so clearly evidenced; proposals for such groups will be expected to provide evidence of need. 
7.26 There is a great diversity of accommodation suitable for people with restricted mobility or in need of care, ranging from mainstream housing meeting accessible and adaptable dwellings standards (see 'Housing Mix'), through to housing with care and residential institutions. The nature of accommodation and level of care varies 
significantly and varies over time as the care needs of any individual resident changes. 
While there are many different specialist housing products which are given differing names, specialist housing for older people can be categorised in broad terms into age-exclusive housing, retirement housing, housing with care and residential institutions, including care/ nursing homes
(21) . The range of specialist 
housing for people aged under 65 is more limited, including housing with care and care/ nursing homes. Further details can be found in the Huntingdonshire Accessible and Specialist Housing Evidence Paper. 
7.27 The current health and social care agenda, affecting future provision of care, promotes independent living, rather than 
institutional care, aiming to enable people with health and social care needs to remain living 
in their own home within the community.  However, for those with the greatest health and social care needs, there is likely to be an ongoing requirement in Huntingdonshire for care homes, in particular as the older population increases
(22) .  Given the high level of need for both specialist housing and residential 
institutions, this Local Plan seeks to ensure that new development contributes to a range of attractive housing options for older people and those with specific needs, including self-contained specialist housing (class 'C3') and residential institutions (class 'C2'). This objective is in addition to seeking a high proportion of new housing to meet additional accessibility standards (see 'Housing Mix'). 
7.28 Developers are encouraged to seek pre-application advice to establish whether their proposal may be classified as C2 or C3 due to the implications for the 
provision of affordable housing and other developer 
contribution matters. 
7.29 The location and design of specialist housing are integral to making specialist housing an attractive option. Proposals should demonstrate that 
residents will have good access to local facilities, and how the 
development will be integrated with the surrounding community, for example by design of shared spaces and provision of ancillary facilities that complement local provision.  Proposals for specialist housing should also demonstrate how the development contributes to an inclusive, mixed community, avoiding creating neighbourhoods with exclusively specialist housing provision. 
20 Huntingdonshire Accessible and Specialist Housing Evidence Paper 
21 Cambridgeshire Older People’s Accommodation Strategy (2015) 
22 Cambridgeshire Older People's Accommodation Strategy (2015) 
101 • 
• 7 Strengthening Communities 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
7.30 As people’s mobility reduces with age and they spend more time in the home, the design of their 
accommodation becomes increasingly important. 
 Proposals should demonstrate how their design 
contributes to the intended residents’ quality of life.  Developers may wish to refer to some of the HAPPI 
principles for the design of housing for older people(23), or successor principles, to show how they meet 
this policy requirement. 
7.31 While residents in care or nursing homes may be unlikely to leave the site unaccompanied, staff and visitors are likely to 
travel to and from such homes on a regular basis.  It is therefore important that 
residential institutions are in locations with easy access to services and facilities.  Locating residential institutions close to shops and services can also encourage residents to visit them, potentially with support from staff or visitors, thereby remaining more active.  Proposals for residential institutions away from larger populations due to the specific needs of proposed residents will be considered on a case b y case basis. 
7.32 The Care Quality Commission provides guidance on the safety and suitability of premises for care homes and other similar uses to ensure that residents are in safe, 
accessible surroundings that promote their 
wellbeing. The Design and Access Statement submitted with any proposal should demonstrate that the design and layout of the proposed building(s) and any grounds is suitable for the intended residents.  It should also demonstrate that appropriate measures will be provided to ensure the security of the premises. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered providers Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, masterplans, design 
codes Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators 
 Amount of C2 floorspace & number of bedrooms completed for older people 
and other residents 
Number of self-contained (C3) specialist housing units provided by tenure 
Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople 
7.33 The purpose of the policy is to enable the appropriate provision of sites to meet the specific needs of 
Gypsies, T
ravellers and Travelling Showpeople in accordance with the Government's 'Planning Policy for 
Traveller Sites' (August 2015). 
LP 27 
Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople 
New traveller sites outside of the Built-Up Area will be supported in sustainable locations where they respect 
the scale of the nearest settled community, 
and will be very strictly limited in open countryside that is away 
from existing settlements. The Council will therefore support a proposal which contributes to the delivery of Gypsy and Traveller pitches and Travelling Showpeople plots, where it satisfies each of the following criteria: 
a. the location is within 1.5 miles of a primary school and 2 miles of a GP surgery; 
b. the character and appearance of the wider landscape is not significantly harmed; 
23 The HAPPI principles are not included within the policy, as several of them overlap with optional housing 
technical standards. 
102 Strengthening Communities 7 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
c. the location and scale of sites does not dominate the nearest settled community, when the proposal is 
considered collectively with other nearby traveller sites; 
d. the proposed boundary treatment provides a good balance between minimising the development's 
impact on surrounding countryside and its integration into the local community; 
e. there will not be a significant adverse effect on the amenity of nearby residents or the effective operation of adjoining uses; 
f. the site provides a high level of residential amenity for the proposed residents, for example in relation 
to protection from noise and provision of play facilities; 
g. the health and safety of occupants is not put at risk, including through unsafe access to sites, poor air quality, contamination or unacceptable flood risk; 
h. there is adequate space for operational needs, including the parking and turning of vehicles; 
i. there are appropriate management arrangements in place, where the site may have multiple owners 
or tenants or be used for transit purposes; and 
j. the site can be safely and adequately serviced by infrastructure. 
Reasoning 
7.34 The Council, working with neighbouring authorities, will maintain a local assessment of need for Gypsy 
and Tr
aveller pitches and Travelling Showpeople plots.  Evidence for the Local Plan is contained within 
the Cambridgeshire, King's Lynn & West Norfolk, Peterborough and West Suffolk Gypsy and Traveller 
Accommodation Assessment 2016 (GTAA 2016). The GTAA 2016 identified a need for an additional 9 permanent residential 
Gypsy and Traveller pitches between 2016 and 2036 (of which 5 were needed 
between 2016 and 2021), and no specific need for Travelling Showpeople plots.  It also identified a potential further need for between 0 and 19 additional pitches arising from existing households whom it was not possible to interview as a part of the GTAA process.  It is expected that the GTAA will be reviewed every few years. 
7.35 Since the base date of the GTAA 2016 in February 2016 the remaining identified need for permanent pitches between 2016 
and 2021 has been met through approvals to planning applications. The Council 
therefore does not intend to identify additional land for pitches.  Given the highly uncertain nature of the potential further need, it is not considered justified to allocate land for this either.(24) 
7.36 Where there is no identified need for Gypsy and Traveller pitches, government's 'Planning Policy for 
Traveller Sites' (PPTS) (DCLG August 2015) states that criteria-based policies should be included in Local Plans to provide a 
basis for decisions in case applications nevertheless come forward.  In particular, the 
PPTS includes a definition of Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople which applicants will need to demonstrate that they meet.  Proposals for occupants who do not meet the definitions set out in the PPTS will be assessed against other relevant policies in this Local Plan, subject to the provisions of the Equality Act 2010. 
7.37 For the purposes of monitoring the delivery of pitches, and to limit the landscape harm that pitches and sites may cause
, the Council will take a rounded approach to defining what constitutes a household and 
therefore a pitch. The GTAA 2016 (paragraph 4.1) defines a pitch as being "an area normally occupied by one household, which typically contains enough space for one or two caravans, but can vary in size”. The starting point is therefore that a single pitch includes one static caravan, one touring caravan and one utility block.  However, in circumstances where applications propose a single pitch including more than two caravans and one utility block, consideration will be given to other factors to determine how many pitches the proposal includes.  Factors include: where there is more than one 'breadwinner' living in separate caravans this may point to the existence of more than one household, and therefore more than one pitch; and where adult family relationships are horizontal (including adult brothers and/or sisters with 
24 The Inspector's Report (paragraph 90) acknowledged that the Local Plan is justified in not allocating sites 
for Gypsies and T
ravellers. 
103 • 
• 7 Strengthening Communities 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
their own partner living in separate caravans) as opposed to 'vertical' (including grandparents, parents 
and children), this may also point to the existence of more than one household, and therefore more than one pitch. 
7.38 The PPTS includes specific criteria guiding the location and design of Gypsy and Traveller sites, recognising their particular char
acteristics. These criteria recognise that sites may be located in rural areas, but that 
new traveller site development in open countryside that is away from existing settlements should be very strictly limited. This policy addresses proposals for Gypsy and Traveller sites outside of the built-up area; proposals for such sites within the built-up area will be assessed against other relevant policies in this Local Plan. 
7.39 The local policy criteria identify that proposals for Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpeople's sites should be in a location with good access to local health services and 
primary schools. This approach is 
intended to ensure that that Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpeople households are able to access such services easily, and that new sites are very strictly limited in open countryside that is away from existing settlements.  For the purposes of this policy, the threshold distances have been determined to be within walking or cycling distance (no reliance has been placed upon public transport provision since bus services are liable to relatively frequent change). The threshold distance to a primary school is 1.5 miles (2.4km)
(25) .  At a typical walking speed of 3 miles per hour, a 1.5 mile walk to school would take 30 
minutes.  For the purposes of this policy, the threshold distance to healthcare services the distance is 2 miles (3.2km).  At a typical walking speed of 3 miles per hour, a 2 mile walk to a GP surgery would take 40 minutes. These distances should be used as a guide rather than a fixed limit; account will also be taken of qualitative aspects, and in particular the nature of the route to the nearest primary school, including the presence or lack of pavements and/or cycle paths. 
7.40 In addition to consideration of access to services, the effect on the landscape and on neighbours is of particular impor
tance.  Proposals will be considered together with other nearby gypsy and traveller sites 
to ensure that collectively, such sites do not dominate the nearest settled community. What constitutes the nearest settled community will vary in relation to location and the local pattern of development. This issue will be considered on a case by case basis. 
7.41 Sites that are small in size, to accommodate a single family group, are likely to better meet the criteria although they m
ust be of sufficient size to accommodate large vehicles.  It is anticipated that new Gypsy 
and Traveller sites will be in the form of small family sized sites of up to four pitches although some larger sites that already exist, or new sites of up to eight pitches, may be appropriate depending upon local circumstances. 
7.42 Appropriate boundary treatments should be provided which facilitate integration with the local community rather than 
completely enclose the site forcing a sense of isolation.  Further criteria seek to ensure a safe 
and well functioning living environment for occupants of traveller sites, and to minimise negative impacts on adjoining uses.  Other national or local policies such as those relating to vehicular access, contamination and heritage assets are also applicable. 
Responsible agencies 
Delivery mechanism 
Timescale Through the determination of planning applications 
Throughout the plan period 
Monitoring indicators Number of Gypsy & Traveller pitches delivered 
Number of Travelling Showpeople plots delivered Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered providers, 
travelling community 
25 Distances identified here are as travelled on the ground, as opposed to being a straight line. 
104 
r 
\. Strengthening Communities 7 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Rural Exceptions Housing 
7.43 The purpose of this policy is to facilitate provision of land for housing focused on meeting the needs of 
people with an established connection to the place in which the new homes are b
uilt. 
LP 28 
Rural Exceptions Housing 
A proposal for housing will be supported on a site well-related to a built-up area, as an exception to the 
requirements of relevant policies, where it can be demonstrated that: 
a. at least 60% (net) of the site area is for affordable housing for people with a local connection; 
b. the number, size, type and tenure of the affordable homes is justified by evidence that they would meet 
an identified need arising within the settlement or nearby small settlements (as defined in 'Small 
Settlements' ) through a local needs survey or other local needs evidence; 
c. the remainder of the site area is available as open market housing or plots suitable for custom or 
self-build homes tailored to meet locally generated need; and 
d. the amount of development and location of the proposal is sustainable in terms of: 
i. availability of services and existing infrastructure; 
ii. opportunities for users of the proposed development to travel by sustainable modes; and iii. effect on the character of the immediate locality and the settlement as a whole. 
Mechanisms, including planning conditions/ obligations, will be put in place to ensure that the affordable 
housing is delivered and remains affordable in perpetuity
(26) or for the appropriate period as applicable to 
the form of housing(27) . 
To ensure that market housing and affordable housing elements are delivered concurrently a planning condition will be applied. 
Reasoning 
7.44 It is recognised that communities need new housing to maintain their vitality and help residents find 
accommodation that meets their changing needs whether that is older people seeking to downsize 
but 
remain within the same community to maintain their social networks or younger people seeking affordable housing where they grew up.  Opportunities for development within the built-up areas of settlements may be limited and considering proposals for development on well-related land on the outskirts of a settlement can help maintain a settlement's character, by providing alternatives to cramming development within a tightly-defined built-up area. 
7.45 The Council is keen to facilitate a higher provision of affordable homes, particularly in rural areas, with a view to 
maintaining sustainable communities and meeting their specific housing needs. To achieve this 
the Council will support development on land where planning permission would not normally be granted for housing development and where consequently land values are low relative to policy compliant development sites.  Such sites are referred to as 'rural exception sites', but are not limited to rural parts 
26 Subject to the provisions of section 17 of the Housing Act 1996 and statutory instrument 623 of 1997, or other relevant legislation 
27 Starter Homes will be discounted for the nationally defined period 
105 • 
• 
• 
• 7 Strengthening Communities 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
of the district and could be outside the built-up area of any settlement.  In particular, rural exceptions 
schemes will be encouraged which support provision of affordable housing in settlements where it will not be delivered through allocated housing sites. 
7.46 The delivery of rural exceptions sites can be challenging due to reduced public subsidy for provision of affordable 
housing and low financial returns for landowners.  Facilitating development by allowing for up 
to 40% (net) of the site area to be used for provision of market housing or plots for self or custom build homes is intended to boost the viability of exceptions housing schemes and provide a wider mix of tenures aiding social integration. Where public subsidy is available for a scheme, the market housing element should be reduced to reflect this.  A development proposal which takes advantage of this rural exceptions policy must provide at least 60% (net) of the site for affordable housing; no further viability considerations will be taken into account. 
7.47 Affordable housing provided on a rural exceptions sites is limited to that necessary to meet local needs. The local needs to which this policy relates will be those arising from 
the parish or other nearby parishes 
whose need can successfully be met in the location to which the proposal relates. To be eligible for this housing a potential resident must be able to demonstrate a genuine local connection and that they cannot afford suitable housing in the locality to meet their needs. This includes: 
Existing residents who are in need of alternative accommodation 
People who are employed, or have a firm offer of employment, in the settlement People who have a close family member who lives in the settlement People who were previously resident and can demonstrate an ongoing connection to the settlement 
7.48 Any proposal for a rural exceptions scheme will need to be accompanied by evidence of a local housing 
need.  In addition to reference to the Council's Housing Register, an up-to-date parish needs survey should be completed. The scale and mix of housing proposed on a rural exception site must reflect the identified need. The Council will support innovative provision of affordable housing schemes, including affordable self-build and custom build projects.  Proposals will be subject to an agreement which ensures that the housing will be managed to meet the needs of local people in perpetuity. 
7.49 Promoters will be expected to work with communities to resolve any concerns expressed regarding a specific proposal.  
However, given that any individual scheme is likely to receive both support and objections, 
a balanced judgement will be taken reflecting community views and the merits of the proposal. 
7.50 The overall scale of a rural exceptions scheme will be limited by the level of need for affordable housing in the community it 
is intended to serve.  Consideration will also be given to the wider sustainability of the 
proposed location to ensure access to services and infrastructure appropriate to the needs of the expected residents. The impact of a proposed scheme on its immediate locality and the wider settlement will be considered in the light of other policies in this plan; in particular reference should be made to policy LP 12 'Design Implementation'. 
7.51 This policy is designed to complement the Development Strategy policies LP 7 'Spatial Planning Areas', LP 8 'Key Service Centres' and LP 9 'Small Settlements'. These strictly limit development to sites within 
the existing b
uilt-up area.  However, the expected decline in average household size would result in 
reduced populations within the existing housing stock of any settlement by 2036. This may increase pressure on the available supply forcing prices higher and may have a detrimental impact on the viability of local services where there are fewer residents to support them. This policy is intended to facilitate limited, organic growth of settlements whilst emphasising the response to local needs. 
7.52 The market housing provision within a rural exceptions scheme will be encouraged to contribute to the diversity of 
housing within the settlement.  Public engagement during the preparation of this plan particularly 
highlighted a desire by residents of market homes to move to properties which better meet their needs as they age but retain established social networks within their community. This coincides with forecasting in the Cambridge sub-region SHMA 2013 indicating a substantial increase in the proportion of older 
106 • 
r Strengthening Communities 7 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
residents by 2036. Therefore, a scheme which helps to address this sector of the market will be 
encouraged.  Smaller homes suitable for downsizing will be looked on particularly favourably given the anticipated high level of need for this sort of property. 
7.53 Rural exceptions schemes may be particularly attractive to smaller, local builders and people seeking plots for self 
or custom build housing projects, both in terms of the market and affordable housing elements. 
The Council maintains a Custom and Self-Build Register providing evidence of the amount, nature and location of interest in plots for this type of development.  Again, a scheme which helps to address this sector of the market will be encouraged. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered providers, 
parish councils Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans, neighbourhood plans Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators Number of affordable homes completed through rural exceptions schemes 
Health Impact Assessment 
7.54 The purpose of this policy is to facilitate safe, healthy and inclusive communities. 
LP 29 
Health Impact Assessment 
A proposal for large scale development, defined in the 'Glossary' , will be supported where it can be 
demonstrated that the design of the scheme has been informed by the conclusions of a rapid Health Impact 
Assessment. 
A proposal for large scale major development, defined in the 'Glossary' , will be supported where it can be 
demonstrated that the design of the scheme has been informed by the conclusions of a full Health Impact 
Assessment. 
Reasoning 
7.55 Taken together, the policies in this Plan seek to ensure that new development of all scales and types 
facilitates saf
e, healthy and inclusive communities.  For larger development proposals, Health Impact 
Assessment (HIA) brings together a range of issues addressed in other policies in the Plan to focus on health impacts, acknowledging that a community's health is determined by economic, social, psychological and environmental influences, not just by its health services. 
7.56 HIA assesses the likely positive and negative impacts of a development proposal on the health of different groups in 
the population, and makes recommendations on how positive health impacts could be enhanced 
and negative impacts avoided or mitigated.  In particular, it considers how the proposal will affect vulnerable people and considers both short- and long-term impacts.  HIA should form an integral part of working up a development proposal, and should be undertaken at a sufficiently early stage for it to inform the proposed design and layout. 
107 • 
• • 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 7 Strengthening Communities 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
7.57 An HIA may cover many or all of the topics listed below which can affect the health and wellbeing of 
different groups within a comm
unity: 
Housing quality and design 
Access to healthcare services and other social infrastructure Access to open space and nature Air quality, noise and neighbourhood amenity Accessibility and active travel Crime reduction and community safety Access to healthy food Access to work and training Social cohesion and lifetime neighbourhoods Minimising the use of resources Climate change 
7.58 To be both meaningful and manageable, the scale of the assessment and level of detail required in an 
HIA should be proportionate to the scale of development proposed. To address this: 
For proposals for smaller scale development, policies elsewhere in this Plan are considered sufficient 
to demonstrate that such proposals will facilitate healthy communities; 
Proposals for large scale development as defined in the 'Glossary' will be required to complete a 
rapid HIA; and Proposals 
for large scale major development as defined in the 'Glossary' will be required to complete 
a full HIA. 
7.59 A rapid HIA can be completed using the London Healthy Urban Development Unit Rapid Health Impact 
Assessment Tool, which is in the form of a self-assessment checklist.  Rapid HIAs are not intended to 
assess all possible health 
impacts in great detail.  Indeed, depending on the nature of the development 
proposal, some or all of the topics may not be relevant. 
7.60 Full HIA involves the same thought process as set out in the rapid HIA Tool, but the assessment should be completed in greater depth, 
following national best practice. The HIA Tool can be used to identify 
whether a more detailed assessment is necessary, a process known as screening.  Should this identify potential health impacts, more in-depth consideration of such impacts and potential mitigations will be required.  It may also be necessary to involve stakeholders to identify relevant impacts and mitigations. A full HIA should be proportionate to the size of the development proposal: an HIA accompanying a development for 200 dwellings would not be expected to be in as great a depth as one for 2,000 dwellings. The key feature of any HIA submitted with a planning application should be that it identifies the relevant positive and negative health impacts, demonstrates consideration of how such impacts may be enhanced or mitigated, and identifies what impact this consideration has had on the development proposal.  For the largest development proposals, it may prove effective to complete HIA in an integrated way together with Environmental Impact Assessment. 
7.61 Evidence to inform both rapid and full HIAs can be found in Cambridgeshire Joint Strategic Needs 
Assessments, and in related health and wellbeing data available from Cambridgeshire Insight. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered developers Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
108 • 
• Strengthening Communities 7 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Monitoring indicators 
 Number and % of planning permissions granted for large scale development 
with a supporting rapid Health Impact Assessment 
Number and % of planning permissions granted for large scale major 
development with a supporting full Health Impact Assessment 
109 8 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
8 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 
8.1 Recognising the intrinsic character and beauty of the countryside and protecting and enhancing the historic 
environment are important components of the National Planning P
olicy Framework. 
8.2 Huntingdonshire has numerous nature conservation designations, include several of international or national importance.
  It also benefits from a rich historic environment with many buildings of historic and 
architectural importance, conservation areas and other heritage assets. These contribute significantly to the attractiveness of Huntingdonshire as a place to live, helping the local economy by attractting visitors and businesses and contributing to the quality of life enjoyed by residents. 
8.3 'Biodiversity and Geodiversity' seeks to protect and enhance the natural environment of ecological and geological value with the aim of achieving net gains for biodiversity. Trees, woodland, hedges and hedgerows are 
dealt with specifically in 'Trees, Woodland, Hedges and Hedgerows'.  Open and green 
spaces of all sizes mak
e a valuable contribution to local communities, whether they are publicly accessible 
or not, and as such 'Protection of Open Space' seeks to ensure that spaces that are particularly valued are not lost but are protected and enhanced by sympathetic development. 
8.4 Rural buildings are an intrinsic part of the countryside both in terms of their role in the rural economy for people living and working 
in the countryside and as part of the character of the landscapes of 
Huntingdonshire. The planning system includes a number of provisions that deal with proposals for the change of use of rural buildings. 'Rural Buildings' deals with those circumstances where a planning 
application is required. 
8.5 Much of the character of Huntingdonshire is shaped by its heritage; historic features are an asset for the economy, 
the environment and the local community. The 'Heritage Strategy' identifies the strategy that 
the Council is taking to protecting and enhancing the historic environment. The quality of the historic environment is sensitive to change from development and so 'Heritage Assets and their Settings' sets out the requirements for development proposals. 
8.6 A positive approach to renewable energy is an important part of the UK's energy infrastructure and efforts to achieve 
reductions in contributing factors to climate change. 'Renewable and Low Carbon Energy' sets 
out the Council's approach to proposals for renewable energy development including wind energy. 
8.7 Pollution control regimes are largely governed by legislation outside the planning process.  However, planning has a key 
role to play in preventing development from causing pollution.  Planning also has a 
role in controlling the risk of pollution arising from contamination and possible impacts on human health, property and the wider environment. 'Air Quality' and 'Ground Contamination and Groundwater Pollution' 
set out the Council's approach. 
8.8 Huntingdonshire benefits from an extensive network of waterways and other water bodies.  Both the water's edge 
and the water bodies themselves are attractive locations for certain types of development 
and activity. The Council's approach to development proposals that relate to rivers and lakes is set out in 'Water Related Development'. 
110 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 8 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Biodiversity and Geodiversity 
8.9 The purpose of this policy is to set out how the Council will consider proposals in relation to biodiversity 
and geodiversity. 
LP 30 
Biodiversity and Geodiversity 
A proposal will be required to demonstrate that all potential adverse impacts on biodiversity and geodiversity 
have been in
vestigated. 
A proposal that is likely to have an impact, either direct or indirect, on biodiversity or geodiversity will need to be accompanied by an 
appropriate appraisal, such as a Preliminary Ecological Appraisal, identifying all 
individual and cumulative potential impacts on biodiversity and geodiversity.  Any further research that is identified as necessary by this appraisal will need to have been carried out and submitted with the proposal. Where a proposal has potential to affect an internationally important site
(28) an 'appropriate assessment' in 
accordance with the Habitats Directive will be required and sufficient information to enable such an assessment to be completed must be submitted with the proposal. 
All possible efforts must be taken to avoid adverse impacts.  If it is demonstrated that adverse impacts are 
unavoidab
le they must be minimised as far as possible and then mitigated.  Only where this process of 
avoidance, minimisation and then mitigation is insufficient to fully address adverse impacts will consideration be given to compensation measures.  Following this process a proposal will only be supported subject to a hierarchy where: 
a. a site of international importance, being a Special Area of Conservation (SAC), Special Protection Area 
(SPA) or Ramsar site would be affected there has to be exceptional overriding reasons of human health, public safety or environmental benefit; 
b. a site of national importance, such as a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) or National Nature Reserve (NNR) would be affected there has to be exceptional circumstances where the need for, and the benefits of, the proposal significantly outweigh both the potential impacts on the features of the site that make it of national importance and any broader impacts on the national network of such sites; 
c. a protected species, a priority habitat or species, a site of local or regional importance, the achievement of water body good ecological potential, or the biodiversity value of the proposed development site as part of the wider network would be affected, the need for and the benefits of the proposal must clearly outweigh the assessed impacts. 
A proposal will not be supported if potential impacts would lead to the deterioration of water body ecological status/ potential. 
A proposal will ensure no net loss in biodiversity and provide a net gain where possible, through the planned 
retention, enhancement and creation of habitats and wildlife f
eatures, appropriate to the scale, type and 
location of development.  Large scale development proposals should provide an audit of losses and gains in biodiversity produced according to a recognised methodology.  In seeking to provide net gains for biodiversity reference should be had to the Natural Cambridgeshire publication 'Developing with Nature Toolkit' and the proposal should prioritise measures that: 
d. complement or enhance existing features of biodiversity value within the design and layout of 
development; 
e
. provide new biodiversity features within the development; 
f. help reverse the decline of species; 
28 Natura 2000 sites: Special Areas of Conservation (SACs), Special Protection Areas (SPAs) and Ramsar 
sites 
111 8 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
g. assist in achieving local targets for priority habitats and species including those set out in Habitat Action 
Plans; 
h. improve public access to nature; 
i. ensure the effective management of biodiversity or geological features; 
j. contribute to the provision of multi-functional green infrastructure to enhance ecological networks and the Green Infrastructure Pr
iority Areas 
k. contribute towards the achievement of good ecological status in water bodies (or not compromise achievement of good ecological potential) in accordance with the Anglian River Basin Management Plan (RBMP) and accompan
ying catchment action plans; or 
l. will help species adapt to climate change. 
Reasoning 
8.10 The policy aims to prevent harm to protected habitats and species, and sites of geological importance, 
from direct impacts such as land take, 
and from indirect impacts such as recreational impacts, changes 
to a watercourse or air pollution and the potential combination of such impacts.  It should be recognised that harm to a nature site could be manifested at some distance from a proposed development site, for example where a proposal would lead to changes in water quality or quantity that affects a designated site down-stream. 
8.11 A development proposal should consider its potential impact on biodiversity and on sites of importance for geological 
conservation. Where existing buildings will be affected consideration should be given to 
the potential impact on protected and priority species that may use the building as part of their habitat.  A development proposal should be accompanied by a landscape scheme with high biodiversity value as this can aid the sustainability of the proposal through habitat creation.  It should be noted that knowledge of wildlife sites and their condition is constantly changing and decisions will be based on the most up to date information available. 
8.12 When producing an assessment of habitats and species an established methodology should be used such as that for Preliminar
y Ecological Appraisal (PEAs) available from the Chartered Institute of Ecology and 
Environmental Management. The assessor will be expected to access the ecological data held by the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Environmental Records Centre (CPERC) before undertaking any on-site ecological surve
y work. To ensure the quality of the assessment it should be completed by an 
appropriately qualified specialist.  A useful tool at the initial assessment stage will be the SSSI Impact Risk Zones produced by Natural England. The Impact Risk Zones (IRZs) are a GIS tool to make a rapid initial assessment of the potential risks posed by development proposals to: Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs), Special Areas of Conservation (SACs), Special Protection Areas (SPAs) and Ramsar sites.  Zones are defined around each site which reflect the particular sensitivities of the features for which it is designated and indicate the types of development proposal which could potentially have adverse impacts.  Further information on issues to be considered is available from the Association of Local 
Government Ecologists.  If any further research, such as species specific survey work, is identified as necessary it will need to be carried out b
y a suitably qualified person at an appropriate time of year. 
8.13 The Council wishes to ensure that there is a net gain in biodiversity, where possible.  Development should ensure no net loss in biodiversity and 
provide a net gain where possible, through the planned retention, 
enhancement and creation of habitats and wildlife features.  Large scale developments should provide an audit of biodiversity losses and gains following a recognised methodology (for example the Defra Biodiversity Metric) to inform their proposals.  Reference should be had to the Natural Cambridgeshire
(29)  publication 'Developing with Nature Toolkit', which seeks to guide developers through 
the decisions they make with a view to being able to demonstrate enhancement of biodiversity above and beyond mitigation and compensation, so that a net gain is achieved. 
29 Natural Cambridgeshire is the Local Nature Partnership for Cambridgeshire and Peterbough 
112 • 
• 
• 
• Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 8 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
8.14 When determining any mitigation or enhancement the 'Biodiversity Checklist: Developers' and the 
'Biodiversity Chec
klist: Householder' produced by the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Biodiversity 
Partnership, or any relevant successor documents, will need to be followed.  Any works affecting a protected species and/ or habitats should be undertaken 
at an appropriate time of year and under the supervision 
of a suitably trained person in accordance with appropriate guidance. 
8.15 Mitigation may involve providing or contributing towards the following measures: 
access and visitor management measures within the designated site/s; 
improvement of existing green space and recreational routes; provision of suitable alternative natural green space and recreational routes; monitoring the impacts of new development on designated sites to inform the necessary mitigation 
requirements and future refinement of any mitigation measures. 
8.16 The Middle Level Commissioners (MLC) have responsibility for flood defence and water level management 
along with some conservation duties in much of the northeast of the district. The detailed guidance found in the Middle Level IDB Biodiversity Manual and the Drainage Channel Biodiversity Manual should be 
referred to 
when assessing the impacts and determining mitigation measures for proposals in the MLC 
area. 
8.17 Huntingdonshire includes internationally important nature sites such as Special Areas of Conservation (SACs), Special 
Protection Areas (SPAs), and Ramsar sites and nationally important sites such as Sites 
of Special Scientific Importance (SSSIs) and National Nature Reserves (NNRs), which benefit from statutory protection set out in European or national legislation. The district also includes locally designated sites such as county wildlife sites (CWSs) and local geological sites (LGSs), which are not statutorily defined but provide important habitats to sustain a wealth of biodiversity. 
8.18 Proposals that could potentially affect a internationally important site (Natura 2000 sites), whether that is a Special Areas of Conservation, 
a Special Protection Area or a Ramsar site, will need to subject to an 
appropriate assessment in accordance with the Conservation (of Habitats and Species) Regulations 2010 (as amended) and the Habitats Directive (92/43/EEC) and sufficent information for this to be undertaken will need to be submitted with the proposal.  Please refer to national planning guidance on Biodiversity and Ecosystems. 
8.19 The Wildlife Trust for Bedfordshire, Cambridgeshire and Northamptonshire, on behalf of the Cambridgeshire & Peterborough Biodiv
ersity Partnership, coordinates the implementation of Biodiversity Action Plans. 
Cambridgeshire’s Habitat Action Plans provides specifc information on desirable habitat design in the 
county. 
 In addition to the list of national priority habitats there are a range of local habitat action plans. 
Local species action plans have now been replaced by a list of priority species found in Cambridgeshire. The habitat action plans outline actions to help preserve and enhance important habitats while the list of priority species in Cambridgeshire identify those considered to be the most threatened and worthy of conservation action. Where appropriate, priority should be given to achieving the targets set out in the habitat action plans and measures to conserve and increase the populations of priority species. The Cambridgeshire & Peterborough Biodiversity Partnership has details of both local habitat action plans and the local list of priority species. 
Responsible agencies 
Delivery mechanism Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, Natural Cambridgeshire Local Nature Partnership, 
The Wildlife Trust for Bedfordshire, Cambridgeshire and Northamptonshire, 
Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Biodiversity Partnership, Natural England, landowners, developers, registered providers 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans, design codes, neighbourhood plans, ecological appraisals 
113 • 
• 
• 
• 
• 8 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators 
 Losses to biodiversity habitat 
Additions to biodiversity habitat 
Total change in biodiversity habitat 
Total number and % of Local Sites where positive conservation management 
is being or has been implemented during the last five years (Single Data List Indicator Ref 160) 
% of SSSIs in favourable, unfavourable recovering, unfavourable no change, unfavourable declining, destroyed/part destroyed condition 
Trees, Woodland, Hedges and Hedgerows 
8.20 The purpose of this policy is to set out the Council’s approach to protecting existing trees, woodlands, 
hedges and hedgerows par
ticularly those of visual, historic or nature conservation value, from the impacts 
of development and to halt the loss of trees in Huntingdonshire. 
LP 31 
Trees, Woodland, Hedges and Hedgerows 
A proposal will be required to demonstrate that the potential for adverse impacts on trees, woodland, hedges 
and hedgerows has been investigated. Where investigations show that such adverse impacts are possible a statement will be required that: 
a. assesses all trees, woodland, hedges and hedgerows that would be affected by the proposal, describing 
and assessing their value; 
b. sets out how the details of the proposal have been decided upon in terms of their impact on the value 
of trees, woodland, hedges and hedgerows and how adverse impacts will be avoided as far as possible, or if unavoidable how they will be minimised as far as possible. 
A proposal will only be supported where it seeks to conserve and enhance any existing tree, woodland, hedge or hedgerow of value that would be affected by the proposed development.  In such cases the proposal will be expected to make reference to and follow the guidance contained in the Council's 
A Tree Strategy 
for Huntingdonshire (2015)  or successor documents. 
Loss, threat or damage to any tree, woodland, hedge or hedgerow of visual, heritage or nature conservation 
value will only be acceptable where: 
c. it is addressed firstly by seeking to avoid the impact, then to minimise the impact and finally where 
appropriate to include mitigation measures; or 
d. there are sound arboricultural reasons to support the proposal. Where impacts remain the need for, and benefits of, the development in that location must clearly outweigh 
the loss, threat or damage. 
Where loss, threat or damage cannot be fully addressed through minimisation and/ or mitigation measures 
the proposal may be supported if alternative measures such as reinstatement of features, additional landscaping, habitat creation or tree planting will compensate for the harm and can be implemented and established before development starts. 
114 l ______ J 
• Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 8 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
A proposal for major scale development will be required to include additional new trees to form part of 
landscaping for the proposal, the form of which will be determined by negotiation. 
Reasoning 
8.21 Trees, woodlands, hedges and hedgerows provide important habitats for a range of species, provide 
shelter, help 
reduce noise and atmospheric pollution and also store carbon dioxide, helping to mitigate 
against climate change.  A hedge is generally found within a settlement and often has an amenity or ornamental role; a hedgerow is more commonly found in a rural setting although some old hedgerows remain within settlements and often provide field boundaries and may comprise a range of native species. They add to the character and quality of the local environment, can have historic value (e.g. ancient woodlands) and can offer recreation opportunities supporting health and wellbeing. Trees along a river bank also help to protect the river edge and shade the water reducing the potential for water to warm and thereby hold less oxygen, which is detrimental to biodiversity. 
8.22 To ensure that these benefits are retained, development proposals will be expected to avoid harm to trees, woodlands, 
hedges and hedgerows wherever possible, and where appropriate, incorporate them within 
a landscape scheme. This can assist in integrating the scheme into the local environment by providing some mature, established landscape elements. When this cannot be achieved, or it is known that trees are being lost to disease, mitigation or replacement compensatory measures will be required to ensure no loss to the overall value to the environment. These should be secured by condition or through a S106 Agreement. 
8.23 Some specific trees or groups of trees are of particular value such that their removal would have a significant impact upon the local environment and 
its enjoyment by the public. Where they are potentially under 
threat, the Council will make Tree Preservation Orders (TPO) to protect them. Where trees are covered by TPOs, the policy is intended to safeguard them from damage or removal unless there are overriding reasons for the development. 
8.24 Some parts of urban and rural Huntingdonshire have very few trees.  In these areas it is particularly important to 
retain existing trees and plant new ones. The requirements of this policy relating to additional 
new trees apply to new-build residential development and to conversions to residential use. 
8.25 The Council's approach to tree protection, care, planting and risk management is set out in the Council's A Tree Strategy for Huntingdonshire (2015). This also provides operational standards for the care and management of trees. 
 It contains a 5 year action plan which shapes the Council's tree related management 
and projects. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Responsible agencies 
Delivery mechanism 
Timescale Huntingdonshire District Council, Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Biodiversity 
Partnership, Natural England, landowners, developers, registered providers 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans, design 
codes, neighbourhood plans, ecological appraisals, S106 agreements, TPOs 
Throughout the plan period 
Monitoring indicators 
 Number of applications refused on the basis of impact on trees, woodland, 
hedges and hedgerows 
115 8 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Protection of Open Space 
8.26 The purpose of this policy is to protect against the loss of open space, outdoor recreation facilities, 
allotments and areas of garden land that provide amenity value
. 
LP 32 
Protection of Open Space 
A proposal that would lead to the whole or partial loss of an area of open space of public value will only be 
supported where there would be no significant adverse impact on the character of the surrounding area and: 
a. the loss is minimised where possible and compensatory measures are put in place that provide a net 
benefit to the community that is served by the space, which will be judged in terms of availability, 
accessibility, quality and quantity; or 
b. where the loss involves outdoor sport or recreational space: 
i. the proposal is for, or includes, development of the space for an alternative outdoor sport or 
recreational use of an equivalent or better quality and of equivalent or greater quantity, in a suitable location and subject to equivalent or better management arrangements, prior to the commencement of development; or 
ii. the loss is justified by an assessment that demonstrates that the space is clearly surplus to the 
requirements of the current local population and the population of planned development that would be served by the space. 
In order to ensure that compensatory measures provide net benefits to the community the proposal will be expected to include enhancement of any remaining open space in cases of partial loss, the enhancement of other existing spaces or new provision that would serve the same community as that being lost.  New provision for the loss of sports or recreational open space should be in a form that best meets an identified existing need, as agreed with the Council. 
Local Green Space A Local Green Space may be designated in a Neighbourhood Development Plan where it accords with the 
criteria in the NPPF (see 
paragraphs 99-101 ). 
A proposal for development on a designated Local Green Space will only be supported in very special 
circumstances, in line with the NPPF. 
Reasoning 
8.27 Open space takes many forms including parks, village greens, play areas, sports pitches, allotments, 
semi-natural areas 
and substantial private gardens.  Many provide important recreational and sporting 
facilities or are important for biodiversity.  Others are part of heritage assets or form part of the setting of heritage assets. Whatever their size, function and accessibility they all contribute to the character of place and quality of life for the local community.  It is important to prevent the loss of open space where this would harm the character of a settlement, the visual quality of the locality or the quality of life of residents and visitors. 
116 • 
• Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 8 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
8.28 The policy seeks to protect areas of open space of public value from development that would lead to their 
partial or 
complete loss.  A proposal will only be supported where the open space is to be replaced with 
an alternative for which there is a proven need or where compensatory measures that will deliver net gains for the community can be delivered. The loss of outdoor sport or recreation facilities may also be accepted where up to date assessment shows that the facility is surplus to requirements. The Huntingdonshire 
Sports and Leisure Facilities Strategy 2016-2021 identifies a number of outdoor sports facilities which need to be maintained due to identified strategic need. 
Variations in under- and over-provision of outdoor 
sports facilities exist across the district, as stated in the strategy and will be taken into account when proposals involving losses are considered.  Additional information and guidance is available in the Huntingdonshire Green Space and Play Strategy 2019/20 (forthcoming).  From time to time as necessary these documents will be be updated and/ or replaced. The latest available documents should be used. Sport England's Assessing needs and opportunities guidance, produced in July 2014 provides national guidance. When 
considering whether open space is surplus the needs of the existing population must 
be assessed. The population that will be resident in residential development allocated in this plan that would be served by the open space should also be taken into account. 
8.29 Consideration of whether open space is surplus to requirements can only be applied to values that can be quantified. This means 
that open space that has a public value because of qualitative reasons cannot 
be considered to be surplus to requirements.  Even where open space has a public value in quantitative terms there will be some element of qualitative value and so its loss should be carefully considered.  Open spaces can also make a valuable contribution to preventing flooding and mitigating its impact elsewhere by storing both surface and river waters in times of flood. 
8.30 In addition to the protection offered to open space the policy also identifies the national provisions for Local Green Spaces that can be designated in neighbourhood plans. The 
process for preparing a 
neighbourhood plan is set out in the Localism Act 2011 and subsequent regulations. The Council has extensive advice available for parish and town councils considering producing neighbourhood plans. Criteria for designation of Local Green Spaces are set out in the NPPF in paragraph 100. The National 
Planning Practice Guidance 
includes a section that deals with Local Green Space designation.  Development 
proposals on designated Local Green Space will be considered carefully given the 
status of the designation, 
which conveys similar protection to Green Belt.  A key consideration will be that the qualities that enabled designation as Local Green Space should be maintained. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, Sport England, landowners, developers, registered 
providers Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans, design codes, neighbourhood plans, CIL, S106 agreements Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators 
 Open space managed to Green Flag award standard 
Number of planning applications permitted involving the loss of open space 
which is not to be replaced off-site, or a financial contribution made 
Rural Buildings 
8.31 The purpose of this policy is to set out the Council's approach to proposals for the reuse or replacement 
of buildings in the countryside that f
all outside of the 'Prior Approval/ Notification' process. 
117 r 
\. 8 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
LP 33 
Rural Buildings 
A proposal for the conversion of a building in the countryside that would not be dealt with through 'Prior 
Approval/ Notification' will be supported where it can be demonstrated that: 
a. the building is: 
i. redundant or disused; 
ii. of permanent and substantial construction; iii. not in such a state of dereliction or disrepair that significant reconstruction would be required; and 
iv. structurally capable of being converted for the proposed use; and 
b. the proposal: 
i. would lead to an enhancement of the immediate setting; and ii. any extension or alteration would not adversely affect the form, scale, massing or proportion of 
the building. 
A proposal for the replacement of a building in the countryside will be supported where criteria a, i to iii above 
are fulfilled and the proposal would lead to a clear and substantial enhancement of the immediate setting. A modest increase in floorspace will be supported. 
The position of the replacement buildings within the site should be considered comprehensively so that it is 
located where it would have the least possible adverse impact on the immediate surroundings, the wider landscape and the amenity of the users of existing buildings nearby. 
Reasoning 
8.32 As introduced in 'What does the Local Plan do?', permitted development rights for changes of use of 
agricultur
al buildings to homes (use class 'C3') and 'flexible use', within certain limitations and with certain 
exceptions(30), are dealt with through a process know as 'Prior Approval' or 'Prior Notification'. The 
requirements of this policy will apply to proposals that are outside the limitations of that process, with 
development possible through ’Prior Approval’ or ’Prior Notification’ being a material consideration in the decision making process. 
8.33 A building is considered to be redundant or disused only where it has not been made vacant for the sole purpose of complying with the remaining criter
ia set out in this policy. 
8.34 Economically capable means that no one wants to use the building at a reasonable rent or that the investment in alter
ations or improvements to enable such a use would only be repaid in the long-term. 
8.35 Rural buildings that meet the definition of previously developed land can be dealt with through the 'Brownfield Register/ Permission 
In Principle' process but will be subject to applicable planning policy.  Subsequent 
'Technical Details' applications will be subject to applicable planning policies relevant to the nature of the proposed development. 
30 Exceptions include where the building is listed, the site is or contains a scheduled monument, is 
 located on 
Article 1(5) land (National Parks, areas of outstanding natural beauty and conservation areas etc.), or in a site of special scientific interest, a safety hazard area or a military explosives storage area. 
118 • 
r Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 8 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Timescale Throughout the plan period Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered providers Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs Delivery mechanism 
Monitoring indicators Number and % of planning applications refused on grounds of impact on the 
countryside 
Heritage Strategy 
The Council will give great weight to the conservation of the historic environment in Huntingdonshire. 
The Council will seek to protect non-designated assets by establishing local lists. 
The Council will work to ensure that the effective conservation and enhancement of conservation areas is 
enabled through a progr
amme of review and updating of conservation area character statements. 
The Council will work proactively with property owners and other stakeholders to ensure positive management of heritage assets
. This management will recognise the significance of the historic environment and its 
contribution to local character and identity whilst accommodating the changes necessary to secure viable and sustainable uses. Where possible opportunities will be taken to enable public enjoyment and interpretation of heritage assets. 
Key assets that contribute to the distinct identity of Huntingdonshire that are a priority for conservation and 
enhancement include: 
a. listed buildings with a wider visual and economic benefit; 
b. registered parks and gardens; 
c. listed churches; 
d. historic built form including distinctive street patterns and traditional building materials, whether it is 
part of designated conservation areas or not; 
e. historic landscape features, scheduled monuments, archaeological remains and the many ancient and semi-natural woodlands; 
f. the heritage associated with significant historic figures with a local connection. 
8.36 The NPPF recognises that heritage assets are an irreplaceable resource which should be conserved in 
an appropriate manner reflecting their significance. The term heritage assets embraces a wide range of historic features including buildings, parks and gardens, monuments, sites and landscapes. The features can be of historic, archaeological, architectural or cultural interest that have a degree of ‘significance’, whether designated or not. The significance of a heritage asset is the value of the asset to this and future generations because of its heritage interest. That interest may be archaeological, architectural, artistic or historic. Significance derives not only from a heritage asset’s physical presence, but also from its setting.  Designated heritage assets within Huntingdonshire include listed buildings, conservation areas, historic parks and gardens and scheduled ancient monuments.  Undesignated assets also form a material consideration in determining planning applications as identified in the NPPF. 
119 • 8 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
8.37 The Council is committed to the positive conservation of heritage assets in the district as they make an 
important contr
ibution to the identity, distinctiveness and character of Huntingdonshire as well as to the 
quality of life. The historic environment contributes to strategic objectives for tourism, leisure and recreation, economic development, the quality of design, development of skills and distinctive residential neighbourhoods. Conservation and enhancement of the historic environment and heritage assets can provide opportunities to help achieve wider objectives of this plan relating to economic development and leisure.  Listed buildings with a wider visual and economic benefit such as Buckden Towers, Ramsey Abbey, Hinchingbrooke House, Kimbolton Castle, Elton Hall, Houghton Mill and St Ives Town Bridge are considered to make this type of contribution as do the registered parks and gardens at Elton Hall, Hilton Maze, Abbots Ripton Hall, Hamerton and Leighton Bromswold. The district has many listed churches that make a special contribution to the character of our towns and villages along with the historic built form including distinctive street patterns and traditional building materials. The wider landscape owes much to the agricultural heritage of this part of the east of England together with other historic landscape features that shaped the landscape over generations.  Huntingdonshire has few significant areas of woodland but the ancient and semi-natural woodlands such as Brampton Wood, Aversley Wood, Monks Wood, Warboys Wood and Perry Wood are particularly valued.  Several notable historic figures had local connections, heritage assets associated with Samuel Pepys, Lucy Boston, Lancelot 'Capability' Brown and Oliver Cromwell are considered to make a significant contribution that should be recognised. 
8.38 Huntingdonshire contains many sites of historic importance which are protected under specialist legislation including the Ancient Monuments and 
Archaeological Areas Act 1979 and the Planning (Listed Buildings 
and Conservation Areas) Act 1990.  Some heritage assets make a particularly strong contribution to local identity, either individually or collectively.  Any development proposal which may have an impact on these should clearly demonstrate what that impact is likely to be, how it will be addressed and how any adverse impact will be mitigated.  Historic England and Cambridgeshire County Council (CCC) have responsibility for the management of the historic environment through their Sites and Monuments Record and the Cambridgeshire Historic Environment Record. These provide extensive information on Huntingdonshire's historic environment and can assist in appreciating the potential impact of a development proposal on a heritage asset or its setting. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered 
providers, Historic England, Cambridgeshire County Council Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs, master plans, neighbourhood plans Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators Number of conservation character assessments reviewed within the 
last five years 
Heritage Assets and their Settings 
8.39 The purpose of this policy is to ensure that development proposals protect and conserve the district’s 
heritage assets and where possible enhance them and their settings
. 
120 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 8 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
LP 34 
Heritage Assets and their Settings 
Great weight and importance is given to the conservation of heritage assets (see 'Glossary' ) and their settings. 
The statutory presumption of the avoidance of harm can only be outweighed if there are public benefits that 
are powerful enough to do so. 
A proposal will be required to demonstrate the potential for adverse impacts on the historic environment. 
Where investigations show that impacts on heritage assets or their settings, whether designated or not, are possible a heritage statement will be required, in a manner proportionate to the asset’s significance, that: 
a. assesses all heritage assets and their settings that would be affected by the proposal, describing and 
assessing the significance of each asset and its setting to deter mine its architectural, historical or 
archaeological interest; 
b. sets out how the details of the proposal have been decided upon such that all adverse impacts are 
avoided as far as possible, or if unavoidable how they will be minimised as far as possible; 
c. details how, following avoidance and minimisation, the proposal would impact on the significance and 
special character of each asset; 
d. provides clear justification for the proposal, especially if it would harm the significance of an asset or 
its setting, so that the harm can be weighed against public benefits; and 
e. identifies ways in which the proposal could make a positive contribution to, or better reveal the 
significance of, affected heritage assets and their settings. 
Conversion, Alteration or Other Works to a Heritage Asset Additionally, where a proposal is for conversion, alteration, other works to a heritage asset or within its setting 
it must be demonstrated that the proposal: 
f. protects the significance of designated heritage assets and their settings by protecting and enhancing 
architectural and historic character, historical associations, landscape and townscape features and through consideration of scale, design, materials, siting, layout, mass, use, and views both from and towards the asset; 
g. does not harm or detract from the significance of the heritage asset, its setting and any special features that contribute to its special architectural or historic interest and the proposal conserves and enhances its special character and qualities; 
h. respects the historic form, fabric and special interest that contributes to the significance of the affected heritage asset; 
i. will conserve or enhance the quality, distinctiveness and character of the affected heritage asset; and 
j. contributes to securing the long-term maintenance and management of the heritage asset. 
The Council will consider the significance of a designated heritage asset and where there is less than 
substantial harm, this will be weighed against the public benefits of the proposal. Where there is deemed to be substantial harm, then the proposal would need to achieve substantial public benefits to outweigh that harm. 
Where a non-designated heritage asset would be affected a balanced judgement will be reached having 
regard to the scale of any harm and the significance of the heritage asset. 
Conservation Areas A proposal within, affecting the setting of, or affecting views into or out of, a conservation area should preserve, 
and wherever possible enhance, features that contribute positively to the area’s character, appearance and setting as set out in character statements or other applicable documents.  A proposal should: 
121 8 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
k. minimise negative impact on the townscape, roofscape, skyline and landscape through retention of 
buildings/ groups of buildings, existing street patterns, historic building lines and land form; 
l. retain and reinforce local distinctiveness with reference to height, scale, massing, form, materials and 
plot widths of the existing built environment; as well as retaining architectural details that contribute to 
the character and appearance of the conservation area; and 
m. where relevant and practical, remove features that are incompatible with or detract significantly from 
the conservation area. 
Archaeology 
If initial site assessment does not provide sufficient information to enable consideration of the impact of the 
proposal on the significance of archaeological remains, developers will be required to undertake fieldwork evaluation of a site in advance of determination of the application. 
Where possible and appropriate the preservation of archaeological remains in-situ should be ensured.Where 
this is either not possible or not desirable, as agreed with the Council, provision must be made for comprehensive recording, analysis of the results and publication. There will also be a requirement for preservation and where practical enhancement. 
Reasoning 
8.40 As heritage assets are irreplaceable, any harm to or loss should require clear and convincing justification. 
Substantial harm to 
or loss of a Grade II listed building, park or garden should be exceptional.  Substantial 
harm to or loss of designated heritage assets of the highest significance, such as scheduled monuments, grade I and II* listed buildings and grade I and II* registered parks and gardens should be wholly exceptional. 
8.41 The value or 'significance' of heritage assets may be derived from the archaeological, architectural, artistic or historic interest 
of the asset or its setting.  It is this significance that justifies protection in planning 
decisions. The key to the sympathetic management of heritage assets is having a clear understanding of the assets themselves and the context within which they exist.  Detailed information on both designated and non-designated heritage assets within Huntingdonshire can be found in the Cambridgeshire Historic 
Environment Record or the Heritage Gateway. These can also be used to help predict the likelihood of 
unidentified heritage assets 
which exist in the vicinity of a proposed development.  Other appropriate 
sources include Conservation Area character statements, Neighbourhood Plans, other parish or community plans and the Huntingdonshire Landscape and Townscape Assessment SPD (or successor documents). 
8.42 All proposals will need to investigate whether heritage assets will be affected. Where investigations show that impacts on heritage assets 
or their settings, whether designated or not, are possible a more detailed 
heritage statement will be required. The statement needs to explain the value of each asset, reflecting its character, appearance, historic value, value to the local community and its setting.  Evaluation requirements will vary depending on the nature of the asset likely to be affected.  Guidance on the scale and nature of information required may be obtained from the Council's Conservation Team or, in some instances, from Historic England or Cambridgeshire County Council. The statement should indicate how the proposal will affect any of these qualities, any public benefits that it will give rise to and how it will assist in conservation of the asset. When considering the acceptability of potential adverse impacts the level of harm will be weighed against the public benefits of the proposal.  Any accompanying heritage statement should justify the proposal in the context of NPPF paragraphs 189-202. 
8.43 The significance of heritage assets should be conserved for the long-term wherever possible.  Carefully managed change can help achieve 
this goal, delivering viable uses consistent with conservation objectives. 
Where a change from the original use is proposed it should be demonstrated that the use is the best viable use for the asset, causing the least harm to its significance. 
122 • Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 8 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
8.44 A development proposal that relates directly to a heritage asset or affects the setting of a heritage asset 
should be of high quality design which enhances the special character of 
the heritage asset and pays 
special attention to the surrounding area’s established height, scale, massing, building lines, detailing and materials.  New development will not be encouraged to copy existing buildings but rather must be informed by and well integrated with the established character of the area. There is no embargo on development in conservation areas; carefully considered, high quality designs that provide a successful contrast with their surroundings can preserve and enhance character, as well as schemes that employ authentic historical forms and features. 
8.45 Archaeological remains provide links to the past and can provide useful information about local heritage. Appropriate steps 
must be undertaken to identify and protect them as they are easily damaged or destroyed 
when development takes place.  Huntingdonshire’s archaeological heritage comprises of both above and below ground remains, previously identified through individual finds, evidence of previous settlements and standing structures.  Due to its nature, much of the district’s archaeological heritage is likely to have been undiscovered and so is very sensitive.  If a site is identified as having potential archaeological significance, applicants will be required to undertake a desk based archaeological assessment and, if necessary, a field evaluation, which may include a range of techniques for both intrusive and non-intrusive evaluation, as appropriate to the site.  It is the responsibility of the developer to fund any investigations, using appropriately qualified and experienced personnel. To protect the integrity of archaeological remains which are discovered, preservation should take place in situ wherever possible. Where this is either not possible or inappropriate an agreed programme of excavation, recording, publication and archiving should be undertaken prior to the commencement of any development. 
8.46 A major risk to the district's heritage assets, particularly the many listed buildings, is that they fall into disuse, o
ver time become derelict and demolition is then sought. The Council is keen to avoid this situation 
arising and so will generally be supportive of a proposal that can bring a vacant listed building back into use where the proposed use is viable, sustainable and appropriate to the particular location.  A detailed assessment will be required to justify any proposed development which would result in substantial harm to or total loss of significance of a designated heritage asset. Where there is evidence of deliberate or conscious damage to, or neglect of, a heritage asset the Council may take action to prevent further decay. This may involve prosecution, serving an Urgent Works or Repairs Notice or adding the building to the Buildings at Risk Register. The Council also maintains a Buildings at Risk Register to highlight the threat 
to these important buildings
. 
8.47 When, in exceptional circumstances, a known heritage asset cannot be retained, the development will be required to conduct a full recording surve
y (including photographs) and make the information publicly 
available. When a non-designated heritage asset of archaeological interest cannot be retained, a programme of archaeological investigation will be required, including post-excavation analysis, publication and preparation of archive material; this information should be made publicly available. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered providers Responsible agencies 
Delivery mechanism Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators 
 Number and % of planning applications refused on grounds of impact on 
heritage assets 
123 8 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Renewable and Low Carbon Energy 
8.48 The purpose of this policy is to set out the Council’s approach to development proposals for renewable 
and low carbon 
energy generation as part of Huntingdonshire's contribution to this important part of the 
UK's energy infrastructure and efforts to achieve reductions in contributing factors to climate change. 
LP 35 
Renewable and Low Carbon Energy 
A proposal for a renewable or low carbon energy generating scheme, other than wind energy, will be supported 
where it is demonstrated that all potential adverse impacts including cumulative impacts are or can be made acceptable. 
A proposal for wind energy development will only be supported where: a. it lies within the area identified as suitable for wind energy development, being the whole of the district 
with the exception of the Great Fen and its Landscape and Visual Setting, or within an area defined in an adopted neighbourhood plan; and 
b. following consultation, as set out in the Wind 
Turbine De velopment guidance note , the Council is 
satisfied that all potential adverse planning impacts, including cumulative impacts and those identified 
by affected local communities, have been fully addressed. 
When identifying and considering the acceptability of potential adverse planning impacts their significance and level of harm will be weighed against the public benefits of the proposal. 
When identifying and considering impacts on heritage assets and/ or their settings special regard will be had 
to the desirability of protecting and enhancing the significance of such assets. 
When identifying and considering landscape and visual impacts regard will be had to the 
Wind Energy in 
Development in Huntingdonshire SPD (2014)  and the Huntingdonshire Landscape and Townscape 
Assessment SPD (2007)  or successor documents. 
Having identified potential adverse impacts the proposal must seek to address them all firstly by seeking to 
avoid the impact, then to minimise the impact. The acceptability of impacts on the significance of heritage assets will be considered at this point. For all other impacts alternative enhancement and/ or compensatory measures should be assessed and included in order to make the impact acceptable.  All reasonable efforts to avoid, minimise and, where appropriate, compensate will be essential for significant adverse impacts to be considered fully addressed.  Sufficient evidence will need to have been provided to demonstrate that adverse impacts on designated nature conservation sites can be adequately mitigated. Where relevant this will include sufficient information to inform a Habitats Regulations Assessment. 
A proposal for an extension of time to the permitted period for time limited planning permissions for a renewable 
or low carbon energy generation installation will be required to demonstrate that the measures to address adverse planning impacts remain effective and adhere to prevailing standards. 
Provision will be made for the removal of apparatus and reinstatement of the site to an acceptable condition, 
should the scheme become redundant or at the end of the permitted period for time limited planning permissions. 
124 • 
• 
• 
• 
• Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 8 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Reasoning 
8.49 Together with energy conservation measures, renewable energy generation is central to efforts to reduce 
reliance on fossil fuels 
and achieve international agreements and the requirements set out in UK legislation 
on reductions in carbon dioxide emissions in order to tackle climate change.  National planning policy encourages renewable energy schemes unless the environmental impacts would outweigh the wider social, economic and environmental advantages that stem from exploiting the energy generation potential. 
8.50 Cambridgeshire Renewables Infrastructure Framework (CRIF) has demonstrated significant potential for renewab
le energy generation in Huntingdonshire, especially from biomass (including waste), wind and 
solar sources. This policy is intended to encourage appropriate schemes whilst ensuring that the risk of adverse impacts are properly addressed. 
8.51 The National Planning Practice Guidance (NPPG) has guidance about what issues should be considered 
and how to 
determine whether or not they have been addressed.  Applicants should ensure that they 
address all of the relevant Planning considerations for particular technologies identified in the NPPG. 
Reference to 
the National Policy Statements for energy infrastructure, particularly EN1 and EN3, would 
also be of benefit when identifying planning impacts. 
8.52 Potential adv
erse impacts to be identified will include, but will not be limited to: 
any on the surrounding environment 
amenity, and in particular impacts from noise, light or odour heritage assets and/ or their settings biodiversity landscape 
8.53 The potential for cumulative impacts will need to be considered and addressed. 
8.54 The Council's Wind Energy Development in Huntingdonshire SPD (2014) and the Huntingdonshire 
Landscape and Townscape Assessment SPD (2007) or successor documents should be used to inform 
assessment of potential impacts on the surrounding landscape of wind energy proposals and for other 
rene
wable or low carbon energy proposals respectively.  Natural England has produced Information Notes 
providing detailed guidance relating to bats and onshore wind turbines (TIN051) and maximising the benefits of solar farms 
(TIN101) which will need to be taken into account in demonstrating how adverse 
impacts on the natural environment, particularly 'European' sites(31) and protected species, can be avoided 
or minimised. 
8.55 Having identified potential adverse impacts the proposal should seek to address them all firstly by seeking to avoid 
the impact, then to minimise the impact. The acceptability of impacts on heritage assets will be 
considered at this point, for all other impacts alternative enhancement and/ or compensatory measures should be assessed and included as necessary.  All reasonable efforts to avoid, minimise and, where appropriate, compensate will be essential for significant adverse impacts to be considered fully addressed. Sufficient evidence will need to have been provided to demonstrate that adverse impacts on designated sites can be adequately mitigated. Where relevant this will include sufficient information to inform a Habitats Regulations Assessment. 
8.56 On 18 June 2015, the Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government issued a Written Ministerial 
Statement (WMS) concerning the approach local planning authorities should take with proposals for wind energy development.
  In responding to the WMS the Council has decided that an area where wind energy 
development is potentially suitable is defined for the whole of Huntingdonshire, with the exception of the Great Fen and its landscape and visual setting(32) . This area has been defined based on available evidence 
31 Special Areas of Conservation (SACs), Special Protection Areas (SPAs) and Ramsar sites 32 Identifying an area such as this that covers the majority of the district on the Policies Map is likely to cause 
legibility issues when viewed in combination with other designations and allocations. 
  For this reason only 
the Great Fen and its Landscape and Visual Setting are shown on the Policies Map 
125 • 
• 8 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
that indicates that most of the district is, in principle, suitable for wind turbine development.  However, this 
'in principle' suitability does not take account of the full range of planning impacts that could come about as such impacts are dependant on the details of individual proposals and can therefore only be addressed once those details are known at the application stage. 
8.57 Whether a proposal has fully addressed all potential planning impacts and therefore has the backing of the affected local 
community is a planning judgement for the Council.  In drawing up proposals effective 
public consultation should be undertaken to ensure that planning issues that are a concern for local communities, whether they would be affected or not, are identified and addressed in the application. What constitutes effective public consultation has been set out in the revised Wind Turbine Development: A 
Guidance Note for Applicants and Agents.  All planning applications are subject to public consultation during the 
Council's decision process during which the public can raise concerns and this may lead to 
new issues being identified. 
8.58 Proposals for solar photo-voltaic schemes, often referred to as 'solar farms' should apply national guidance contained in the NPPG and seek to follow industry best practice guidance such as that available from the 
Solar Trade Association and from the Building Research Establishment (BRE).  Additional information 
about how the 
government sees solar energy being deployed is available in the UK Solar PV Strategy. 
Developers and landowners considering such proposals should be aware of the high proportion of high quality agricultural land (grades 1 and 2) in the district, with reference to the requirements of policy LP 10 'The Countryside'.  BRE have also published guidance for solar energy developments on the biodiversity 
benefits that can be realised. 
8.59 Where sites and equipment become obsolete or redundant or in any other circumstances where a site ceases operation arr
angements for the removal of any equipment and the return of the site to an acceptable 
state will be required to be agreed with the Council prior to a proposal being approved.  In appropriate circumstances this may include the creation of priority habitats such as those included in the England Biodiversity List, rather than returning the site to the conditions that prevailed prior to development. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered providers Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators 
 Permitted renewable energy capacity in MW 
Completed renewable energy capacity in MW 
Air Quality 
8.60 The purpose of this policy is to set out the Council’s approach in relation to how development proposals 
affect and are affected b
y air quality. 
LP 36 
Air Quality 
A proposal will need to be accompanied by an Air Quality Assessment where: a. 
it is for large scale major development, defined in the 'Glossary' ; 
b. it would potentially conflict with an Air Quality Action Plan; 
126 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 8 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
c. any part of the site is located within 50m of an Air Quality Management Area (AQMA) or a Clean Air 
Zone (CAZ); 
d. a significant proportion of the traffic generated would go through an AQMA or a CAZ; or 
e. any part of the site is located within 100m of a monitoring site where the annual mean level of nitrogen dioxide exceeds 35μ
g/m3. 
An Air Quality Assessment should be proportionate to the nature and scale of the proposal and the level of concern about air quality, b
ut should assess: 
f. the existing state of air quality surrounding the site; 
g. how the proposal could affect air quality during construction and operational phases; 
h. the extent to which people could be exposed to poor air quality; and 
i. how biodiversity could be affected by changes in air quality as a result of the proposal. 
A proposal will need to be accompanied by a low emissions strategy where the air quality assessment shows that the proposal would: 
j. hav
e a significant adverse effect on air quality; 
k. have an adverse effect on the air quality factors that led to the affected AQMA being designated; 
l. cause a significant increase in the number of people that would be exposed to poor air quality; or 
m. lead to a designated nature conservation site or protected species that is sensitive to poor air quality 
being adversely affected b
y changes in air quality. 
The low emissions strategy will include measures that mitigate the impacts of the proposed development by contributing 
to the improvement of air quality and/ or the reduction of emissions relating to the designation 
of the affected AQMA/ CAZ, prioritising actions identified in relevant Air Quality Action Plans/ CAZ action plans or equivalent documents. 
In other circumstances, where identified as necessary based on a transport assessment/ statement, measures 
to reduce air pollution arising from traffic and tr
affic congestion may also be required. 
Reasoning 
8.61 Pollution can arise from a wide variety of the activities and sources. Development types that are sensitive 
to poor air quality include, b
ut will not be limited to, residential uses, schools, hospitals and children’s 
playing areas. Where pollution issues are likely to arise pre-application discussions should be held with the Council, the relevant pollution control authority and stakeholders with a legitimate interest.  An air quality assessment should be undertaken for proposals that may adversely affect or be affected by poor air quality. 
8.62 There are four Air Quality Management Areas (AQMAs) in Huntingdonshire – Huntingdon, Brampton, St Neots and Fenstanton, identified 
where the annual mean level of nitrogen dioxide exceeds 40μg/m3. The 
main source of nitrogen dioxide is vehicle emissions.  Careful monitoring of the nitrogen dioxide levels occurs within these areas and the Council has developed an Air Quality Action Plan which includes actions to promote cycling and walking and reducing the need to travel by car. Where a transport statement/ assessment shows that it is likely that a significant proportion of road trips generated by the proposed development would go through a AQMA an air quality assessment will be required.  An air quality assessment will also be required where the annual mean level of nitrogen dioxide exceeds 35μg/m
3 as 
adverse impacts could lead to a new AQMA being designated. 
8.63 A Clean Air Zone (CAZ) defines an area where targeted action is taken to improve air quality.  A CAZ is intended to form 
a proactive response to a clearly defined air quality problem, with actions being focused 
on reducing air pollution from transport.  Local authorities can designate a CAZ in an area of poor air 
127 • 8 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
quality which may or may not have an AQMA designation.  Development proposals affecting a CAZ will 
trigger the need for an Air Quality Assessment, and if a low emissions strategy is required it should prioritise actions in any relevant CAZ action plans. 
8.64 Whether or not effects are considered to be significant is a judgement for the Council, but will include instances where there is predicted to be an increase in nitrogen dioxide of 
3μg/m3 or more. Where an air 
quality assessment shows that as a result of the proposed development the affect on air quality could be significant, the proposal will need to be supported by a low emissions strategy.  Such a strategy should concentrate on identifying measures that will tackle the air quality issues identified in the assessment. Actions with permanent or long lasting effects should be prioritised as well as actions identified in applicable air quality action plans. 
8.65 The DEFRA guidance produced in partnership with Low Emissions Strategies Partnership - Low Emissions 
Strategies: using the planning system to reduce transport emissions Good Practice Guidance -January 2010 will be of use when seeking to address the air quality impacts of de velopment. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered providers Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators Number of planning permissions granted which require a low emissions strategy 
Ground Contamination and Groundwater Pollution 
8.66 The purpose of this policy is to set out the Council’s approach in relation to ground contamination and 
groundwater pollution. 
LP 37 
Ground Contamination and Groundwater Pollution 
Where ground contamination of a site and/ or adjacent land is possible, due to factors including but not 
limited to existing or previous uses, the risks of ground contamination, including ground water and ground gases, will need to be investigated. 
Where investigation shows that development could result in an unacceptable risk or a controlled waters 
receptor (principal or secondary aquifer) exists a risk assessment will be required.  If the risk assessment shows that the risk is acceptable the proposal will be supported, subject to appropriate arrangements being put in place to ensure that work stops if unexpected contamination comes to light. 
If the risk assessment shows that risks will not be acceptable, then a more detailed investigation or remediation 
scheme will be required. Only where the more detailed investigation or remediation scheme shows that the risks can be made acceptable will the proposal be supported, subject to appropriate arrangements being put in place to ensure that work stops if unexpected contamination comes to light. 
Where remediation is necessary a strategy or scheme for its implementation and, where appropriate, 
maintenance will need to be agreed, which demonstrates that: 
a. the site is safe for development; 
128 • 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• • 
• 
• 
• Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 8 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
b. there would be no adverse health impacts to future/ surrounding occupiers; and 
c. there will be no deterioration of, or minimal impact on, the environment as a result of contamination. 
Upon completion of the agreed remediation strategy/scheme a Verification Report will need to be submitted 
to demonstrate compliance with the scheme. 
Protection of Groundwater A proposal within a Source Protection Zone (SPZ) 1 or within 50m of a private potable groundwater source 
that includes any of the following development types will only be supported where adequate safeguards against possible contamination can be agreed, implemented and maintained: 
septic tanks, waste water treatment works, chemicals storage tanks or underground storage tanks; 
sustainable drainage systems with ground infiltration; 
oil pipelines; 
storm water overflows and below ground attenuation tanks; 
activities that involve the disposal of liquid waste to land; 
cemeteries and graveyards; or 
other types of development identified in the Environment Agency’s Groundwater Protection guides , or 
successor documents. 
A proposal within a SPZ 2 or 3 or on a principal or secondary aquifer will be considered on a risk based 
approach with the exception of development involving sewerage, trade and storm effluent to ground or deep soakaways, which will only be supported where it can be demonstrated that these are necessary, are the only option available and adequate safeguards against possible contamination of groundwater can be agreed, implemented and maintained. 
A proposal in any SPZ will be expected to provide full details of the proposed construction of new buildings 
and construction techniques, including foundation design. 
Reasoning 
8.67 Failing to deal adequately with contamination could cause harm to human health, property and the wider 
environment. 
 It could also limit or preclude new development.  It could also undermine compliance with 
European Directives such as the Water Framework Directive. The planning system works alongside a number of other regimes including: 
The system for identifying and remediating statutorily defined contaminated land under Part 2A of 
the Environmental Protection Act 1990(33); 
Building Regulations, which require reasonable precautions to be taken to avoid danger to health and safety caused by contaminants in ground to be covered by buildings and associated ground; and 
Environmental Permitting Regulations, under which an environmental permit from the Environment 
Agency or Local Authority is normally required to cover the treatment and/ or redeposit of contaminated soils if the soils are ‘waste’ and under the same regulations, a site condition report is required for any facility where there may be a significant risk to land or groundwater (including where one is necessary to satisfy the requirements of the Industrial Emissions Directive). 
33 The government has published statutory guidance on Part 2A which concentrates on addressing contaminated 
land that meets the legal definition and cannot be dealt with through any other means, including through planning. 
129 8 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
8.68 Contamination can arise from a wide variety of activities and sources, both anthropogenic and natural. 
Contamination by pre
vious land uses on or adjacent to the land, as well as natural hazardous geological 
units and invasive/ harmful plants, can present a potential source of contamination to land and/ or pollution of groundwater. 
8.69 The onus is on the developer to ensure that all proposals are situated on land where it will be safe and suitable f
or the proposed use.  In some circumstances remediation works will be required to make land 
safe prior to development. For example, if a site’s previous use was a petrol station, there will be a need to ensure that fuel is not left on-site in tanks or in the ground from spillages that may cause a hazard to the health of future users or pollute the groundwater.  In some cases where there is contamination, the level and type may make land unsuitable for certain uses. 
8.70 When considering individual proposals in relation to all land subject to or adjacent to previous industrial use and also where uses are being considered that are particularly 
sensitive to contamination, the possibility 
of contamination should be assumed.  Planning conditions will be applied in order to secure appropriate pollution prevention or mitigation measures as appropriate. 
8.71 For the purposes of this policy sensitive developments include residential uses, schools, hospitals as well as children’s pla
ying areas, sports fields and allotments. The Department for Environment Food & Rural 
Affairs Industry Profiles provide details on the processes and substances associated with common industrial uses and should be referred to when determining whether the possibility of contamination should be assumed. 
8.72 Pre-application discussions with the Council, the relevant pollution control authority and stakeholders with a legitimate interest, for e
xample drainage and SuDS Approving Bodies will be useful where contamination 
is an issue.  A preliminary risk assessment (desk-top study and reconnaissance survey) should be undertaken as a requirement for validating relevant planning applications.  All investigations and subsequent remediation should be carried out in accordance with CLR 11 'Model Procedures for the Management of 
Land Contamination' or equivalent or successor procedures by a competent person.  Planning permission will only be granted 
when it can clearly be demonstrated that the development can proceed as proposed 
without causing pollution to controlled waters or significant risks to human health.  Planning conditions will be applied to manage any outstanding detailed surveys, investigation, modelling, remediation and verification. Planning Practice Guidance provides current requirements.  On those parts of the site where 
infiltration Sustainab
le Drainage Systems (SuDS) are proposed, details of ground permeability, groundwater 
levels and ground quality will need to be supplied with applications to demonstrate the site's suitability for the selected SuDS, and prospects for successful remediation.  Reference should also be had to national guidance on contaminated land.  Further technical guidance on the management of contaminated land 
including how to 
investigate, assess and manage the risks is drawn together by the Environment Agency 
in land contamination: technical guidance. 
8.73 Groundwater provides a third of the drinking water in England and Wales, and maintains the flow in many rivers
.  It is crucial that development does not cause contamination of these sources so that the water is 
safe for human consumption. The Environment Agency has identified source protection zones (SPZs) 
and maintains maps showing the 
three main zones: inner (zone 1), outer (zone 2) and total/ source 
catchment (zone 3) in addition to a range of sub-zones. The main area of SPZs in the district is located to the east of Huntingdon and south of St Ives. There are also SPZs at Little Paxton and south and east of Waresley/ Great Gransden.  Private potable groundwater sources should be treated as a SPZ1 with a 50m radius. 
8.74 Particular new activities represent an intrinsic hazard to groundwater and are unlikely to be acceptable. The hazard may result 
from a combination of the activity type, its duration and the potential for failure of 
controls.  Close to sensitive receptors a precautionary approach should be taken even where the risk of failure is low as the consequences may be serious or irreversible.  Anyone considering development proposals within a source protection zone that could potentially affect groundwater should hold 
130 • 
• Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 8 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
pre-application discussions with the Council and the Environment Agency.  Applicants should refer to the 
Environment Agency's Groundwater protection guides in relation to potentially hazardous development 
proposed within a SPZ. 
8.75 Land instability is not considered to be a problem for development in Huntingdonshire for which specific policy provision is 
required.  However, in circumstances where land instability may potentially pose a risk 
to development the national guidance set out in the NPPG will be followed. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered providers Responsible agencies 
Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs Delivery mechanism 
Throughout the plan period Timescale 
Monitoring indicators 
 Number of planning permissions granted with an agreed contamination 
mitigation strategy 
Number of planning permissions for the specified development types granted in a SPZ 1 where adequate safeguards against possible contamination have not been agreed 
Water Related Development 
8.76 The purpose of this policy is to set out the Council's approach to development proposals that relate to 
rivers
, lakes and other water bodies within the district. 
LP 38 
Water Related Development 
A proposal for water related development will be supported where it can be demonstrated that: a. it will not overload the environmental, navigational or flood conveyance capacity of the watercourse or 
water body; 
b. adequate servicing is provided, including water supply, electricity, and disposal facilities for sewage 
and waste; 
c. it will not impede the use of leisure moorings or berths or navigation or lead to hazardous boat 
movements; 
d. the use of any publicly accessible paths or other forms of access to the water body will not be 
compromised or impeded; 
e. measures will be incorporated to maintain or enhance water quality and quantity and river morphology, with reference to the Environment Agency's 
Anglian river basin district River Basin Management Plan 
and the Water Framework Directive; 
f. biodiversity of the water, its margins and nearby nature conservation sites will be maintained or 
enhanced; 
g. it will not lead to any adverse impact on flood risk or flood defences or displacement of flood risk; 
h. it will contribute to the re-naturalisation of the water body; and i. there is adequate demand to justify the creation of new berths or moorings where they are proposed. 
Residential Moorings 
131 8 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
In addition to applicable criteria above a proposal for a berth or mooring for permanent sole or main residential 
use will be supported where: 
j. the boat will be moored to the bank of a watercourse or water body where that bank is within the built-up 
area of any settlement; or 
k. the proposal is for a berth in a marina, where the marina is within or immediately adjacent to the built-up area of any settlement and the use would not lead to a change in the character of the marina away from a tourist/ leisure facility. 
Reasoning 
8.77 Water related development includes water related tourism, sport and leisure developments, such as 
proposals for new shor
t term/ leisure moorings and marinas, and residential moorings. 
8.78 Huntingdonshire benefits from an extensive network of rivers, drainage canals and lakes which are already widely used for tour
ism, sport and leisure activities including boating, windsurfing, fishing and birdwatching. 
They also provide valuable wildlife habitats.  Increased recreational use should only be facilitated where no significant environmental damage will result. 
8.79 The level of public access to rivers and other bodies of water varies.  Proposals which facilitate public access to waterside recreation 
opportunities will be encouraged where they can be achieved without 
having adverse impacts on water quality, nature conservation and the character of the surrounding landscape. 
8.80 Boatyards and marinas are located across Huntingdonshire and they can make a valuable contribution to the local economy.
  Improvements will generally be considered favourably provided they demonstrate 
no detrimental impact on the watercourse or body of water which they serve or on any surrounding countryside. 
8.81 Development should include measures to help achieve the objectives of the Anglian river basin district River Basin 
Management Plan (RBMP).  Development should not compromise the ability to achieve these 
objectives. Water Framework Compliance assessments will be needed for development that has the potential to compromise RBMP objectives, or risk deterioration.  UK law does not allow further deterioration in status of a groundwater body already in ‘poor’ condition. This will reflect in strategic matters, such as any future availability of the groundwater resources for abstraction in the area.  Specific projects are also assessed through Water Framework Compliance Assessments. 
8.82 Water quality and quantity are important in maintaining rivers and water bodies as valuable resources for a wide range of 
uses and particularly for biodiversity. There are a wide range of measures that can be 
taken to help maintain and improve water quality.  For example trees and other vegetation on the banks of rivers and water bodies can provide shading which will help limit temperature rises during sunny periods with consequent benefits to oxygen levels and biodiversity. Water quantity is managed through controlling water flow and abstraction rates. 
8.83 It is acknowledged that living on boats is a lifestyle choice for some residents and contributes to increasing the diversity of 
residential accommodation within the district.  However, the Council considers residential 
use of boats or houseboats to have significant shortcomings in terms of meeting the needs of residents or prospective residents.  As set out in earlier sections of this plan, Huntingdonshire is expected to have a significant retired population with those over 65 significantly increasing as a proportion of the population. As Building Regulations do not apply to the residential use of boats or houseboats the Council cannot be certain that they meet the basic accessibility requirements of these national regulations and therefore are uncertain that they meet the needs of our ageing population. The number of berths, either residential or for leisure uses, is subject to frequent change.  It is, however, considered reasonable to assume that residential use of boats represents a very small proportion of the total residential accommodation available in Huntingdonshire.  It is very difficult to gauge the proportion of existing moorings that may be suitable 
132 • Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 8 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
for conversion to residential use.  Even more difficult is the assessment of suitable locations for new 
residential moorings.  In the same way as for allocation of land for housing development the Council does not consider it to be practical to allocate sites for less than 10 dwellings.  For these reasons it is not considered possible to set a target for residential moorings in the Local Plan and as such any that are developed will form part of the expected small sites windfall development identified in the Council's housing trajectory illustrated in policy LP 2 'Strategy for Development' and updated annually. 
8.84 Residential use of boats can create demand for facilities that are inappropriate in a rural riverside location, such as boardwalks f
or safe access or provision of water and pump-out facilities. There is also a risk of 
pollution and disturbance to wildlife.  New homes should therefore be concentrated in sustainable locations and so the same principle will be applied to proposals for berths and moorings for residential use. The policy aims to ensure that potential residents of such residential moorings benefit from the same level of access to services and facilities as those living in conventional housing and to protect the countryside from adverse impacts associated with permanent occupation, such as visual intrusion. 
8.85 Proposals for conversion of existing leisure berths or moorings for permanent sole or main residential use will be accepted within a built-up area 
of a defined settlement.  Outside of built-up areas, proposals for 
conversion of existing moorings will only be accepted within marinas that are adjacent to a built-up area. In such cases, consideration will be given to the level of provision of leisure berths or moorings within the marina and the impact of residential use.  A 20% limit on the conversion of moorings or berths to residential use within the same marina is considered appropriate, but decisions will be based on the particular circumstances involved. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Responsible agencies 
Delivery mechanism 
Timescale Through the determination of planning applications, SPDs 
Throughout the plan period 
Monitoring indicators 
 Number of planning permissions granted contrary to the advice of the 
Environment Agency on flooding or water quality grounds Huntingdonshire District Council, landowners, developers, registered providers, 
Environment Agency 
133 r 
• 
• 
• 
• Section D: Allocations 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Section D: Allocations 
D.1 The NPPF specifies that local planning authorities should identify a supply of specific, deliverable sites 
capable of 
meeting 5 years worth of housing requirements; a further supply of specific, developable sites 
for the following 5 year period; and specific, developable sites or broad locations for growth where possible to complete the housing requirements for 15 years from the adoption date of the Local Plan. To promote increased certainty over deliverability of development this Local Plan identifies specific sites which are suitable and confirmed as available for development that have sufficient capacity to fulfil the total outstanding housing requirement for the district up to 2036. 
D.2 The Council's land availability assessments have informed a package of sites capable of delivering the development 
strategy for the district up to 2036.  Existing planning permissions have been taken into 
account when compiling packages of sites in each settlement.  Some sites with planning permission have been proposed as allocations to secure the preferred future use of the site if the extant permission is not delivered. 
D.3 The inclusion of a site as an allocation does not remove the need for planning permission; nor does 
it guarantee that planning permission will be granted.  A proposal should be in accordance with the site-specific allocation policy. In addition, a proposal should satisfy: 
all relevant national planning policy and guidance 
all other relevant development plan policies contained in this plan any relevant policies contained in the Minerals and Waste Core Strategy and Site-Specific Proposals 
Plan (or successor documents) 
any relevant policies in a 'made' neighbourhood plan covering the site area. 
D.4 The site allocation policies highlight the key issues for each site.  However, it is impossible to foresee 
every eventuality prior to a planning application being made and consequently to foresee which polices may be applicable. Therefore, additional information and requirements may be sought dependent on the detailed nature of development proposals put forward. 
D.5 For the purposes of town and parish councils that may draw up Neighbourhood Plans the allocations in 
this section are considered to be strategic as they are necessary to deliver the spatial strategy and achieve the development requirements of this plan. 
D.6 The site allocations identified in this Local Plan are not an exhaustive list of sites with development potential within the district. 
 In addition to this, an ongoing supply of small and windfall sites is expected to continue 
to come forward throughout the plan period.  Decisions on such sites will be made using the development strategy and development management policies of this plan. 
D.7 A housing trajectory has been prepared to demonstrate the anticipated housing delivery for each year up to 2036 and is presented within the 4 'The Development Strategy'. The trajectory is a snapshot in time 
normally produced 
annually as part of the Annual Monitoring Report. The most up to date version of the 
housing trajectory will be used to calculate whether or not there is a five year housing supply as required by the NPPF. 
D.8 There is some flexibility in the level of development proposed on most of the allocations.  Residential capacities have 
been conservatively estimated to ensure the overall districtwide development requirements 
are achievable.  All sites with a capacity of over 15 dwellings are presented with an approximate number of homes rounded to the nearest 5. There is scope for variation in the proposed numbers through the planning application process and it is expected that in many cases higher capacities may be achieved on sites as a result of individual design processes. The capacity of each allocation is stated to be an 
134 Allocations Section D: 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
'approximate' figure. A 10% tolerance either side of the approximate figure set out is considered to be 
reasonable. All housing capacities should be design-led and where a scheme proposes a number outside this variance this should be justified through the design and access statement. 
135 • 
• 9 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
9 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 
9.1 The Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area is defined in the 'Definition of Spatial Planning Areas'. 
Strategic Expansion Location: Alconbury Weald 
9.2 Alconbury Weald is located at the former Alconbury airfield and adjoining land to the north of Huntingdon 
close to Great and Little Stukeley
. The land lies adjacent to the East Coast Mainline railway. 
9.3 As part of the government's initiatives to promote economic growth, a series of enterprise zones was designated in August 2011.
  Alconbury airfield was selected as the location for the enterprise zone for the 
Greater Cambridge Greater Peterborough Enterprise Partnership(34) area.  Alconbury Enterprise Campus 
covers 150 hectares of land and provides significant opportunities for new investment in the economy.  It is envisaged that the Alconbury Enterprise Campus will accommodate some 8,000 new jobs in the period 2011 to 2036. 
9.4 The designation of Alconbury Enterprise Zone was one of the major triggers for preparing this Local Plan. Outline planning permission (1201158OUT) 
was granted 1 October 2014 for development at Alconbury 
Airfield and Grange Farm. The proposal includes the Enterprise Zone as a part of a wider mixed use development including 5,000 homes and associated community infrastructure. The first phase of development is underway.  Details of the site are provided in the allocation and Development Guidance below. 
9.5 The remaining element of RAF Alconbury has been declared surplus to military requirements and is expected to 
be available for development from around 2024. The existing permission at Alconbury Airfield 
and Grange Farm includes measures to maintain a boundary between that site and RAF Alconbury. However, when RAF Alconbury becomes available it should be incorporated into a wider Alconbury Weald development. 
9.6 The strategic expansion location at Alconbury Weald therefore consists of the two site allocations: 
The 'Former Alconbury Airfield and Grange Farm'; and 
'RAF Alconbury'. 
34 Responsibility transferred to the Business Board of the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Combined Authority 
on 1 April 2018 
136 w•-""'"" . .. ' 1 -··('.~_! 
'-' \. ...... 
.. 
'·, - ' ··-. 
I Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 9 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Former Alconbury Airfield and Grange Farm 
SEL 1.1 
Former Alconbury Airfield and Grange Farm 
A total area of approximately 575ha of land east of the A1(M) at the former Alconbury Airfield and Grange 
Farm is allocated for a mix of uses to comprise: 
1. the permitted scheme for 5,000 homes (including 400 units of supported housing some of which may 
be classed as residential institutions) with potential for more homes to be supported subject to capacity 
2. safeguarding of land to facilitate provision of a realigned A141 
3. at least 290,000m2 of business floorspace (class 'B') on the designated 150ha Alconbury Enterprise 
Zone 
4. approximately 7,000m2 retail floorspace (class 'A') to be contained within defined centres to comprise 
approximately 4,500m2 shop floorspace (class 'A1'), with a maximum of 1,500m2 floorspace in any 
one store 
5. educational and community facilities appropriate to the scale of development, to include a secondary 
school and at least 3 primary schools and day care/ nursery provision 
6. indoor and outdoor sports facilities appropriate to the scale of development 
7. supported living and residential/ nursing accommodation appropriate to the scale of the development 
137 9 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
8. strategic green infrastructure incorporating publicly accessible natural green space and other open 
space appropriate to the scale of development 
9. transport infrastructure improvements proportionate to the scale of development including linkages to the Cambridgeshire Bus
way and the identified opportunity for provision of a railway station on the 
East Coast Mainline Railway 
Successful development of the site will require: 
a. comprehensive master planning to be undertaken by the site developer with public engagement with 
the cooperation of the Council 
b. production 
and implementation of a development strategy that seeks to ensure balanced delivery of 
industrial and commercial dev
elopment with development of homes, infrastructure, services and 
facilities 
c. integration with Huntingdon while maintaining separation from other nearby settlements 
d. a comprehensive approach to maintaining and enhancing character and creation of development with a distinctive sense 
of place that integrates development with the existing structure of the airfield 
and protects and enhances the significance of heritage assets and their settings 
e. the arrangement of different uses in a manner that minimises the need to travel and includes a transport netw
ork that promotes sustainable travel modes 
f. satisfactory resolution of any additional traffic impact on the surrounding road network arising from detailed transport assessment of each k
ey phase of development 
g. safeguarding of land to facilitate provision of a realigned A141 
h. provision of access to serve the development from the existing A141 in order to limit amount of, and ease the impact of, additional 
traffic on Ermine Street through The Stukeleys and to provide greater 
connectivity by all travel modes to and from Huntingdon 
i. provision of high quality pedestrian and cycle linkages into Huntingdon and surrounding villages 
j. all retail to be complementary to the continuing vitality and viability of Huntingdon town centre 
k. the location of a main centre and up to two secondary centres and the details of the mix of uses to be incorporated in these centres
, including social and community facilities sufficient to meet the 
needs arising from the proposed development 
l. differentiated densities of development with higher densities around defined centres and the development of distinctiv
e character areas 
m. design codes for the appearance of development proposals 
n. assessment of noise impacts for the site, particularly from the East Coast Mainline Railway, and appropriate acoustic treatments to address any adv
erse impacts 
o. management, retention or replacement of existing trees in accordance with a tree survey/ landscaping scheme 
p. enhancement and provision for habitats in accordance with an ecological strategy 
q. a coordinated and integrated approach to the provision of green infrastructure throughout the site, including links with and enhancement of the surrounding green infr
astructure network concentrating 
on establishing links between the development, Huntingdon and the Great Fen 
r. a comprehensive approach to providing publicly accessible green and open space throughout the development 
s
. landscaping design recognising vistas, boundaries and appropriate visual screening from the surrounding countryside 
t. production and implementation of a waste audit and a w
aste minimisation, re-use and recovery 
strategy 
u. flood risk assessment and pro
vision of sustainable drainage systems to be provided in accordance 
with the approved flood r
isk assessment site wide water management strategy 
v. agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that they are satisfied that waste water flo
ws from the proposal can be accommodated 
w. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised 
138 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 9 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Development Guidance 
9.7 As part of the government's initiatives to promote economic growth a number of enterprise zones were 
designated in August 2011.
  Alconbury airfield was selected as the location for the enterprise zone for the 
Greater Cambridge Greater Peterborough Enterprise Partnership area. 
9.8 Outline planning permission (1201158OUT) was granted on 1 October 2014 for development at this site including 5,000 homes, 290,000m
2 of employment floorspace and along with community and ancillary 
facilities.  Reserved Matters were approved in late 2015 on the first phase of housing (128 dwellings). Work commenced in January 2016 with Ermine Street Church Academy opening in September 2016 ready for pupils from the first homes moved into in late 2016. The development is being brought forward through a series of reserved matters applications with multiple housebuilders working on the site. 
9.9 It is not anticipated that all of the proposed dwellings associated with this allocation will be built by the end of the plan period. When 
assessed against realistic rates of annual delivery, including taking into account 
the proximity of other nearby allocations, it is estimated that final completion of the site will be beyond 2036. This will be reviewed through the Council's annual housing trajectory. 
9.10 The Memorandum of Understanding between Greater Cambridgeshire Greater Peterborough LEP(35)and 
Urban&Civic, the land owners, sets out how the enterprise zone will be marketed.  A business incubator building and a club building comprising employment and leisure uses have been completed and a range of businesses already moved onto the site. The enterprise campus provides opportunities for a range of flexible buildings for research and development, office and production. These are supported by a skills centre supporting manufacturing, engineering and leadership and The Club facility which supports events, meetings and social opportunities for businesses. The Enterprise Zone is identified as an Established Employment Area to reflect its role in the development strategy for Huntingdonshire and the Greater Cambridgeshire Greater Peterborough LEP . 
9.11 The housing mix will have regard to the expected demographic change over the lifetime of the development. This means that homes suitable f
or first time buyers, family homes, homes for those who wish to downsize 
and extra care units or care homes are all likely to be required.  In recognition of the scale of this allocation it is considered important that the full range of sizes, types and tenures of home are available.  Having regard to the original planning application 5000 houses are identified in this allocation.  However, the overall capacity of the site is considered to be greater with potential to accommodate significant numbers of additional homes, potentially around 6,500 in total, although this would be subject to further detailed capacity work. 
9.12 Alconbury Airfield and the surrounding area are of considerable importance in terms of the historic environment. The 
airfield represents a significant example of World War II and Cold War military heritage, 
with a number of surviving buildings, spaces and routes. There are four designated heritage assets within the airfield (the Grade II listed Watch Office and Briefing Room dating from World War II and the three Grade II* Cold War structures dating from the 1980s, namely the two Extra-wide Hardened Aircraft Shelters (HAS) and the Avionics Building), plus a number of buildings that can be regarded as undesignated heritage assets.  Beyond the airfield, but still within the site boundary, is Prestley Wood Scheduled Monument which was on the National Heritage at Risk Register as at 2017, while there are a number of designated and undesignated heritage assets within close proximity of the site.  It is essential that the significance of heritage assets is preserved and where possible enhanced, particularly the Grade II* listed Cold War structures and Prestley Wood Scheduled Monument. 
9.13 A variety of densities of development along with local centres will help a distinctive character to emerge. The distinctive char
acter will respect the heritage and historic character of the airfield which includes listed 
structures from World War II and the Cold War.  It is expected that the main centre and other secondary 
35 The GCGP LEP became The Business Board of the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Combined Authority 
on 1st April 2018. 
139 9 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
centres will be the focus of the highest density development.  Design codes will establish how variation 
in character through transitions in the use of materials and a changing dynamic of hard and soft landscaping features can be achieved without limiting the potential for variety and innovative design responses. Appropriate design should ensure that development sits as a positive feature within the landscape. Residential development will be set back from the East Coast Mainline Railway and existing major roads with necessary acoustic treatments incorporated in respect of areas affected by noise. 
9.14 A transport assessment and travel plan is required for each key phase of development in order to assess the transport 
impact of each phase on the local road network, including the existing A14. The outline 
planning permission for the site includes the provision of a southern access to the A141 to serve the development and provide connection to Huntingdon and thereby avoiding additional traffic on Ermine Street through nearby settlements. The outline consent includes the need to provide an extensive range of travel modes to both Huntingdon and its town centre, as well as to further destinations, particularly by an extensive range of public transport services, and these will be vital to the success of the development and to minimise the effects of car-based impact on the local network. 
9.15 The opportunity to incorporate a new railway station on the East Coast Mainline (ECML) has been identified. Such provision w
ould be coordinated with proposed capacity enhancements and upgrading of the ECML 
by Network Rail. This would result in vastly increased sustainable integration of the development into the national rail network.  Extensions to the Cambridgeshire Guided Busway will also be developed in order to facilitate links to Huntingdon and further afield to Cambridge and Peterborough. The outline consent also requires other bus services, plus cycle and footways, to be provided to nearby settlements and other service and employment destinations in order to link with the wider network of such routes. 
9.16 It is expected that retail development will be limited to that which is necessary to serve day to day needs of residents and visitors, as 
the additional population growth here should look to Huntingdon town centre 
as the main location for retail services in the same way as residents of Brampton and Godmanchester do. The development at Chequers Court, Huntingdon will ensure that the town is well placed to provide the necessary retail facilities.  Retail uses, along with other services and facilities are expected to be concentrated at a main centre towards the northwestern end of the site and a secondary centre at the eastern end of the site adjacent to the ECML.  Another secondary centre is expected to provide shops for local convenience/ top up shopping needs.  Other social and community facilities will be required to meet the needs of the population. 
9.17 Alconbury Weald will be home to a substantial new community, albeit one benefiting from good access to the services and 
facilities available in Huntingdon. To help develop a successful and cohesive community 
and encourage sustainable lifestyles the provision of adequate social and community facilities and support will be an integral part of this development. These are essential to help promote the health and well-being of residents of this new community.  Facilities that foster community spirit and cohesion such as public meeting spaces, places of worship and education facilities should be incorporated in accessible locations; multi-purpose use should be promoted to aid the viability and efficient use of such facilities. To accommodate the need for school places that will arise this site will incorporate a new secondary school, along with at least three primary schools.  Appropriate early years/ day care nursery provision should also be included which may be a mixture of public and private provision. 
9.18 Appropriate open space, sports and play facilities should be provided in accordance with the Council's current standards at the time of development.
  A full range of formal and informal open space should be 
incorporated along with structural planting to help define and shape the new development. An objective assessment of need for sports and active recreation facilities will be required reflecting the quantity and nature of development proposed. 
9.19 As a strategic expansion location there are opportunities to add significantly to the strategic green infrastructure 
network and provide significant open space for a wide range of uses. Open space should 
be dispersed throughout the site to assist in achieving the aspirations of Natural England's Accessible 
140 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 9 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Natural Green Space Standards towards improving accessibility, naturalness and connectivity of green 
spaces.  At least one larger area of 20ha within 2km of the majority of homes should be provided as the scale of the site allows a rare opportunity for this to be incorporated. 
9.20 It is envisaged that green space provided on this site will link in with public rights of way to the south through Huntingdon to the Ouse Valle
y and beyond and northwards to the Great Fen.  Biodiversity will be 
enhanced through a network of green spaces and sustainable drainage systems that should be specifically designed to foster greater ecological diversity. 
9.21 Development on this scale offers an unprecedented opportunity for minimising carbon dioxide emissions with the aim of the whole site being zero carbon.
  Options to achieve this aim, which could include a 
decentralised heat/ energy network, should be thoroughly explored. 
9.22 Agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that the waste water flows from the development 
can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework Directive 
would not be compromised will be necessary.  It is expected that the Huntingdon Waste water Treatment Works (WwTW) will serve this development, although alternative solutions may be available.  Huntingdon WwTW is understood to have available flow headroom in its existing discharge consent and can accept proposed growth in its catchment up equivalent to approximately 5,100 homes, as at 2014.  After this unless additional headroom becomes available an increased discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be necessary.  Interim treatment solutions may be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place. 
141 Airfield 
(disused) 0 9 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
RAF Alconbury 
SEL 1.2 
RAF Alconbury 
84ha of land at RAF Alconbury is allocated for mixed use development to comprise: 
1. approximately 1,680 homes 
2. a primary school 3. social and community facilities to meet needs arising from the development 
Successful development of the site will require: a. completion of a public master planning exercise agreed with the Council 
b. preservation and where possible enhancement of the significance of affected heritage assets and 
their settings 
c. design codes or conceptual appearance of development proposals d. landscape design recognising vistas, long distance views, boundaries and green infrastructure 
networks 
e. satisfactory integration with the former Alconbury Airfield and Grange Farm site to the north f. provision of a sustainable transport network for pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles incorporating links 
to the surrounding area 
g. satisfactory resolution of any impact caused by traffic generated from the allocation on the surrounding local road network having regard to a transport assessment and travel plan 
142 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 9 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
h. provision of a sustainable transport network for vehicles, public transport, cyclists and pedestrians 
incorporating safe off-road routes connecting with the former Alconbury Airfield and Grange Farm site to the north and to the Stukeleys 
i. provision of strategic green infrastructure to included ecological mitigation and enhancement measures to minimise potential impacts of development 
on the Stukeleys and to link with existing and planned 
green infrastructure in the surrounding area 
j. social and community facilities appropriate to the scale of development 
k. provision of primary and early years education facilities, in agreement with Cambridgeshire County Council 
l. assessment of the need for retail development and the impact on main town centre uses nearby and in Huntingdon town centre 
m. phasing of 
development to ensure provision of infrastructure and services coincides with occupation 
of properties 
n. a prog
ramme of work designed to investigate, and where appropriate protect, archaeological assets 
o. flood risk assessment and provision of sustainable drainage strategy 
p. agreement with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that waste water flo
ws from the proposal can be accommodated 
q. agreement with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water F
ramework Directive would not be compromised 
Development Guidance 
9.23 The remaining element of RAF Alconbury has been declared surplus to military requirements and is 
expected to 
be available for development from the mid-2020s. The area has been incorporated within the 
Alconbury Weald strategic expansion location to promote comprehensive redevelopment and assist with integrating the two sites into a single new community. Alconbury Weald will be home to a substantial new community, albeit one benefiting from good access to the services and facilities available in Huntingdon. 
9.24 It is not anticipated that all of the proposed dwellings associated with this allocation will be built by the end of the plan period. When 
assessed against realistic rates of annual delivery, including taking into account 
the proximity of other nearby allocations, it is estimated that final completion of the site will be beyond 2036. This will be reviewed through the Council's annual housing trajectory. 
9.25 The housing mix will have regard to the expected demographic change over the lifetime of the development. This means that homes suitable f
or first time buyers, family homes, homes for those who wish to downsize 
and extra care units or care homes are all likely to be required.  In recognition of the scale of this allocation it is considered important that the full range of sizes, types and tenures of home are available.  Opportunities to re-use pre-existing dwellings on the site in preference to redevelopment should be thoroughly explored. 
9.26 There is a range of heritage assets with significance in the area that may be affected by development of this site, including 
the Little Stukeley Conservation Area, a number of listed structures and a scheduled 
monument, Prestley Wood moated site which was on the Heritage at Risk Register as at 2017.  It is essential that the significance of heritage assets is preserved and where possible enhanced, particularly listed Cold War structures and Prestley Wood Scheduled Monument. 
9.27 A variety of densities of development will help a distinctive character to emerge. This will need to respect the heritage and 
historic character of the air base and of Little Stukeley.  Design codes will establish how 
variation in character through transitions in the use of materials and a changing dynamic of hard and soft landscaping features can be achieved without limiting the potential for variety and innovative design responses. 
143 9 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
9.28 A transport assessment and travel plan is required to assess its transport impact on the local road network, 
including the existing tr
unk road network.   Connections should be provided into the adjacent 'Former 
Alconbury Airfield and Grange Farm' to provide an alternative route to Huntingdon than using Ermine Street through the Stukeleys 
.  An extensive range of travel modes to both Huntingdon and its town centre, 
as well as to further destinations will be required, particularly by an extensive range of public transport services. These will be vital to the success of the development and to minimise the effects of car-based impact on the local network. 
9.29 Extensions to the Cambridgeshire Guided Busway will be developed through the adjacent 'Former Alconbury Airfield and Grange Farm', in order to facilitate links to Huntingdon and further afield to Cambridge and Peterborough. 
 Ideally a route through both sites for busway services would facilitate use by residents of 
this site.  However, if such a route is not possible or practical, clear and direct footpaths to bus stops will be required.  Other bus services, plus cycle and footways, will also be required to be provided to nearby settlements and other service and employment destinations, in order to link with the wider network of such routes. 
9.30 It is expected that retail development will be limited to providing for a basic range of day to day needs of residents, as 
residents here should look to Huntingdon town centre as the main location for retail services, 
but also to the main centre within 'Former Alconbury Airfield and Grange Farm' for the full range of day to day service requirements.  Retail uses, along with other services and facilities are expected to be concentrated in 
a single centre towards the northwest of the site where it would be accessible by residents 
of Little Stukeley. 
9.31 To help develop a successful and cohesive community and encourage sustainable lifestyles the provision of adequate social and community f
acilities and support will be an integral part of this development. These 
are essential to help promote the health and well-being of residents of this new community.  Facilities that foster community spirit and cohesion such as public meeting spaces, places of worship and education facilities should be incorporated in accessible locations; multi-purpose use should be promoted to aid the viability and efficient use of such facilities. To accommodate the need for school places that will arise from this site a primary school will be required.  Appropriate early years/ day care nursery provision should also be included which may be a mixture of public and private provision. The site currently contains a number of community facilities including primary, middle and upper schools, as well as health facilities. Where possible the reuse of existing community, education and health facilities should be incorporated into the master planning.   Secondary education provision is expected to be provide on the adjacent 'Former 
Alconbury Airfield and Grange Farm' site, which may necessitate further capacity than has been planned thus far.  Foot and cycle routes to enable these sustainable modes for school journeys should be incorporated within the site and linking with the wider netw
ork. 
9.32 Appropriate open space, sports and play facilities should be provided in accordance with the Council's current standards at the time of development. 
Where possible the reuse of existing sports and leisure 
facilities should be incorporated into the master planning.  A full range of formal and informal open space should be incorporated along with structural planting to help define and shape the new development. 
9.33 As a strategic expansion location there are opportunities to add significantly to the strategic green infrastructure 
network and provide significant open space for a wide range of uses. Open space should 
be dispersed throughout the site to assist in achieving the aspirations of Natural England's Accessible Natural Green Space Standards (ANGSt) towards improving accessibility, naturalness and connectivity of green spaces. Where feasible opportunities should be taken to connect larger areas of green space on the Natural England ANGSt hierarchy with those provided within with 'Former Alconbury Airfield and Grange Farm'. 
9.34 It is envisaged that green space provided on this site will link in with the surrounding network and provide links through to Huntingdon and the Ouse Valle
y to the south and northwards to the Great Fen.  Biodiversity 
will be enhanced through a network of green spaces and sustainable drainage systems that should be specifically designed to foster greater ecological diversity. 
144 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 9 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
9.35 Development across the strategic expansion location as a whole offers an unprecedented opportunity for 
minimising carbon dioxide emissions 
with the aim of the whole site being zero carbon.  Options to achieve 
this aim, which could include a decentralised heat/ energy network, should be thoroughly explored. 
9.36 Agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that the waste water flows from the development 
can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework Directive 
would not be compromised will be necessary.  It is expected that the Huntingdon Waste water Treatment Works (WwTW) will serve this development, although alternative solutions may be available.  Huntingdon WwTW is understood to have available flow headroom in its existing discharge consent and can accept proposed growth in its catchment up equivalent to approximately 5,100 homes, as at 2014.  After this unless additional headroom becomes available an increased discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be necessary.  Interim treatment solutions may be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place. 
145 9 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Huntingdon 
146 Chu re 
'\.," 
STlJ~.f 
' 
;.<' . ....... ...... ,. ,,.m ,, ..... 
/ / Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 9 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Ermine Street, Huntingdon 
HU 1 
Ermine Street, Huntingdon 
85ha of land at Ermine Street, Huntingdon is 
allocated for mix
ed use development to comprise: 
1. approximately 1,440 homes 
2. a potential realignment route for the A141 
3. approximately 1,000m2 of shop floorspace 
(class 'A1') 
4. food and drink retail (class 'A3' to 'A5') 
5. a primary school and other social and community facilities to meet needs ar
ising 
from the development 
6. strategic green infrastructure 
Successful development of the site will require: 
a. satisfactory resolution of any impact caused 
by traffic gener
ated from the allocation on the local and strategic road networks in accordance with 
the requirements of relevant highway authorities 
b. satisfactory resolution of any impact caused by traffic generated from the allocation on the surrounding local road network ha
ving regard to a transport assessment and travel plan 
c. safeguarding of land to facilitate provision of a realigned A141 
d. provision of a sustainable transport network for vehicles, public transport, cyclists and pedestrians incorporating 
safe off-road routes connecting north and south parts of the site, to Huntingdon and to 
the Stukeleys 
e. provision of strategic green infrastructure to provide a substantial buffer between the development and Green End and to link with existing and planned green infr
astructure in the surrounding area 
f. social and community facilities appropriate to the scale of development 
g. phasing of development to ensure provision of infrastructure and services coincides with occupation of properties 
h. agreement with the En
vironment Agency and Anglian Water Services that they are satisfied that 
waste water flo
ws from the proposal can be accommodated 
i. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised 
j. flood r
isk assessment and provision of sustainable drainage systems 
k. separation from the gas pipeline and electricity transmission line in accordance with National Grid requirements 
l. all retail elements to be complementary to the continuing vitality and viability of the town centre 
m. a programme of work designed to investigate, and where appropriate, protect archaeological assets 
n. preparation of a detailed master plan and public consultation exercise agreed with the Council that addresses: 
i. provision of vehicular routes to be created 
ii. provision of a sustainable transport network for vehicles, cyclists and pedestrians incorporating 
links to the surrounding area including the nearby right of w
ay 
iii. Integration of development with the main built up area of Huntingdon 
iv. design codes or conceptual appearance of development proposals 
147 9 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
v. provision of primary and early years education facilities 
vi. phasing of development 
vii. landscape design recognising vistas, long distance views, boundaries and green infrastructure 
networks 
viii. mitigation 
against the potential impact of noise from the A14 and A141 development proposals 
Development Guidance 
9.37 Residential led development of the southern part of this site was proposed in the 2002 Local Plan Alteration 
but difficulties 
with access and integration have hindered delivery. Construction of the A14 improvements 
are expected to substantially alter the volume and nature of traffic in the immediate vicinity of this site allowing for exploration of alternative ways to facilitate access for pedestrians and cyclists into Huntingdon. 
9.38 It is not anticipated that all of the proposed dwellings associated with this allocation will be built by the end of the plan period. When 
assessed against realistic rates of annual delivery, including taking into account 
the proximity of other nearby allocations, it is estimated that final completion of the site will be beyond 2036. This will be reviewed through the Council's annual housing trajectory. 
9.39 Ermine Street (between the A141 roundabout and the site access) is predicted to operate close to capacity particularly 
in the peak periods when the long anticipated southern element of this development is delivered, 
together with longer term wider background growth in traffic flows.  Access will need to be considered in context with neighbouring developments, including the potential junction to the A141 for Alconbury Weald. A transport assessment (in accordance with policy LP 16 'Sustainable Travel') and Travel Plan is required 
for each phase of development in order to assess the transport impact on the local road network. The development 
also needs to ensure that sufficient parking is provided on the site in line with policy LP 
17 'Parking Provision and Vehicle Movement'. 
9.40 The Cambridgeshire Local Transport Plan 2011-2031 (LTP3): Long Term Transport Strategy (LTTS) (2014) proposes the safeguarding of 
an alignment for the possible future re-routing of the A141 Huntingdon 
northern bypass. This route would separate the strategic and local functions of the current route, and provide capacity for further growth both locally and further north-east along the A141. Transport impacts will be reassessed once the A14 upgrade scheme is completed.  It would only be delivered if conditions on the network required it, or if it were needed to support growth. The LTTS suggests that the route may be sought in the late 2020s/ early 2030s. The Huntingdonshire Strategic Transport Study (2017) tested the provision of a re-routed A141 Huntingdon northern bypass but identified significant funding challenges in delivering this at least in the short term. 
9.41 The land is currently segregated from the main built up area of Huntingdon by the A141 dual carriageway. Assimilation into the main built up 
area of Huntingdon is essential to ensure social and economic integration. 
Any development proposal should address how this can be safely and effectively achieved. This must include provision of safe pedestrian and cycle crossing routes both to link the site into Huntingdon and to connect to the Stukeleys. To facilitate pedestrian links with the wider area a pedestrian route would need to be incorporated to link into the existing public right of way (The Stukeleys Bridleway 230/12) on the northern boundary. This would be considered together with emerging access proposals for Alconbury Weald and the A141. 
9.42 To reduce the need to travel adequate community and retail facilities should be incorporated within the site to meet residents' ever
yday needs. This must include a primary school within the site situated in a 
position which maximises the potential for children to walk to school.  Approximately 0.1ha of land will also be required for an early years education/ daycare facility, for private or voluntary sector provision to complement that provided alongside the primary school. Retail facilities should be incorporated to promote sustainable access to convenience shopping. To minimise impact on Huntingdon town centre any one store should not exceed 600m
2 net floorspace in accordance with policy LP 7 'Spatial Planning Areas' unless 
148 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 9 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
an impact assessment is provided demonstrating the proposal would not have a significant adverse impact. 
In addition, a public house or restaurant (class 'A3', 'A4' or 'A5') would be appropriate to provide local social opportunities. 
9.43 Green infrastructure should be provided along the north-western boundary, dependent on the future A141 alignment, to provide a 
substantial landscaped setting between the development and Green End/ Great 
Stukeley. This should link with the existing green infrastructure network and planned provision nearby. A robust landscape management plan would be required for the whole site to help integrate it with its surroundings, to mitigate against visual intrusion for Great Stukeley and Green End and to help maintain settlement separation. 
9.44 Archaeological investigation of any areas proposed for development is required as the site lies either side of the Roman Ermine Street and there are known her
itage assets in the area. 
9.45 The site is highly visible in the local landscape and can been seen from several long distance viewpoints. It will require significant landscaping both to ameliorate the 
impact of development and to protect future 
residents from noise and air pollution. Traffic noise from the A14 and A141 detrimentally impacts on the site although the nature and scale of this is expected to change as highway proposals are delivered. Careful layout and design along with use of strategic green infrastructure should be used to mitigate the potential harmful impacts of this with consideration given to both current and likely future impacts.  A noise assessment will be required along with the incorporation of appropriate acoustic treatments into the design of any scheme as necessary. 
9.46 To ensure safety National Grid's requirements should be adhered to regarding the gas pipelines situated within the site and appropriate easement strips incor
porated into the landscaping scheme. 
9.47 Agreement is needed with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that the waste w
ater flows from the development can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements 
of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised.  Huntingdon Waste water Treatment Works (WwTW), which will serve this development, is understood to have available flow headroom in its existing discharge consent and can accept proposed growth in its catchment equivalent to approximately 5,100 homes, as at 2014.  After this unless additional headroom becomes available an increased discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be necessary.  Interim treatment solutions may be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place. 
149 ~~!Ji~. f " 'II 
;iQ u 
~~-l1r/fi 
~1rt/J-~ ~~/)it~ 
1]/ ~r:ff --
" lJ II! 
/lJ 9 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Former Forensic Science Laboratory, Huntingdon 
HU 2 
Former Forensic Science Laboratory, Huntingdon 
2.7ha of land at the former Huntingdon Forensic 
Science Laboratory, Christie Drive is allocated for residential development to comprise approximately 105 homes. 
Successful development of the site will require: a. completion of a public master planning 
exercise agreed with the Council 
b. provision of appropriate access(es) to serve 
development 
c. provision of suitable and safe pedestrian and cycle routes to the surrounding area 
d. provision of additional landscaping on the 
western boundary and separating the residential and education facilities 
e. flood risk assessment and provision of sustainable drainage systems 
f. agreement with the Council in liaison with Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that they 
are satisfied that waste water flows from the proposal can be accommodated 
g. agreement with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements 
of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised 
Development Guidance 
9.48 This site previously accommodated the Forensic Science Laboratory which closed in March 2012 due to 
national cuts. 
 Redevelopment offers the opportunity to improve the streetscene and the site's awkward 
relationship with the surrounding residential development. 
9.49 Development proposals should provide clear visual and physical links through to surrounding development to facilitate integ
ration.  A transport assessment and accompanying travel plan will be required which 
includes consideration of the impact of additional traffic generation on Hinchingbrooke Park Road and enhanced pedestrian and cycleway facilities. The development also needs to ensure that sufficient parking is provided on the site. 
9.50 Significant landscape enhancements would need to be provided between the housing development and the education facilities.
  Due to the proximity of the site to Hinchingbrooke Country Park and Bobs Wood 
County Wildlife Site a biodiversity/ ecology survey and report will be required. 
9.51 The proposed scheme would not be able to use the existing surface water network without increasing flood risk. 
 However, the site is considered to be suitable for use of SuDS so any scheme should use this 
mechanism to ensure surface water runoff is restricted. 
9.52 Agreement is needed with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that the waste w
ater flows from the development can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements 
of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised.  Huntingdon Waste water Treatment Works (WwTW), which will serve this development, is understood to have available flow headroom in its existing 
150 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 9 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
discharge consent and can accept proposed growth in its catchment equivalent to approximately 5,100 
homes, as at 2014.  After this unless additional headroom becomes available an increased discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be necessary.  Interim treatment solutions may be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place. 
151 ,t-
,c-
,, 
'\' 
s:, ... 
,. 
" 
/", ;Y 
-I..< ;·i 
--.I 9 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Former Police HQ site, Huntingdon 
HU 3 
Former Police HQ site, Huntingdon 
5.8ha of land at the Former Police HQ land, 
Hinchingbrooke Park Road, Huntingdon is allocated for mixed use development to comprise: 
1. approximately 75 dwellings 
2. supported housing or care home and/or 
supporting health care uses 
3. structural open space and landscaping 
including retention of the existing tree belts 
between the hospital and the former police playing field, facing Hinchingbrooke Park Road and between Views Common and the former police playing field 
Successful development of the site will require: 
a. landscape design recognising the setting provided by the historic parkland of Hinchingbrooke House 
and by Views Common and retaining protected trees within the site 
b. provision of safe and appropriate road accesses, cycle paths and footpaths that link in with wider 
transport plans as necessary 
c. a travel plan to cater for sustainable travel patterns 
d. preservation and where appropriate enhancement of heritage assets that may be affected including 
the Huntingdon Conservation Area 
e. a programme of work to investigate, and where appropriate protect, archaeological assets, protected trees and protected species 
f. agreement with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from the proposal can be accommodated 
g. agreement with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements 
of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised 
Development Guidance 
9.53 In addition to providing approximately 75 homes part of the aim of this allocation is to encourage greater 
collaboration betw
een health and social care with a range of housing that is adaptable to differing care 
requirements within use classes C2 and/ or C3, reflecting the national aspiration to integrate health and social care more effectively and to help facilitate people remaining in their own homes as their care needs change.  Alternatively supporting health care uses, within use class D1, should make up the remainder of development on this site. 
9.54 A transport assessment will be required which includes consideration of the impact of additional traffic generation on 
Hinchingbrooke Park Road and enhanced pedestrian and cycleway facilities. The 
development also needs to ensure that sufficient parking is provided on the site.The access opportunities for the site will substantially change upon completion of the link road from the A14 following removal of the viaduct across Brampton Road. 
152 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 9 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
9.55 The site's proximity to Views Common and the setting provided by the historic parkland of Hinchingbrooke 
House, mean 
that landscape impact and impact on heritage assets are development constraints. The 
design of any development proposal and its landscaping scheme should demonstrate how it will mitigate and minimise negative impacts on the landscape and on heritage assets. This includes retaining and enhancing where necessary the substantial protected tree belt on the northeastern boundary between the site and Views Common, the wildlife strip between the hospital and the former police playing field, and the area facing Hinchingbrooke Park Road, retaining the protected trees on-site where possible.  It also includes the protection and where possible the enhancement of the Huntingdon Conservation Area and other heritage assets and their settings that may be affected by development.  A public right of way runs south west to north east on western boundary of the site which must be retained with appropriate connections provided to it to promote walking connections. 
9.56 There is potential for protected species to be present on this greenfield site as the site is within the threshold for an 
SSSI; and protected species (greater crested newts) are understood to exist in the wildlife strip to 
the north of the site adjoining Views Common and the adjoining Hinchingbrooke Hospital site.  An ecological survey should be undertaken, and development should ensure that any impacts on protected species are avoided, mitigated, or compensated for, and that opportunities are taken to enhance biodiversity. 
9.57 Agreement is needed with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that the waste w
ater flows from the development can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements 
of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised.  Huntingdon Waste water Treatment Works (WwTW), which will serve this development, is understood to have available flow headroom in its existing discharge consent and can accept proposed growth in its catchment equivalent to approximately 5,100 homes, as at 2014.  After this unless additional headroom becomes available an increased discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be necessary.  Interim treatment solutions may be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place. 
153 . ~ --· . 
......... f,ri, ' 
•, 
I 
'--- -
--:. - ~ - -~-~-~- ~r --- - , • 11.;-' . ;:.,:; ·· , [ - -_,..., . -. , r 9 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
West of Railway, Brampton Road, Huntingdon 
HU 4 
West of Railway, Brampton Road, Huntingdon 
2ha of land west of the railway is allocated for 
business uses (class 'B1a' and/ or 'B1b'). Successful development of the site will require: 
a. an air quality assessment and low emissions 
strategy 
b. preservation and where possible 
enhancement of affected heritage assets 
c. appropriate noise mitigation 
d. design appropriate to the prominent location 
and being set in landscaped grounds reflecting the Views Common context and the Huntingdon Conservation Area 
e. a single point of access for the whole site 
which ensures a safe pedestrian route is retained along Brampton Road 
f. agreement with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from the proposal can be accommodated 
g. agreement with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements 
of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised 
Development Guidance 
9.58 This site is currently partly vacant land and partly used as a car park. The approach from Brampton Road 
is dominated by the 
A14 viaduct and scope for redevelopment is highly constrained until this is removed 
as part of the A14 improvement scheme.  A disused water tower and reservoir are on the site.  Planning permission has been granted for the conversion and extension of the water tower to an office building.  A transport assessment will be required. The development also needs to ensure that appropriate parking provision is provided on the site.  Access to the site should be gained from Brampton Road with appropriate connections made into the public footpath and rights of way network. The design of any access must ensure a safe pedestrian and cycle crossing is incorporated as the footpath and cycle path along the northern side of Brampton Road are heavily used, particularly by students at Hinchingbrooke School. The public right of way that runs along the eastern side of Views Common and across the site adjacent to the reservoir will be retained, although the alignment may be amended to facilitate efficient, attractive urban design. 
9.59 Approximately half the site lies within Huntingdon Conservation Area and there are several other heritage assets in the surrounding area that may be 
affected by development on this site.  It is essential that the 
significance of these assets and their settings is preserved and where possible enhanced. 
9.60 High quality development is expected to reflect the location near the railway station as a gateway to Huntingdon town centre, 
and the 'community campus' style of development at Hinchingbrooke Park. 
Landscaped grounds should also set development in a spacious setting adjacent to Views Common. 
9.61 The approved water tower development anticipates 2,252m2 of office space over four floors added to the 
side of the water tower and three floors on top. The development is to include renewable energy technologies and be a key landmark building. 
154 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 9 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
9.62 The design for the remaining part of the site will need to respond to the constraints upon the area including 
noise from the railwa
y and nearby road network, and the relationship with the open environment of Views 
Common.  Highway improvements that will remove the viaduct will have a substantial impact on the site, increasing its visibility to Views Common significantly. The car park on the site is intended as a temporary use pending development for business uses once the highway improvements are implemented.  Some 6,300m
2 of office space should be capable of being accommodated within this site, although other forms 
of development would be acceptable.  Subject to the detail of the A14 related local highways improvements, agreement between landowners and appropriate justification on the basis of securing an appropriately high quality scheme, the Council will consider favourably the use of a small area of Views Common adjacent to the identified site, where the existing A14 viaduct is to be removed. 
9.63 Using the jobs density figure from Alconbury Enterprise Zone and the industry standard floorspace a jobs figure of approximately 215 
may be possible on the 2ha identified.  Alternatively using the floorspace 
figures above and the floorspace per job figures for office jobs (12m2) gives a much higher figure of up to 
525 jobs. 
9.64 Agreement is needed with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that the waste w
ater flows from the development can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements 
of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised.  Huntingdon Waste water Treatment Works (WwTW), which will serve this development, is understood to have available flow headroom in its existing discharge consent and can accept proposed growth in its catchment equivalent to approximately 5,100 homes, as at 2014.  After this unless additional headroom becomes available an increased discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be necessary.  Interim treatment solutions may be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place. 
155 / 5lo 
c'!;f, -\\ ~ p} 
~- !-~~~~ q: \?i. 
= . 9 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Edison Bell Way, Huntingdon 
HU 5 
Edison Bell Way, Huntingdon 
3.5ha of land adjoining the southern end of Edison 
Bell Way, Huntingdon is allocated for residential development of approximately 345 homes. Successful development of the site will require: 
a. completion of a public master planning 
exercise agreed with the Council 
b. preservation and where possible 
enhancement of heritage assets and their 
settings affected by development, including Huntingdon Conservation Area and the Grade II listed buildings located immediately east and south of the site 
c. an air quality assessment and low emissions strategy 
d. integration with the existing pedestrian and cycle network 
e. high quality architectural design having regard to the conservation area, heritage assets and 
neighbouring uses 
f. high quality landscaping and public realm creating attractive, well-functioning spaces g. agreement with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that 
waste water flows from the proposal can be accommodated 
h. a contamination preliminary risk assessment and if necessary subsequent investigation and 
remediation appropriate to the proposed development 
Development Guidance 
9.65 The site is located around the southern end of Edison Bell Way and comprises a significant redevelopment 
opportunity in 
a sustainable location in close proximity to Huntingdon town centre.  It forms a highly visible 
'gateway' site to the town centre, surrounded by and including small parts of the Huntingdon Conservation Area.  Strong, high quality urban design reflecting this context will be required. This should be a residential-led scheme, possibly including a limited amount of main town centre uses complementary to those in the established primary shopping area and subject to compatibility with proposed and surrounding uses. 
9.66 This is a visually prominent site, adjacent to Huntingdon Conservation Area. The site represents a rare opportunity to 
enhance the conservation area. There are several heritage assets in the surrounding area 
including several Grade II listed buildings located immediate east and south of the site.  It is essential that the significance of these heritage assets and their settings as well as any others that may be affected by development be preserved and where possible enhanced. The Council will consider favourably proposals that enhance the conservation area. Such proposals are expected to include landscaping of the sloped sections of the northern part of the site with trees and other soft landscaping. Provision should be investigated for stepped pedestrian access at the north of the site to the pedestrian/ cycle way running under the railway, which should be provided if possible. 
9.67 Along the Edison Bell Way frontage development should consist of a high density urban form in perimeter blocks 
facing Edison Bell Way and George Street.  Buildings here should address adjacent development 
and can range in height from two and a half/ three storeys to four storeys, incorporating where appropriate 
156 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 9 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
ground level undercroft parking, but with ground floor activity facing the streets. The way development 
of this site addresses the corner at the junction of Edison Bell Way and George Street is important.  Building here should be close to the junction and act as a landmark for the route to the town centre.  A focal point should also be included at the site's northwest corner when viewed along Edison Bell Way from the north. 
9.68 The site benefits from direct access to Edison Bell Way designed to accommodate retail servicing vehicles in response to the former 
proposal for a supermarket development. This should form the main vehicular 
access to the site, but may be reconfigured as appropriate for the proposed form of development. 
9.69 It also presents an opportunity, along with other allocations in this area, to improve accessibility, integration and quality of links with surrounding areas and between the 
railway station and the town centre. The 
layout of development should provide a permeable network of routes with active frontages to ensure the site is attractive to walk through and maximises the opportunities to provide pedestrian and cycle links between the railway station and the town centre. Vehicular access from St John's Street should be limited while recognising existing rights of way; vehicular access must be maintained for the right of way serving the car park for Godwin House.  In addition a new pedestrian crossing of St John's Street linking to St John's Passage should be added to the east of the site to complete the integration with the town centre. 
9.70 The design of development will need to accommodate the change in levels across the site from the highest point at the south adjacent to George Street to the lowest 
in the northeastern parts of the site. This may 
present opportunities to incorporate undercroft car parking in an innovative way.  Car parking provision should reflect the proximity to Huntingdon town centre and the availability of services and facilities and high frequency public transport.  Cycle parking should be incorporated to encourage cycle access by people resident and working within the site and those using the new facilities. 
9.71 The quality of landscaping and the public realm are seen as particularly important in enhancing the urban form 
and contributing to the success and attractiveness of this area as a transition from the town centre 
and a prominent area on arrival in the town from the railway station. The area of the site adjacent to George Street, opposite Millfield House and Mill Common should include public realm with a mix of hard and soft landscaping, with particular attention paid to the quality of materials and the architectural detailing facing the space. The space should also provide a clear visual link with Mill Common to the south. The design of development in the northeastern corner of the site between Edison Bell Way and Ferrars Road should provide for pedestrian movement along existing desire lines where possible and could include public open space and/ or a landmark building. The trees in the western part of the site should be retained. 
9.72 Development proposals will need to provide information on how the impacts of the development will be accommodated and mitigated where appropriate.
  A transport assessment and travel plan will be required 
to demonstrate how sustainable travel modes will be promoted and prioritised and how vehicular access and parking arrangements will be provided.  An air quality assessment will be necessary due to the site's proximity to the Huntingdon Air Quality Management Area, designated due to the nearby A14 to the south and the Huntingdon Ring Road, which St John's Street forms part of.  An appropriate low emissions strategy should be prepared.  A noise assessment will also be required due to the site's proximity to the East Coast mainline railway and other town centre uses. An assessment of the nature and extent of land contamination will be required and an appropriate remediation scheme prepared and implemented. 
9.73 Agreement is needed with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that the waste w
ater flows from the development can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements 
of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised.  Huntingdon Waste water Treatment Works (WwTW), which will serve this development, is understood to have available flow headroom in its existing discharge consent and can accept proposed growth in its catchment equivalent to approximately 5,100 homes, as at 2014.  After this unless additional headroom becomes available an increased discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be necessary.  Interim treatment solutions may be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place. 
157 --- - --=-=-=,---.rr 
---~-- -!' - - 1 , ' 9 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Gas Depot, Mill Common, Huntingdon 
HU 6 
Gas Depot, Mill Common, Huntingdon 
0.6ha of land at the former Gas Depot, Mill 
Common is allocated for residential development of approximately 11 homes.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. assessment of the ecological impact of 
development, complying with the Habitats 
Regulations as necessary 
b. a flood risk assessment, taking account of 
all forms of flood risk and climate change, demonstrating that development will be sequentially located within the site and that it will be safe 
c. an air quality assessment and low emissions strategy 
d. completion of land contamination 
remediation measures appropriate to residential development 
e. provision of a single vehicular access from the east of the site 
f. provision of pedestrian access from the west of the site to the public footpaths connecting to the west 
g. high quality development which enhances the conservation area and reflects the sensitive landscape 
setting of the site 
h. publicly accessible open space along the water frontage with natural landscaping to protect and 
enhance biodiversity 
i. retention of trees and shrubs on the south, west and northern boundaries of the site to minimise the impact of development on views to and from Port Holme SAC/ SSSI and Huntingdon Conservation Area 
j. separation from the high pressure gas pipeline in accordance with National Grid requirements 
k. agreement with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that 
waste water flows from the proposal can be accommodated 
l. agreement with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements 
of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised 
Development Guidance 
9.74 This site is sensitively located immediately north of Port Holme SAC/ SSSI and Alconbury Brook CWS 
which are high value biodiv
ersity assets.  Appropriate ecological assessments should be undertaken and 
redevelopment should ensure no detrimental impact upon the ecological value of the adjacent sites. Habitats regulations assessment may be required under the Conservation (Habitats and Species) Regulations 2010. The site is relatively well screened by trees and shrubs on and around the site with the exception of the eastern boundary, but development proposals would need to minimise the impact on views across Port Holme into the conservation area.  Redevelopment should maximise the potential to enhance this part of the conservation area.  A design brief should be prepared for the site due to its sensitive location. 
158 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 9 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
9.75 Some land contamination mitigation has already been completed on the site to bring it up to an adequate 
standard for emplo
yment development.  Further mitigation will be required to bring the site up to a suitable 
standard for residential use. 
9.76 An appropriately detailed flood risk assessment should be completed, considering all forms of flood risk and the effects of 
climate change.  Development should be sequentially located within the site to avoid 
flood risk and will therefore need to be concentrated in the northern part of the site to minimise risk to potential residents.  Details of a suitably designed single vehicular access point should be provided from Mill Common with adequate parking and turning facilities provided within the site.  Pedestrian access should be incorporated providing an escape route to higher land. 
9.77 The southern side of the site is highly vulnerable to flooding with part being in the functional floodplain with much of 
the site being within flood zones 2 and 3a. This impacts both on the proportion of the site 
that could be redeveloped and potential design solutions.  A site-specific flood risk assessment will be essential for the site.  A detailed explanation of flood risk management and mitigation measures will be required which should include provision of flood resilient structures.  A flood response emergency plan should also be put in place. The southern part of the site has potential to provide publicly accessible open space with a landscaping scheme that would ensure a natural river frontage to minimise impact on longer distance views across Port Holme into the site and enhance the environment for biodiversity. 
9.78 There is potential for noise to affect the site as an embanked section of the A14 runs close to the northern boundary of 
the site. This will be partly addressed through the A14 improvement scheme.  However, 
mitigation measures should be incorporated to fully address noise impacts.  Its proximity to Huntingdon ring road air quality management area means that the site is exposed to air pollution so an air quality assessment and low emissions strategy should be completed and the design mitigate against poor air quality where possible. 
9.79 To ensure safety National Grid's requirements should be adhered to regarding the gas pipelines situated within the site and appropriate easement strips incor
porated into the landscaping scheme. 
9.80 Agreement is needed with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that the waste w
ater flows from the development can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements 
of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised.  Huntingdon Waste water Treatment Works (WwTW), which will serve this development, is understood to have available flow headroom in its existing discharge consent and can accept proposed growth in its catchment equivalent to approximately 5,100 homes, as at 2014.  After this unless additional headroom becomes available an increased discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be necessary.  Interim treatment solutions may be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place. 
159 ,.... ,-
' ~ -
. , ,,. 
>,\ . · -
' > \ ' -". \ '. ,,, ' -<"' . "• • Y , . ..... . 'J,T 't / " . . .. , .... J / "'-,? , .... .. 
'(' .,.,..'!", --..::, •'I) '\ ' ,,. , " ' '-<..:,..,, .. , . . 
'', ...,, I 9 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
California Road, Huntingdon 
HU 7 
California Road, Huntingdon 
1.3ha of land at California Road is allocated for 
residential development of approximately 55 homes.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. a noise assessment and consequential 
mitigation measures 
b. appropriate flood risk assessment and 
surface water management plan 
c. archaeological investigation, recording and 
where appropriate conservation 
d. provision of vehicular, cycle and pedestrian 
routes to integrate the site with the adjoining development to the north 
e. provision of open space within the site for 
informal use and a play area as an integral part of development 
f. retention and enhancement of trees and shrubs on western boundary 
g. provision of landscape planting on the south western boundary to provide adequate screening between 
Huntingdonshire Regional College and the proposed scheme 
h. agreement with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that they are satisfied that waste water flows from the proposal can be accommodated 
i. agreement with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements 
of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised 
Development Guidance 
9.81 The site lies between a residential development completed in 2016/17 and Cambridge Regional College 
(Huntingdon Campus). The pro
ximity of the College may give rise to noise implications for new homes 
and a noise assessment and appropriate mitigation measures may need to be incorporated into the design of proposals. 
9.82 Surface water flooding is known to be an issue in this area.  An appropriately detailed flood risk assessment will be needed along with a surface w
ater management plan to ensure appropriate surface water attenuation. 
9.83 Consideration should be given to integration of the site with the surroundings and to facilitate convenient pedestrian access
. Vehicular access should be provided through the adjoining recent development known 
as Saxon Gardens. 
9.84 Landscaping will be an important issue for development proposals to minimise the potential for overlooking from the Regional College incorporating 
existing trees and shrubs along the western boundary.  Potential 
development proposals would need to pay attention to the scale and massing of buildings to create a design that reflects the adjacent uses. 
160 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 9 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
9.85 The site's potential for containing archaeological remains will need to be assessed through the completion 
of an archaeological assessment prior to 
development commencing.  As the site is greenfield it may 
provide some habitats for wildlife; a biodiversity and ecology survey will therefore be required along with the incorporation of necessary mitigation measures where appropriate. 
9.86 Agreement is needed with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that the waste w
ater flows from the development can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements 
of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised.  Huntingdon Waste water Treatment Works (WwTW), which will serve this development, is understood to have available flow headroom in its existing discharge consent and can accept proposed growth in its catchment equivalent to approximately 5,100 homes, as at 2014.  After this unless additional headroom becomes available an increased discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be necessary.  Interim treatment solutions may be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place. 
161 9 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Hinchingbrooke Country Park Extension, Huntingdon 
HU 8 
Hinchingbrooke Country Park Extension, Huntingdon 
27.5ha of land adjacent to Hinchingbrooke Country Park is allocated for green infrastructure. 
Successful delivery of the site will require: 
a. provision of additional pedestrian 
paths, including a north to south route via 
the eastern edge of the island 
b. provision of interpretation boards, 
way-marking signs and bird watching hides 
c. management to improve the site's value for 
biodiversity 
d. an appropriately detailed flood risk 
assessment considering relevant forms of flood risk and the intended use followed by a management strategy including appropriate practices to ensure that the public is not exposed to unacceptable  risk 
e. a new car park off Huntingdon Road 
Development Guidance 
9.87 This extension to Hinchingbrooke Country Park is an important part of the overall strategy to provide 
strategic g
reen infrastructure alongside development. This extension would increase the size of the 
country park considerably and provide a strategic scale area of publicly accessible natural green space capable of serving a significant population in and around the Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area. This extension will specifically help guard against adverse impacts on designated sites in the area that might come about as a result of planned development in the area. 
9.88 The existing route around the eastern lake provides a loop that would ideally be replicated by paths around the western 
part crossing from north to south via the eastern edge of the island using boardwalks, providing 
both access and additional recreational value. This could be achieved in stages with initial paths leading to bird hides giving opportunities for people to observe wildlife in an unobtrusive manner. 
9.89 The allocated land is largely within the floodplain and is also an area that is at risk from surface water flooding.  
An appropriately detailed flood risk assessment should be completed. The assessment should 
include consideration of ways to alleviate surface water flooding in the area including of the B1514, adjacent to the southern boundary. A flood management strategy will be needed to implement necessary practices including closure of the affected parts of the park during flood events to ensure that the public are not put at unnecessary risk. 
9.90 A suitably designed safe access or accesses onto existing highway will be required. There is a significant demand for car 
parking during events at the country park and a new car park accessed from Huntingdon 
Road would cater for increased visitor numbers and avoid the need for all visitors arriving by car to use Hinchingbrooke Park Road.  Adequate parking and preventative highway measures should be provided so that the surrounding highway network is not adversely affected. The Council will look to lease or purchase this land when funds are available. 
162 ..... ! ' I --
-:. ii I Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 9 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Huntingdon Racecourse 
HU 9 
Huntingdon Racecourse 
72ha of land at Huntingdon Racecourse is 
allocated for mixed use development to comprise: 
1. continued use of the site for the racecourse, 
equine support facilities and Huntingdon Rugby Football Club 
2. complementary conference and events 
facilities, outdoor recreational and leisure facilities 
Successful delivery of this development will require: 
a. a suitably detailed flood risk assessment, 
considering all forms of flood risk and climate 
change and a drainage strategy to be produced in agreement with the Council in liaison with relevant bodies 
b. a development strategy that seeks to sequentially locate development and relocate existing uses to 
lower flood risk parts of the site wherever possible in order to reduce overall exposure to flood risk 
c. a proportionate transport assessment and travel plan will be required in relation to the proposed 
development and taking into account the cumulative impact of any preceding or future development. 
d. an ecological assessment to ensure protection of the Brampton racecourse SSSI 
e. a programme of work designed to investigate, and where appropriate to protect, archaeological 
assets 
Development Guidance 
9.91 Huntingdon racecourse comprises 72ha of land currently used for horse racing with around 17 events per 
year, 
the site also hosts Huntingdon rugby club and a range of occasional outdoor events.  A 98 bedroom 
hotel was opened adjacent to the site in 2013.  It is situated within the open countryside and is clearly visible from the A1 and A14 roads. 
9.92 Jockey Club Racecourses are seeking to improve and extend the facilities at the racecourse to support its role in providing a 
recreation, leisure and entertainment facility for the area and to help ensure its 
continuing vitality and viability. Proposals related to equine support facilities and provision or improvement of uses necessary for the effective running of race meetings will be supported where they are within or well-related to the existing complex of buildings to minimise the visual impact. 
9.93 Any proposals for complementary uses for conferences and events, recreation or leisure should ensure minimal visual impact and that any ancillary b
uildings are contained within the eastern portion of the site 
and are well-related to the existing complex of buildings. 
9.94 This site is sensitively located within functional floodplain and contains the Brampton racecourse SSSI which is a high value biodiv
ersity asset.  A site-specific flood risk assessment will be required, appropriate 
to the risk category of the use proposed, to demonstrate that any proposed development is capable of being safely used for its expected lifetime and that if possible it will reduce overall flood risk.  Appropriate ecological assessments should be undertaken and development should ensure no detrimental impact 
163 9 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
upon the ecological value of the SSSI. The agreement of Natural England should be sought on any 
mitigation measures necessary to ensure detailed proposals will not have an adverse effect on the SSSI. Archaeological investigation of any areas proposed for development will be required as the area is rich in prehistoric remains with known heritage assets in the south of the site. 
9.95 A proportionate transport assessment and Travel Plan will be required where appropriate to the proposed development 
which takes into account the cumulative impact of any preceding or proposed future 
development. There is a significant demand for car parking during racing events and concerns exist over increased transport leading to deteriorating air quality and additional noise.  Appropriate travel planning would need to be put in place for visitors and people working on the site, including retention of the public transport connection to Huntingdon railway station to promote non-car based access for race day visitors. 
164 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 9 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Brampton 
165 I ; 
\\\ 
I I 
II 9 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Dorling Way, Brampton 
HU 10 
Dorling Way, Brampton 
12ha of land at Dorling Way, Brampton is 
allocated for residential development of approximately 150 homes.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. a noise assessment and mitigation from the 
A1 and A14 
b. an air quality assessment and low emissions strategy 
c. satisfactory resolution of additional traffic 
impact on local roads having regard to a transport assessment and travel plan 
d. provision of a sustainable transport network for pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles, which facilitates integration with the adjoining residential area 
e. an appropriate form of development that addresses the site's relationship with Laws Crescent and 
Dorling Way 
f. retention and reinforcement of boundary landscaping to provide screening, noise and pollution buffers 
g. a programme of work designed to investigate, record and where appropriate protect, archaeological assets 
h. provision of a surface water drainage strategy detailing on-site storage, drainage routes, and drainage rates 
i. agreement with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from the proposal can be accommodated 
j. agreement with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements 
of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised 
Development Guidance 
9.96 Outline permission was granted for up to 150 homes on this site in September 2016 (planning reference 
16/00194/OUT), follow
ed by reserved matters approval in March 2019 (17/01879/REM). 
9.97 Due to the site's location adjacent to the A1 and A14 noise and light pollution are significant constraints. The design of any de
velopment proposal and its landscaping scheme should take account of the A14 
improvement scheme and demonstrate how it will mitigate and minimise impacts and safeguard the amenity of future residents. 
9.98 A proportionate transport assessment will be required to demonstrate that safe, appropriate accesses can be provided from 
the road network and that any adverse off-site transport impacts can be adequately 
mitigated. In particular, the design of any development should provide a sustainable transport network for vehicles, cyclists and pedestrians which will facilitate integration with Brampton village. 
9.99 The design of any development proposal and its landscaping scheme should demonstrate how it will minimise negative landscape 
impacts from surrounding uses, and how it will respond to existing vistas, 
boundaries, trees and green infrastructure networks. 
166 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 9 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
9.100 There are known archaeological assets in the vicinity of this site and appropriate investigations should be 
carried out, follo
wed by further recording, conservation or other work as applicable. 
167 9 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Brampton Park 
HU 11 
Brampton Park 
32ha of land at Brampton Park is allocated for 
mixed use development to comprise: 
1. approximately 600 homes 
2. approximately 560m2 (gross) of shop 
floorspace (class 'A1') 
3. an appropriate viable use for the grade II 
listed Brampton Park House 
4. community facilities to meet needs arising 
from the development 
5. accessible open space and green 
infrastructure links 
Successful development of the site will require: 
a. satisfactory resolution of any additional traffic 
impact on the surrounding road network having regard to an agreed transport assessment and travel plan 
b. phasing of development, including the provision of community facilities, footpaths, cycle connections, public transport, open space, and affordable housing 
c. provision of a sustainable transport network for vehicles, cyclists and pedestrians which facilitate 
integration with Annington Homes and Brampton village 
d. provision of access from the existing roundabout on Buckden Road and re-opening of Park Lane 
e. use of design codes to create distinctive character areas f. landscape design recognising vistas, boundaries, trees and green infrastructure networks, paying 
particular attention to the area around the northern boundary and views of the grade II listed Brampton 
Park House 
g. incorporation of sustainable drainage systems 
Development Guidance 
9.101 As at May 2019 construction was well advanced on this site.  As such the policy and development guidance 
are retained to detail the role of this site within the development 
strategy and to inform decision making 
on outstanding proposals and should any revised proposals be forthcoming. 
9.102 The site offers the opportunity to develop a new mixed use neighbourhood for Brampton and integrate both itself and the adjoining former 
RAF housing better with the village of Brampton.  Although any 
development scheme is expected to be residential led it should also incorporate a mix of uses to promote its overall sustainability.  An Urban Design Framework (UDF) for the redevelopment of the site was approved in 2011 and should be taken into account as a material consideration.  A number of recent permissions exist on this site. 
9.103 A transport assessment will be required to indicate the ability of the surrounding highway network to accommodate the anticipated levels 
of traffic generation. The creation and enhancement of pedestrian 
and cycle links to the village centre will be necessary to provide safe routes to services and facilities. 
168 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 9 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
9.104 Flood risk is higher in the north of the site from fluvial sources with variable risk of surface water flooding 
including some localised high risk areas 
in the southern part of the site.  A minor watercourse runs across 
the northern boundary of the site and run-off rates will need to be managed to prevent increasing flood extents from there.  A site-specific flood risk assessment will be required with detailed water management and flood mitigation proposals incorporated. 
9.105 A small convenience store and possibly one or two other small shops should be located close to the entrance to 
the site to allow for greatest accessibility for all of the new community.  More detailed guidance 
on this is provided within the UDF .  Community facilities should be provided appropriate to the needs arising from the development, including flexible meeting space capable of meeting social and cultural needs. Successful development of the site will require that school provision can be made at Brampton Primary School to meet the needs arising from residents of the development and a suitable footpath/ cycle link provided. 
9.106 Brampton Park House is a substantial listed building used by the RAF as the officers' mess. This building needs an alternative 
use that respects and protects its heritage.  Given the viability challenges inherent 
in re-use of this building proposed uses will be considered on their merits with regard to achieving appropriate protection of the main listed building, related listed structures and the relationship with the historic parkland.  Retention of other heritage assets which are distinctive features will add to and help retain the character of the site. 
9.107 The site also contains significant groups of trees which contribute to its character and landscape, many of which are protected by a 
tree preservation order. The mature tree belts on the northern, eastern and 
south eastern edges should be retained and reinforced reflecting their contribution to Brampton Conservation Area. The tree lined roads contribute strongly to the existing character of the site and should also be retained and supplemented. 
9.108 The central area of open space, marked out playing field and tennis courts should be retained as these will provide a 
useful facility for future residents and provide an open setting to Brampton Park House.  A 
multi-use community building will be provided close to this central area including the provision of changing facilities for the sports facilities. 
9.109 The site contains mineral resources that should be protected in accordance with Cambridgeshire and 
Peterborough Minerals and Waste Core Strategy policies CS26 and CS27 (or relevant successor document).  
A waste strategy and audit will also be required in conformity policies CS7, CS16 and CS28. 
169 -
/' 
---9 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Brampton Park Golf Club Practice Ground 
HU 12 
Brampton Park Golf Club Practice Ground 
3ha of land at Brampton Golf Club, Buckden Road 
is allocated for residential development of approximately 65 homes.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. a detailed flood risk assessment and flood 
mitigation works as appropriate and surface 
water management strategy 
b. a transport assessment and travel plan 
c. an ecological assessment and enhancement 
scheme 
d. a tree protection and landscape scheme 
e. provision of pedestrian and cycle routes to 
integrate the site with the surrounding 
network 
f. a programme of work designed to 
investigate, record and where appropriate protect, archaeological assets 
Development Guidance 
9.110 More than half the site is considered to be at risk of flooding, being within flood zone 2. The extent of 
flood risk will 
need to be established through a detailed flood risk assessment, and development will need 
to address any risk through incorporation of suitable flood protection/ mitigation measures, including ensuring that development does not increase flood risk off-site.  In particular, a sequential approach will need to be taken to the arrangement of development within this site. 
9.111 A transport assessment will be required to indicate the ability of the surrounding highway network to accommodate the anticipated levels 
of traffic generation. The creation and enhancement of pedestrian 
and cycle links to the village centre, and to the adjacent Brampton Park development, will be necessary to provide safe routes to services and facilities. 
9.112 The site's location on the edge of Brampton means that impact on the surrounding landscape is a development 
constraint. However, the site is screened from the B1514 by hedgerow trees, and is screened 
from longer distance views to the south and east by mature trees on and adjacent to Brampton Golf Course minimising its impact on the Ouse Valley. The design of any development proposal and its landscaping scheme should demonstrate how it will mitigate and minimise landscape impact., 
9.113 Due to the presence of hedgerow trees on-site, and mature trees on the adjacent golf course, a tree protection strategy will 
be required.  In addition, this area could support bat species due to the presence 
of particular tree species.  A biodiversity and ecology survey and report would be required and appropriate mitigation measures incorporated into the design of potential development where necessary. 
9.114 The site is considered to be located within an area with archaeological potential as such a programme of work 
designed to investigate, record and where appropriate protect, archaeological assets will be required. 
170 Stirling Farm Col Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 9 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Park View Garage, Brampton 
HU 13 
Park View Garage, Brampton 
0.4ha of land at Park View Garage, Brampton is 
allocated for employment development to be comprised of light industrial use (class 'B1c'). Successful development of the site will require: 
a. incorporation of the protected trees into a 
comprehensive landscaping scheme 
b. An appropriately high quality design 
recognising this sites prominent location at 
a 'gateway' for Brampton 
c. rationalisation to a single safe access point 
onto the highway network 
Development Guidance 
9.115 The site is in a prominent location at the gateway to Brampton from the south, redevelopment proposals 
should therefore incor
porate high quality design to enhance the approach to the village. There are several 
protected trees within the site which would need to be incorporated into a landscape scheme as part of development. 
9.116 Redevelopment proposals should investigate land contamination issues given the previous use and incorporate 
appropriate mitigation measures to bring it up to an adequate standard for modern employment 
use. 
9.117 The site is currently detached from the village but additional services and facilities are being provided by the redevelopment 
of 'Brampton Park', opposite. There are presently two accesses to the site. 
Redevelopment 
will reduce this to a single point, in accordance with current standards complemented 
with adequate internal turning and parking.  Details on how the site will be connected to the nearest pedestrian routes will also be required. 
9.118 The site has potential to provide high quality employment development in an appropriately landscaped setting.  
It is envisaged that development of this site will comprise light industrial floorspace (class 'B1c'). 
It is anticipated that approximately 40 jobs may be possible on the 0.4ha identified. 
9.119 The site falls within the Station Farm/ Buckden Landfill Waste Consultation Area (Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Minerals and Waste Site-Specific Proposals Plan policy W8AX).  Development will therefore have to demonstr
ate compatibility with the nearby waste management uses protected through the waste 
consultation area in this plan or relevant successor documents. 
171 9 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Godmanchester 
172 .oi&, /,,, 
" ••• \.\\€) 
' I.;-
.., ......_--..; _ Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 9 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
RGE Engineering, Godmanchester 
HU 14 
RGE Engineering, Godmanchester 
3ha of land at RGE Engineering, the 
Council owned Bridge Place public car park at The Avenue and land extending under the A14 flyover to Cook’s Stream, , Godmanchester is allocated for a mix of uses to comprise: 
1. approximately 90 homes 
2. re-provision of part of the site as 
public car park 
Successful development of the site will 
require: 
a. flood risk assessment considering 
all forms of flood risk and climate 
change with development sequentially located within the site and appropriate mitigation measures incorporated as necessary 
b. an air quality assessment and low emissions strategy 
c. a contamination assessment and mitigation measures as appropriate d. provision of high quality development to reflect the site's sensitive location and relationship with 
several listed buildings and the Huntingdon and Godmanchester conservation areas, ensuring that 
heritage assets and their settings are preserved and where possible enhanced 
e. provision of a cycle/ foot bridge across Cook's Stream to the dismantled railway line to link in with 
the wider pedestrian/ cycle network should be investigated and provided if possible 
f. agreement with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from the proposal can be accommodated 
g. agreement with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements 
of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised 
Development Guidance 
9.120 The site offers an opportunity for environmental enhancement of this approach into Huntingdon.  It can 
also consolidate a cluster of housing which is well located 
with regard to access to services and provide 
homes in an attractive, sensitive location.  A design brief should be prepared for the site due to its sensitive location. 
9.121 Due to the risk of flooding on-site a flood risk assessment will need to be carried out and mitigation measures incorporated 
as necessary.  Levels of flood risk should inform the sequential location of uses 
with more vulnerable uses on lower flood risk parts of the site. 
9.122 The existing commercial use and historic uses of the site mean that contamination may be an issue. This will need to be fully investigated 
and appropriate measures taken to bring the site up to the required 
standard for residential development. 
173 9 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
9.123 A high quality design-led development should reflect the site's sensitive location on the urban/ rural fringe 
of Godmanchester and the relationship with the Huntingdon and Godmanchester conservation 
areas and 
a number of listed buildings. The scheme must ensure that heritage assets and their settings are preserved and where possible enhanced. There is an opportunity for a cycle/ foot bridge across Cook's Stream to the dismantled railway line to link in with the network of cycle and footpaths across the Ouse meadows. A bridge here would enable a more direct long distance route between Huntingdon and Hemingford Abbots linking into the Ouse Valley Way. This opportunity should be investigated and provided if possible. 
9.124 Agreement is needed with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that the waste w
ater flows from the development can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements 
of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised.  Huntingdon Waste water Treatment Works (WwTW), which will serve this development, is understood to have available flow headroom in its existing discharge consent and can accept proposed growth in its catchment equivalent to approximately 5,100 homes, as at 2014.  After this unless additional headroom becomes available an increased discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be necessary.  Interim treatment solutions may be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place. 
174 I f 
< 
.......__ ., .. 
--~111 '~ 
ill 1 
rl I Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 9 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Wigmore Farm Buildings, Godmanchester 
HU 15 
Wigmore Farm Buildings, Godmanchester 
0.7ha of land east of Silver Street, Godmanchester 
is allocated for residential development of approximately 13 homes.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. flood risk assessment considering all forms 
of flood risk and climate with development sequentially located within the site and appropriate mitigation measures incorporated as necessary 
b. provision of a single access route in the 
northern corner to Silver Street 
c. upgrading of Silver Street between the site 
entrance and Duck End in agreement with Cambridgeshire County Council 
d. provision of pedestrian links to the adjacent development (Comben Drive) via open space to the south 
e. provision of high quality development to reflect the site's sensitive location on the rural fringe of 
Godmanchester 
f. provision of landscaping adjacent to Silver Street on the western boundary 
g. agreement with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that 
waste water flows from the proposal can be accommodated 
h. agreement with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements 
of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised 
Development Guidance 
9.125 The section of Silver Street adjacent to this site has a rural character and has limited capacity to 
accommodate additional traffic. 
 Development will need to reflect this character and capacity and should 
therefore be low density with well landscaped areas and open space. 
9.126 A single vehicular access point onto Silver Street should be agreed and provided.  A transport statement would be 
required to ascertain what improvements would be necessary; it is thought that passing bays 
will be needed but widening between the site and Duck End cannot be ruled out.  Foot and cycle path access to development to the south of the site will also need to be created via the adjacent open space. 
9.127 Landscaping will be required to protect the rural character along Silver Street to provide extra screening therefore a landscape management plan should be provided. 
9.128 This 
area could support bat species due to the presence of particular tree species.  A biodiversity and 
ecology surve
y and report would be required and appropriate mitigation measures incorporated into the 
design of potential development where necessary. 
9.129 Evidence from adjacent development identified soil contamination and remediation work was required. A contamination assessment and remediation works as appropr
iate would therefore be required. 
175 9 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
9.130 Full planning permission, reference 16/01477/FUL, was granted in August 2017 for erection of 13 dwellings. 
9.131 Part of the western part of the site is within flood zones 2 and 3a. There is also some risk of surface water 
flooding.  
Due to this risk a flood risk assessment will need to be carried out, development sequentially 
located within the site and potential mitigation measures incorporated as necessary. 
9.132 Agreement is needed with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that the waste w
ater flows from the development can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements 
of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised.  Huntingdon Waste water Treatment Works (WwTW), which will serve this development, is understood to have available flow headroom in its existing discharge consent and can accept proposed growth in its catchment equivalent to approximately 5,100 homes, as at 2014.  After this unless additional headroom becomes available an increased discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be necessary.  Interim treatment solutions may be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place. 
176 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 9 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Bearscroft Farm, Godmanchester 
HU 16 
Bearscroft Farm, Godmanchester 
45.5ha of land at Bearscroft Farm, 
Godmanchester is allocated for development of a mix of uses to comprise: 
1. approximately 750 homes 
2. 4.4ha of land for employment uses (all class 
'B' uses except 'B8') 
3. a neighbourhood centre to comprise 950m
2 
retail floorspace(36) (classes 'A1', 'A2', 'A3' 
or 'A5'), of which not more than 700m2 to be 
shops (class 'A1') 
4. a primary school on 2.3ha of land 
5. an area of at least 2ha of accessible natural 
green space with comprehensive links to the wider green infrastructure network 
6. social and community facilities to meet 
needs arising from development 
Successful development of the site will require: 
a. satisfactory resolution of any impact caused by traffic generated from development on the A14 in 
accordance with the Highways Agency's requirements or delivery of an upgraded A14 
b. satisfactory integration of development with the existing built-up area of Godmanchester 
c. completion of a public consultation exercise agreed with the Council d. production and implementation of a development strategy that seeks to ensure balanced delivery of 
industrial and commercial development with development of homes, infrastructure, services and facilities 
e. design codes or conceptual appearance of development proposals 
f. landscape design recognising vistas, boundaries and green infrastructure networks, paying particular 
attention to the area around the eastern boundary 
g. the mixture of uses to be incorporated, including social and community facilities to meet the needs 
arising from development 
h. a sustainable transport network for vehicles, cyclists, pedestrians and public transport 
i. flood risk assessment and provision of sustainable drainage systems j. agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that they are satisfied that 
waste water flows from the proposal can be accommodated 
k. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework 
Directive would not be compromised 
36 All figures for floorspace are gross unless specifically stated otherwise 
177 9 Huntingdon Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Development Guidance 
9.133 As at May 2019 construction was well advanced on this site with the Bridge Primary Academy and the 
local shops open. As 
such the policy and development guidance are retained to detail the role of this site 
within the development strategy and to inform decision making on outstanding proposals and forthcoming for the remainder of the site or revised proposals be submitted. 
9.134 The site lies in close proximity to the A14 and it is expected that traffic from development will use the trunk road. The Highw
ays Agency's requirement for nil detriment or minimal impact to be demonstrated must 
be complied with, until such time as the A14 improvement scheme is completed. There have been substantial works to and around the A1198 in order to address conflicts between through traffic and people travelling within Godmanchester.  However the road is likely to continue to be a barrier to some extent to full integration of this site with the rest of Godmanchester. The transport impacts of this proposal are set out in the approved transport assessment and travel plan accompanying the approved planning permission (reference 1200685OUT) which was granted in February 2014. 
9.135 Shopping facilities should meet local residents’ day to day needs but not have an impact on Huntingdon town centre.
  Other services and facilities should be included in the same neighbourhood centre to ensure 
a sustainable and balanced community.  Playing fields and play areas should be provided in accordance with policies elsewhere in the Development Plan.  Primary school provision will be provided to meet the needs of this development (considered to be met with 1.5 forms of entry) and to provide scope for future capacity, in agreement with Cambridgeshire County Council. 
9.136 It is anticipated that the employment development on this site will be comprised of office, research and development 
and light industrial uses.  Alternatively a combination of business and general industrial 
(classes 'B1' and 'B2') may be appropriate.  Storage and distribution (class 'B8') should not form part of development on this site.  It is calculated that approximately 475 jobs may be possible on the 4.4ha identified. 
9.137 Boundary treatments along with development densities, building heights and their proximity to the eastern boundary will 
need to be carefully considered due to the change in topography around the eastern boundary 
and the potential for impact on views from the east and southeast. 
9.138 There are known archaeological assets in the vicinity of this site and appropriate investigations should be carried out, follo
wed by further recording, conservation or other work as applicable. 
9.139 Agreement is needed with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that the waste w
ater flows from the development can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements 
of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised.  Huntingdon Waste water Treatment Works (WwTW), which will serve this development, is understood to have available flow headroom in its existing discharge consent and can accept proposed growth in its catchment equivalent to approximately 5,100 homes, as at 2014.  After this unless additional headroom becomes available an increased discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be necessary.  Interim treatment solutions may be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place. 
178 • St Neots Spatial Planning Area 10 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
10 St Neots Spatial Planning Area 
10.1 The St Neots Spatial Planning Area is defined in 'Definition of Spatial Planning Areas'. 
179 I , 
I I 10 St Neots Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Strategic Expansion Location: St Neots East 
10.2 The eastern expansion of St Neots on land to the east of the railway line was the largest direction of growth 
identified in the Core Strategy 2009. 
The St Neots Eastern Expansion Urban Design Framework 2010 
developed by the Council and the key developer interests forms the basis of the proposed development site. 
SEL 2 
St Neots East 
226ha of land east of Loves Farm and at Wintringham Park, Cambridge Road, St Neots is allocated for 
mixed use sustainable development in accordance with the St Neots Eastern Expansion Urban Design Framework 2010 to comprise: 
1. approximately 3,820 homes 
2. approximately 22ha of employment land (class 'B') 3. a local centre of some 3ha containing offices (class 'B1a' uses), approximately 4,000m
2 of gross retail 
floorspace (class 'A1') including a supermarket (class 'A1') with a maximum retail floorspace of 
3,000m2 and other retail and food and drink uses (classes 'A2' to 'A5') and ancillary uses appropriate 
to the scale of development within the centre 
4. a neighbourhood centre of some 0.3ha containing approximately 800m2 of floorspace for retail, 
service, food and drink and community uses (class 'A1' to 'A5' and 'D1' and 'D2') 
5. specialist accommodation for older people equivalent to at least a 120 bed space care home 
180 \. St Neots Spatial Planning Area 10 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
6. educational and community facilities appropriate to the scale of development, including primary 
schools and day care/ nurser
y provision 
7. indoor and outdoor sports facilities appropriate to the scale of development 
8. transport infrastructure improvements proportionate to the scale of development 
9. strategic green space and open space 
Successful development of the site will require: 
a. satisfactory resolution of the impact of additional traffic on the A428, A1 and the local highway network 
having regard to a transpor
t assessment and travel plan 
b. comprehensive master planning to be undertaken by the site developer with public engagement with the cooperation of the Council 
c. provision of quality pedestr
ian and cycle improvements to the town centre and other key service 
destinations 
d. production and implementation of a development strategy that seeks to ensure balanced delivery of industrial and commercial dev
elopment with development of homes, infrastructure, services and 
facilities 
e. the arrangement of different uses in a manner that minimises the need to travel and includes a transport netw
ork that promotes sustainable travel modes 
f. differentiated densities of development with higher densities around defined centres and the development of distinctiv
e character areas 
g. a mix of uses to be incorporated, including social, community and sporting facilities, that meets the needs of the proposed development 
h. retail 
provision appropriate to the area which is complementary to the continued vitality and viability 
of St Neots town centre 
i. the creation of a single main centre on the south side of Cambridge Road fronting the road, with shared comm
unal spaces and a clear sense of place 
j. the creation of a neighbourhood centre near to the underpass b
y Howitt's Lane 
k. the creation of a landscaped business park with frontage to the A428 
l. enhancement and provision for habitats in accordance with an ecological assessment and strategy 
m. areas of green and open space throughout the development that link with the strategic green infrastructure netw
ork and provide for a wide range of recreational purposes and flood reduction 
n. a tree survey and planting scheme 
o. a landscaping scheme recognising and enhancing vistas, boundaries, and green infrastructure networks 
p
. design codes for the appearance of development proposals 
q. assessment of noise impacts for the site, particularly from the East Coast Main Line Railway, and appropriate acoustic treatments to address any adv
erse impacts 
r. flood risk assessment and provision of sustainable drainage systems 
s. separation from the gas pipeline and high voltage electricity transmission line in accordance with National Grid requirements 
t. production and implementation of a waste audit and a w
aste minimisation, re-use and recovery 
strategy 
u. agreement with the En
vironment Agency and Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from 
the proposal can be accommodated 
v. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised 
181 10 St Neots Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Development Guidance 
10.3 The Urban Design Framework 2010 sets out a framework for urban growth in this area.  In order to best 
provide f
or economic growth and facilitate easy access to employment opportunities, development of 
industrial and commercial uses will need to be phased in with housing growth. 
10.4 Two separate planning applications cover the area, one to the south of Cambridge Road (Wintringham Park) 
and the other to the north (Loves Farm Phase 2). It is recognised that these will be built out separately 
with a number of phases within each. 
10.5 It is not anticipated that all of the proposed dwellings associated with this allocation will be built by the end of the plan period. When 
assessed against realistic rates of annual delivery, including taking into account 
the proximity of other nearby allocations, it is estimated that final completion of the site will be beyond 2036. This will be reviewed through the Council's annual housing trajectory. 
10.6 A key issue is the effect of this development on the strategic highway network. While the A428 has been dualled east of Caxton Gibbet, and 
the A1 and A421 to the west are also dual carriageway, this part of 
the A428 is currently still a single 2-lane carriageway, and currently experiences congestion at certain times of the day. Highways England are progressing an improvement scheme which is part of the government's Road Investment Strategy April 2015 to March 2020. On-site works are anticipated to start around spring 2020. 
10.7 In order to off-set the impact of introducing new access points on the A428 and to mitigate the impact of development 
on other off-site junctions on the route, improvements are anticipated at the roundabouts at 
Wyboston, Barford Road, Cambridge Road and Caxton Gibbet. A transport assessment (in accordance with policy LP 16 'Sustainable Travel') and Travel Plan is required for each phase of development in order 
to assess the transport impact on the A428, A1 and the local road network. Delivery of this site will need to take into 
account the timing of highway improvement works. The development also needs to ensure 
that sufficient parking is provided on the site in line with policy LP17 'Parking Provision and Vehicle 
Movement'. 
10.8 The internal layout of the development will include new roads and public rights of way.  A central landscaped spine road is anticipated from Cambridge Road 
through to Potton Road.  Additional access along Cambridge 
Road will be needed, especially for the main centre and the area north of Cambridge Road.  Links with the existing Loves Farm development should be provided to encourage integration.  Cambridge Road itself should be improved as the gateway to St Neots town centre.  Despite the barrier of the railway line, connections are expected under the two bridges in the area between Cambridge Road and Potton Road. New and improved public transport, in particular bus transport, is expected.  Some of the existing public rights of way will need to be relocated to correspond with expected travel routes. 
10.9 The land should accommodate a variety of densities of development, a main centre, a local centre, a business par
k and smaller employment areas.  Retail development in this area should not compete with, 
but instead complement the existing town centre.  It is expected that development will be most dense closest to the main centre and other services.  Design codes will establish how the uses will be viewed and their interrelationships.  Appropriate design should ensure that development sits as a positive feature within the landscape.  Development is expected to be set back and necessary acoustic treatments incorporated in respect of areas affected by noise from the East Coast Mainline. 
10.10 Employment land is an essential element of this allocation to contribute to sustainable development by offering 
opportunities for people to work close to home.  Employment provision should complement that 
already in St Neots and be distributed across several locations within the strategic expansion location.  A variety of premises should be included offering suitable accommodation for a range of employment uses. B1 light industrial and office uses may be integrated with residential areas, however, B2 general industrial uses should avoid directly adjoining residential areas to protect against adverse impacts on the amenity of residents.  Using the jobs density figure from Alconbury Enterprise Zone and the industry standard floorspace a jobs figure of approximately 2,420 may be possible on the 22ha identified. 
182 St Neots Spatial Planning Area 10 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
10.11 St Neots East will form a substantial increase to the newly established community at Loves Farm and will 
require social and community ser
vices and facilities to supplement those accessible elsewhere within St 
Neots. To help develop a successful and cohesive community and encourage sustainable lifestyles social and community facilities and support are integral to this development.  Locations to facilitate the development of community spirit such as public meeting spaces, places of worship and education facilities should be incorporated in accessible positions; multi-purpose use should be promoted to aid the viability and efficient use of such facilities. To accommodate the need for school places that will arise from the scale of development proposed three primary schools should be provided.  Appropriate early years/ day care nursery provision should also be included which may be a mixture of public and private provision. 
10.12 A variety of densities of housing development and some mixed use areas should be incorporated to help promote areas of distinct character within 
St Neots East. The housing mix should have regard to the 
expected demographic change over the lifetime of the development. This means that starter homes, family homes, homes for those who wish to downsize and self-contained supported housing are all likely to be required.  A care home suitable to meet the needs of older people should be incorporated to ensure that people who move to the neighbourhood have the opportunity to remain there in appropriate specialist accommodation later in life if they require this.  In recognition of the scale of this allocation it is considered important that the full range of sizes, types and tenures of home are available. 
10.13 Given the size of the development there are opportunities to provide significant open space for recreational needs and add to the strategic g
reen infrastructure network.  A full range of formal and informal open 
space, including sports and play facilities, should be incorporated in accordance with the Council's current standards at the time of development. 
10.14 An objective assessment of need for sports and active recreation facilities will be required and appropriate provision made
, reflecting the quantity and nature of development proposed.  Structural planting should 
also be provided to help define and shape the new development.  Public open space can address the potential for flooding and should result in little if any sensitive development within flood zones.  However, surface water attenuation areas, such as swales or retention basins, should not be used as public open space if their use would be impractical during wet months. 
10.15 Improved biodiversity and wildlife can be encouraged through a network of green spaces and sustainable drainage systems 
that are specifically designed to foster greater ecological diversity. The open space 
referred to above should therefore be dispersed throughout the site to assist in achieving the aspirations of Natural England's Accessible Natural Green Space Standards: improving accessibility, naturalness and connectivity of green spaces.  In addition, it is envisaged that green space provided on this site will link in with public rights of way through St Neots to the Ouse Valley and that this site should link to additional green corridors out to South Cambridgeshire. Existing areas of particularly high biodiversity value should be integrated into the design of the network of green spaces. 
10.16 Development on this scale offers an opportunity for minimising carbon dioxide emissions with the aim of the whole site being zero carbon.
  Options to achieve this aim, which could include a decentralised heat/ 
energy network, should be thoroughly explored. 
10.17 Part of the site is affected by overhead transmission lines and there are also gas pipelines near the railway line. 
 Appropriate separation distances from these will need to be maintained, in accordance with advice 
from National Grid.  It is recognised that the overhead transmission lines will not be placed underground as it is not considered feasible and there is little net benefit in visual terms due to the need to replace two pylons with larger terminal towers. 
10.18 Reference should be made to the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Minerals and Waste Core Strategy  (or relevant 
successor document) regarding requirements to ensure that waste is appropriately managed and 
dealt with. 
10.19 The policy requires agreement with the Environment Agency (EA) and Anglian Water Services (AWS) to ensure that the waste w
ater flows from proposed development can be accommodated and that meeting 
the requirements of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised.  St Neots Waste Water 
183 10 St Neots Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Treatment Works (WwTW) will serve this site and currently has no available headroom.  Unless additional 
headroom becomes available a change in discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be required.This would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and hence would not impact on attainment of future WFD water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions will be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place.  Should temporary measures prove not to be viable or would be insufficient it may be necessary to place limits on the amount of development that can take place. Anglian Water has identified further investment at St Neots Water Recycling Centre as outlined in their current Asset Management Plan (which covers the period 2015 to 2020). 
184 St Neots Spatial Planning Area 10 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
St Neots 
St Mary's Urban Village, St Neots 
SN 1 
St Mary's Urban Village, St Neots 
0.9ha of land at St Mary's Urban Village is 
allocated for a mix of uses to comprise: 
1. approximately 45 homes 
2. 60m2 of retail floorspace (class 'A1' or 'A2') 
Successful development of the site will require: 
a. provision of vehicular access points from 
Brook Street and pedestrian access points 
from High Street and Church Walk 
b. provision of high quality development that 
enhances the character of the conservation area and safeguards and enhances the character and setting of Brook House, a grade II* listed building, 7-11 Brook Street which is a grade II listed building and the nearby St Mary's Church, a grade I listed building 
c. a layout which maximises the opportunities to create a sense of place afforded by views to surrounding listed buildings 
d. provision of an air quality assessment and low emissions strategy 
e. provision of a Flood Risk Assessment to be produced in agreement with relevant bodies f. agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from 
the proposal can be accommodated 
g. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework 
Directive would not be compromised 
Development Guidance 
10.20 This site has potential for some redevelopment to reinforce its role as a residential-led area of mixed uses 
within St Neots town centre.
 Any opportunities to aid its reintegration with the rest of the town centre should 
be taken, reinforcing the existing network of routes that provide physical and visual links to the High Street and Brook Street. Vehicular access points should be created at the south of the site, with pedestrian access to the north from the High Street and to the east from Church Walk. 
10.21 This site is located within the conservation area and contains a mixture of buildings.  Some of the existing buildings on-site 
are in a poor state of repair and could be improved by appropriate redevelopment. The 
site includes Brook House, a Grade II* listed building, considered to be one of the finest buildings in St Neots. There are two other listed buildings within the site, and several adjacent, including St Mary's Church, and the view of the church tower could become a focal view in any redevelopment proposals. Any development proposal should protect the character and setting of all nearby listed buildings. The 
185 10 St Neots Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
layout of development should also maximise the contribution to a sense of place and integration that may 
be afforded by views to other listed buildings such as the United Reformed Church. The site also contains some trees that should be retained. 
10.22 Development that harms views or a sense of the historic nature of this site should be resisted. Design distinctiveness is 
important in this sensitive location and proposals should add variety and interest to the 
area. Contemporary design elements will be supported which respond sensitively to the surrounding buildings. 
10.23 A small part of the site in the south lies within the functional floodplain.  A flood risk assessment will be required.  
It is likely that a proportion of the site cannot be developed with any buildings and that a further 
buffer may be needed to avoid climate change impacts. However, it is necessary to incorporate this area into the site in order to ensure an appropriate design solution for the area is prepared. 
10.24 The site lies partly within and partly adjacent to the St Neots Air Quality Management Area, which means that it is exposed to 
air pollution.  An air quality assessment and low emissions strategy should be 
completed, and the design of development should mitigate against poor air quality where possible. 
10.25 A planning application for 24 dwellings on part of the site (0900411FUL) was approved in December 2014. 3 dwellings w
ere permitted in May 2014 on another part (1301969FUL) and permission for change of use 
of the chapel to form 2 dwellings was granted in April 2013 (1201442FUL). As at May 2019 a series of planning applications have been granted covering the majority of the site. 
10.26 The policy requires agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services to ensure that the waste w
ater flows from proposed development can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements 
of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised.  St Neots Waste Water Treatment Works (WwTW) will serve this site and currently has no available headroom.  Unless additional headroom becomes available a change in discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be required. This would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and hence would not impact on attainment of future WFD water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions will be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place.  Should temporary measures prove not to be viable or would be insufficient it may be necessary to place limits on the amount of development that can take place. 
10.27 The St Mary's Urban Village Urban Design Framework and Master Plan (2006) makes recommendations addressing various 
issues affecting the majority of this site including the mix of uses, historic buildings 
and trees, and transport and access, before proposing an indicative footprint for built form. Any development proposal should consider how it responds to the objectives and guidance set out in this document. 
186 St Neots Spatial Planning Area 10 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Loves Farm Reserved Site, St Neots 
SN 2 
Loves Farm Reserved Site, St Neots 
1ha of land east of the East Coast Main Line at 
Loves Farm, Cambridge Road, St Neots is allocated for residential development of approximately 40 dwellings.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. development in accordance with the outline 
approval for Loves Farm 
b. an access point from Dramsell Rise to serve all new development 
c. good urban design recognising the 
importance of this site to the townscape 
d. detailed flood risk assessment and flood 
mitigation works as appropriate 
e. protection of Fox Brook and associated 
vegetation 
f. noise assessment and design to mitigate the effects of noise from the East Coast Main Line 
g. avoidance of any harm to the adjoining Grade II listed milestone h. separation from the high pressure and intermediate pressure gas pipelines located adjacent to the 
site 
i. agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from 
the proposal can be accommodated 
j. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework 
Directive would not be compromised 
Development Guidance 
10.28 Development proposals should respond to the challenges of this gateway location into St Neots ensuring 
exceptional design. 
To date the site has been reserved while development of the remainder of Loves 
Farm has proceeded around it. The original size of the site has been reduced following the establishment of a service complex and footpath. The site is affected by the East Coast Main Line, busy road junctions, a gas pipeline and Fox Brook and development proposals will need to recognise these. 
10.29 The site is within the Environment Agency's Flood Zones 2 and 3.  Flood risk assessment is required upon any planning 
application.  More detailed assessments have identified that the site is suitable in flood risk 
management terms given upstream flood attenuation works that have been undertaken in relation to the Loves Farm development. These works are not accounted for in the Environment Agency's mapping, or in the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment. 
10.30 Residential development is anticipated and should be coordinated with the forms already under development in Loves 
Farm. The design should take into account the results of a noise assessment particularly in 
respect of noise from the railway.  A lesser scale of development is expected on the northern edge of the site adjoining Fox Brook and provision should be made for the protection of vegetation alongside the brook.  An access to the site has been identified within the design of Dramsell Rise. The grade II listed 
187 10 St Neots Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
milestone located on Cambridge Rd adjacent to the site should not be affected by development.  Appropriate 
separation distance from the gas pipeline along the railway line should be established with the National Grid and any necessary easement strips incorporated into the landscaping scheme. 
10.31 An outline application was approved in January 2017 for 41 dwellings referenced 1300389OUT, with all matters reserved apar
t from the access. 
10.32 The policy requires agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services to ensure that the waste w
ater flows from proposed development can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements 
of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised.  St Neots Waste Water Treatment Works (WwTW) will serve this site and currently has no available headroom.  Unless additional headroom becomes available a change in discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be required. This would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and hence would not impact on attainment of future WFD water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions will be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place.  Should temporary measures prove not to be viable or would be insufficient it may be necessary to place limits on the amount of development that can take place. 
188 St Neots Spatial Planning Area 10 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Cromwell Road North, St Neots 
SN 3 
Cromwell Road North, St Neots 
2.6ha of land west of Cromwell Road is allocated 
for residential development to comprise approximately 80 homes.  Successful redevelopment of the site will require: 
a. provision of appropriate vehicular access 
from Cromwell Road 
b. provision of a Flood Risk Assessment to be 
produced in agreement with relevant bodies 
c. on-site sustainable drainage 
d. protection of Wintringham Brook e. noise attenuation measures incorporated in 
the design of the site or individual buildings 
f. provision of a safety assessment together 
with a site contamination report 
g. retention of trees where appropriate and 
provision of additional open space and landscaping 
h. separation from the gas pipeline in accordance with National Grid requirements 
i. agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from 
the proposal can be accommodated 
j. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework 
Directive would not be compromised 
Development Guidance 
10.33 Part of this site was formerly in employment use along with related car parking, the remainder being 
grassland.
 Demolition of the remainder of the fire damaged employment building was agreed in 2014. 
Given the former use land contamination investigations will be required and appropriate mitigation will be required to bring the site up to a suitable standard for residential use. 
10.34 The site is adjacent to the Cromwell Road Established Employment Area which is a relatively noisy environment and 
there is industry on the eastern side of the road with the East Coast Mainline railway 
beyond that.  Appropriate noise attenuation measures should therefore be incorporated to ensure that new housing will provide adequate residential amenity. 
10.35 The site is adjoined by residential development on two sides and any opportunities to provide pedestrian and cycle linkages to aid integration with this should be tak
en up. 
10.36 A large proportion of the site lies within Flood Zone 3a but it is understood that the flood attenuation works associated with the St Neots East strategic e
xpansion location and the change in levels at the railway 
embankment will mean that the land is unlikely to be subject to flooding.  Nevertheless it is essential that a flood risk assessment is carried out and that on-site measures are implemented to deal with surface water and for protection from flood risk associated with Wintringham Brook which is culverted at this point. Opening the culvert could reduce the future cost of maintenance and replacement and improve visual amenity and biodiversity of the site. The capacity identified in the allocation reflects this constraint. 
189 10 St Neots Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
10.37 Development proposals will need to provide information on how the impacts of the development will be 
accommodated and mitigated where appropriate.  
A transport assessment (in accordance with policy LP 
16 'Sustainable Travel') will be required. The development also needs to ensure that sufficient parking is provided on the site in line with policy LP 17 'Parking Provision and Vehicle Movement'. 
10.38 It is expected that an ecological survey and arboricultural survey will identify the need for the protection of any areas and trees. 
10.39 The 
policy requires agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services to ensure that 
the waste w
ater flows from proposed development can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements 
of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised.  St Neots Waste Water Treatment Works (WwTW) will serve this site and currently has no available headroom.  Unless additional headroom becomes available a change in discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be required. This would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and hence would not impact on attainment of future WFD water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions will be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place.  Should temporary measures prove not to be viable or would be insufficient it may be necessary to place limits on the amount of development that can take place. 
190 St Neots Spatial Planning Area 10 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Cromwell Road Car Park, St Neots 
SN 4 
Cromwell Road Car Park, St Neots 
0.6ha of land west of Cromwell Road is allocated 
for residential development of approximately 20 homes.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. improvements to the existing access 
opposite the Bargroves Education Centre 
b. noise attenuation measures incorporated in 
the design of the site or individual buildings 
c. retention of trees and provision of additional landscaping 
d. separation from the gas pipeline in 
accordance with National Grid requirements 
e. agreement with the Environment Agency 
and Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from the proposal can be accommodated 
f. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework 
Directive would not be compromised 
Development Guidance 
10.40 The site is situated in an area of mixed uses; residential development is deemed appropriate given that 
there is neighbouring housing to the south. 
10.41 The site 
is currently accessed from a non-adopted road used by the Bargroves Education Centre and 
Samuel P
epys School in addition to this car park.  Improvements to the existing access are likely to be 
necessary to service the anticipated number of new homes in accordance with the Manual for Streets to ensure a suitably designed safe access can be agreed and provided. 
10.42 Appropriate boundary treatments with the neighbouring residential properties and the school will be expected, including 
noise attenuation measures. The trees which are currently part of the landscaping 
around the car park should be retained where possible and form part of the additional landscaping required for residential use of the site. 
10.43 The site falls within a waste consultation area for the Marston Road Household Recycling Centre and Biffa Depot as set out in the Cambridgeshire and 
Peterborough Minerals and Waste Core Strategy. Given the 
nearby residential use residential development on this site is unlikely to prejudice the continued operation of the waste facilities. However, any development proposal should demonstrate compatibility with the nearby waste management uses. 
10.44 To ensure safety National Grid's requirements should be adhered to regarding the gas pipelines situated within the site and appropriate easement strips incor
porated into the landscaping scheme. 
10.45 The policy requires agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services to ensure that the waste w
ater flows from proposed development can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements 
of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised.  St Neots Waste Water Treatment Works 
191 10 St Neots Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
(WwTW) will serve this site and currently has no available headroom.  Unless additional headroom becomes 
available a change in discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be required. This would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and hence would not impact on attainment of future WFD water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions will be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place.  Should temporary measures prove not to be viable or would be insufficient it may be necessary to place limits on the amount of development that can take place. 
192 1-j 't ' ,..,_ s' l -, 
f. T ;-_ 
< ,,.. r, ' l 
' t.:.._ -- C1 ,.,, 1:ll-t i¼' " - ~ 
,.... ... __ c. .,. r 
" 
i:: i ".,.. I 
,,,.J St Neots Spatial Planning Area 10 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Little Paxton 
North of St James Road, Little Paxton 
SN 5 
North of St James Road, Little Paxton 
1.3ha of land at North of St James Road Little 
Paxton is allocated for residential development of approximately 35 homes.  Successful development of the site will require: 
1. provision of a safe and suitable means of 
access 
2. an ecological assessment and enhancement 
scheme for the site that addresses its impact 
on Paxton Pits Nature Reserve and SSSI, including the County Wildlife Site 
3. retention of the raised embankment on the 
northern edge of the site 
4. retention of trees and hedgerows and their 
reinforcement to minimise the visual impact of development and provide a mature setting to development 
5. agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that they are satisfied that waste water flows from the proposal can be accommodated 
6. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework 
Directive would not be compromised 
Development Guidance 
10.46 The land is situated on the northern edge of the village between existing housing and the countryside, 
including the Paxton Pits 
Nature Reserve and SSSI.  Access is currently obtained via the Old Great North 
Road; details of a suitably designed safe access onto the existing highway should be provided and agreed. A public right of way runs close to the southern boundary of the site; an equivalent route must be retained in agreement with the local highway authority. 
10.47 There is a raised embankment along most of the northern boundary of the site that will be expected to be retained to give the 
development a mature setting and provide screening for the countryside and Paxton 
Pits.  It is expected that development of the site will take place on land south of the raised embankment to ensure it is well-related to the existing built up area of Little Paxton. 
10.48 A comprehensive arboricultural survey will be necessary, along with a landscape management plan, to ensure existing trees 
and planting on the embankment are retained and reinforced with new planting to 
provide screening of the development and a sense of containment with the settlement. 
10.49 The impact of development on Paxton Pits Nature Reserve and SSSI, including the adjacent County Wildlife Site 
will need to be assessed and any negative impacts avoided, or where that is not feasible, 
appropriate mitigation and compensation measures will be proposed. A bat survey will be required as the long woodland edge along the site and land immediately to the east and nearby freshwater lakes have potential to be foraging habitats for Barbastelle bats. 
193 11 St Ives Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
11 St Ives Spatial Planning Area 
11.1 The St Ives Spatial Planning Area is defined in the 'Definition of Spatial Planning Areas'. 
St Ives 
194 St Ives Spatial Planning Area 11 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
St Ives West 
SI 1 
St Ives West 
54ha of land south of Houghton Road (A1123) to 
the west of St Ives, including land within the parish of Houghton and Wyton, is allocated for a mix of uses to comprise: 
1. approximately 23ha of green space 
2. approximately 400 homes 3. social and community facilities to meet 
needs arising from the development 
Successful development of the site will require: 
a. completion of a detailed master planning 
exercise to be agreed with the Council 
b. design codes or conceptual appearance of 
development proposals 
c. phasing of development, including the provision of green space 
d. appropriate access via the Houghton Road/ Garner Drive junction and Knights Way e. assessment of the surrounding road network and measures to address identified inadequacies that 
would come about as a consequence of development of this site 
f. a sustainable transport network for pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles across the site to be integrated with the wider network 
g. a landscape scheme design recognising vistas, boundaries and the surrounding green infrastructure network, to be particularly focused on restoring the tree lined approach on the south side of the A1123 and maintaining a sense of separation between developments at Houghton Grange and The Spires 
h. social and community facilities appropriate to the scale of development 
i. sustainable drainage systems j. enhancement and provision for habitats in accordance with an ecological strategy k. production of a management plan for all areas of green space l. safeguarding and enhancing the character, appearance and setting of the conservation areas and 
the grade II listed Houghton Grange and the two lodges 
Once developed, parts of this site that comply with the 
'Built-up Areas definition'  will form part of the built-up 
areas of St Ives or Houghton and Wyton as appropriate and considered as part of such for the purposes 
of determining planning applications. 
Development Guidance 
11.2 This is a sensitively located site lying between recent development on the western outskirts of St Ives and 
the east of Houghton and Wyton. 
The site comprises four main parcels of land. The westernmost portion 
of the site contains Houghton Grange, a grade II listed building previously used by the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC); immediately south of Houghton Grange is a county wildlife site designated for its grassland value. The central portion of the site contains a water tower, two groups of derelict buildings and associated grounds also formerly used by the BBSRC, known locally as the BBSRC field. Towards the southwest of the site is a substantial private residence called The How 
195 11 St Ives Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
around which planning permission for seven new homes was approved in principle in April 2017, (references 
1201890FUL and 1201891FUL).The easternmost part of the site comprises a former golf course on which 'The Spires' housing development commenced in September 2016; this scheme includes the change of use of land on the southern part of the development site to form the easternmost part of a new country park to serve local recreational and leisure needs. 
11.3 This is a complex site which contains a number of constraints and will require a sensitive approach to development.
 However, it provides an opportunity to create high quality mixed use development providing 
substantial areas of natural greenspace, high quality new homes and social and community facilities to meet the needs of residents of the new homes. 
11.4 This allocation indicates a form of development that recognises both the opportunities and sensitivities of the site. The 
indicative illustration below summarises detailed urban design work setting out how 
development of the area could take place. 
11.5 Vehicular access is to be taken from the Houghton Road/ Garner Drive junction, which serves the Slepe Meadow housing 
development, and from Knights Way in the Green Acres development.  A transport 
assessment in accordance with policy LP 16 'Sustainable Travel' and a travel plan will be required in order 
to assess the transport impact of the development and appropriate infrastructure improvements incorporated to mitigate impacts and promote sustainable tra
vel options. 
11.6 The site contains numerous trees subject to preservation orders, as well as the Houghton Grange County Wildlife Site 
which would benefit from early restoration.  Appropriate ecological assessments should be 
undertaken and redevelopment should ensure no detrimental impact upon the ecological value of the site and nearby county wildlife sites, including the River Great Ouse. 
11.7 The southern edge of the site adjoins an area of established woodland, known as St Ives Thicket, which is bisected by The 
Thicket.  South from this lies the River Great Ouse. To reinforce the strategic green 
corridor along the River Great Ouse, the southern part of the site should comprise a substantial area of publicly accessible greenspace. This approach will contribute to fulfilling the sequential test for flood risk, which should govern the layout of this site. The area to be devoted to open space will be determined using existing building lines and trees as well as levels and slopes to maximise its contribution to the Ouse Valley Landscape Character Area. 
11.8 Local evidence gathered in preparing the Houghton and Wyton Neighbourhood Plan indicates a high level of demand for smaller 
properties suitable for first time buyers and for older people.  Development proposals 
should respond to this preference. 
11.9 Housing development should be predominantly situated in the northern part of the site and arranged in a series of 
clusters separated by green corridors running north-south through the site both to screen and 
separate areas of development and to connect through to the greenspace in the south of the site. A substantial band of greenspace should be retained through the portion of the BBSRC field to the east of the derelict buildings and up to the western edge of residential development at 'The Spires'. Management plans should be prepared for the greenspaces within the site which should encourage ecological diversity. 
11.10 Redevelopment of Houghton Grange will require sensitive, high quality design to convert the listed building into residential accommodation appropriate f
or modern needs and to ensure new development does not 
have a detrimental impact on its setting. A heritage statement will be required for any development which would have potential to impact upon the listed buildings of Houghton Grange, and its accompanying East and West Lodges which adjoin Houghton Road and their settings; in addition both the St Ives and Houghton and Wyton conservation areas extend into the site. 
196 v I I I playing 
~e/ds 
Existing St Ives housing areas 
New residential development 
Planting areas forming an edge/barrier 
Open Space 
Access St Ives Spatial Planning Area 11 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Key 
197 11 St Ives Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
St Ives Football Club 
SI 2 
St Ives Football Club 
1.4ha of land at St Ives Football Club is allocated 
for development of approximately 30 homes. Successful development of the site will require: 
a. alternative, improved provision of the 
recreational facility 
b. provision of appropriate access c. substantial landscaping on the western 
boundaries 
Development Guidance 
11.11 For development proposals to be supported it is essential that suitable replacement facilities are secured. 
The football club 
currently provides a well used, centrally located facility and alternative provision will be 
necessary.  Replacement facilities must be available prior to development starting so that there is no period when facilities are not available. 
11.12 Access to the site is restricted by a very narrow private road with a sharp bend.  In order to achieve safe access to the site from the highway 
network it is likely that additional land will be required as the access, 
currently taken past the adjacent car park, is not considered to be suitable for the anticipated scale of development. This may be achievable in discussion with the Council as owners of land adjacent to the site.  Provision and upgrading of pedestrian and cycle way connections will also be necessary.  A transport assessment (in accordance with policy LP 16 'Sustainable Travel') and travel plan will be required. The development also needs to ensure that sufficient parking is provided on the site in line with policy LP 
17 'Parking Provision and Vehicle Movement'. 
11.13 There is known archaeological potential in the vicinity which should be investigated.  A programme of archaeological work ma
y be required. 
11.14 Substantial landscaping will be required on the western boundaries to help safeguard against disturbance from the adjoining leisure uses. 
 A design brief should be prepared for this site due to its sensitive location. 
198 ,---
1 I 
, I 
II St Ives Spatial Planning Area 11 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Giffords Farm, St Ives 
SI 3 
Giffords Farm, St Ives 
5.6ha of land at Giffords Farm, east of 
Somersham Road (B1040) is allocated for employment development to comprise any class 'B' uses except 'B1a' offices and 'B8' storage and distribution.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. detailed flood risk assessment and flood 
mitigation works as appropriate 
b. suitable access 
Development Guidance 
11.15 Land and buildings available for employment uses other than offices (B1a use) in and around St Ives are 
currently limited.  
Storage and distribution uses are considered to be well provided for in other locations 
that are more accessible to the strategic road network. This site is therefore allocated for employment uses other than offices and storage and distribution. 
11.16 Details of a suitably designed safe access onto the existing highway network should be provided and agreed. 
Development proposals will also need to set out how the site will be connected in to the surrounding 
pedestrian and cycle facilities to the south of the site. 
11.17 SFRA modelling shows that a small part along the western edge of this site is considered to be at risk of flooding, being within either flood zone 2 
or flood zone 3a. The extent of flood risk will need to be 
established through a detailed flood risk assessment, and development will need to address any risk through incorporation of suitable flood protection/ mitigation measures, including ensuring that development does not increase flood risk off-site.  In particular, a sequential approach will need to be taken to the arrangement of development within this site. 
11.18 Using the jobs density figure from Alconbury Enterprise Zone and the industry standard floorspace a jobs figure of approximately 600 
may be possible on the 5.6ha identified. This calculation may not be particularly 
accurate as the allocation excludes class B1a and class B8 uses. 
199 12 Ramsey Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
12 Ramsey Spatial Planning Area 
12.1 The Ramsey Spatial Planning Area is defined in the 'Definition of Spatial Planning Areas'. 
Ramsey 
200 ·--d .,, 
l. 
I ,,. 
:::, 
·, ... 
'" ' 
'{, 
•4,,,-.: .. 
": ,--".': ,,,. .... , • ·'-Ramsey Spatial Planning Area 12 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Ramsey Gateway (High Lode) 
RA 1 
Ramsey Gateway (High Lode) 
2.6ha of land at Ramsey Gateway (High Lode) is 
allocated for residential development of approximately 110 homes; this may include specialist accommodation for older people. Successful development of the site will require: 
a. provision of suitable accesses via the 
existing roundabout on St Mary's Road for 
the western part of the site and onto Stocking Fen road for the eastern part of the site 
b. navigation related improvements to Ramsey Basin 
c. the provision of a 20m wide maintenance 
access strip along High Lode required by Middle Level Commissioners 
d. the provision of a scheme for protecting any homes from the noise from the scrap yard, should a cessation of its use and removal not form part of a development proposal for the redevelopment of this site 
e. the design and layout of any development proposal reflecting the site's importance in the conservation area and as a gateway to Ramsey 
f. separation from the high and medium pressure gas pipelines in accordance with National Grid 
requirements 
g. agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from 
the proposal can be accommodated 
h. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework 
Directive would not be compromised 
i. agreement with the Middle Level Commissioners that they will not object on the basis of flood risk 
in the Middle Level system 
Development Guidance 
12.2 A development proposal incorporating a mixture of housing appropriate for occupation by older people is 
encouraged. 
Reserved Matters approval was granted on this site in March 2015 (planning reference 
1101894REM).This comprises 81 dwellings on the western side of High Lode and 29 on the eastern side composed of a mixture of two storey houses and three storey apartments. A technical start was made to this development on 1 February 2017 to prevent the permission from expiring.This also obviates the need for sequential and exception flooding tests prior to actual construction of the permitted development. The allocation is retained to provide guidance should the approved scheme not be fully delivered. 
12.3 The site is in a prominent location at the northern gateway to Ramsey and a high quality of design is required to make a 
positive contribution to the area.The western part of the site lies within the conservation 
area. Redevelopment provides an opportunity to preserve and enhance the setting, character and appearance of the conservation area and build on the character established by Rivermill Apartments and Ramsey Mill. The design and layout of any development proposal should maximise the opportunities 
201 12 Ramsey Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
arising from the riverside frontages whilst creating a sense of enclosure to the Rivermill basin. Any proposal 
should ensure that it does not preclude enhancement of Ramsey basin and the provision of mooring points to maximise its benefit both to boat users and as a visual feature within the town. 
12.4 Given the flat topography of the area and varied scale of surrounding buildings, careful consideration should be given to 
the boundary treatment of any site proposals, to ensure that development is appropriately 
sited within the landscape. 
12.5 The site should be accessed via the existing roundabout on St Mary's Road. A suitable transport assessment in accordance with policy LP 16 'Sustainable Travel' and a travel plan will be required to demonstrate the highway network is suitable.  A new pedestrian and cycleway bridge would be required to ensure linkages are improved betw
een the two parcels either side of High Lode. 
12.6 The opportunity to relocate the existing scrap yard to a more appropriate location for a use of that type would be 
of benefit to the locality.  However, if the owner of the scrap yard is not prepared to include it as 
part of a comprehensive redevelopment scheme, attenuation measures would be required to adequately protect the amenity of future occupiers of new homes on the site, such as a landscaped cordon. 
12.7 There is a known need for specialist older person's accommodation in Ramsey, particularly class C3 sheltered/ extra-care 
housing units. This location would be eminently suitable due to its proximity to food 
stores, the GP surgery and the community centre. 
12.8 Middle Level Commissioners (MLC) require a 20 metre wide access strip for maintenance and machinery along both sides of High Lode. 
 MLC anticipate that the Great Fen Project will, as it develops, increase 
navigation on their system and may increase leisure, recreation and tourism use within Huntingdonshire and therefore require navigation related improvements to Ramsey Basin.To ensure safety National Grid's requirements should be adhered to regarding the gas pipelines situated within the site and appropriate easement strips incor
porated into the landscaping scheme. 
12.9 The policy requires consultation with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services (AWS) to ensure that the waste w
ater flows from proposed development can be accommodated and that meeting 
the requirements of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised.  Ramsey WwTW will serve this site. The WwTW currently has no available headroom and so unless additional headroom becomes available a change in discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be required for the projected growth. This would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and hence would not impact on attainment of future WFD water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions will be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place.  Should temporary measures prove not to be viable or would be insufficient it may be necessary to place limits on the amount of development that can take place. 
12.10 Additionally the water level/ flood risk management system is sensitive to increased surface water/ treated effluent discharges and the Ramsey High 
Lode drains into the Middle Level catchment, managed by the 
MLC. The MLC have advised that their default position is no increase in flow volume will be accepted. Therefore, if sufficient headroom does not become available, triggering an increase in the flow consent required, consultation will be needed with AWS and the MLC to determine whether additional flow volumes will result in an increase in flood risk before the additional flow can be discharged.  Discussion is ongoing between MLC and AWS regarding discharges from existing outlets into MLC's system, and this may have implications for development proposals. 
12.11 The MLC's position of not accepting additional water to enter their system will also present issues for drainage. 
The use of soakaways or other infiltration devices is unlikely to provide an efficient means of 
surface water disposal at the site.  A flood risk assessment and drainage management plan that satisfies the MLC will therefore be required. The western part of the site lies within the Ramsey, Upwood & Great Raveley Internal Drainage Board area (IDB) and the eastern part within Ramsey IDB. The installation/ improvement of positive water level management systems and off-site works may be required. 
202 Ramsey Spatial Planning Area 12 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Ramsey Gateway 
RA 2 
Ramsey Gateway 
1.8ha of land at Ramsey Gateway is allocated for 
residential development of approximately 50 homes.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. provision of a single new access from the 
roundabout on St Mary's Road 
b. the design and layout of any development 
proposal reflecting the site's importance as 
a gateway to Ramsey and location within the conservation area 
c. provision of views through from St Mary's 
road to Northern Mill to provide visual integration with this local landmark 
d. retention of trees along site boundaries to 
protect views to and from Ramsey Conservation Area 
e. separation from the high and medium pressure gas pipelines in accordance with National Grid 
requirements 
f. agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from 
the proposal can be accommodated 
g. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework 
Directive would not be compromised 
h. agreement with the Middle Level Commissioners that they will not object on the basis of flood risk 
in the Middle Level system 
Development Guidance 
12.12 This previously developed site is well located in relation to shopping, community facilities and Ramsey's 
employment oppor
tunities. Redevelopment provides an opportunity to provide a higher quality approach 
into Ramsey and preserve and enhance the setting, character and appearance of the conservation area. The site is partially screened by trees and a suitable landscaping scheme should be provided to capitalise on the views to the Northern Mill to provide a visual link to the area's heritage and protect its setting. 
12.13 The main point of access to any proposed development on this site should be taken from the new roundabout on St Mary's Road, 
with suitable safety audits being undertaken. Adequate pedestrian 
connectivity to nearby community services should also be ensured. 
12.14 To ensure safety National Grid's requirements should be adhered to regarding the gas pipelines situated within the site and appropriate easement strips incor
porated into the landscaping scheme. 
12.15 The policy requires consultation with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services (AWS) to ensure that the waste w
ater flows from proposed development can be accommodated and that meeting 
the requirements of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised.  Ramsey WwTW will serve this site. The WwTW currently has no available headroom and so unless additional headroom becomes available a change in discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be required for the projected growth. This would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and hence 
203 12 Ramsey Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
would not impact on attainment of future WFD water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions will 
be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place.  Should temporary measures prove not to be viable or would be insufficient it may be necessary to place limits on the amount of development that can take place. 
12.16 Additionally the water level/ flood risk management system is sensitive to increased surface water/ treated effluent discharges and the Ramsey High 
Lode drains into the Middle Level catchment, managed by the 
Middle Level Commissioners (MLC). The MLC have advised that their default position is that no increase in flow volume will be accepted. Therefore, if sufficient headroom does not become available, triggering an increase in the flow consent required, consultation will be needed with AWS and the MLC to determine whether additional flow volumes will result in an increase in flood risk before the additional flow can be discharged.  Discussion is ongoing between MLC and AWS regarding discharges from existing outlets into MLC's system, and this may have implications for development proposals. 
12.17 The MLC's position of not accepting additional water to enter their system will also present issues for drainage. 
The use of soakaways or other infiltration devices is unlikely to provide an efficient means of 
surface water disposal at the site.  A flood risk assessment and drainage management plan that satisfies the MLC will therefore be required. The site is within Ramsey, Upwood & Great Raveley IDB and surface water should be disposed of into its system. The installation/ improvement of positive water level management systems and off-site works may be required. 
204 Ramsey Spatial Planning Area 12 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
West Station Yard and Northern Mill, Ramsey 
RA 3 
West Station Yard and Northern Mill 
1ha of land at Ramsey Gateway is allocated for 
residential development of approximately 30 homes.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. provision of access through the adjoining 
Ramsey Gateway site to the roundabout on 
St Mary's Road 
b. the design and layout of any development 
proposal reflecting the site's location within the conservation area 
c. retention of trees along site boundaries to 
protect views to and from Northern Mill and Ramsey Conservation Area 
d. retention of the existing Northern Mill 
building to act as a local landmark subject to viability 
e. separation from the high and medium pressure gas pipelines in accordance with National Grid 
requirements 
f. agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from 
the proposal can be accommodated 
g. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework 
Directive would not be compromised 
h. agreement with the Middle Level Commissioners that they will not object on the basis of flood risk 
in the Middle Level system 
Development Guidance 
12.18 The main point of access to any proposed development on this site should be taken through the adjoining 
allocation to the north, RA 2 'Ramse
y Gateway', and onto the new roundabout on St Mary's Road. 
12.19 Redevelopment would have limited visual impact on the surrounding area as the site is partially screened by trees
.  Northern Mill has historic local significance and subject to viability should be retained and 
converted to residential use and a suitable landscaping scheme provided to maintain its significance and setting which capitalise on the views in and out of the site to the Mill. Any development proposal should preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the conservation area. 
12.20 To ensure safety, National Grid's requirements should be adhered to regarding the gas pipelines situated within the site and appropriate easement strips incor
porated into the landscaping scheme. 
12.21 The policy requires consultation with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services (AWS) to ensure that the waste w
ater flows from proposed development can be accommodated and that meeting 
the requirements of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised.  Ramsey WwTW will serve this site. The WwTW currently has no available headroom and so unless additional headroom becomes available a change in discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be required for the projected growth. This would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and hence would not impact on attainment of future WFD water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions will 
205 12 Ramsey Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place.  Should temporary measures prove not 
to be viable or be insufficient it may be necessary to place limits on the amount of development that can take place. 
12.22 Development proposals should be in accordance with the principles set out in the Ramsey Gateway Urban Design Frame
work adopted November 2004. 
12.23 Additionally the water level/ flood risk management system is sensitive to increased surface water/ treated effluent discharges and the Ramsey High 
Lode drains into the Middle Level catchment, managed by the 
Middle Level Commissioners (MLC). The MLC have advised that their default position is that no increase in flow volume will be accepted. Therefore, if sufficient headroom does not become available, triggering an increase in the flow consent required, consultation will be needed with AWS and the MLC to determine whether additional flow volumes will result in an increase in flood risk before the additional flow can be discharged.  Discussion is ongoing between MLC and AWS regarding discharges from existing outlets into MLC's system, and this may have implications for development proposals. 
12.24 The MLC's position of not accepting additional water to enter their system will also present issues for drainage. 
The use of soakaways or other infiltration devices is unlikely to provide an efficient means of 
surface water disposal at the site.  A flood risk assessment and drainage management plan that satisfies the MLC will therefore be required. The site is within Ramsey, Upwood & Great Raveley IDB and surface water should be disposed of into its system. The installation/ improvement of positive water level management systems and off-site works may be required. 
206 Ramsey Spatial Planning Area 12 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Field Road, Ramsey 
RA 4 
Field Road, Ramsey 
5.2ha of land at Field Road, Ramsey is allocated 
for residential development of approximately 90 homes.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. provision of a suitable new access from Field 
Road 
b. improvement to pedestrian and cycle routes to link to existing networks, having regard to the existing public right of way on the site 
c. retention of the woodland area to the west 
and north west of the site 
d. boundary treatments to protect and enhance the amenity of neighbouring properties and to minimise the impact of the development on the surrounding countryside 
e. agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from 
the proposal can be accommodated 
f. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework 
Directive would not be compromised 
g. agreement with the Middle Level Commissioners that they will not object on the basis of flood risk 
in the Middle Level system 
Development Guidance 
12.25 The site is bordered on two sides by residential development and opportunities to integrate any development 
scheme with this should be maximised. The site 
would be suitable for general family homes with low 
density development on the western edge. The woodland to the west and north west of the site provides a very attractive landscape setting and high quality screening, and must be retained to minimise the impact on the surrounding countryside. 
12.26 There is potential to create an appropriate access from Field Road. Development proposals will need to provide inf
ormation on how the transport impacts of the development will be accommodated and mitigated 
where appropriate, particularly in terms of the impact of additional generated traffic on Blenheim Road and Field Road. A transport assessment and Travel Plan will be required in accordance with policy LP 16 'Sustainable Travel'. The development also needs to ensure that sufficient parking is provided on the site. Footpath linkages should be retained to facilitate integration of the site into adjoining residential areas. 
12.27 The policy requires consultation with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services (AWS) to ensure that the waste w
ater flows from proposed development can be accommodated and that meeting 
the requirements of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised.  Ramsey WwTW will serve this site. The WwTW currently has no available headroom and so unless additional headroom becomes available a change in discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be required for the projected growth. This would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and hence would not impact on attainment of future WFD water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions will 
207 12 Ramsey Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place.  Should temporary measures prove not 
to be viable or would be insufficient it may be necessary to place limits on the amount of development that can take place. 
12.28 Additionally the water level/ flood risk management system is sensitive to increased surface water/ treated effluent discharges and the Ramsey High 
Lode drains into the Middle Level catchment, managed by the 
Middle Level Commissioners (MLC). The MLC have advised that their default position is no increase in flow volume will be accepted. Therefore, if sufficient headroom does not become available, triggering an increase in the flow consent required, consultation will be needed with AWS and the MLC to determine whether additional flow volumes will result in an increase in flood risk before the additional flow can be discharged.  Discussion is ongoing between MLC and AWS regarding discharges from existing outlets into MLC's system, and this may have implications for development proposals. 
12.29 The MLC's position of not accepting additional water to enter their system will also present issues for drainage. 
The use of soakaways or other infiltration devices is unlikely to provide an efficient means of 
surface water disposal at the site.  A flood risk assessment and drainage management plan will therefore be required that satisfies the MLC. 
208 / 
RAMSEY 
Pla)'ing Field Ramsey Spatial Planning Area 12 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Whytefield Road, Ramsey 
RA 5 
Whytefield Road, Ramsey 
0.9ha of land at Whytefield Road, Ramsey is 
allocated for residential development of approximately 40 homes.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. provision of suitable access b. completion of land contamination 
remediation measures appropriate to 
residential development 
c. the design and layout of any development 
proposal reflecting the site's location within the conservation area 
d. provision of a substantial landscaping buffer along the boundary with the primary school to protect against overlooking between the primary school and properties 
e. agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from 
the proposal can be accommodated 
f. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework 
Directive would not be compromised 
g. agreement with the Middle Level Commissioners that they will not object on the basis of flood risk 
in the Middle Level system 
Development Guidance 
12.30 The site is considered to have potential to be redeveloped to provide an attractive, sustainably located 
residential scheme, appropr
iate to its position within Ramsey Conservation Area. Any development proposal 
should preserve or enhance the character or appearance of this. Details of a suitably designed safe access onto the existing highway network should be agreed and provided. 
12.31 The site has some boundary trees at present and any development proposals should retain and reinforce these, par
ticularly along the boundary with the primary school to protect against overlooking of the playing 
fields; a crime reduction statement may also be required. 
12.32 The site comprises previously developed land in close proximity to services, employment, open space and public tr
ansport, and is therefore a very sustainable choice for residential development. There would 
be a loss of employment on the site if it were to be redeveloped for housing, and given the site's former use as petrol station, there may be potential for contamination. Given this a contamination assessment would be required and appropriate mitigation undertaken if required to ensure the land is suitable for residential use. 
12.33 The policy requires consultation with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services (AWS) to ensure that the waste w
ater flows from proposed development can be accommodated and that meeting 
the requirements of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised.  Ramsey WwTW will serve this site. The WwTW currently has no available headroom and so unless additional headroom becomes available a change in discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be required for the projected growth. This would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and hence 
209 12 Ramsey Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
would not impact on attainment of future WFD water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions will 
be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place.  Should temporary measures prove not to be viable or would be insufficient it may be necessary to place limits on the amount of development that can take place. 
12.34 Additionally the water level/ flood risk management system is sensitive to increased surface water/ treated effluent discharges and the Ramsey High 
Lode drains into the Middle Level catchment, managed by the 
Middle Level Commissioners (MLC). The MLC have advised that their default position is no increase in flow volume will be accepted. Therefore, if sufficient headroom does not become available, triggering an increase in the flow consent required, consultation will be needed with AWS and the MLC to determine whether additional flow volumes will result in an increase in flood risk before the additional flow can be discharged.  Discussion is ongoing between MLC and AWS regarding discharges from existing outlets into MLC's system, and this may have implications for development proposals. 
12.35 The MLC's position of not accepting additional water to enter their system will also present issues for drainage. 
The use of soakaways or other infiltration devices is unlikely to provide an efficient means of 
surface water disposal at the site.  A flood risk assessment and drainage management plan that satisfies the MLC will therefore be required. 
210 Ramsey Spatial Planning Area 12 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
94 Great Whyte, Ramsey 
RA 6 
94 Great Whyte, Ramsey 
0.7ha of land at 94 Great Whyte, Ramsey is 
allocated for residential development of approximately 35 homes.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. provision of suitable access from Great 
Whyte 
b. the design and layout of any development 
proposal to reflect the site's location within 
the conservation area 
c. provision of soft landscaping along the 
boundaries with adjoining residential properties 
d. agreement with the Environment Agency 
and Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from the proposal can be accommodated 
e. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework 
Directive would not be compromised 
f. agreement with the Middle Level Commissioners that they will not object on the basis of flood risk 
in the Middle Level system 
Development Guidance 
12.36 This previously-developed site is located within the built-up area of Ramsey town centre.  It has most 
recently been used for w
arehousing/ storage, but has fallen into a semi-derelict state.  It is surrounded 
mainly by residential development with the fire station on part of its northern boundary. The site is considered to have potential to be redeveloped to provide an attractive, sustainably located residential scheme, appropriate to its position within Ramsey Conservation Area, in close proximity to services, employment, open space and public transport. Details of a suitably designed safe access onto the existing highway network should be agreed and provided. 
12.37 High quality design will be required to reflect the site's location within the conservation area and preserve or enhance its character or 
appearance.  A comprehensive landscaping scheme will be required to provide 
appropriate boundary treatments with the variety of surrounding uses. 
12.38 The policy requires consultation with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services (AWS) to ensure that the waste w
ater flows from proposed development can be accommodated and that meeting 
the requirements of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised.  Ramsey WwTW will serve this site. The WwTW currently has no available headroom and so unless additional headroom becomes available a change in discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be required for the projected growth. This would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and hence would not impact on attainment of future WFD water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions will be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place.  Should temporary measures prove not to be viable or would be insufficient it may be necessary to place limits on the amount of development that can take place. 
211 12 Ramsey Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
12.39 Additionally the water level/ flood risk management system is sensitive to increased surface water/ treated 
effluent discharges and the Ramsey High 
Lode drains into the Middle Level catchment, managed by the 
Middle Level Commissioners (MLC). The MLC have advised that their default position is that no increase in flow volume will be accepted. Therefore, if sufficient headroom does not become available, triggering an increase in the flow consent required, consultation will be needed with AWS and the MLC to determine whether additional flow volumes will result in an increase in flood risk before the additional flow can be discharged.  Discussion is ongoing between MLC and AWS regarding discharges from existing outlets into MLC's system, and this may have implications for development proposals. 
12.40 The MLC's position of not accepting additional water to enter their system will also present issues for drainage. 
The use of soakaways or other infiltration devices is unlikely to provide an efficient means of 
surface water disposal at the site.  A flood risk assessment and drainage management plan will therefore be required that satisfies the MLC. 
212 ,_, 
/< I [ . 
I _r 
I -~ ,......_ 
,_ 
' l I 
~0-' ,, 1 
/,; ,, 
/ ' > c,, I) !l 
C ' .. 
<'' tt." 
<, } 
1--Q--.;; ' Ramsey Spatial Planning Area 12 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
East of Valiant Square, Bury 
RA 7 
East of Valiant Square, Bury 
3.6 ha of land at East of Valiant Square, Bury is 
allocated for residential development of approximately 90 homes. Successful development of the site will require: 
a. provision of a suitable means of access and 
satisfactory resolution of additional traffic 
impacts on local roads 
b. retention of trees and hedgerows other than 
where removal is necessary to obtain access 
c. agreement with the Environment Agency and 
Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from the proposal can be accommodated 
d. agreement with the Environment Agency that 
meeting the requirements of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised 
e. agreement with the Middle Level Commissioners that they will not object on the basis of flood risk in 
the Middle Level system. 
Development Guidance 
12.41 Development of the land should achieve a low density housing development that maximises the use of 
the existing trees 
and hedgerow growing on the site boundaries to visually contain the development and 
reduce its impact on the surrounding countryside. 
12.42 The section of Tunkers Lane along the northern site boundary is narrow and unmade, and it will be expected that development 
will deliver a programme of works to upgrade Tunkers Lane to current standards. A 
proportionate transport assessment will be required to demonstrate that suitable access to the site can be provided from Tunkers Lane and that any adverse off-site transport impacts can be satisfactorily mitigated.The design of development should provide a sustainable transport network for vehicles, cyclists and pedestrians which will facilitate integration with Bury. 
12.43 A significant number of trees and hedgerows are growing along the boundaries of the site. The trees growing 
along the western boundary with Valiant Square are protected by a Tree Preservation Order. 
The trees provide screening of the site and will give the development a mature setting.  A comprehensive arboricultural survey will be necessary, along with a management plan, to ensure the layout of development retains and protects the long-term health and well-being of the existing trees. 
12.44 The presence of trees around the boundaries of the land indicates the presence of protected species. This will need investigating 
through appropriate ecological surveys.  It will be expected that negative 
impacts on protected species are avoided, or where that is not feasible, appropriate mitigation and compensation measures are proposed. 
213 12 Ramsey Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
12.45 The land is classed as non-agricultural and its condition indicates that it has not been disturbed by cultivation 
in recent times. These 
factors indicate that any underlying archaeology may not have been disturbed.  A 
scheme of archaeological investigation is likely to be necessary to determine the significance of any archaeological remains, and measures for preservation or recording. 
12.46 The policy requires consultation with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services (AWS) to ensure that the waste w
ater flows from proposed development can be accommodated and that meeting 
the requirements of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised.  Ramsey WwTW will serve this site. The WwTW currently has no available headroom and so unless additional headroom becomes available a change in discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be required for the projected growth. This would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and hence would not impact on attainment of future WFD water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions will be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place.  Should temporary measures prove not to be viable or would be insufficient it may be necessary to place limits on the amount of development that can take place. 
12.47 Additionally the water level/ flood risk management system is sensitive to increased surface water/ treated effluent discharges and the Ramsey High 
Lode drains into the Middle Level catchment, managed by the 
Middle Level Commissioners (MLC). The MLC have advised that their default position is no increase in flow volume will be accepted. Therefore, if sufficient headroom does not become available, triggering an increase in the flow consent required, consultation will be needed with AWS and the MLC to determine whether additional flow volumes will result in an increase in flood risk before the additional flow can be discharged.  Discussion is ongoing between MLC and AWS regarding discharges from existing outlets into MLC's system, and this may have implications for development proposals. 
12.48 The MLC's position of not accepting additional water to enter their system will also present issues for drainage. 
The use of soakaways or other infiltration devices is unlikely to provide an efficient means of 
surface water disposal at the site.  A flood risk assessment and drainage management plan will therefore be required that satisfies the MLC. 
214 ,r-0 
I : 
#? 
"-___L _ _.,.{/· _,. _____ ___j Ramsey Spatial Planning Area 12 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Former RAF Upwood and Upwood Hill House, Bury 
RA 8 
Former RAF Upwood and Upwood Hill House, Bury 
25ha of land at the former RAF Upwood and 
Upwood Hill House is allocated for development for a mix of uses to comprise: 
1. 2ha of employment land for business uses 
(class 'B1') 
2. approximately 450 homes 
3. community facilities appropriate to the scale 
of development 
Successful development of the site will require: 
a. completion of a master planning exercise 
with the Council 
b. production of a schedule detailing the extent 
of existing buildings to be cleared and whether any are to be retained to be agreed with the Council 
c. a form of development that enables the character of the historic RAF use to be maintained and the 
environment, both on-site and of the surrounding area, to be of a suitably high standard for the benefit of users and residents 
d. completion of land contamination investigation and remediation measures appropriate to residential development 
e. provision of a drainage strategy in agreement with relevant bodies 
f. a transport assessment and transport infrastructure improvements appropriate to the scale of 
development 
g. phasing of site preparation and development h. design codes or conceptual appearance of development proposals i. landscape design recognising vistas, boundaries and green infrastructure networks j. assessment of ecological impacts including on nearby designated sites k. a sustainable transport network for pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles incorporating links to the 
surrounding area 
l. agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from 
the proposal can be accommodated 
m. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework 
Directive would not be compromised 
n. agreement with the Middle Level Commissioners that they will not object on the basis of flood risk 
in the Middle Level system 
Development Guidance 
12.49 Most of the 40 or so buildings that remain on-site appear to be in poor condition and could not realistically 
be refurbished.  
As such it is expected that most of the buildings would require demolition and clearing. 
It is also likely that the majority of the existing roads and hard standing will require clearing because of their poor condition. 
215 12 Ramsey Spatial Planning Area 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
12.50 Despite the condition of the existing built form of the site it is considered to be important for the character 
of the historic RAF 
use to be retained and the environment to be of a suitably high standard for the benefit 
of users and residents. Buildings should be retained where they are of particular architectural merit or are particularly important as part of the historic character of the site.  In particular, Upwood Hill House would appear to be in a better condition than many of the other buildings and may be suitable for refurbishment. The immediate area surrounding Upwood Hill House is considered to be suitable for development in a way which respects its setting and former use. Opportunities should be taken to identify and where appropriate preserve non-designated heritage assets which reflect the site's former use as an RAF station. A master plan will be required to ensure comprehensive redevelopment of this site. 
12.51 There are a significant number of trees on the site many of which will be worthy of retention.  A comprehensive arbor
icultural survey will be necessary, along with a management plan.  New planting 
would be appropriate in keeping with the existing landscape character. An ecological assessment will be required which should include consideration of the impact on nearby designated sites such as Upwood Meadows arising from increased recreational use and promotion of avoidance and mitigation measures to ensure no adverse impacts arise. 
12.52 The site's previous use of the land as an airfield means that land contamination may be an issue affecting land use and drainage.
  Given this, a contamination assessment will be required, to inform both the 
drainage management plan discussed below, and any appropriate mitigation required to ensure the land is suitable for residential use. 
12.53 Development proposals will need to provide information on how the impacts of the development will be accommodated and mitigated where appropriate.
 Social and community facilities sufficient to meet the 
needs arising from the development should be provided. A transport assessment in accordance with policy LP 16 'Sustainable Travel' will be required. This should take into account the overall development at the site.The development also needs to ensure that sufficient parking is provided on the site in line with policy LP17 'Parking Provision and Vehicle Movement'. 
12.54 It is thought that the best part of the site to be developed for employment uses will be in the west on land close to the southern most 
hangar buildings.  Employment development is considered to have potential 
synergy with these existing large scale buildings which are being used for employment purposes.  Care will need to be taken with siting and screening to safeguard against negative impacts on the existing residential area immediately to the south.  In addition the area of existing buildings adjacent to the eastern boundary may be more suitable for office or other business type (class 'B1') uses rather than residential uses.  It is envisaged that development of employment areas of this site will be comprised of approximately 7,800m
2 gross floor area of business (classes 'B1') uses.  Using the jobs density figure from Alconbuy 
Enterprise Zone and the industry standard floorspace a jobs figure of approximately 215 may be possible on the 2ha identified. The number of jobs created may be higher as the class 'B1' uses specified have on average higher numbers of people employed per hectare than broader class 'B' uses as a whole. 
12.55 A waste strategy and audit will be required in conformity with Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Core Strategy Policies CS7, CS16 and CS28. 
12.56 The 
policy requires consultation with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services (AWS) to 
ensure that the waste w
ater flows from proposed development can be accommodated and that meeting 
the requirements of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised.  Ramsey WwTW will serve this site. The WwTW currently has no available headroom and so unless additional headroom becomes available a change in discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be required for the projected growth. This would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and hence would not impact on attainment of future WFD water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions will be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place.  Should temporary measures prove not to be viable or would be insufficient it may be necessary to place limits on the amount of development that can take place. 
216 Ramsey Spatial Planning Area 12 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
12.57 Additionally the water level/ flood risk management system is sensitive to increased surface water/ treated 
effluent discharges and the Ramsey High 
Lode drains into the Middle Level catchment, managed by the 
Middle Level Commissioners (MLC). The MLC have advised that their default position is no increase in flow volume will be accepted. Therefore, if sufficient headroom does not become available, triggering an increase in the flow consent required, consultation will be needed with AWS and the MLC to determine whether additional flow volumes will result in an increase in flood risk before the additional flow can be discharged.  Discussion is ongoing between MLC and AWS regarding discharges from existing outlets into MLC's system, and this may have implications for development proposals. 
12.58 The MLC's position of not accepting additional water to enter their system will also present issues for drainage. 
The use of soakaways or other infiltration devices is unlikely to provide an efficient means of 
surface water disposal at the site.  A flood risk assessment and drainage management plan will therefore be required that satisfies the MLC.  Additionally they have advised that they will require provision of an impact assessment advising of any adverse impacts on its system and any mitigation, together with a mechanism for the recovery of the cost of the future processing of the discharge. 
217 13 Key Service Centres 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
13 Key Service Centres 
13.1 Key Service Centres are larger villages that have a level of services and facilities that support their residents 
and those of other small villages in the surrounding area, they are defined in 'K
ey Service Centres'. 
Buckden 
218 I. 
It Key Service Centres 13 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
East of Silver Street and South of A1, Buckden 
BU 1 
East of Silver Street and South of A1, Buckden 
14.8ha of land at East of Silver Street and South of 
A1, Buckden is 
allocated for residential development 
of approximately 270 homes.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. provision of suitable access and satisfactory 
resolution of additional traffic impacts on local roads and the A1 
b. a noise assessment and appropriate mitigation from the A1 and realigned A14 
c. provision of a sustainable transport network for pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles, which facilitates integration with the village 
d. an appropriate form of development that addresses the site's relationship with the allotments and adjoining homes 
e. retention and reinforcement of existing boundary landscaping and new boundary landscaping to provide screening and noise buffers 
f. an ecological assessment and enhancement scheme for the site that also addresses its impact on the County Wildlife Site 
g. a programme of work designed to investigate, and if necessary protect, archaeological assets 
h. provision of a surface water drainage strategy detailing on-site storage, drainage routes, and drainage rates 
i. agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from the proposal can be accommodated 
j. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised 
k. design that incorporates any views of important landmarks 
Development Guidance 
13.2 This is a large site beyond the northern edge of Buckden. A proposed development scheme should be 
concentrated pr
imarily in the western side of the site to maximise the relationship with the built up part of 
the village and limit the spread of development into the countryside.  Substantial landscaping that seeks to minimise public views of the development and provide a soft interface with the countryside beyond will be required. 
13.3 Due to the site's location adjacent to the A1, noise impacts should be assessed and the design of any development 
proposal and its landscaping scheme should demonstrate how it will mitigate and minimise 
impacts and safeguard the amenity of future residents. The noise assessment should have regard to the A14 improvement scheme and associated works to the A1. 
13.4 A proportionate transport assessment will be required to demonstrate that safe, appropriate accesses can be provided from 
the road network and that any adverse off-site transport impacts on the A1 and local 
roads can be adequately mitigated. The design of any development should provide a sustainable transport network for vehicles, cyclists and pedestrians which will facilitate integration with Buckden village. A travel plan will also be required. 
219 13 Key Service Centres 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
13.5 A ditch runs parallel with the southern boundary of the site.  A flood risk assessment will be required due 
to potential flood risk in 
the south of the site, and potential mitigation measures incorporated as necessary. 
13.6 A biodiversity and ecology survey and report would be required due to the proximity to a County Wildlife Site and existence of 
mature trees and hedgerows within the western portion of the site and around its 
boundaries.  Appropriate mitigation and compensation measures would need to be incorporated into any development scheme.  A tree survey would also be required. 
13.7 The site has the potential to contain archaeological assets. A scheme of archaeological investigation will be necessary to 
determine the significance of any archaeological remains, and measures for preservation 
or recording. 
220 i & 
I / " " 
& ' 
i<;{)~~~ 
,~., i ,~ l . \ 
' l Key Service Centres 13 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Luck's Lane, Buckden 
BU 2 
Luck's Lane, Buckden 
10.3ha of land at Luck's Lane, Buckden is allocated 
for residential development of approximately 165 homes.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. a noise assessment and mitigation from the A1 
b. an air quality assessment and low emissions 
strategy 
c. satisfactory resolution of additional traffic impact 
on local roads having regard to a transport assessment and travel plan 
d. provision of safe and appropriate access from 
Stirtloe Lane to the A1 
e. provision of a sustainable transport network for 
pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles, which facilitates integration with the adjoining residential area 
f. an appropriate form of development that addresses the site's relationship with Springfield and The 
Osiers and provides clear separation from Stirtloe 
g. retention and reinforcement of boundary landscaping to provide screening, noise and pollution buffers 
h. provision of a surface water drainage strategy detailing on-site storage, drainage routes, and drainage rates 
i. agreement with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that 
waste water flows from the proposal can be accommodated 
j. agreement with the Council in liaison with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of 
the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised 
Development Guidance 
13.8 Following a public inquiry, outline permission was granted on this site in July 2017 for residential 
development 
of up to 180 homes (planning reference 16/00576/OUT). This required an application for 
approval of the reserved matters before 21st July 2020 which has been achieved. Approximately 165 dwellings are allowed for to ensure the 180 dwellings figure is not exceeded. 
13.9 A proportionate transport assessment will be required to demonstrate that safe, appropriate accesses can be provided from 
the road network, including the connection via Stirtloe Lane to the A1, and that any 
adverse off-site transport impacts can be adequately mitigated. In particular, the design of any development should provide a sustainable transport network for vehicles, cyclists and pedestrians which will facilitate integration with Buckden village. 
13.10 Both noise and air quality assessments will be required given the proximity of the site to the A1. Development 
should ensure that appropriate measures are included to mitigate any adverse impacts that 
might arise from these issues to ensure an appropriate level of residential amenity. The design of any development scheme should also ensure that it minimises the impact of noise and light pollution arising from the proposed homes on the surrounding open countryside. 
221 13 Key Service Centres 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
13.11 The site is bordered by residential development to the north and opportunities to integrate any development 
scheme with this should be maximised. The design 
of any development proposal and its landscaping 
scheme should demonstrate how it will respond to existing vistas, boundaries, trees and green infrastructure networks. 
13.12 An ecological assessment will be required and appropriate mitigation measures incorporated into the design of potential development 
where necessary. There is limited boundary planting at present on all 
boundaries of the site. The landscaping scheme should demonstrate how this will be reinforced, with particular attention paid to creating a soft southern edge to the development. In addition, lower density development should be incorporated on the southern edge reflecting the transition to open countryside and to reduce the impact on the hamlet of Stirtloe which is situated immediately to the south. 
13.13 To the south of the site are situated the grade II listed Stirloe House and its associated Dower House.  It is essential that the significance of these heritage assets 
and their settings be preserved and where 
possible enhanced. 
222 Key Service Centres 13 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Fenstanton 
223 13 Key Service Centres 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Former Dairy Crest Factory, Fenstanton 
FS 1 
Former Dairy Crest Factory, Fenstanton 
3.2ha of land formerly comprising the Dairy Crest 
factory is allocated for development of a mix of use to comprise: 
1. approximately 90 homes 
2. 0.5ha for employment uses (class 'B1') 3. a village hall or other community facility 4. open space 
Successful development of the site will require: a. satisfactory resolution of the impact of traffic 
having regard to a transport assessment including impact on the A14 or until such time as the A14 upgrade scheme is implemented 
b. provision of noise mitigation measures in relation to the adjoining A14 
c. improvement to pedestrian and cycle links d. sensitive design having regard to the Conservation Area designation over part of the site and adjoining 
land 
e. retention and reuse of the listed building 
f. provision of agreed land contamination remediation measures g. retention of significant trees in accordance with an arboricultural assessment h. identification of shared use car parking and open space for the various uses on the site 
Development Guidance 
13.14 The Dairy Crest factory closed in early 2013.  An urban design process involving a working group including 
District and 
Parish Councillors as well as the landowners helped inform and shape this allocation. A 
planning application was approved in May 2017 for 88 dwellings, public open space, 660 sqm of B1 and 279 sqm of D1 community use which was under construction as at May 2019. 
13.15 The factory had its main access from the slip road from the A14.  New development is expected to gain access from the High Street and Conington Road as well as 
the existing access on the slip road.  Conington 
Road will need to be improved to accommodate new development, and pedestrian pavements provided along both sides.   A traffic assessment will be required in accordance with policy LP 16 'Sustainable 
Travel' to consider the characteristics of the traffic movements proposed and how they can be catered for within the village and on the A14.The de
velopment also needs to ensure that sufficient parking is provided 
on the site in line with policy LP17 'Parking Provision and Vehicle Movement'. To facilitate integration 
pedestrian access should be provided to the High Street and the village centre. 
13.16 Mitigation measures for noise pollution from the A14 must be included in the design, as must any necessary air quality mitigation measures. A 
mix of uses is anticipated on the site. Residential development is 
envisaged on the northern and eastern parts of the site.  Employment is anticipated along the southern part of the site closest to the A14 as employment uses are less noise sensitive, as well as being less sensitive to the potential for air pollution. While the site is adjacent to the A14 Air Quality Management 
224 Key Service Centres 13 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Area, the forthcoming re-routing of the A14 may reduce such impacts. Offices could also form a buffer 
between the A14 corridor and the residential environment to the north.  It is anticipated that between 1,000m
2 and 2,000m2 of B1 uses could be developed on the site.  Using the jobs density figure from 
Alconbury Enterprise Zone and the industry standard floorspace a jobs figure of up to about 55 may be possible on the 0.5ha identified. 
13.17 The listed building will remain as a feature of the site and it is anticipated that this can be reused for residential purposes. 
There may be opportunities to redevelop other existing buildings for new uses, for 
example a village hall or other community use.  It may be possible for some car parking and open space to be shared between the community use, employment uses and residential visitor car parking. 
13.18 New development must have regard to the finished levels of the site following demolition of buildings, and ensure that development 
on the new levels do not affect neighbouring property.  Given the site's proximity 
to a Roman road appropriate archaeological investigations are anticipated prior to decontamination of the site. 
13.19 Land contamination is an issue which will need to be assessed and appropriate remediation undertaken. The site is within a water source 
protection zone which may affect layout, restrictions on piling and drainage 
locations. 
13.20 Redevelopment of the site will change its character enabling a more attractive setting with open space, trees and landscaping.  
Larger existing trees on the site should be retained where possible to enable the 
redevelopment to be immediately set in the most attractive environment possible. 
225 13 Key Service Centres 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Cambridge Road West, Fenstanton 
FS 2 
Cambridge Road West, Fenstanton 
4.5ha of land off Cambridge Road and to the west 
of the A14 access road at Fenstanton is allocated for mixed use development to comprise: 
1. approximately 85 homes 
2. a village hall or other community facility 
Successful development of the site will require: a. satisfactory resolution of the impact of traffic 
having regard to a transport assessment including impact on the A14 or until such time as the A14 upgrade scheme is implemented 
b. provision of a new access into the site from Cambridge Road 
c. improvement to pedestrian and cycle routes to link to the existing networks 
d. retention of the 0.42ha remnant orchard part of the site as open space e. use of the former allotment land in the eastern part of the site for provision of a village hall f. retention of important trees as identified in tree and ecology surveys g. retention of the existing pond on the site h. provision of noise mitigation measures in relation to the adjoining A14 i. setbacks from the A14 to reduce the visual effect of development on the landscape 
Development Guidance 
13.21 As at May 2019 this site was being developed for a residential led scheme. It is intended to bring about 
the benefit of a new village 
hall for Fenstanton on the eastern part of the site and to incorporate substantial 
areas of open space, in particular retaining the former orchard land to the west of old Conington Road. 
13.22 Given the A14 improvement scheme it is anticipated that this level of development is acceptable from a traffic point 
of view; a transport assessment will be required.  Access should be provided from Cambridge 
Road.  A traffic management scheme on the A14 eastbound off-slip may be required to reduce speeds so that vehicles are travelling at no more than 30mph on the section that is two way. The accessibility of the site for pedestrians should be improved with the provision of pedestrian footways and crossing facilities linking the site with the centre of Fenstanton. The development also needs to ensure that sufficient parking is provided on the site. 
13.23 The site has a long boundary with the A14 and noise mitigation measures should be included in the design. Its proximity to 
an air quality management area means that the site is exposed to air pollution so any 
design should mitigate against this where possible. The required open space and allotments, together with setbacks, landscaping and other measures designed to reduce the visual impact of the development and ensure acceptable residential amenity significantly reduce the developable area of the site. 
13.24 Given the site's proximity to a known Roman road an archaeological investigation will be required and appropriate mitigation implemented if necessary
. 
226 Key Service Centres 13 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
13.25 The site is situated within a Sand and Gravel Mineral Safeguarding Area in the Cambridgeshire and 
Peterborough Miner
als and Waste Development Plan.  Cambridgeshire County Council has in this case 
confirmed that due to the small size and proposed policy restrictions for the site, that mineral extraction is not expected.  However, in the event that mineral is extracted as part of any future development it must be put to a sustainable use either on- or off-site.  Any development proposal must address this issue with reference to the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Minerals and Waste Core Strategy Policy CS26  (or relevant successor document). 
227 13 Key Service Centres 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Cambridge Road East, Fenstanton 
FS 3 
Cambridge Road East, Fenstanton 
2.4ha of land off Cambridge Road and to the east 
of the A14 access road at Fenstanton is allocated for mixed use development to comprise: 
1. approximately 35 homes 
2. 0.2ha extension to allotment gardens 
Successful development of the site will require: a. satisfactory resolution of the impact of traffic 
having regard to a transport assessment including impact on the A14 or until such time as the A14 upgrade scheme is implemented 
b. provision of safe access into the site 
c. improvement to pedestrian and cycle routes 
to link to the existing networks 
d. extension of the allotment land 
e. retention of important trees as identified in tree and ecology surveys f. provision of noise mitigation measures in relation to the adjoining A14 g. setbacks from the A14 to reduce the visual effect of development on the landscape 
Development Guidance 
13.26 This site should be developed for a residential led scheme. It is intended to bring about the benefit of 
additional allotment land for F
enstanton; the Parish Council's website indicates there is a waiting list for 
allotment plots and availability is highly constrained. 
13.27 Given the A14 improvement scheme it is anticipated that this level of development is acceptable from a traffic point 
of view; a transport assessment will be required.  A traffic management scheme on the A14 
eastbound off-slip may be required to reduce speeds so that vehicles are travelling at no more than 30mph on the section that is two way.  Access may utilise the existing access and bridge across the drain or an alternative access may be appropriate. The existing access into the allotments can be retained for that use. The accessibility of the site for pedestrians should be improved with the provision of pedestrian footways and crossing facilities linking the site with the centre of Fenstanton. The development also needs to ensure that sufficient parking is provided on the site in line with policy LP 17 'Parking Provision and Vehicle Movement'. 
13.28 The northern part of the site may be susceptible to surface water flooding; the design of any development scheme will need to take this into account. 
13.29 Given 
the site's proximity to a known Roman road an archaeological investigation will be required and 
appropriate mitigation implemented if necessary
. 
13.30 The site is situated within a Sand and Gravel Mineral Safeguarding Area in the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Miner
als and Waste Development Plan  (or relevant successor document).  Cambridgeshire 
County Council has in this case confirmed that due to the small size and proposed policy restrictions for 
228 Key Service Centres 13 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
the site, that mineral extraction is not expected.  However, in the event that mineral is extracted as part 
of any future development it must be put to a sustainable use either on- or off-site.  Any development proposal must address this issue with reference to the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Minerals and Waste Core Strategy Policy CS26  (or relevant successor document). 
13.31 The site has a boundary with the A14 and noise mitigation measures should be included in the design. Its proximity to 
an air quality management area means that the site is exposed to air pollution so any 
design should mitigate against this where possible. The required open space and allotments, together with setbacks, landscaping and other measures designed to reduce the visual impact of the development and ensure acceptable residential amenity significantly reduce the developable area of the site. 
229 13 Key Service Centres 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Kimbolton 
230 \ Key Service Centres 13 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
West of Station Road, Kimbolton 
KB 1 
West of Station Road, Kimbolton 
1.3ha of land west of Station Road, Kimbolton is 
allocated for residential development of approximately 20 dwellings.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. provision of appropriate safe vehicular 
access to Station Road in accordance with 
the speed of the road, minimising loss of mature hedgerows 
b. provision of pedestrian and cycle links to the village centre and schools 
c. provision of open space and screening in 
the south and west of the site to minimise impact on the surrounding landscape 
d. provision of a flood risk assessment 
demonstrating the proposals can be safely accommodated 
Development Guidance 
13.32 The site is located on the north west edge of Kimbolton fronting Station Road (B660) and forms part of 
the gatewa
y to the village.  Integrating the site with the rest of Kimbolton would be a major challenge to 
development. 
13.33 There is potential for vehicular access to be created from Station Road; details of a suitably designed safe access would need 
to be agreed and provided. This would need to be carefully assessed to minimise the 
loss of existing mature hedgerows and be in accordance with the speed of the road. There may be opportunities for pedestrian and cycle links via the housing at Montagu Gardens to the north. 
13.34 Landscape impact is a constraint on development of this site since the land is partially visible from the B660 to the east, housing at the urban edge, and 
from across the valley from Tilbrook Road and Kimbolton 
School. The southern part of the site is of high landscape quality due to the River Kym being roughly 50m to the south, with views towards parkland to the south. Three grade II listed buildings lie approximately 100m to the west. The design of any development proposal and its landscaping scheme should demonstrate how it will mitigate and minimise the impact on the landscape and on the setting of heritage assets. 
13.35 The layout of development should maximise the opportunities offered by views across the River Kym Valley 
and into Kimbolton.  A loose edge to development should be provided on the south-western boundary 
to blend the site into the adjoining countryside. Open space provision should be focused along this edge and the existing mature hedgerow maintained. The site's proximity to the river may increase its archaeological interest, and an appropriate archaeological assessment will be required. 
13.36 Given the site's proximity to the River Kym a site-specific Flood Risk Assessment will need to show the effect of 
additional drainage from the site on the river.  Any development proposal should sequentially 
locate development within flood zone 1. 
231 13 Key Service Centres 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
13.37 A sewer pipe crosses this site which is protected by easements.  Any development layout should ensure 
that the sewers or mains are located under highways or public open space, they should not be built over or located in private gardens where access for maintenance and repair could be restricted.  If it is not 
possible to accommodate the existing sewers within the design then diversion may be possible under section 185 of the Water Industry Act 1991 or entering into a build over/ near agreement may be considered. 
13.38 The site lies wholly within a Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Sand and Gravel Mineral Safeguarding Area.  Given the size of the site and its proximity to residential development, it is unlikely to be worked as an economic resource.  However in the event that mineral is extracted as part of any future development it must be put to a sustainable use either on- or off-site in accordance with Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Minerals and Waste Core Strategy Policy CS26. 
232 L 
" { k /4 'I 
·-/~:/ } 'Y ' £ ~,1', /-t 
',;q (' 1-i" y I i",. ,'). <..,l 1-l' "; , , Key Service Centres 13 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
North of Station Road/ Stowe Road, Kimbolton 
KB 2 
North of Station Road/ Stowe Road, Kimbolton 
2.5ha of land at North of Station Road/Stowe Road, 
Kimbolton is allocated for residential development of approximately 65 homes.  Successful development of the site will require. 
a. provision of safe and suitable vehicular and 
pedestrian access 
b. a comprehensive soft landscaping scheme 
including planting along the highway frontage 
c. provision of a surface water drainage strategy 
that responds to the sloping topography of the land 
d. an ecological assessment and enhancement 
scheme 
Development Guidance 
13.39 The site is located on the edge of the village on land that slopes down to the highway. The land should 
be developed 
at a relatively low density in keeping with the existing residential development in the locality 
and it should respond positively to the topography of the land. 
13.40 The extent of highway frontage provides opportunities to form an access or accesses to the land as informed 
by a proportionate Transport Assessment which should ensure satisfactory resolution of additional 
traffic impacts on local roads. 
13.41 At present the site is relatively open with sparse soft landscaping along the site frontage.  It will be expected that a comprehensive planting 
scheme is designed to soften the development in public views and provide 
integration with the countryside. A substantial planting buffer should be provided along the northern and eastern boundaries of the site to minimise the impact of the development from public rights of way on higher ground. 
13.42 The slope of the site will influence the design of the surface water drainage system for the development. The opportunity to 
incorporate attractive surface water storage features of high amenity and biodiversity 
value in the design of development should be explored 
13.43 The planting along the site boundaries indicates the potential for protected species to be present.  It is expected that 
an ecological assessment of the land will be carried out and appropriate enhancement 
measures integrated into the development. 
233 t, 
( 13 Key Service Centres 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
South of Bicton Industrial Estate 
KB 3 
South of Bicton Industrial Estate, Kimbolton 
1.3ha of land adjacent to Bicton Industrial Estate, 
Kimbolton is allocated for light industrial business uses (class 'B1c').  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. provision of satisfactory access appropriate 
to the nature of traffic 
b. provision of a tree buffer on the eastern and southern boundary to provide a screen to the surrounding countryside 
c. safeguarding the adjacent county wildlife 
site 
Development Guidance 
13.44 The site is located adjacent to an Established Employment Area but is bounded to the south and west by 
open countryside. 
The design and landscaping of any development will need careful consideration with 
regard to its setting and impact on the wider landscape, especially the adjacent county wildlife site to the west of the site and the heritage assets to the south.  Substantial planting will be required on the eastern and southern boundaries to minimise the impact on views from the surrounding countryside. 
13.45 Although the location of the industrial estate is relatively unsustainable, in that access is almost exclusively by car
, the estate successfully meets the needs of a range of businesses and makes a valuable contribution 
to the local economy.  Ideally access to the site should be provided through the Established Employment Area.  However, the Highways Authority have acknowledged that this may not be easily achieved.  A detailed transport assessment will be required to demonstrate that an alternative access, upgrading one of the established tracks linking the site to Stow Longa Road to the west, can provide a safe and suitable access.  If this is necessary impacts on the adjoining county wildlife site should be minimised. 
13.46 Using the jobs density figure from Alconbury Enterprise Zone and the industry standard floorspace a jobs figure of approximately 140 may be possib
le on the 1.3ha identified. 
234 Key Service Centres 13 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Sawtry 
235 13 Key Service Centres 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
East of Glebe Farm, Sawtry 
SY 1 
East of Glebe Farm, Sawtry 
3.9ha of land east of Glebe Farm, Gidding Road, 
Sawtry is allocated for residential development of approximately 80 homes.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. provision of suitable access and 
improvements to Gidding Road 
b. provision of cycleway links to facilitate 
integration of the site into adjoining 
residential areas to the east, and pedestrian linkages retained 
c. protection and enhancement of Sawtry 
Brook as a landscape and nature conservation feature 
Development Guidance 
13.47 The site is in a sustainable location within walking distance of local shops and health facilities, as well as 
indoor and outdoor sports f
acilities, a primary school and a secondary school.  Local employment 
opportunities exist at the small Established Employment Area at Brookside.  However, potential residents would need to access many services and facilities as well as employment opportunities at larger centres, especially Huntingdon and Peterborough.  A robust travel plan should accompany any proposals for this site, including measures to encourage sustainable travel patterns both within and outside the village.  A transport assessment will be required. The development also needs to ensure that sufficient parking is provided on the site.  Development proposals will also need to provide information on how the impacts of the development will be accommodated and mitigated where appropriate. 
13.48 This scheme should be developed at a relatively low density to reflect its immediate context. To aid integration 
development of the eastern part of the site should reflect the existing pattern and character of 
development.  Any development proposals should enhance the gateway into the village and incorporate additional planting to enhance the landscape and nature conservation value of the watercourse, without encroachment into the Middle Level Commissioners (MLC) maintenance strip, and provide a robust and attractive boundary to this edge of the village. The western portion of the site should be retained in open space use. Existing footpath linkages should be retained, and cycleway links provided to facilitate integration of the site into adjoining residential areas to the east. 
13.49 Sawtry Brook should be protected by provision of a green corridor alongside it and the retention and enhancement of the existing hedgero
w in recognition of its value both as a landscape feature and for 
biodiversity.  A 9 metre wide maintenance access strip for the open watercourse that forms the northern boundary of the site would be required by MLC.  Although the site falls within flood zone 1, part is known to be prone to flooding around Sawtry Brook. This will need to be addressed in any planning application. 
236 Key Service Centres 13 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
13.50 The eastern part of the site is susceptible to surface water flooding; the design of any development scheme 
will need to take this 
into account. Surface water run off should be restricted to greenfield rates to reduce 
the risk of flooding, as Catchwater Drain approaches capacity during high rainfall events.  It is unlikely that the site will be conducive to the use of soakaways or infiltration devices, therefore a flood risk assessment and drainage strategy to be produced in agreement with relevant bodies would be required. 
13.51 The site falls within a Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Brickclay Mineral Safeguarding Area although Cambridgeshire County Council say it is unlik
ely to be worked. 
237 13 Key Service Centres 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
South of Gidding Road, Sawtry 
SY 2 
South of Gidding Road, Sawtry 
10.8ha of land south of Gidding Road, Sawtry is 
allocated for residential development of approximately 295 homes.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. provision of suitable access and 
improvements to Gidding Road 
b. provision of cycleway and pedestrian links 
to facilitate integration of the site into 
adjoining residential areas to the east 
c. a transport assessment and travel plan 
d. substantial landscaping on the western 
boundary to provide a soft edge to the village 
and to minimise the impact of the development in long distance views from the west 
e. an ecological assessment and enhancement scheme 
Development Guidance 
13.52 Given its position on the outskirts of the village adjoining open countryside the site should be developed 
at a relatively lo
w density. The design and layout of any development proposals should promote the site 
as an attractive the gateway into the village. 
13.53 A proportionate transport assessment will be required to demonstrate that safe, appropriate access can be provided from 
the road network for any detailed scheme and that any off-site transport impacts are 
adequately mitigated. A travel plan will be required to address the needs generated by new residents. To aid integration of development pedestrian links must be provided into the adjacent development known as 'The Mulberries'. A public right of way runs parallel to the southern boundary of the site and connections should be provided to this including a bridge over the intervening ditch where necessary. 
13.54 The site is in an area of high archaeological potential and an archaeological evaluation should be completed prior to 
any development. A programme of work to investigate and protect archaeological assets will be 
required. 
13.55 The site is greenfield with boundary hedging so it may provide some habitats for wildlife. The adjoining land to the east contains Great Crested Newt habitats
. A biodiversity and ecology survey will therefore be 
required. An ecological management plan and landscaping scheme will be necessary to mitigate any impacts of development of this site and provide appropriate enhancements. Open space should be incorporated in the southern part of the site and the landscaping scheme should ensure retention and enhancement of the boundary planting to reduce the impact on the surrounding countryside. 
13.56 The site lies below High Holborn Hill and a surface water drainage strategy should be provided to ensure that the proposed development 
can be adequately drained and that there is no flood risk on- or off-site 
resulting from the development. 
238 Key Service Centres 13 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
13.57 The site falls within a Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Brickclay Mineral Safeguarding Area although 
Cambridgeshire County Council hav
e confirmed it is unlikely to be worked. 
13.58 A planning application for up to 295 dwellings on this site (17/00077/OUT) was approved in May 2017. 
239 13 Key Service Centres 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Somersham 
240 t Key Service Centres 13 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
College Farm, West of Newlands Industrial Estate, Somersham 
SM 1 
College Farm, West of Newlands Industrial Estate, Somersham 
1.8ha of land at College Farm, West of Newlands 
Industrial Estate, Somersham is allocated for residential development of approximately 55 homes. Successful development of the site will require: 
1. provision of a suitable means of vehicular 
access 
2. provision of a footway to link the site with the 
existing footway network to the village 
3. design which provides for lesser density and/or 
landscaping towards the west and north of the site reflecting the transition to open countryside 
4. provision of appropriate acoustic treatment to 
mitigate against adjacent industrial uses and the College Farm complex to the north-west 
5. retention of the trees along the west boundary and the site frontage; except where removal is required for access 
6. provision of a surface water drainage strategy that responds to the sloping topography of the land 
7. agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from the 
proposal can be accommodated 
8. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework 
Directive would not be compromised 
Development Guidance 
13.59 This land is located on the edge of the settlement and development is expected to provide an appropriate 
transition between the b
uilt up area and surrounding countryside. 
13.60 It expected that the site would be served by a single access road, although it may also be suitable to have 
a few 
individual driveways for detached dwellings facing St Ives Road.  Details of suitably designed and 
safe access arrangements should be informed by completion of a Transport Assessment which should also consider any improvement works necessary to resolve additional traffic impacts on local roads. 
13.61 There is a narrow footpath on this side of St Ives Road connecting to the west but eastwards it terminates at the frontage of the Industrial Estate
. Continuous safe pedestrian access between the site and the village 
will be required; this is expected to be provided as part of any development scheme on the allocated site 'Newlands, St Ives Road, Somersham'. 
13.62 Development in the locality is characterised by spacious plots and predominantly two storey buildings. Development 
in the northern portion of the site and along the western boundary should be designed at a 
lesser density and be landscaped to achieve a transition to the open countryside and avoid a harsh built edge in views approaching the village. 
241 13 Key Service Centres 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
13.63 Due to the proximity of the site to the industrial estate and to College Farm to the north-west, a noise 
assessment would be 
required and additional hard landscaping may be required to mitigate against noise 
generated from the industrial estate to the east. The presence of trees on the site frontage and western boundary necessitate the completion of a tree survey. 
13.64 The policy requires agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that the waste water flo
ws from proposed development can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements of the 
Water Framework Directive would not be compromised. The Somersham Waste water Treatment Works (WwTW) will serve this allocation. The WwTW currently has no available headroom and so unless additional headroom becomes available a change in discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be required for the projected growth. This would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and hence would not impact on attainment of future WFD water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions will be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place.  Should temporary measures prove not to be viable or would be insufficient it may be necessary to place limits on the amount of development that can take place. 
13.65 The slope of the site is likely to influence the design of the surface water drainage system. The opportunity to incorporate 
attractive surface water storage features of high amenity and biodiversity value into the 
design of development should be explored. 
242 Key Service Centres 13 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Newlands, St Ives Road, Somersham 
SM 2 
Newlands, St Ives Road, Somersham 
2.5ha of land at Newlands, St Ives Road, 
Somersham is allocated for development for mixed uses to comprise: 
1. 0.8ha for supported housing (a care home 
comprising approximately 60 beds) 
2. approximately 45 homes Successful development of the site will require: a. provision of an appropriate single access 
road to serve the supported housing and the 
majority of the residential development 
b. laying of a footway along the frontage linking with the existing footway network to the village 
c. design which provides for lesser density and/or landscaping towards the north of the site reflecting 
the transition to open countryside and protecting the setting of the conservation area 
d. high quality development acknowledging the nearby listed Somersham House and its setting 
e. provision of appropriate acoustic treatment to mitigate against adjoining industrial uses f. retention of the frontage hedge except where removal is required for access g. improved drainage to cater for development on the site h. agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from 
the proposal can be accommodated 
i. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework 
Directive would not be compromised 
Development Guidance 
13.66 The site has potential to accommodate a mixed use development incorporating supported housing and 
residential development.
  It has reasonable access to facilities including access to two doctors' surgeries 
and could cater for supported housing either in the form of a care home or sheltered flats. 
13.67 An access road should serve the supported housing element and most of the houses, although it may also be suitable to 
have individual a few individual driveways for detached dwellings facing St Ives Road. 
Details of suitably designed and safe access arrangements should be agreed and provided; access arrangements would be subject to the completion of a transport assessment to ensure highway safety. Provision of a new footpath to link the development to the village centre would be required to promote safety. The development also needs to ensure that sufficient parking is provided on the site. 
13.68 Development proposals should reflect the scale and massing of surrounding residential development which is characterised 
by spacious plots and development of one and two storeys.  Development in the 
northern portion of the site should be designed at a lesser density or be landscaped having regard to the line of adjoining development and allow for a transition to the open countryside and protecting the setting of the conservation area. 
243 13 Key Service Centres 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
13.69 Due to the proximity of the site to the industrial estate a noise assessment would be required and additional 
hard landscaping may be 
required to mitigate against noise generated from the industrial estate to the 
east. The presence of a protected tree on the south western boundary and existing landscaping on-site would necessitate the completion of a tree survey.  Enhanced landscaping on the eastern boundary may also be required to protect the residential amenity of neighbouring properties unless the residential component of the development is located on this eastern edge. 
13.70 The preferred arrangement of the uses on-site is for the care home to be on the west side adjacent to the industrial estate and the housing adjacent to the existing housing areas to the east. 
13.71 A 
sewer pipe crosses this site which is protected by easements.  Any development layout should ensure 
that the sewers 
or mains are located under highways or public open space, they should not be built over 
or located in private gardens where access for maintenance and repair could be restricted.  If it is not possible to accommodate the existing sewers within the design then diversion may be possible under section 185 of the Water Industry Act 1991 or entering into a build over/near agreement may be considered. 
13.72 The policy requires agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that the waste water flo
ws from proposed development can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements of the 
Water Framework Directive would not be compromised. The Somersham Waste water Treatment Works (WwTW) will serve this allocation. The WwTW currently has no available headroom and so unless additional headroom becomes available a change in discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be required for the projected growth. This would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and hence would not impact on attainment of future WFD water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions will be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place.  Should temporary measures prove not to be viable or would be insufficient it may be necessary to place limits on the amount of development that can take place. 
13.73 The slope on the site results in surface water collecting along the St Ives Road frontage which is carried into a drain. 
 Improved drainage on-site and improvements to the existing drain should be made to 
accommodate development. 
244 ! -r:!J 'v i I 
j 
vt 'f ~~f7 ,. 
._ 
" 
l't . c.., ' -. 
..,. ,...._ . 
' Ii I I (; 
} ,: ,.., ./ r\ 6 
'~ <) & 0 
l',.f, 0 t-< (. ,,. Key Service Centres 13 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
The Pasture, Somersham 
SM 3 
The Pasture, Somersham 
0.6ha of land at The Pasture, Somersham is 
allocated for approximately 15 dwellings. Successful development of the site will require: 
a. provision of appropriate access from The 
Pasture 
b. high quality sensitive development 
acknowledging the adjacent conservation 
area designation and listed Somersham House 
c. agreement with the Environment Agency 
and Anglian Water Services that they are satisfied that waste water flows from the proposal can be accommodated 
d. agreement with the Environment Agency 
that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised 
Development Guidance 
13.74 This is a small site for which access should be taken from The Pasture. The site adjoins both the 
conservation 
area and the Grade II listed Somersham House (the Old Rectory), the grounds of which 
contain a number of protected trees.  Development must demonstrate sensitivity to this surrounding context and substantial boundary landscaping reinforced appropriately. 
13.75 The western boundary of the site adjoins a large arable field; the current hedgerow screening the site from the open countryside should be retained and reinforced to minimise the impact of the de
velopment. 
13.76 The policy requires agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that the waste water flo
ws from proposed development can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements of the 
Water Framework Directive would not be compromised. The Somersham Waste water Treatment Works (WwTW) will serve this allocation. The WwTW currently has no available headroom and so unless additional headroom becomes available a change in discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be required for the projected growth. This would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and hence would not impact on attainment of future WFD water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions will be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place.  Should temporary measures prove not to be viable or would be insufficient it may be necessary to place limits on the amount of development that can take place. 
245 13 Key Service Centres 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Somersham Town Football Ground 
SM 4 
Somersham Town Football Ground 
1.8ha of land at Somersham Town Football 
Ground is allocated for development of approximately 45 homes.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. appropriate alternative provision of the 
recreational facility 
b. the eastern edge of development limited to 
the extent of the football pitch to protect the 
setting of the Scheduled Monument 
c. archaeological investigation prior to 
development 
d. improved access to the B1086 (utilising the 
existing access point) to serve the residential development 
e. sensitive design having regard to the 
Conservation Area designation over part of the site and adjoining land 
f. agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that they are satisfied that 
surface and waste water flows from the proposal can be accommodated 
g. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework 
Directive would not be compromised 
Development Guidance 
13.77 Somersham Town football club has aspirations to relocate and redevelop their existing site for housing. 
This should only occur after relocation to a suitable alter
native site with a similar level of accessibility to 
users. 
13.78 The site is located adjoining Pond Closes, which is the name for the former fish pond associated with the Bishop of Ely's Palace.
  It is part of a Scheduled Monument which extends to the south. Given this any 
development should be sensitively designed to avoid detrimental impact on Ponds Closes. The site may contain remains of archaeological significance which should be fully explored prior to redevelopment. An archaeological investigation and heritage statement would be required. 
13.79 Ponds Closes is separated from the football ground by a stream and an area of raised ground. There is also a public f
ootpath running along the northern edge.  An appropriate buffer and landscaping is required 
between residential development and Pond Closes to ensure that the setting of the Scheduled Monument is not affected. 
13.80 Access to the football ground is currently via a relatively narrow bridge over a stream near the road frontage with the B1086. This access 
should be widened to provide good visibility for residential development and 
a suitably designed safe access onto the existing highway network agreed and provided. 
13.81 The southern part of the site is susceptible to surface water flooding; the design of any development scheme will need to take this 
into account. A flood risk assessment and drainage strategy to be produced 
in agreement with relevant bodies would be required. 
246 Key Service Centres 13 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
13.82 The policy requires agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that the surface 
and waste w
ater flows from proposed development can be accommodated and that meeting the 
requirements of the Water Framework Directive would not be compromised. The Somersham Waste water Treatment Works (WwTW) will serve this allocation. The WwTW currently has no available headroom and so unless additional headroom becomes available a change in discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be required for the projected growth. This would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and hence would not impact on attainment of future WFD water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions will be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place.  Should temporary measures prove not to be viable or would be insufficient it may be necessary to place limits on the amount of development that can take place. 
247 ( 13 Key Service Centres 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
North of the Bank, Somersham 
SM 5 
North of the Bank, Somersham 
5.5ha of land north of the Bank, Somersham is 
allocated for development of approximately 120 homes.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. design and layout which provides for low 
density development and landscaping 
towards the north and west of the site reflecting the transition to open countryside and proximity to the local nature reserve respectively 
b. provision of safe and appropriate access to The Bank, B1050 
c. a comprehensive package of community 
benefits including enhancements to the local rights of way network, access to the Local Nature Reserve to the north-west and cycleway improvements 
d. retention of existing trees on the west and north boundaries and the two trees centrally located in 
the southern part of the site 
e. building setbacks from the bus depot to the east and reinforcing of landscaping to provide a robust 
screen between the development site and the bus depot 
f. agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from 
the proposal can be accommodated 
g. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework 
Directive would not be compromised 
Development Guidance 
13.83 The site is on the eastern edge of Somersham on the northern side of the B1050 (The Bank which becomes 
Chatteris Road 
to the east). To the west, closer to the village centre, are substantial areas of open space 
and woodland including a county wildlife site along the former railway line.  A pedestrian access to the Local Nature Reserve parallels the western boundary of the site. To the east is another area of open land, a residential property and a bus depot. 
13.84 Careful site design is needed to ensure that development sits appropriately within  the sensitive context established b
y the local nature reserve and county wildlife site to the west and the open landscape to the 
north. The existing boundary trees and hedging should be retained to minimise the impact of the development on the nature conservation and leisure value of the adjoining land. Landscaping and a low density of development is expected at the northern edge. The site design should also seek to retain the two existing central trees to provide a natural feature. 
13.85 Development of this site should in no way result in pressure to limit the operations of the nearby bus depot which is lawfully estab
lished.  Substantial landscaping will be expected along the eastern boundary aimed 
at visually screening the bus depot and reducing the impact of noise arising from vehicle movements there. 
248 Key Service Centres 13 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
13.86 The existing farm entrance is the appropriate location for a new access to serve the entire development. 
This should be improved 
as required for vehicle visibility to meet the needs of the scale of development. 
A transport assessment will be required. This should highlight any deficiencies in connectivity and put forward mitigation measures to make an acceptable development.The development also needs to ensure that sufficient parking is provided on the site. There is an existing footpath which passes the site entrance allowing for pedestrian access into the village centre but this may need to be improved. There is also an opportunity to link the site to the adjoining green infrastructure elements to the west which could enable a through link past the lake and to the pavilion for pedestrians and possibly cyclists. There are existing footpaths already in this location which are well used by the community. 
13.87 The policy requires agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that the waste water flo
ws from proposed development can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements of the 
Water Framework Directive would not be compromised. The Somersham Waste water Treatment Works (WwTW) will serve this allocation. The WwTW currently has no available headroom and so unless additional headroom becomes available a change in discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be required for the projected growth. This would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and hence would not impact on attainment of future WFD water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions will be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place.  Should temporary measures prove not to be viable or would be insufficient it may be necessary to place limits on the amount of development that can take place. 
249 13 Key Service Centres 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Warboys 
250 Key Service Centres 13 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
West of Ramsey Road, Warboys 
WB 1 
West of Ramsey Road, Warboys 
1.7ha of land West of Ramsey Road, Warboys is 
allocated for residential development of approximately 45 homes.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. vehicular access being taken from 
Longlands Close and / or directly from 
Ramsey Road 
b. provision of landscaping on the western and northern boundaries to provide a soft edge to the village including retention and appropriate replacement of the mature trees in the boundary hedging 
c. provision of high quality development that 
is complementary to the adjacent conservation area 
d. retention or appropriate replacement of 
mature trees on the frontage to 21 Ramsey Road 
e. retention of trees and open space in the southern part of the site adjacent to The Paddock 
f. agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from 
the proposal can be accommodated 
g. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework 
Directive would not be compromised 
Development Guidance 
13.88 Development of this site should be sensitive to the scale of properties to the south of the site and retain 
trees and open space along the southern boundar
y to reduce the impact on neighbouring homes.  Details 
of a suitably designed safe access onto the existing highway network should be provided and agreed. Vehicular access should be provided via an extension of Longlands Close and/ or directly from Ramsey Road. If vehicular access is only obtained from Longlands Close an additional pedestrian access directly to Ramsey Road should be provided to give easy access to the services and facilities in the village centre. 
13.89 The eastern part of the site lies within the conservation area and adjacent to the grade II listed building at 17 Ramsey Road.
 Development proposals should demonstrate how they respect and reflect these 
heritage assets and their settings. Substantial landscaping will be required on the western and northern boundaries to minimise intrusion into the countryside and retain a soft edge to the village. The mature trees within the frontage of 21 Ramsey Road contribute to the character of this road and are situated within the Conservation Area. An arboricultural assessment will be required to ascertain which trees should be retained or replaced and how the impact on the street scene is minimised. 
13.90 A sewer pipe crosses this site which is protected by easements.  Any development layout should ensure that the sewers 
or mains are located under highways or public open space, they should not be built over 
or located in private gardens where access for maintenance and repair could be restricted.  If it is not possible to accommodate the existing sewers within the design then diversion may be possible under section 185 of the Water Industry Act 1991 or entering into a build over/near agreement may be considered. 
251 13 Key Service Centres 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
13.91 The policy requires agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that the waste 
water flo
ws from proposed development can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements of the 
Water Framework Directive would not be compromised. The Oldhurst Waste water Treatment Works (WwTW) will serve this allocation. The WwTW currently has no available headroom and so unless additional headroom becomes available a change in discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be required for the projected growth. This would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and hence would not impact on attainment of future WFD water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions will be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place.  Should temporary measures prove not to be viable or would be insufficient it may be necessary to place limits on the amount of development that can take place. 
252 TM Paddock 
Motilk tlomtll Pa.tit Key Service Centres 13 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Manor Farm Buildings, Warboys 
WB 2 
Manor Farm Buildings, Warboys 
0.6ha of land at Manor Farm buildings, Warboys 
is allocated for residential development of approximately 10 homes.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. provision of a safe vehicular access onto 
Church Road 
b. provision of high quality development which 
enhances the character of the conservation area and reflects the sensitive setting of the site created by the surrounding high quality listed buildings 
c. retention of trees and shrubs on the northern boundary of the site to protect views to and from Adam Lyons recreation field 
d. retention of trees in the centre of the site to 
protect the character of the conservation area 
e. provision to preserve high value heritage assets are situated immediately to the south, including the Grade II* listed Manor House and Grade I listed St Mary Magdalene's Church 
f. agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from 
the proposal can be accommodated 
g. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework 
Directive would not be compromised 
Development Guidance 
13.92 This site offers an opportunity for a significant environmental enhancement.  However, it is an extremely 
sensitive location 
in relation to heritage assets and an exceptionally high quality design would be required. 
A cluster of high value heritage assets are situated immediately to the south, including the Grade II* Manor House and associated listed barn and curtilage listed structures and the Grade I St Mary Magdalene's Church. The site is also surrounded by the conservation area on all but the western boundary.  A heritage statement would be required to assess the impact on these assets and an exceptionally high quality of design and build would be required to reflect the sensitivity of the location. 
13.93 The existing access is very constrained and will need improvement to ensure adequate visibility and safety.
  In particular, achievement of adequate visibility splays will be challenging given the need to retain 
the boundary wall and the mature trees on the southern side of the site to protect the setting of the adjacent listed buildings. A speed survey will be required to demonstrate that safe access and egress can be achieved. Details of suitably designed safe access onto the existing highway network should be provided and agreed. Use as an agricultural access to the farmland to the west of the site will need to cease. 
13.94 The northern boundary adjoins the Adam Lyons Recreation Ground and trees and shrubs along this boundary should 
be retained to provide visual and acoustic screening between the new homes and the 
recreation ground.  A group of trees is currently situated in the centre of the site providing some screening of the agricultural sheds from the conservation area. These should ideally be retained to reduce the impact 
253 13 Key Service Centres 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
of the redevelopment. The western boundary of the site adjoins extensive arable fields and is open to 
long distance views from lower land to the west.  Boundary planting should be incorporated to mitigate the visual impact of development on the site. 
13.95 The policy requires agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that the waste water flo
ws from proposed development can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements of the 
Water Framework Directive would not be compromised. The Oldhurst Waste water Treatment Works (WwTW) will serve this allocation. The WwTW currently has no available headroom and so unless additional headroom becomes available a change in discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be required for the projected growth. This would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and hence would not impact on attainment of future WFD water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions will be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place.  Should temporary measures prove not to be viable or would be insufficient it may be necessary to place limits on the amount of development that can take place. 
254 .,,.. , {:. 
w , 
L ..... 
I' .Z,~,.. .... Key Service Centres 13 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
South of Stirling Close, Warboys 
WB 3 
South of Stirling Close, Warboys 
1.9ha of land at South of Stirling Close, Warboys is 
allocated for residential development of approximately 50 homes.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. the provision of a suitable means of access 
from Stirling Close 
b. retention and protection of trees along the 
northern and western boundaries 
c. provision of landscaping on the southern and 
eastern boundaries to provide a soft edge to 
the village and screen the development 
d. a design that preserves or enhances the 
character and appearance of the adjacent conservation area 
e. a design that incorporates any important views towards the Church of Mary Magdalene to the west 
f. provision of open space in the north of the site to complement the existing area of open space 
g. an ecological assessment and enhancement scheme h. agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from the 
proposal can be accommodated 
i. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework 
Directive would not be compromised 
j. agreement with the Middle Level Commissioners that they will not object on the basis of flood risk in 
the Middle Level system. 
Development Guidance 
13.96 Access to the site will need to be provided via an extension of Stirling Close. A transport assessment will 
be required to demonstrate satisf
actory resolution of additional traffic impacts on local roads. Details of 
safe and suitably designed vehicular and pedestrian access would need to be provided and agreed. 
13.97 Open space and landscaping should be provided in the eastern part of the site in combination with provision of substantial soft planting along the boundaries to 
contain the development within the settlement and 
provide a soft outer edge to the village. 
13.98 A number of trees are growing along some of the existing field boundaries and these should be largely retained to add established char
acter to the new development.  A tree growing in the north-west corner 
is protected by a Tree Preservation Order. 
13.99 The planting along the site boundaries and presence of watercourses, indicates the potential for protected species to be present.  
It is expected that an ecological assessment of the land will be carried out and 
appropriate enhancement measures integrated into the development. 
255 13 Key Service Centres 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
13.100 The Grade I listed St Mary Magdalene's Church is located around 300m to the north west of the site.  It 
will be expected that 
any important views of the Church from the site are incorporated into the design of 
the development. The site is also adjacent to the Conservation Area and the development of the land will be required to preserve and enhance the Conservation Area. Archaeological assessment will be required given the site's proximity to heritage assets. 
13.101 The policy requires agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that the waste water flo
ws from proposed development can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements of the 
Water Framework Directive would not be compromised. The Oldhurst Waste water Treatment Works (WwTW) will serve this allocation. The WwTW currently has no available headroom and so unless additional headroom becomes available a change in discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be required for the projected growth. This would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and hence would not impact on attainment of future WFD water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions will be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place.  Should temporary measures prove not to be viable or would be insufficient it may be necessary to place limits on the amount of development that can take place. 
256 I Key Service Centres 13 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
South of Farrier's Way, Warboys 
WB 4 
South of Farrier's Way, Warboys 
3.6ha of land south of Farrier's Way, Warboys is 
allocated for residential development of approximately 75 homes.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. appropriate vehicular access being made 
from Farrier's Way 
b. retention of trees within the site and 
provision of landscaping on the southern 
boundary to provide a soft edge to the village and on the western boundary to maintain the character of the sports ground and provide screening 
c. provision of comprehensive pedestrian and cycle access through the site to Farrier's Way, to the open space area between the site and Farrier's Way, and to the adjacent sports ground 
d. a comprehensive master plan to ensure a holistic approach to the design of development 
e. provision of open space in the north west corner of the site to complement the existing area f. agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that waste water flows from 
the proposal can be accommodated 
g. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework 
Directive would not be compromised 
Development Guidance 
13.102 Vehicular access to the site will need to be provided via an extension of Farrier's Way.  Pedestrian access 
should be provided through 
the site to Farrier's Way, as well as to the footpath through the area of open 
space between the site and Farrier's Way to aid integration of the site into the village and maximise accessibility for pedestrians.  A transport assessment and accompanying travel plan will be required. Residential development of this site was underway as at May 2019. 
13.103 Additional open space should be provided within the site, potentially adjacent to the open space adjoining the northwest cor
ner of the site. 
13.104 The site has a substantial number of trees running along some of the existing field boundaries, particularly on the boundary that 
separates the eastern part of the site. These should be largely retained to add 
established character to the new development and minimise the impact on neighbouring properties. The established cluster of trees and shrubs in the southeastern corner of the site should be retained to maintain biodiversity and provide separation from Fenton Field Farm house.  Landscaping along the boundaries will be required to provide a soft edge to the village and to protect the residential amenity of neighbouring properties and future residents.  Additionally landscaping along the western boundary between the site and the adjoining sports ground will protect the residential amenity of future residents. 
13.105 The land is in an area of high archaeological potential and as such, development may have an impact on heritage assets.
 An archaeological investigation may be required before development takes place. 
257 13 Key Service Centres 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
13.106 There is some risk of surface water flooding in a small part of the north of the site close to the connection 
point with Farrier's 
Way. Development has the potential to alleviate this and appropriate assessment and 
mitigation should be undertaken. 
13.107 The policy requires agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that the waste water flo
ws from proposed development can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements of the 
Water Framework Directive would not be compromised. The Oldhurst Waste water Treatment Works (WwTW) will serve this allocation. The WwTW currently has no available headroom and so unless additional headroom becomes available a change in discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be required for the projected growth. This would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and hence would not impact on attainment of future WFD water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions will be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place.  Should temporary measures prove not to be viable or would be insufficient it may be necessary to place limits on the amount of development that can take place. 
258 Key Service Centres 13 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Extension to West of Station Road, Warboys 
WB 5 
Extension to West of Station Road, Warboys 
3.63ha of land west of Station Road Road, 
Warboys is allocated for residential development of approximately 80 homes.  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. provision of safe vehicular access via the 
adjacent West of Station Road site 
b. substantial landscaping on the western 
boundary to provide a soft edge to the village 
and to minimise the impact of the development in long distance views from the west 
c. provision of landscape planting to protect 
the residential amenity of neighbouring properties 
d. ecological appraisal and mitigation strategy for Great Crested Newts and other protected species 
e. completion of a transport assessment and provision of a network of cycleways and footpaths which 
facilitate integration between the Station Road area and the main part of Warboys village to promote sustainable transport modes 
f. provision of open space within the site for informal use as an integral part of development 
g. agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that they are satisfied that 
waste water flows from the proposal can be accommodated 
h. agreement with the Environment Agency that meeting the requirements of the Water Framework 
Directive would not be compromised 
Development Guidance 
13.108 This site forms an extension to the West of Station Road, Warboys site, which was built as 'Great Pastures'. 
As such, this extension should be fully integr
ated with the West of Station Road site. 
13.109 Detailed development proposals for this site should maximise the opportunities to facilitate integration between the 
residential area west of Station Road and the main part of Warboys village.  A transport 
assessment in accordance with the policy LP 16 'Sustainable Travel' and accompanying travel plan will be required to ensure appropriate, safe access is established from Station Road, complemented by footpaths and 
cycleways to improve sustainable connections to services and facilities in the village centre. 
13.110 The lack of significant landscaping enhances the site's prominence as it is very open, particularly in long distance views from 
the west.  A landscape management plan will therefore be required as part of any 
potential development proposals.  Landscaping should be designed to minimise the impact on neighbouring residential properties and the surrounding open countryside.  As the site is greenfield it may provide some habitats for wildlife; a biodiversity and ecology survey will therefore be required along with the incorporation of necessary mitigation measures where appropriate. 
259 13 Key Service Centres 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
13.111 The policy requires agreement with the Environment Agency and Anglian Water Services that the waste 
water flo
ws from proposed development can be accommodated and that meeting the requirements of the 
Water Framework Directive would not be compromised. The Oldhurst Waste water Treatment Works (WwTW) will serve this allocation. The WwTW currently has no available headroom and so unless additional headroom becomes available a change in discharge consent and process upgrades at the WwTW will be required for the projected growth. This would be achievable within the limits of conventional treatment and hence would not impact on attainment of future WFD water quality objectives.  Interim treatment solutions will be necessary until a permanent treatment solution is put in place.  Should temporary measures prove not to be viable or would be insufficient it may be necessary to place limits on the amount of development that can take place. 
260 Key Service Centres 13 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Yaxley 
261 13 Key Service Centres 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Askew's Lane,Yaxley 
YX 1 
Askew's Lane,Yaxley 
0.5ha of land at Askew's Lane, Y axley is allocated 
for residential development of approximately 10 homes (net).  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. provision of suitable vehicular access to 
Askew's Lane or Main Street 
b. the design and layout of any development 
proposal reflecting the site's location on the 
edge of a conservation area 
c. provision of a flood risk assessment and 
drainage strategy in agreement with relevant bodies 
d. provision of a 20m wide maintenance access strip to Y ards End Dyke 
Development Guidance 
13.112 Approximately half the site is previously developed, now vacant, and covered with hardstanding which 
reduces the impact of redevelopment 
on potential run-off rates. There may be contamination on part of 
the site associated with its previous use as a coal yard which should be investigated and appropriate remediation conducted as part of any development proposals. 
13.113 Potential redevelopment provides the opportunity to provide an attractive residential environment which could enhance the character and 
setting of the conservation area.  Redevelopment would have a limited 
visual impact on the surrounding area as the site is well screened by vegetation, which is worthy of retention, however the need to obtain safe access arrangements may necessitate the loss of some of the trees/ hedges. 
13.114 Askew's Lane is extremely narrow, however planning permission 14/01547/OUT has approval for residential development 
and demonstrated that safe and suitable access is possible. Reserved matters approval was 
granted in December 2018 (18/01341/REM). If this is not implemented details of a suitably designed safe access onto the existing highway network should be provided and agreed as appropriate to any proposed scheme. However, access could potentially be provided from Main Street following demolition of existing home(s) within the site area. 
13.115 A sewer pipe crosses this site which is protected by easements.  Any development layout should ensure that the sewers 
or mains are located under highways or public open space, they should not be built over 
or located in private gardens where access for maintenance and repair could be restricted.  If it is not possible to accommodate the existing sewers within the design then diversion may be possible under section 185 of the Water Industry Act 1991 or entering into a build over/near agreement may be considered. 
13.116 The southern boundary of the site runs along the bank of the Y ards End Dyke drainage channel which is part of 
the Middle Level Commissioners (MLC) systems.  A 20 metre wide access strip is required for 
maintenance purposes by the MLC. The water level/ flood risk management system is sensitive to increased surface water/ treated effluent discharges and consequently the MLC will not accept additional 
262 Key Service Centres 13 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
water to enter their managed system including the Y ards End Dyke.  Additionally soakaway and similar 
infiltration type drainage solutions are unlikely to be suitable.  A flood risk assessment and drainage management plan will therefore be required that satisfies the MLC.  Discussion is ongoing between MLC and Anglian Water regarding discharges from existing outlets into MLC's system, and this may have future implications for development proposals. 
263 , \U\ \ \ I 
1Il 1 \ \ 
\ I 
' 13 Key Service Centres 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Yax Pak,Yaxley 
YX 2 
Yax Pak,Yaxley 
3.2ha at Y ax Pak, Broadway, Y axley is allocated 
for employment development to comprise business uses (class 'B1') or general industrial uses (class 'B2').  Successful development of the site will require: 
a. provision of a flood risk assessment and 
drainage strategy, to be produced in 
agreement with relevant bodies 
b. appropriate vehicle and pedestrian access 
Development Guidance 
13.117 The water level/ flood risk management system downstream of the site is sensitive to increased surface 
water/treated effluent 
discharges and there has been flooding in the area, consequently the Middle Level 
Commissioners (MLC) will not accept additional water to enter their managed system.  A flood risk assessment and drainage management plan will therefore be required that satisfies the MLC. 
13.118 The site lies within the Great Fen Landscape and Visual Setting Area and so the impact of development on the surrounding landscape will need to be carefully considered, with particular consider
ation given to 
long distance views from and to the south. 
13.119 Appropriate vehicle and pedestrian access will need to be provided. The main access is currently from Broadway 
at the northern end of the site, which should be maintained as a pedestrian access; it is unsuitable 
for further intensification of use as a vehicular access. This access slopes steeply up to the road.Vehicular access should be provided through the adjacent Eagle Business Park. 
13.120 A sewer pipe and water main cross this site which is protected by easements.  Any development layout should ensure that the sewers 
and mains are located under highways or open space, they should not be 
built over or located in private areas where access for maintenance and repair could be restricted.  If it is not possible to accommodate the existing sewers within the design then diversion may be possible under section 185 of the Water Industry Act 1991 or entering into a build over/near agreement may be considered. 
13.121 Using the jobs density figure from Alconbury Enterprise Zone and the industry standard floorspace a jobs figure of approximately 345 may be possib
le on the 3.2ha identified. 
264 • 
• 
• 
• Replacement of Development Plans Appendix A: 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Appendix A: Replacement of Development Plans 
This Local Plan replaces all the following parts of the development plan: 
The saved policies of the Local Plan 1995 and Local Plan Alteration 2002 as set out in the Direction 
on Saved Policies 2007. 
The saved policies Proposals Map All par
ts and policies of the Core Strategy 2009 
All parts and policies of the Huntingdon West Area Action Plan 2011
 For clarity the 'made' Neighbourhood Plans for St Neots, Godmanchester and Houghton and Wyton remain part 
of the adopted development plan. 
The Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Minerals and Waste Plans remain part of the development plan. 
265 Appendix B: Developed Sites 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Appendix B: Developed Sites 
Certain sites that were proposed for allocation earlier on in the process of preparing the Local Plan have already 
been brought forward, and at the date of submission of the Local Plan for independent examination (March 2018) were already either under construction or built out, as set out in the table below. 
Sites already under construction as at March 2018 that are over 200 dwellings are retained as allocations for 
information due to the potential longe
vity of their built-out to completion. 
Site status Site 
Eaton Court, St Neots Full planning permission for 29 dwellings, and under construction. 
Nelson Road, St Neots 45 dwellings and a 70 bed care home (C2) built. Site complete. 
Full planning permission for 59 dwellings and 125 with outline 
permission on the for
mer Golf Course part of site, and 
development has commenced. 180 dwellings built. Site complete. California Road (northern part), Huntingdon 
14 dwellings built. Site complete. St Mary's Street, Huntingdon 
66 bedroom care home (C2) built. Site complete. Ferrars Road, Huntingdon 
47 dwellings built. Site complete. Ermine Street/Edison Bell Way, Huntingdon 
74 dwellings - development commenced summer 2017. South of Edison Bell Way, Huntingdon 
Brampton Park, Brampton Reserved Matters approval for 603 dwellings. The first phase of 
development has commenced. 
St Ives West 
Ivy Nursery, Fenstanton Reserved Matters approval for 35 dwellings, and approaching 
completion. 
43 dwellings - development commenced summer 2017. West of St Andrew's Way, Sawtry 
Reserved Matters approval for 120 dwellings, and under 
construction. West of Station Road, Warboys 
14 dwellings built. Site complete. Rear of 64 High Street, Warboys 
Reserved Matters approval for 78 dwellings, and under construction. Former Snowcap Mushrooms site, Y axley 
266 Glossary 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Glossary 
The Local plan to 2036 was examined under the NPPF (2012). Please note where terms are defined in the 
National Planning Policy Framework (2012) they are replicated below for consistency of interpretation. 
Please check the latest version of the NPPF in case definitions have changed. 
Affordable housing 
Social rented, affordable rented and intermediate housing, provided to eligible households whose needs are not met by the market. Eligibility is determined with 
regard to local incomes and local house prices. Affordable housing should include provisions to remain 
at an affordable price for future eligible households or for the subsidy to be recycled for alternative affordable housing provision. 
Social rented housing is owned by local authorities and private registered providers (as defined in section 80 of the Housing and 
Regeneration Act 2008), f or which guideline target rents are deter
mined through the national rent regime.  It may also be owned 
by other persons and provided under equivalent rental arrangements to the above, as agreed with the local authority or with the Homes and Communities Agency. 
Affordable rented housing is let by local authorities or private registered providers of social housing to households who are eligible 
for social rented housing. 
Affordab
le Rent is subject to rent controls that require a rent of no more than 80% of the local market rent (including service charges, 
where applicable). Intermediate 
housing is homes for sale and rent provided at a cost above social rent, but below market levels subject to the criteria 
in the Affordab le Housing definition abo
ve. These can include shared equity (shared ownership and equity loans), other low cost 
homes for sale and intermediate rent, but not affordable rented housing. Homes that do not meet the above definition of affordable housing, such as “low cost market” housing, may not be considered as 
affordab le housing f
or planning purposes. 
Aged or veteran tree A tree which, because of its great age, size or condition is of exceptional value for wildlife, in the landscape, or culturally. 
Air Quality Management Areas 
Areas designated by local authorities because they are not likely to achieve national air quality objectives by the relevant deadlines. Information regarding air quality management in Huntingdonshire can be f ound in the latest v
ersion of the Council's Air Quality 
Updating and Screening Assessment Report. 
Allowable Solutions 
Allowable Solutions are a wide range of carbon-saving measures that are available to developers to allow them, in addition to on-site building perf 
ormance target to meet the Zero Carbon Housing policy of all housing achieving effectively zero CO2 emissions 
from regulated energy use such as energy used for space heating and cooling, hot water, fixed lighting and ventilation, from 2016. 
Amenity 
A positive element or elements that contribute to the overall character or enjoyment of an area.  For example, open land, trees, historic b uildings and the inter-relationship betw 
een them, or less tangible factors such as tranquillity. 
Ancient woodland An area that has been wooded continuously since at least 1600 AD. 
Annual Monitoring Report (AMR) 
Document produced each year to report on progress in producing the development plan documents and implementing its policies. 
Archaeological interest 
There will be archaeological interest in a heritage asset if it holds, or potentially may hold, evidence of past human activity worthy of expert in
vestigation at some point.  Heritage assets with archaeological interest are the primary source of evidence about the 
substance and evolution of places, and of the people and cultures that made them. 
Best and most versatile agricultural land 
Land in grades 1, 2 and 3a of the Agricultural Land Classification. 
267 Glossary 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Birds and Habitats Directives 
European Directives to conserve natural habitats and wild fauna and flora. 
Brownfield 
See previously developed land (PDL) 
Built-up area 
The built-up area is defined as a distinct group of 30 or more homes. land which relates more to the group of buildings rather than to the surrounding countr yside is also considered to f or 
m part of the built-up area. 
Climate change adaptation Adjustments to natural or human systems in response to actual or expected climatic factors or their effects, including from changes in rainf all and r
ising temperatures, which moderate harm or exploit beneficial opportunities. 
Climate change mitigation Action to reduce the impact of human activity on the climate system, pr imarily through reducing greenhouse gas emissions. 
Community Infrastructure Levy A levy allowing local authorities to raise funds from owners or developers of land undertaking new building projects in their area. Arrangements f
or the Community Infrastructure Levy for Huntingdonshire are set out in the Huntingdonshire Community Infrastructure 
Levy Charging Schedule. 
Community Right to Build Order 
An Order made by the local planning authority (under the Town and Country Planning Act 1990) that grants planning permission for a site-specific de v 
elopment proposal or classes of development. 
Comparison shopping Comparison shopping is the provision of items not obtained on a frequent basis. These include clothing, footwear, household and recreational goods. 
Conser v
ation (for heritage policy) 
The process of maintaining and managing change to a heritage asset in a way that sustains and, where appropriate, enhances its 
significance. 
Conservation Area 
A designated area of special architectural and/or historical interest, the character or appearance of which it is desirable to preserve or enhance . 
 It is a recognition of the value of a group of buildings and their surroundings and the need to protect not just individual 
buildings but the character of the area as a whole. 
Convenience shopping 
Convenience shopping is the provision of everyday essential items, including food, drinks, newspapers/magazines and confectionery. 
Curtilage 
The area occupied by a property and land closely associated with that property.  In terms of a house and garden, the garden normally f or 
ms the curtilage of the property, but fields and paddocks would be outside the curtilage. 
Custom build homes Custom home building typically involves individuals or groups of individuals commissioning the construction of a new home or homes from a builder , 
contractor or package company or, in a modest number of cases, physically building a house for themselves 
or working with sub-contractors. This latter form of development is also known as ‘self build’ (i.e. custom build encompasses self build). 
Decentralised energy 
Local renewable and local low-carbon energy usually but not always on a relatively small scale encompassing a diverse range of technologies. 
Development plan 
This includes adopted Local Plans and neighbourhood de
velopment plans, and is defined in section 38 of the Planning and 
Compulsory Purchase Act 2004. 
268 Glossary 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Edge of centre 
For retail purposes, a location that is well connected and up to 300 metres of the primary shopping area.  For all other main town centre uses, a location within 300 metres of a town centre boundary
.  For office development, this includes locations outside the 
town centre but within 500 metres of a public transport interchange.  In determining whether a site falls within the definition of edge of centre, account should be taken of local circumstances. 
Environmental Impact Assessment 
A procedure to be followed for certain types of project to ensure that decisions are made in full knowledge of any likely significant effects on the en vironment. 
Eur
opean site 
This includes candidate Special Areas of Conservation, Sites of Community Importance, Special Areas of Conservation and Special Protection Areas, and is defined in regulation 8 of the Conser v 
ation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2010. 
Geodiversity The range of rocks, minerals, fossils, soils and landforms. 
Green infrastructure 
A network of multi-functional green space, urban and rural, which is capable of delivering a wide range of environmental and quality of life benefits f or local comm
unities. 
Green spaces Publicly accessible spaces, including local parks, sports grounds, cemeteries, school grounds, allotments, commons and historic parks and gardens . 
Habitat The natur
al home or environment of a plant or animal. 
Heritage asset A building, monument, site, place, area or landscape identified as having a degree of significance meriting consideration in planning decisions , because of its her itage interest. 
Heritage asset includes designated heritage assets (world heritage sites, scheduled 
monuments, listed buildings, protected wreck sites, registered parks and gardens, registered battlefields or conservation areas) and assets identified by the local planning authority (including local listing). 
Infrastructure 
A collective term for services such as roads, electricity, sewerage, water, education and health facilities. 
International, national and locally designated sites of importance for biodiversity 
All international sites (Special Areas of Conservation, Special Protection Areas, and Ramsar sites), national sites (Sites of Special Scientific Interest) and locally designated sites including County Wildlif e Sites
. 
Landscape Character Assessment An assessment to identify different landscape areas which have a distinct character based on a recognisable pattern of elements, including combinations of geology, landf or
m, soils, vegetation, land use and human settlement. 
Large scale development For dwellings, a large scale development is one where the number of residential units to be constructed is 50 or more. Where the number of residential units to be constr ucted is not giv
en in the application a site area of 2 hectares or more should be used as 
the definition of a large scale development.  For all other uses a large scale development is one where the floor space to be built is 2,500m
2 or more, or where the site area is 2 hectares or more. 
Large scale major development For dwellings, a large scale major development is one where the number of residential units to be constructed is 200 or more. Where the number of 
residential units to be constructed is not given in the application a site area of 4 hectares or more should be 
used as the definition of a large scale major development.  For all other uses a large scale major development is one where the 
floor space to be built is 10,000m2 or more, or where the site area is 2 hectares or more. 
269 Glossary 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Listed building curtilage 
Listed building curtilage is a legal term describing an area around a building, the boundary of which is defined by matters including past and present ownership and 
functional association and interdependency. The setting of a heritage asset will normally include, 
but generally be more extensive than, its curtilage. 
Local planning authority 
The public authority whose duty it is to carry out specific planning functions for a particular area.  All references to local planning authority apply to the distr ict council, London borough council, county council, Broads A 
uthority, National Park Authority and the 
Greater London Authority, to the extent appropriate to their responsibilities. 
Main town centre uses 
Retail development (including retail warehouse clubs and factory outlet centres); leisure, entertainment facilities, the more intensive sport and recreation uses (including cinemas , restaur 
ants, drive-through restaurants, bars and pubs, night-clubs, casinos, health 
and fitness centres, indoor bowling centres, and bingo halls); offices; and arts, culture and tourism development (including theatres, museums, galleries and concert halls, hotels and conference facilities). 
Major scale development 
Development above a particular scale (10 or more homes for residential development) as defined in the General Development Procedure Order (2006) as amended. 
Material consideration 
An issue that should be taken into account when a decision is made on a planning application. 
Mineral Safeguarding Area 
An area designated by Minerals Planning Authorities which covers known deposits of minerals which are desired to be kept safeguarded from unnecessar y ster
ilisation by non-mineral development. 
Minor scale development Development up to a particular scale (10 or more homes for residential development) as defined in the General Development Procedure Order (2006) as amended. 
Mitigation measures 
These are measures requested/ carried out in order to limit the damage by a particular development/ activity. 
Neighbourhood Development Order 
An Order made by a local planning authority (under the Town and Country Planning Act 1990) through which Parish Councils and neighbourhood f orums can g
rant planning permission for a specific development proposal or classes of development. 
Neighbourhood Development Plans A plan prepared by a Parish Council or Neighbourhood Forum for a particular neighbourhood area (made under the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004). 
Obtrusive light 
Light pollution that includes the br ightening of the night sky (sky glo
w), uncomfortably bright light (glare) and light spilled beyond 
the area being lit (light intrusion). 
Older people 
People 
over retirement age, including the active, newly-retired through to the very frail elderly, whose housing needs can encompass 
accessible , adaptab
le general needs housing for those looking to downsize from family housing and the full range of retirement 
and specialised housing for those with support or care needs. 
Open space 
All open space of public value, including not just land, but also areas of water (such as rivers, canals, lakes and reservoirs) which offer impor tant oppor 
tunities for sport and recreation and can act as a visual amenity. 
Original building A building as it existed on 1 July 1948 or, if constructed after 1 July 1948, as it was built originally. 
Out of centre 
A location which is not in or on the edge of a centre but not necessarily outside the urban area. 
Out of town 
A location out of centre that is outside the existing urban area. 
270 Glossary 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Planning condition 
A condition imposed on a grant of planning permission (in accordance with the Town and Country Planning Act 1990) or a condition included in a Local Development Order or Neighbourhood De
velopment Order. 
Planning obligation A legally enforceable obligation entered into under section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 to mitigate the impacts of a dev elopment proposal. 
Pla
ying field 
The whole of a site which encompasses at least one playing pitch as defined in the Town and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 2010. 
Pollution 
Anything that affects the quality of land, air, water or soils, which might lead to an adverse impact on human health, the natural environment or 
general amenity. Pollution can arise from a range of emissions, including smoke, fumes, gases, dust, steam, odour, 
noise and light. 
Previously developed land (PDL) 
Land which is or was occupied by a permanent structure, including the curtilage of the developed land (although it should not be assumed that the whole of the curtilage should 
be developed) and any associated fixed surface infrastructure. This excludes: land 
that is or has been occupied by agricultural or forestry buildings; land that has been developed for minerals extraction or waste disposal by landfill purposes where provision for restoration has been made through development control procedures; land in built-up areas such as private residential gardens, parks, recreation grounds and allotments; and land that was previously-developed but where the remains of the permanent structure or fixed surface structure have blended into the landscape in the process of time. 
Primary shopping area 
Defined area where retail development is concentrated (generally comprising the primary and those secondary frontages which are adjoining and closely related to the primar y shopping frontage). 
They are defined on the policies map. Policy applies only to 
the ground floor of properties within a primary shopping area. 
Primary and secondary shopping frontage 
Primary frontages are likely to include a high proportion of retail uses which may include food, drinks, clothing and household goods. The 
y are defined on the policies map.  Policy applies only to the ground floor of properties within a primary shopping frontage. 
Secondary frontages provide greater opportunities for a diversity of uses such as restaurants, cinemas and businesses. Secondary frontages are all those streets located within the primary shopping area that are not primary shopping frontages. 
Priority habitats and species 
Species and habitats of principal importance included in the England Biodiversity List published by the Secretary of State under section 41 of the Natural En vironment and Rur
al Communities Act 2006. 
Ramsar sites Wetlands of international importance, designated under the 1971 Ramsar Convention. They mainly provide habitats for water birds 
Registered Providers 
These are independent housing organisations registered with the Housing Cor poration under the Housing Act 1996.  Most are 
housing associations , but there are also tr
usts, co-operatives and companies. 
Renewable and low carbon energy Includes energy for heating and cooling as well as generating electricity.  Renewable energy covers those energy flows that occur naturally and repeatedly in the en vironment – from the wind, the f
all of water, the movement of the oceans, from the sun and also 
from biomass and deep geothermal heat.  Low carbon technologies are those that can help reduce emissions (compared to conventional use of fossil fuels). 
Rural exception schemes/ sites 
Small sites used for affordable housing in perpetuity where sites would not normally be used for housing. Rural exception sites seek to address the needs of the local community b y accommodating households who are either current residents or ha v
e an 
existing family or employment connection.  Small numbers of market homes may be allowed at the local authority’s discretion, for example where essential to enable the delivery of affordable housing units without grant funding. 
Self build homes 
See custom build homes above. 
271 Glossary 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Setting of a heritage asset 
The surroundings in which a heritage asset is experienced. its extent is not fixed and may change as the asset and its surroundings evolv
e. Elements of a setting make a positive or negative contribution to the significance of an asset, may affect the ability to 
appreciate that significance or may be neutral. 
Significance (heritage) 
The value of a heritage asset to this and future generations because of its heritage interest. That interest may be archaeological, architectural, ar tistic or histor 
ic. Significance derives not only from a heritage asset’s physical presence, but also from its setting. 
Special Areas of Conservation Areas given special protection under the European Union’s Habitats Directive, which is transposed into UK law by the Habitats and Conserv ation of Species Regulations 2010. 
Special Pr
otection Areas 
Areas which have been identified as being of international importance for the breeding, feeding, wintering or the migration of rare and vulnerab le 
species of birds found within European Union countries. They are European designated sites, classified under the 
Birds Directive. 
Site of Special Scientific Interest 
Sites designated by Natural England under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment 
A study intended to review the existing housing market in an area, consider the nature of future need for market and affordable housing and to inf orm policy de 
velopment. 
Submission Point at which a draft development plan is sent to the Secretary of State for examination. 
Superfast broadband 
Fast internet connections typically making use of fibre-optic technologies. There is a wide range of speeds that are considered to be superf ast b ut it is currently typically considered to be at least 25Mbps
. 
Supplementary planning documents Documents which add further detail to the policies in the Local Plan. They can be used to provide further guidance for development on specific sites, or on par ticular issues
, such as design.  Supplementary planning documents are capable of being a material 
consideration in planning decisions but are not part of the development plan. 
Sustainable Drainage System (SuDS) 
Previously known as Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems, these cover a range of approaches to surface water drainage management including source control measures such as rainw ater recycling, infiltr 
ation devices to allow water to soak into the 
ground, vegetated features that hold and drain water downhill mimicking natural drainage patterns, filter drains and porous pavements to allow rainwater and run-off to infiltrate into permeable material below ground and provide storage if needed and basins and ponds to hold excess water after rain and allow controlled discharge that avoids flooding. 
Sustainable transport modes 
Any efficient, safe and accessible means of transport with overall low impact on the environment, including walking and cycling, low and ultr a lo
w emission vehicles, car sharing and public transport. 
Town centre Area defined on the local authority’s policies map, including the primary shopping area and areas predominantly occupied by main town centre uses within or adjacent to the pr imar
y shopping area.  References to town centres or centres apply to city centres, 
town centres, district centres and local centres but exclude small parades of shops of purely neighbourhood significance.  Unless they are identified as centres in Local Plans, existing out of centre developments, comprising or including main town centre uses, do not constitute town centres. 
Transport assessment 
A comprehensive and systematic process that sets out transport issues relating to a proposed development.  It identifies what measures will be required to improv e 
accessibility and safety for all modes of travel, particularly for alternatives to the car such as 
walking, cycling and public transport and what measures will need to be taken to deal with the anticipated transport impacts of the development. 
Transport statement 
A simplified version of a transport assessment where it is agreed the transport issues arising out of development proposals are limited and a full transpor t assessment is not required. 
272 Glossary 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Travel plan 
A long-term management strategy for an organisation or site that seeks to deliver sustainable transport objectives through action and is articulated in a document that is regularly re
viewed. 
Use Classes Order Planning regulations outlining a schedule of uses to which a given premises or building can be put.  Some changes of use require planning permission. 
Viability Assessment 
An assessment of viability consider ing assumed costs that ma
y be incurred and values and income that may be generated (e.g. 
from completed house sales), which determines the residual land v alue and compares that v
alue to a viability benchmark agreed 
by the Council or its nominated representative, namely Existing Use Value or Alternative Use Value plus a reasonable uplift. 
Vitality and Viability 
In terms of retailing, vitality is the capacity of a centre to grow or to develop its level of commercial activity. Viability is the capacity of a centre to achiev e the commercial success necessar 
y to sustain the existence of the centre. 
Windfall sites Sites which have not been specifically identified as available in the Local Plan process. They normally comprise previously-developed sites that hav e une
xpectedly become available. 
Zero carbon building A building with net carbon emissions of zero over a typical year. 
Metric - Imperial conversion factors 
Multiply by Into From Multiply by Into From 
1.609 Kilometres Miles 0.621 Miles Kilometres 
Square metres 
Hectares 
Square 
kilometres 0.093 
0.405 
2.560 Square feet 10.764 Square feet Square metres 
Acres 2.471 Acres Hectares 
Square miles 0.386 Square miles Square 
kilometres 
273 Index 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Index 
A 
Affordable housing, 5-6, 22, 34, 40, 42-44, 95-101, 
105-107, 168, 267, 271-272 Air Quality Management Area 
AQMA, 127
, 157, 159, 186, 224-226, 229 
Allowable Solutions, 267 Amenity, 54, 61, 67, 69-71, 73, 77, 81-82, 103, 108, 115-116, 118, 125, 166, 182, 189, 202, 207, 219, 221, 
226, 229, 233, 242, 244, 257, 259, 267, 270-271 Ancient woodland, 28, 39, 267 Annual Monitoring Report 
AMR, 2, 41, 134, 267 
Archaeological interest 
Archaeological remains 
Archaeological site 
Archaeological assessment, 121, 123, 231, 267 
B 
Best and most versatile agricultural land, 26, 30, 62-63, 85, 267 Birds and Habitats Directives, 268 Brownfield, 268 Built-up area, 53-57, 59-60, 91, 102, 104-106, 132-133, 177, 
211, 268 
C 
Climate change, 22-25, 27, 32-33, 38, 45-46, 108, 110, 112, 115, 124-125, 158-159, 163, 173, 186, 268 Community Infrastructure Levy 
CIL, 42-43, 96, 268 
Conservation, 5, 23, 28, 38, 64, 66, 74, 81, 90, 93, 110-114, 118-125, 127, 131-132, 156, 158, 160, 167, 
173-174, 178, 195-196, 236, 248, 268-269, 272 Conservation Area, 54, 64-66, 119, 121-122, 143, 152-154, 156, 158, 169, 185, 201, 203, 205, 209, 211, 224, 243, 245-246, 251, 253, 255-256, 262, 268 Curtilage, 253, 268, 270-271 Custom build 
Custom build home, 
100, 106-107, 268, 271 
D 
Development plan, 2-5, 64, 134, 178, 227, 265, 267-268, 272 
E 
Edge of centre, 88-90, 269 Established Employment Area 
Established Employment Areas, 56, 81-82, 84, 139, 189, 234, 236 
European site 
European sites, 269 G 
Green infrastructure, 23, 27, 31-32, 36-40, 42, 112, 138, 142-143, 147-149, 162, 166, 168, 177, 181, 195, 
215, 222, 249, 269 Green space, 21, 37, 46, 73, 113, 116-117, 138, 141, 
144, 162, 177, 183, 195, 269 
H 
Habitat, 23, 38-40, 44, 74, 111-114, 269 Heritage asset, 93, 119-121, 123, 267-269, 272 
I 
Infrastructure, 1, 6, 20-22, 24-26, 29-30, 33-36, 40-44, 47-49, 58, 60-61, 72, 77, 97, 103, 105-106, 108, 110, 
124-125, 138, 143, 147, 177, 181, 196, 215, 269, 271 
K 
Key diagram, 49 
L 
Landscape Character, 8, 37-39, 196, 216, 269 
Listed building 
Listed buildings, 
54, 64, 122-123, 169, 185, 195-
196, 224-225, 251, 270 
M 
Main town centre uses 
Town centre uses, 56, 71, 78-79, 81, 88-90, 143, 156, 269-270, 272 
Mineral Safeguarding Area, 227-228, 232, 237, 239, 270 Mitigation measures, 75-76, 113-114, 130, 159-161, 164, 170-171, 173, 175-176, 199, 216, 220, 222, 224, 
226, 228-229, 249, 259, 270 
N 
Neighbourhood Development Plans, 99, 268, 270 NPPF 
National Planning Policy Fr
amework, 2-4, 31, 41, 
57, 64-65, 70, 85-87, 89, 94, 96-97, 116-117, 119, 122, 134, 267 
O 
Objectively assessed need, 31-35, 40 Obtrusive light, 62, 71, 270 Older people, 
20-22, 24, 61, 79, 92, 95, 99-102, 105, 
180, 183, 196, 201, 270 Open space, 27, 38, 43-44, 46, 54, 108, 116-117, 138, 140, 144, 152, 157-160, 168-169, 175, 181, 183, 189, 
196, 209, 211, 224-226, 229, 231-232, 236, 238, 244, 
248, 251, 255, 257, 259, 262, 264, 270 Original building, 270 Index 
Huntingdonshire Local Plan | Huntingdonshire's Local Plan to 2036 
Out of centre, 88-90, 270, 272 
Out of town, 270 
P 
Planning condition 
Planning conditions, 87, 105, 271 
Planning obligation 
Planning obligations, 
43-44, 271 
Playing field 
Playing fields, 
152-153, 169, 271 
Pollution, 27, 69, 71, 73, 82, 110, 112, 115, 127-128, 
130, 133, 149, 159, 166, 186, 221, 224, 226, 229, 270-
271 Previously developed land 
PDL, 22, 24-25, 30, 33-34, 36, 45, 118, 209, 268, 271 
Primary shopping area 
Primary shopping areas
, 88-90, 156, 269, 271-272 
Primary shopping frontage 
Primary shopping frontages
, 88-89, 271 
Priority habitats, 112-113, 126, 271 Priority species, 112-113 
R 
Ramsar site 
Ramsar sites, 74, 111, 113 
Renewable and low carbon energy 
Renewab
le energy, 124, 271 
Rural exception sites 
Rural exception, 
33, 271 
S 
Secondary shopping frontages, 90 Self-build 
Self build home, 
70, 99-100, 105-107 
Service centre 
Service centres, 
59, 81, 90-91 
Setting of a heritage asset, 123 , 270, 272 
Significance, 20, 93, 119, 121-124, 138-139, 142-143, 154, 156, 205, 214, 220, 222, 246, 268-269, 272 Site of Special Scientific Interest 
SSSI, 39, 74, 111, 118, 272 
Spatial strategy, 134 Special Area of Conservation, 39, 74, 111 Special Protection Area, 39, 74, 111, 113 Strategic expansion location 
Strategic expansion locations 
SEL, 32
, 36, 55, 76, 136, 140, 143-145, 180, 182, 
189 
Strategic Green Infrastructure 
Strategic Green Infrastructure enhancement, 28, 37-38, 40, 138, 140, 143-144, 147, 149, 162, 181, 183 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment 
SHMA, 20-21, 31, 34, 68, 95-96, 98, 272 
Submission, 74, 266, 272 Supplementary planning document 
SPD, 37-39
, 43-45, 73 
Sustainable Drainage Systems 
SuDS, 39, 73-74
, 79, 129-130, 138, 141, 144, 147, 
150, 168, 177, 181, 183, 195 
Sustainable transport, 27, 76, 142-143, 147, 166, 168, 177, 195
, 213, 215, 219, 221, 259, 272-273 
T 
Town centre, 56-57, 86, 88-90, 94, 138, 140, 143-144, 
147-148, 154, 156-157, 178, 181-182, 185, 211, 269, 
272 Transport assessment, 76-77, 138, 140, 142, 144, 147-148, 150, 152, 154, 157, 163-164, 166, 168, 170, 178, 
181-182, 190, 196, 198, 202, 207, 213, 215-216, 219, 
221, 224, 226, 228, 233-234, 236, 238, 241, 243, 249, 
255, 257, 259, 272 Transport statement, 76-77, 175, 272 Travel plan, 76-77, 140, 142, 144, 147-148, 150, 152, 
157, 163-164, 166
, 168, 170, 178, 181-182, 196, 198, 
202, 207, 219, 221, 236, 238, 257, 259, 273 
U 
Use class, 152 
V 
Viability Assessment, 6, 96-97, 273 Vitality and Viability, 57, 80, 82, 88-91, 138, 147, 163, 181, 273 
W 
Windfall, 31-35, 133-134, 273 
Z 
Zero carbon, 68, 141, 145, 183, 267, 273 