Lite Version as approved at Full Council 25th March 2021 Information Classification: PUBLIC 
Introduction  
1. The Local Plan will be used to determine  decisions on planning 
applications and to provide an indication of where  and what type 
of new development will be permitted. The 2015 -2030  Local Plan is 
now  the Development Plan for the Isles of Scilly and replace s the 
‘saved’ policies of the Local Plan adopted in 2005.  In accordance 
the Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) Regulations 
2012,1 there is a statutory requirement to review Local Plans 
within five years of adoption. This requirement is to ensure that 
plans remain relevant and up to date.  
 
2. The Local Plan sets out a vision, objectives and a planning strategy for development. 
It includes policies on the type and scale of development that will be supported 
through criteria- based policies on a range of planning issues which will be used to 
determine planning applications. Additionally, the Local Plan identifies sites for new homes , to meet the islands housing needs. Targets and indicators are included 
within the Local Plan to monitor and review its content to ensure that it remains effective and relevant.  
 
3. This Draft Local Plan covers a wide range of planning issues. Generally , several 
policies will be relevant to any development that is proposed on the islands. Consequently, it is important that the Local Plan is read as a whole rather than 
treating each policy or proposal in isolation. Furthermore, where a policy has  a list of 
criteria, all of them should be met unless otherwise stated.  
 
4. All planning applications will be considered against all the relevant policies and 
proposals in the Local Plan. Applications that comply with all relevant policies and 
proposals will be supported. Some policies in the Local Plan refer to ‘Supplementary 
Planning Documents’ (SPDs). These documents provide more detailed information 
on specific planning issues and are intended to supplement certain policies and proposals. SPD’s may be taken into account as a ‘material consideration’ in considering a planning application.  
 
 
1 CE02 The Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations 2012    Information Classification: PUBLIC 
What has 
influenced the 
Draft Local Plan?  
5. The Local Plan has been prepared in accordance with the relevant 
planning legislation and regulations. Additionally, its preparation has been  influenced by appropriate n ational and European 
legislation, policies and guidance, as well as local strategies, 
evidence -based research and studies and previous consultation 
and engagement with the islands’  communities, businesses and 
visitors.  
 
6. National planning policies and guidance that have influenced the draft Local Plan are 
set out in the National Planning Pol icy Framework ( NPPF)  2019 and the National 
Planning Practice Guidance (NPPG). National policies and guidance promote 
sustainable development, set a range of core planning principles and emphasise the requirement to meet the objectively assessed needs of  an area. National guidance 
also includes a Duty to Cooperate that requires local authorities to work constructively and collaboratively with neighbouring authorities and public 
organisations , in order  to secure economic growth and significantly boost the supply 
of housing. 
 
Local st rategies that have influenced the Local Plan include:  
Local Strategy/Plan  Year  
The AONB Management Plan 2015 -2020  2016  
Island Futures: A Strategic Economic Plan for the Isles of Scilly  2014  
Housing Growth Plan (Part of the Island Futures Plan)  2014  
Infrastructure Plan (Part of the Island Futures Plan  2014  
The Isles of Scilly Strategic Transport Framework  2011  
Future of Tourism on Scilly: Blue Sail  2011  
The Isles of Scilly Destination Management Plan  2018   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
Research and technical studies that have influenced the Local 
Plan include:  
Technical Study  Year  
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA)  2016  
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA)  2016  
Cornwall and Isles of Scilly Shoreline Management Plan 2, Isles 
of Scilly Mid-Term Review  2016  
Energy Infrastructure Plan  2016  
Housing Topic Paper  2017  
Historic Environment Topic Paper  2017  
Local Flood Risk Management Plan  2017  
Isles of Scilly Housing Viability Testing  2018  
Strategic Housing Market Assessment Update, including 
standardised calculation of local housing need  2018  
Infrastructure Capacity Assessment  2018  
7. Sustainability Appraisal (SA)  The Local Plan has been subject to a SA 
throughout each stage of its preparation. The SA assesses the social, envi ronmental 
and economic impacts of the Local Plan’s objectives, policies and site specific 
proposals to help ensure it embodies the principles of sustainable development.  This 
assessment also encompasses:  
Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA)   
Equalities Impact Assessment (EqIA)  
Health Impact Assessment (HIA)   
8. The Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP) The Cornwall and Isles of 
Scilly Enterprise Partnership consists of representatives from Cornwall Council and 
the Council of the Isles of Scilly,  as well as  business leaders and educational 
institutions. The role of the LEP is to lead and influence the economy of Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly by supporting economic growth through job creation, improving 
productivity and increasing earnings. Whilst t he LEP operates at a strategic level, 
policies contained within the Local Plan need to be consistent with the visions, aims 
and objectives of the LEP and where possible contribute towards achieving the LEP's strategic objectives and vision:
 ‘By 2030 Cornwall and Isles of Scilly will be the 
place where business thrives and people enjoy an outstanding quality of life.’  To 
achieve this Vision, the LEP plan outlines three objectives:   
Business : achieve thriving businesses which excel at what they do . 
People : achieve inclusive growth and improve the skills of our workforce.  
Place : improve infrastructure and economic distinctiveness.   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
9. The Local Nature Partnership (LNP) The Cornwall and Isles of Scilly 
LNP is a Partnership of those who are working to maintain the special and unique 
environment of Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly. The LNP considers the environment in its broadest sense and draws expertise from a wide range of sectors, including the 
environment, health and wellbeing, education and the ec onomy.  The Partnership has 
already forged strong links with the economic sector,  via the Cornwall and Isles of 
Scilly Local Enterprise Partnerships (LEP) and the two Health and Wellbeing Boards in the area. The guiding principle of the LNP is that:  ‘The culture, communities and 
environment of Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly remain special and unique.’
  
 
10. A Duty to Co -operate Local Plans are required to take into account the 
implications of planning policies of neighbouring authorities in recognition that spatial planning issues are not constrained by Local Authority administrative boundaries. 
The islands geographic isolation fr om mainland UK has made this duty challenging. 
Nonetheless, the Council has  worked closely with Cornwall Council, the LEP and 
LNP, as well as  with a range of statutory and non- statutory organisations at all 
stages in the preparation of the Local Plan.   
 
11. Cornwall Council has expressed in particular a support for the inclusion of an 
Objective  ‘to secure resilient, year -round transport services to Cornwall …’  It has 
also welcomed a policy seeking to move the processing of waste up the waste 
hierarchy by encouraging re-use and recycling as well as exploring the possibilities 
for energy recovery on the islands.  
 
12. 
Statement of Common Ground  The Council of the Isles of Scilly and 
Cornwall Council have signed up to a statement of common ground which covers impo rtant and shared issues relating to the protection of transportation links. The 
issue of transportation links is strongly connected with sustaining the islands’ community, its economy and tourism as well as transportation issues associated with waste management and the importation of minerals.  
 
13. 
Monitoring and Implementation The Local Plan will be monitored 
through the Isles of Scilly Authority Annual Monitoring Report (AMR), in order to establish whether the policies are achieving their intended objectives and whether there are unexpected trends or changed circumstances that may necessitate a review. A monitoring framework for the Local Plan is set out in the final section of the 
plan.  
 
14. 
Structure of the Plan  The Isles of Scilly Local Plan is divided into six 
sections:  
  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
15. Section 1  introduces the Local Plan and includes the Spatial Portrait  and profile 
of the islands which gives an overview of the islands’ characteristics, the issues that 
arise from this as well as identifying the Key Challenges and Issues and the Vision 
and Objectives for the Local Plan. This section also sets out the Spati al Strategy, 
which is the big picture of ‘where’ and ‘when’ we want activity, development and 
investment to take place over the period to 2030. This includes the distribution of 
development and areas that will be protected from development and what this means for the various areas within Scilly. 
 
16. Section 2 : Promoting a Sustainable Scilly  sets out how 
development should address sustainable issues. Promoting Sustainable Scilly 
includes ten development management policies ranging from the principles of 
sustainable development through to renewable energy and transport .  
 
17. Section 3 : Our Outstanding Environment  relates to the 
Outstanding Environment and contains seven development management policies aimed at protecting the natural and historic environments of the islands. They range 
from landscape character to biodiversity and the historic environment.  
 
18. 
Section 4 : Our Island Community  relates to supporting a living 
community and sets out the housing strategy for the plan period. This section 
contains policies about  where and what to build as well as polices in relation to the 
existing housing stock. There are ten development management policies within this 
section.  
 
19. Section 5 : The Islands’ Economy relates to supporting a working 
community and sets out the economic policies that would apply over the plan period.  
There are six development management policies that seek to facilitate economic development proposals where these are compliant with the objectives of the Local Plan.  
 
20. 
Section 6 : Monitoring and Implementation  sets out how the Plan 
will be monitored over the period and what triggers a review of the policies to ensure the Local Plan remains up- to-date. 
 
21. Submission Policies Map s sets out the specific allocations and the 
existing designations of the islands. The purpose of the Policies Map is to identify 
areas of protection, sites allocated for particular land use and development 
proposals to which specific policies apply.  
  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
22. Every effort has been made to make the Local Plan as clear as possible. Howev er, it 
does contain some technical language, so there is a Glossary of Terms and 
Abbreviations at the very back of this document, to help readers with the range of new terms that have been introduced. Where appropriate, footnotes are also 
included at the bottom of each page of the Local Plan. 
 
23. The Local Plan, when it is adopted, will replace all the remaining saved policies from 
the Isles of Scilly Local Plan adopted in 2005. A table of the policies that will be replaced by the Local Plan is included in Appendix 1. 
The Spatial 
Portrait for the 
Isles of Scilly  
 
29. This describes the Isles of Scilly at the beginning of the plan 
period. Its purpose is to develop a clearer understanding of the area, how it functions and to identify key issues that need to be addressed. Without recognising the main features that 
charact erise the islands, it would be difficult to effectively plan for 
the next 15 years.  
 
Location and Physical Context 
30. The Isles of Scilly is an archipelago 28 miles off the south west coast of mainland 
UK. Comprising five inhabited islands with their own dis tinct character  (St Mary’s, St 
Martin’s, St Agnes, Bryher and Tresco) together with hundreds of smaller uninhabited islands and rocky outcrops, the Isles of Scilly has a population of 2,203 people (Census 2011). The total amount of land comprising the inhabited islands is around 6 square miles (15.5 km). This creates a general density of around 137 people per square kilometre (383 per square mile). Cornwall has a density of 153 people per square kilometre, and England has a density of 413 people per square kilometre (or 353 excluding London).  
  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
31. Their geographic isolation from mainland UK, the sparse population spread over five 
separate islands and the exceptional quality of the natural and historic environment, are at the heart of what is special about the Is les of Scilly. This exceptional 
environment is the mainstay of the islands’ economy. The Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) Management Plan 2015– 2020 highlights:
 
‘The Isles of Scilly are the smallest AONB designation in the UK 
measuring only 16 km2. However, the islands possess a diversity of 
scenery and designations that belies their small scale. The archipelago 
combines granite cliffs and headlands, sandy bays, hidden coves, shifting 
dunes and saline lagoons.’   
32. Despite their small domestic and rural scale, most of the settlements are referred to 
as ‘Towns’ (8 out of 13).  Most of the population live on St Mary’s and are 
concentrated in Hugh Town, the administrative centre, and Old Town. The landscape 
and topography of the islands sets the context  for the settlements and buildings, with 
the exception of Hugh Town where the townscape of streets provides the setting for 
individual buildings. Inevitably, with a small population across five islands, the size of the settlements is extremely small, and t heir scale domestic and rural.  
 
33. Other than Hugh Town, Old Town and Porthloo, all on St Mary’s, and New and Old Grimsby on Tresco, most of the islands’ settlements are set back from the coast. Most of the settlements, whilst being grouped at intersections of lanes, are relatively 
loose- grained, in that there are only short streets with individual houses, or short 
terraces of no more than three or four houses.  
 
34. The towns on St Martin’s have the most compact character, whilst those on the other islands are a little more dispersed. Tresco’s settlements reflect the ‘estate’ nature of 
the island in that they are slightly more formal in layout, often in short, regular 
terraces.  
 
35. The Local Plan Scoping Report Consultation 2015 showed that residents of the Isles of Scilly enjoy and appreciate where they live. Key words that were particularly 
expressed included ‘Beautiful’, ‘Environment’, ‘Community’, ‘Safe’, ‘Natural’, ‘Safety’ and ‘Sea’.  
‘Quiet unspoiled beauty with great views, unhurried pace of life in a current ly 
unique environment’
. Consultation Response 2015  
Overview of Existing Constraints  
36. The Isles of Scilly has a significant number of features of environmental and historic 
importance that require additional levels of protection.  
  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
37. Conservation Area, AONB and  Heritage Coast  In 1975 the 
islands were designated as a Conservation Area, and in 1976 designated an Area of 
Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) and defined as a Heritage Coast. The Jellicoe and Coleridge report ‘A Landscape Character for the Isles of Scill y’, published in May 
1956, provided the foundation for the designation as both an AONB and Heritage Coast. The Heritage Coast definition protects 64 km
2 of coastline around the islands, 
which is 23 square kilometres of foreshore, cliff and dune environments. The 
management of the Heritage Coast was originally undertaken by the Isles of Scilly 
Environmental Trust; it is now managed by the Isles of Scilly W ildlife Trust. The 
Conservation Area, AONB and Heritage Coast all overlap and cover all of the islands.
 
 
38. Listed Buildings The islands have a dense and rich historic environment that 
encompasses a Conservation Area and 128 Listed Buildings, which include four 
Grade I, eight Grade II* and 116 Grade II Listed Buildings. The first buildings were 
added to the Statutory Heritage List for England in 1959.   
 
39. Scheduled Monuments There are a total of  238 Scheduled Monuments  on 
the islands scheduled under the Ancient  Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 
1979. Out of the total for England (19,864 sites), this amount represents 1.2% of all Scheduled Monuments. These monuments include 119 cairns,
3 16 Civil War 
batteries,4 and 86 prehistoric -related structures suc h as entrance graves, linear 
boundaries and regular and irregular field systems.  
 
40. Protected Wrecks There are 5 Protected Wrecks  around the islands, 
designated under the Protected Wrecks Act 1973 (52 in total nationally), which equates to 9.6% of all Protected Wrecks in England. These wreck sites are identified as Tearing Ledge, designated in 1975; Bartholomew Ledges, designated in 1980; HMS Colossus, designated in 2001; Wheel Wreck, designated in 2007; and the Association, designated in 2014. 
 
 
41. Registered Parks and Gardens Tresco Abbey Garden is the only 
designated Registered Park and Garden on the islands, registered under the Hist oric 
Buildings and Ancient Monuments Act 1953. It was designated as Grade I in 1987, for the extensively planted garden with exotic species. The planted garden began in the early 19th century, together with a lake and woodland works; it was founded by 
the Lord Proprietor of the islands, Augustus Smith, who first secured a lease of the 
islands from the Duchy of Cornwall in 1834.
 
 
42. Historic Environment Records (HER) and Archaeological 
Constraint Areas (ACA)  There are over  2,400  Historic Environment 
 
2 CE03 Review and Evaluation of Heritage Coasts in England  - Full Report (July 2006)  
3 A cairn is a mound of rough stones bui lt as a memorial or landmark, typically on a hilltop or skyline location.  
4 A battery is a military defensive structure comprising a fortified emplacement for heavy guns.   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
Records on the Cornwall and Isles of Scilly Historic Environment Record (HER), 
which includes the above statutory designations plus undesignated sites, findspots and 771 wreck sites. Additionally, in 1995, 174
 Archaeological Constraint Areas 
across the islands were defined, with the intention to serve as a graphic aid to planning officers and others dealing with the management of the environment.
 
 
43. Heritage at Risk (HAR) The annual Heritage at Risk Registers are 
produced by Historic England and seek to track the state of any designated heritage asset, including improvements or continued decline. The Isles of Scilly are home to a remarkable historic landscape, in which many hundreds of well -preserved prehistoric 
monuments survive. By far the majority are cairns and chambered tombs of the early Bronze Age. Yet the beauty of the islands can make sites difficult to manage, with access limited by weather and tides. In 2018, seven remarkable cairns and tombs were added to the Register. The sites have been overwhelmed by scrub,  bracken, 
and invasive species like New Zealand Flax. Incredibly, ten sites were removed from the register thanks to improved working relationships with the Isles of Scilly Wildlife Trust, and the volunteers of the local Community Archaeology group; these volunteers raise awareness of these features, clear them of vegetation and restore them as features in the landscape, for people to enjoy. A creative partnership between Historic England, the Isles of Scilly Council, and with the Cornwall Archaeological Un it as the principal contractor, has also played a significant role, as 
have grants from Historic England and Natural England -funded Countryside 
Stewardship agreements.
 
 
44. Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) As of 2018 there are 26  
SSSIs over 25 different sites on the islands, covering a mix of terrain environments. The natural environment designations covering 557.92 hectares of land across both the inhabited and uninhabited islands. The condition and status of each SSSI ranges from favourable conditi on, such as Big Pool & Browarth Point on St Agnes and 
Castle Down on Tresco, to unfavourable but recovering status, such as the SSSI on Annet, and Chapel Down on St Martin’s (334.43 hectares in a favourable condition and 223.59 hectares in an unfavourable but recovering condition). The main habitats comprise earth heritage, neutral grassland, dwarf shrub heath, standing open water, fen, marsh and swamp, and supralittoral and sublittoral environments.
  
 
45. Special Areas of Conservation (SAC) Special Areas of Co nservation 
are sites that have been adopted by the European Commission Habitats Directive 
and formally designated by the UK Government. The Isles of Scilly Complex SAC 
designation covers an area of sea around the island archipelago measuring 26848.62 hectares. It includes waters around the islands as well as six component 
(terrestrial) SSSIs. The SAC is a European Natura 2000 site, with the primary 
reasons for protection being the sandbanks that are slightly covered by sea water all the time, the mudflats a nd sandflats not covered by sea water at low tide, reefs, and 
shore dock plant species. Grey seals are also included, but they are not a primary reason for site selection. The SAC is also known as a European Marine Site (EMS). The special features (habitat s and species) of the SACare listed below:
  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
 
(1110) Sandbanks which are slightly covered by sea water all the time;  
(1140) Mudflats and sandflats not covered by seawater at low tide;  
(1170) Reefs;  
 
46. Marine Conservation Zones (MCZs) The Isles of Scilly Marine 
Conservation Zone are a collection of inshore sites located around the Isles of Scilly, 
consisting of 11 separate sites covering a total area of 30 km2. The sites were 
designated in 2013 and span a broad range of physical conditions, which support an 
exceptionally high diversity of habitats and species. The depth of the seabed varies considerably across the 11 areas, extending from mean high water mark to depths of 70 metres in places. The sites encompass a wide variety of marine habitats and their 
associated species.
 
 
47. The importance of the marine environment has been previously recognised through 
the designation of the above Isles of Scilly Special Area of Conservation (SAC), and 10 of the 11 sites  lie within this designated area. The Isles of Scilly MCZ 
complements the SAC by offering protection to species and habitats that are not protected by the SAC.
 
 
48. Special Protection Area (SPA) The purpose of a SPA is designed to 
protect rare or vulnerable bird species (as listed in Annex I of the Birds Directive); and other regularly occurring migratory bird species. The Isles of Scilly Special Protection Area covers 394 hectares over 26 rocks and islands. The site is designated for the European storm petrel and lesser black -backed gull, as well as a 
breeding seabird assemblage. SPAs are designated under the European Commission Birds Directive 1979, and are strictly protected.
 
 
49. In 2018, the UK Government consulted on a proposed marine extension of  the SPA 
(pSPA) for the Isles of Scilly.5 The proposed extended SPA would include the 
additional qualifying species of the European shag and great black -backed gull. At 
the time of writing the Local Plan, this has not been formally designated.  
 
50. Ramsar S ite The Ramsar wetland site on the Isles of Scilly encompasses 
extensive areas of undisturbed intertidal sandflats and sublittoral sandy sediments. The Ramsar Site overlaps with the SPA site and is protected through the Convention of Wetlands (Ramsar, 1971). Although the sites in and around Scilly are sheltered, the shallow sandy sediments include little mud or silt because the surrounding seas have a low suspended sediment concentration, resulting from the islands’ isolation and the presence of fully marine oceanic water. The shallow sublittoral sediments are colonised by the most extensive and best -developed eelgrass Zostera marina 
beds in southern England (Hocking & Tompsett 2001). The Isles of Scilly are surrounded by reefs and rocky islets, some only ex tending into the shallow 
sublittoral, others extending well beyond 50 m in depth. The qualifying species of the 
 
5 CE04 Consultation on the Proposed marine expansion of the Isles of Scilly Special Protection Area 2018   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
Isles of Scilly Ramsar Site include the protected species of the European storm 
petrel and the lesser black -backed gull.  
 
51. Wildlife and Protected  Species The islands are home to a range of 
European protected species and UK priority species (BAP). Wildlife includes 
mammals such as the lesser white- toothed shrew, also known as the Scilly shrew, 
which is endemic; Nationally and internationally important numbers of breeding 
seabirds; species of bats, including the common pipistrelle; birds of prey including owls; and waders such as the greenshank and oystercatcher. The islands host 
globally endangered species of lichens, and nationally scarce rare flowering plants 
and ferns.
 
 
Population and Demography 
52. The population of the Isles of Scilly is seasonal, reflecting the influence of tourism. 
The resident population is around 2,300 but increases to as much as 6,000 in the 
peak of summer. Much of the population is based on the largest Island, St Mary’s 
with around 1,720. The Off -Islands have smaller resident populations; Tresco 175, St 
Martin’s 136, St Agnes 85 and Bryher 84 .  
 
53. The population of the Isles of Scilly peaked in 2008. Any modest future growth 
proposed with this Local Plan will, in part, return to that peak. The 2017 estimate 
shows a population of 2259, which is 74 people fewer than the 2,333 population in 2008. This recent decline has fluctuated year on year and diverges from the overall 
trend since 1991, where there has been a growth of 10 people per year, in contrast 
with the 2008- 2017 average being a loss of 8 people a year. This recent decline has 
clear and significant implications for the sustainability of the economy and serv ices 
on the islands, should it continue.  
 
54. Along with the loss of the younger generation (who leave due to educational needs or employment opportunities; and, due to the higher house prices and fewer career opportunities, are less likely to return), retirees migrate to the islands to take 
advantage of the beauty of the landscape and slower pace of life. This places an 
increased pressure on local services. The 2016 Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) found that the most significant feature of demographic change 
is the ageing population. Whilst this is not significantly above the ageing rate of the 
mainland population, it will impact on demand for supported housing, health and local services, and will require adaptations that allow residents to remain in their own 
home.
 
 
55. The working- age population, which refers to those between the ages of 16 and 64, is 
set to decline from the current 65% of the population to 54% by 2030. This decline 
may have implications for the availability of people to fulfil key roles within the 
community and economy.   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
 
Island  Population  Area (square miles)  
St Mary’s  1723 (2011)  2.54 
Tresco  175 (2011)  1.15 
St Martin’s  136 (2011)  0.92 
Bryher  84 (2011)  0.74 
St Agnes  85 (2011)  0.69 
Total  2203 (2011)  6.04  
 2300 (Est 2014)   
56. Ethnic Diversity  The 2011 census recorded a population of 2,203, of which 
98.8% were of a white (British, Irish or Other) background, with less than 2% of the 
islands’ population being of Mixed, Asian or Black background. During the same 
period, the percentage of the overall UK population that identified as white British was 86%, and in the South West this was 95.3%. The South West is one of the least 
ethnically diverse of the nine regions of England, with the Isles of Scilly being at the 
extreme end of the diversity spectrum.
 
 
57. Housing The 2016 SHMA showed there to be 989 households on the Isles of 
Scilly, of which 412 are owned / shared ownership accommodation, 187 are social rented accommodation, and 390 are privately rented / rent -free. Households on the 
Isles of Scilly are much more likely to be in privately rented accommodation than in Cornwall or England and Wales, and less likely to own their own home. There are 
195 second homes and 190 ‘other properties’, which are assumed to be holiday lets 
and time- shares. The SHMA has provided up- to-date information on the housing 
profile of the islands. Key findings confirmed many of the collective assumptions to 
be true, including much higher house prices than on the mainland, a lower -wage 
economy, a low availabil ity of owner -occupied housing, and limited access to 
affordable housing.
 
 
58. Housing Survey  This was carried out in November 2015, as part of the 2016 
SHMA. This survey indicated that 32.5% of the islands’ housing stock is owner -
occupied (with a mortgage) and 11.1% is owner -occupied (no mortgage); that 30.1% 
is private rented accommodation and 11% is Council rented accommodation, while 
only 4.8% is rented by a registered provider; and with 10.5% being accommodation 
tied to a person’s employment. The private re nted sector is nearly three times 
greater than the national average of 13.2%. This group includes those renting from a private landlord or from a friend or relative. 15.8% of households are social housing 
tenants, which is lower than the national average of 17.7%. Around 44% of 
households are owner -occupiers, compared to 63.4% nationally. These figures 
highlight the specialised tenure situation of the islands.
 
  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
59. Index of Multiple Deprivation (IMD)  The IMD 2015 is the official 
measure of relative deprivation for small areas (or neighbourhoods) in England. It 
can be summarised in a range of ways to describe relative deprivation among local 
authorities. The IMD ranks every small area in England from 1 (most deprived area) 
to 32,844 (least deprived area). It is c ommon to describe how relatively deprived a 
small area is by saying that it falls among the most deprived 10 per cent, 20 per cent 
or 30 per cent of small areas in England (although there is no definitive cut -off point 
at which an area is described as ‘deprived’).  
 
60. The IMD combines information from seven domains to produce an overall relative 
measure of deprivation. The domains are combined using the following weights: 
Income Deprivation (22.5%); Employment Deprivation (22.5%); Education, Skills and Traini ng Deprivation (13.5%); Health Deprivation and Disability (13.5%); Crime 
(9.3%); Barriers to Housing and Services (9.3%) and Living Environment Deprivation (9.3%). In addition to the Index of Multiple Deprivation and the seven domain indices, there are two supplementary indices: the Income Deprivation Affecting Children 
Index and the Income Deprivation Affecting Older People Index.
 
 
For the overall index of deprivation: the Isles of Scilly is 
ranked  21,789  out of 32,844, placing the islands among the 
least deprived 40%  of areas in England.  
Table 1 Source: 2015 Indices of Deprivation6 
Isles of Scilly  Within L east Deprived  Within Most Deprived  
Income Deprivation  10%          
Employment Deprivation  10%          
Education, Skills and Training   20%         
Health Deprivation and Disability  10%          
Crime    30%        
Barriers to Housing and Services         30%   
Living Environment Deprivation           10% 
Income Deprivation affecting Children  10%          
Income Deprivation affecting Old People   20%         
Overall IMD Score                                            40% 
Economy and Employment  
61. The viability of the islands’ economy has long been an important issue. As far  back 
as the 1965 Jellicoe Report, it has been recommended that future developments 
seek to maintain a viable economy. Successive and subsequent economic surveys 
have been undertaken to establish whether this is possible and what is required to achieve a viable economy.
 
 
62. The latest economic assessment was carried out in 2014. The Island Futures Strategic Economic Plan recognised that Scilly has a high level of skilled trades and 
 
6 CE05 Indices of Deprivation    Information Classification: PUBLIC 
professional -level employment, which deliver the year -round and permanent services 
to the community, including healthcare, education and community support services. 
The largest business sector on the islands falls within the administrative and support services sector, closely followed by the accommodation and food sector. This reflects the dominance of ‘tourism’, which remains very significant to the islands’ economy.  
 
63. In September 2016, the Council agreed to incorporate the Island Futures Strategic 
Economic Plan (IFSEP) as part of the wider Cornwall and Isles of Scilly Strategic Economic Plan (CIoSSEP). This decision was made to ensure that the wider overarching issues and priorities of the CIoSSEP retained a local island focus.  
 
‘The future of Scilly is in the hands of the islanders. While there may be support 
and encouragement from elsewhere, essentially it is for the islands to determine 
and then deliver the future that they want. Given the exposed and remote position 
of Scilly and the small population, it may never be possible to have the level of 
services that are enjoyed on the mainland. However, Scilly has much deeper and 
more precious qualities that will underpin the success of the islands’ economy.  
 
Making sure that the future is a bright one requires change. That change needs to 
bring about much closer and more supportive communities who will work 
together to create a shared future. That change needs to be focussed on the 
needs of the next and future generations and how they can survive and thrive. 
That change needs to be open to the ideas, investment and critical mass that new 
residents can bring - adding to the rich mix that is the Isles of Scilly .’ 
Isles of Scilly Strategic Economic Plan 2014 
Key Challenges 
and Issues  
64. The Local Plan seeks to ensure that development is supported by 
a delivery framework that will: promote sustainable economic 
growth; result in sustainably located and planned housing; support  appropriate transport and infrastructure planning; and 
conserve and protect the islands’ outstanding environment. The Local Plan will have a pivotal role in helping to sustain all that is special about Scilly –  its people, character and qualities.  
 
65. The Local Plan seeks to positively address a variety of key challenges and issues 
facing the Isles of Scilly. The exceptional environment, coupled with its location,  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
makes the Isles of Scilly a very special place that offers unique opportunities and 
advantages over the rest of the UK; this was acknowledged through the inclusion of the Smart Islands programme for the Isles of Scilly in the Government’s 2017 
Industrial Strategy for the UK.
7 The islands are therefore well -placed to face the 
future with optimism and confidence. Nonetheless, Scilly’s isolated and remote 
location, with a tiny population base spread across five separate islands, means that 
it faces some significant challenges; not least its vulnerability and unsustainability. 
Recent population decline has changed the longer -term growth trend, and any 
ongoing decline in the available workforce (working- age population) could have 
significant impacts on wider aims to adapt and improv e the local economy.  
 
66. The economy of the Isles of Scilly is vulnerable, as it is unusually self -contained, 
dominated by a few business sectors such as tourism, and with a high proportion of 
very small businesses. Over the past 30 or 40 years, the Isles of Scilly has enjoyed 
relatively benign economic and social conditions. The tourism economy grew rapidly 
and provided a good living to many people on the islands. But more recently, the 
islands’ economy has suffered a decline. Visitor numbers have dropped, and farming 
and fishing have contracted. All of these factors have impacted on the viability of the islands’ community.  
 
67. The Local Plan must be responsive to the specific challenges and issues facing the Isles of Scilly, so that it can build on its strengths , realise opportunities and tackle 
underlying problems, in order to prevent further economic and population decline. 
The ambition is to work proactively with applicants and investors to secure 
developments that improve the economic and social conditions of  Scilly, whilst 
protecting and enhancing its outstanding environment.  The focus will therefore be on 
finding solutions to secure development  that sustains the islands’ future. 
 
 
68. Some of the fundamental issues facing the Isles of Scilly are identical with those of 
other island communities, and cannot be easily addressed through the Local Plan; 
these include costly infrastructure, high transport and freight costs, and reduced competition and limited domestic markets that are too small to provi de economies of 
scale. The following challenges and issues are not ranked in any particular order of 
priority or importance, and will inevitably overlap:
 
 
69. Housing  Building sufficient decent affordable homes for the community is 
the single biggest challenge.  To ensure the long- term sustainability of the islands, 
more homes are required, to overcome the acute shortages of affordable 
accommodation. These are necessary to meet Local Housing Needs, which currently exist due to the marked disparity between house prices and rents, given the low 
average incomes and the high proportion of second and holiday accommodation. 
The challenge is to build a sufficient amount of decent affordable homes to address 
 
7 CE06 Industrial Strategy: Building a Britain Fit for the Future  (2017)  (page 146)   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
this shortage, in the context of exorbitant building costs compared to the mainland 
UK, within an exceptional environment with limited land and significant infrastructural constraints.
 
 
70. Environment  Protecting the exceptionally high- quality environment and 
its significant landscape, heritage and nature conservation assets.  The 
exceptional and outstanding environment establishes the natural, cultural and 
historic distinctiveness and identity of the islands and underpins its economy, 
particularly through tourism. Future development must be sensitive to the area’s signific ant environmental assets; it must ensure that the local character, 
distinctiveness and environmental quality is not compromised, and is wherever possible enhanced, as a consequence of development.
 
 
71. The Isles of Scilly support nationally and internationally  important populations of 
seabirds. The important land areas for seabirds are accordingly designated as Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), Special Protection Area (SPA) and Ramsar Site. Seabirds have been recognised as a priority for conservation and to support a 
strategic approach to seabird management, a Seabird Conservation Strategy has been written for the period 2018- 2023. In addition, all island 6 yearly monitoring of 
the special features of the SPA is carried out alongside annual seabird counts. The 
overall number of seabirds breeding within the Isles of Scilly archipelago in 2015/16 
(8266 pairs) has decreased by 9.8% in the last nine years. There has been a 14.3% decline in the SPA population since the SPA baseline and a 31.3% decrease in t he 
size of the total population since 1983 (the date of baseline data used for the SSSI notifications on Scilly in 1986) when 12,063 breeding pairs of seabirds were recorded. Such a decline in the result of any number of factors that need to be 
addressed, including increased disturbance, risks from invasive, non- native species 
and climate change; these along with habitat loss, are the biggest threats to the 
natural environment.
 
 
72. Creating a more self -sufficient and resilient community through the achievement  of 
sustainable development will require efforts to minimise environmental impacts; reduce the islands’ carbon footprint; and respond to the increased risk of flooding, 
given the significant threats from coastal erosion and the impacts of a changing 
climat e. Whilst the islands have always been exposed to storms, these are likely to 
become more frequent and severe, bringing risk of flooding, damage to buildings and 
livelihoods, and pollution of drinking water.
 
 
73. Infrastructure  Improving the capacity, resilien ce and sustainability of the 
islands’ infrastructure, to address current constraints through new development and investment opportunities, including Smart Islands and 
similar programmes.  Historically, the provision of infrastructure has been disjointed, 
with a legacy of underinvestment. Providing affordable and sustainable energy, drinking water, sewerage treatment and waste management practices for a remote  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
island population within a sensitive environment is expensive, and presents 
considerable practical c hallenges. For example, the Isles of Scilly ranks eighth 
highest, among other Local Authorities in England, for fuel poverty: the proportion of 
households considered to be ‘fuel poor’ in 2016 was 15.5%, against the English 
average of 11.1%, with the South West average being 10.2%, and Cornwall 12.8%.8 
Electricity consumption data shows that the Isles of Scilly has the second- highest 
average domestic consumption per household out of all British local authority areas, at 7,801 kWh. The Shetland Islands are top, at 9,706 kWh, with Great Britain’s 
average being 3,931 kWh, and 5,276 kWh for Cornwall.
9  
 
74. Additionally, the logistics of an island community make the disposal of waste very challenging. In 2016/17, the Isles of Scilly had the lowest recycling rat es in the South 
West region, at 19%; this contrasts with Cotswold District Council, which had the highest recycling rates in the South West, at 60%.
10 During the course of 2017 
through to 2020 waste management practices on the islands have dramatically  
improved in terms of in rolling out household kerbside recycling collection with an 
increase in recycling rates exceeding 30% for the first time.  
 
75. Economy  Attracting sustained investment and enabling a strengthening 
and diversification of the economy, and overcoming the dependence on low -
income and often seasonal employment. In accordance with the Islands’ Future 
Strategic Economic Plan, and with its emphasis of building on the opportunities of 
the Smart Islands  programme and superfast broadband, the growth in research, 
technology and knowledge- based sectors could broaden the economic base of the 
area, and increase employment opportunities that are more skilled and better paid. Additionally, there is a need to capitalise on and strengthen the quality and value of 
tourism, given that it will continue to dominate the islands’ economy over the plan 
period; whilst recognising its vulnerability to transportation, climate change and financial shocks.  Creating a successful economy will require businesses to develop 
new opportunities, become more productive, and continually adapt to new 
challenges. Economic success will also require changes to the current declining 
trend of the working- age population.
 
 
76. Community Facilities  Ensuring the provision of an adequate range of 
services and facilities to meet the current and future needs for all ages in the community, including education and lifelong learning, integrated care and health, retail, culture and cultural spaces and leisur e facilities. Fundamental to 
this challenge is recognising that a rapidly ageing population will have implications for the types of homes that must be provided, and the availability and access to social and health care services. There will be workforce- related requirements to 
 
8 CE08 Annual Fuel Poverty Statistics Report, 2018  (2016 data)   
9 CE09 Sub- national electricity consumption statistics 2005- 2016  
10 CE10 Recycling Statistics   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
continue to support an older population, which are linked to the housing aspirations 
of this Local Plan. Similarly, and in relation to continued improvements to the educational needs of future generations, it will be important to deliv er sufficient 
suitable homes on St Mary’s and the off -islands, to support the needs of the 
education workforce. The local housing market should have sufficient flexibility and capacity to support the development of a skilled and experienced workforce.
 
 
77. Transport  Supporting better access across the islands, in particular 
supporting sustainable and active transport solutions, by foot, bicycle or electric vehicles; and enabling people to access amenities such as schools, 
shops, employment and essential infrast ructure through a range of transport 
options, maximising opportunities for all.  New housing, employment and 
community development opportunities will need to promote active travel within and 
across island communities, as indicated in the spatial strategy section of the Local 
Plan. Strategic transport links to the mainland are fundamental to the future sustainability and viability of the islands, although improving such links are largely 
outside the scope of this Local Plan, it is critical that these are safe guarded.
 
The Spatial 
Planning Vision  
78. The spatial planning vision sets out how the Isles of Scilly could 
develop as a place to meet the future needs of its local residents, 
businesses and visitors. The essential  principle embedded within 
the Local Plan is t o contribute to the achievement of sustainable 
development by enabling and supporting new homes, securing more effective and improved infrastructure and services , and 
enabling better paid jobs, whilst protecting and wherever possible enhancing the islands ’ exceptional environment. This Local Plan 
provides an important platform to realise th is ambitious vision , by 
establishing a positive framework with the aim of removing 
current barriers to sustainable growth and investment.   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
The Vision  
79. In 2030:  The Isles of Scilly is a highly desirable place where people 
are able to live well, work productively, and move freely between 
islands and the mainland ; they can also  benefit from excellent 
education, leisure, health and social care facilities , within a wo rld-
class environment in harmony with nature. The distinctiveness 
and exceptional environment , with the influence of the sea , 
continue to provide a strong sense of community, identity and 
belonging ; these  remain vital assets for the islands ’ economy and 
well-being.  
 
80. In 2030:  Innovative systems and technologies have taken 
advantage of the islands ’ location and environment , and provided 
the catalyst for achieving exemplar y and innovative sustainable 
development , thus providing a model for how other communitie s 
around the world can function.  
 
81. In 2030:  The islands ’ communities have access to a range of 
homes that are more affordable, adaptable and accessible to 
everyone, including families and older people.   
 
82. In 2030:  The Isles of Scilly is a strong, competitive and diverse 
economy that benefits from inward investme nt and innovation. 
Businesses have access to a locally based, highly skilled workforce,  reflecting high -quality learning as well as internships 
and cultural exchanges  – through, for example, the Smart Island 
programme.  Tourism is thriving through the year, with good -
quality and value accommodation, and services in harmony with 
the outstanding environment.  
 
83. In 2030:  The islands ’ infrastructure is a beacon of sustainability for  
the UK and beyond; it  provide s an affordable, innovative and low-
carbon model for managing energy, water and waste , with 
considerable benefits to the environment and residents ’ quality of 
life.     
  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
84. In 2030:  Residents, businesses and visitors enjoy more affordable, 
resilient and reliable transport links to the mainland and between 
islands throughout the year , following improvements to transport 
services and networks.   
   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
Strategic Aims and Objectives  
85. The local plan will  seek to achieve its spatial planning vision and 
address the key challenges and issues by  support ing development 
through its strategic policies , guided by the strategic aims of:  
 
 
 Information Classification: PUBLIC 
86. Each of the seven aims of the Local Plan will be underpinned by a set of  objectives 
that the policies will enable through the types of development that they can support.  
 
 Information Classification: PUBLIC 
 
 
 Information Classification: PUBLIC 
The Spatial Strategy  
87. The spatial strategy sets out the planning framework that 
underpins the Local Plan in  achiev ing its Vision, Aims and 
Objectives , and that secures  sustainable development to meet the 
existing and future needs of the islands. Given the exceptional quality of the environment, development will be expected to make a positive contribution towards the social, economic and environmental sus tainability of the Isles of Scilly. Development will 
therefore be directed to wards  locations , and be appropriately 
designed, to protect the most valued assets and resources.  
 
88. The spatial strategy for the Isles of Scilly provides a framework to deliver 
development that is necessary to meet its future needs; it takes account of the area’s  
characteristics and issues , and how these can be managed to achieve the  Vision for 
the islands. To address the sustainability and viability issues facing the islands, it is evident that new development is required to meet the existing and changing needs of 
the area’s population, particularly more affordable homes. In addition, new 
development is also required to create a more prosperous and resilient economy , 
and to improve the reliability, sustainability and resilience of the islands ’ 
infrastructure, particularly in relation to energy, drinking water, sewerage and waste 
management. Supporting appropriately located, designed and scaled development 
to meet Scilly’s economic and social needs will ensure that the exceptional quality of 
the islands ’ environment and tranquillity is not compromised or undermined.
 
 
89. Fundamental to the future sustainability  of the islands is the need to build more 
homes to address the acute housing problems. Based on the 2016 Strategic Market 
Housing Assessment (SHMA)  and more recent calculations of Local Housing Need 
(LHN) in 2019, the Local Plan identifies a requirement for 105 affordable homes that will need to be delivered over the next 15 years. To ensure that these much- needed 
affordable dwellings are built, it is recognised that open- market homes may  also be 
required,  to financially subsidise and enable their provision. As the costs of delivering 
affordable dwellings will vary due to the particular circumstances of a site and the 
details of the development being proposed, the number of open- market homes 
required during the plan period is not prescribed,  and will be determined through 
viability assessments on a case- by-case basis. No open- market housing will be 
permitted just to meet any demand for such homes.  
 
 
90. To ensure an appropriate amount of land is available to enable the delivery of these 
much- needed affordable homes, the Local Plan identifies a range of sites on St 
Mary’s within the two largest  settlements of Hugh Town and Old Town,  in the 
interests of sustainability. The Local Plan also provides some flexibility , as new  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
homes could also be allowed on sites not specifically identified (windfall sites) where 
they are well related to exiting settlements, including those on the off -islands.   
Windfall housing developments will count towards achieving affordable homes over 
the plan period. Windfall sites will only be permitted where these make a contribution 
to delivering affordable housing,  and will include custom  and self -build homes , for 
those on the Custom Self -Build Register . 
 
91. In addition to allowing new homes, the Local Plan also supports new economic 
development , with the aim of creating a stronger and more resilient economy through 
the availability of quality well -paid jobs and good training opportunities. To achieve 
this aim, the Local Plan provides a flexible and responsive approach to encourage business expansion and inward investment. Enabling an appropriate and sufficient supply of suitable business and employment sites and premises is fundamental to improving the economic prosperity of the islands. No specific sites have been identified for new business or employment development in the Local Plan. Instead,  it 
sets out a policy framework to support appropriate proposals that improve the economic prosperity of the islands.
 
 
92. Allied to new homes and economic growth is the fundamental requirement to improve and modernise the islands ’ infrastructure. As the cost of providing basic 
infrastructural services rises , and as the impacts of climate change increase, the 
islands should look at becoming as self -sufficient  and resilient as possible,  and 
create a more viable and sustainable future for the islands.  
 
 
93. The spatial strategy  for the islands is set out below:   
1. Protect the integrity of the distinctive and exceptional 
environment, including the landscape  character, cultural and historical 
heritage,  and nature conservation interests of the islands.   
2. Support new development that reinforces the sustainability and viability of the Isles of Scilly 
and meets the economic and social 
needs of its  communities . 
3. By 2030,  build sufficient affordable homes  to address Local 
Housing Needs over the plan period,  cross- subs idised, where 
appropriate, by open- market dwellings where no grant funding opportunities 
are available.  
4. Concentrate new homes in the settlements of Hugh  Town 
and Old Town  as the most sustainable locations on St Mary’s , with the aim 
of supporting existing and new facilities and services , improving infrastructure,  
and reducing unnecessary vehicle movements.  
5. Support new development that  creates a more compet itive, 
diverse and resilient economy  that can adapt to change and 
challenges.    Information Classification: PUBLIC 
6. Support development that secures improvements to the 
islands’ infrastructure and utilities  through a coordinated approach 
as part of and in step with planned sustainable growth, including innovative 
and low -carbon technologies, as part of the Smart Islands programme and 
other investment initiatives.    
7. Support new tourism development  and facilities  of an 
appropriate design  and scale,  where they respond to changing 
markets and enhance the quality and diversity of the local tourism product and 
offer. 
8. Support sustainable travel options and reduce  the 
environmental and social impacts of climate change  and 
transport  by reducing the need to travel by petrol and diesel vehicles 
through the siting and design of new developments , and by encouraging  
sustainable travel options, including walking, cycling and the use of electrical 
vehicles.   
 
94. In addition to the above, support will be given to initiatives that improve the reliability 
and resilience of the strategic transport connectivity , by ensuring the operational 
effectiveness of St Mary’s Quay, St Mary’s Airport and Tresco Heliport , as well as 
the inter -island quays . Given the location of the Isles of Scilly, an efficient, reliable, 
year-round transport service connecting to the mainland is paramount, as it provides 
a lifeline for businesses, visitors and residents.  Strategic transport links are, 
however, largely outside the scope of this Local Plan. Additionally , and given the size 
of the Isles of Scilly, there is a limit to the amount of public funds that can realistically 
be spent on improving the transport infrastructure.  
 
95. Recent improvements to St Mary’s Quay and Airport , as well as Lands’ End Airport, 
particularly the runways and the installation of GPS landing systems, will all help facilitate a more reliable and effective year -round transport service. In addition, the 
new heliport in Penzance will provide  an additional transportation route with a re -
established helicopter service.   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
Promoting a 
Sustainable Scilly 
 
96. Supporting a ‘Sustainable Scilly’ has to underpin all development that 
takes place in these islands. The objectives set out in the Local Plan are 
designed to work together to ensure that development is able to deliver the pr incipal aim of the planning system, which is to enable sustainable 
places.   Aims  1. Maintaining an outstanding and world -class environment, and ensuring 
that its distinctive and significant seascape and landscape, heritage and 
nature conservation assets are protected, valued and enhanced. 
 2. Ensuring the provision of infrastructure and utilities to create a more 
sustainable, resilient and self-sufficient Isles of Scilly.  
 3. Creating a balanced local housing market that provides housing choice 
and meets the existing and future needs of the community, enabling 
economic prosperity.  
 4. Creating a more competitive, diverse and resilient economy based on an exceptional and inspirational environment that can adapt to change and 
challenges and maximise opportunities by building on its strengths and 
underpinned by effective infrastructure and an appropriately available and skilled workforce. 
5. Engendering and supporting a strong, vibrant and healthy island 
community with an improved quality of life for its residents.  
6. Adapting to the effects of climate change on people, wildlife and places 
by increasing resilience, matching the vulnerability of land uses to flood 
risk, and managing surface water in the most sustainable way. 
7. Minimis ing carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases, and supporting 
measures that contribute to carbon neutrality and mitigate against the 
effects of climate change. 
 Issues : Housing |  Environment | Infrastructure | Economy  | Community Facilities  
  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
 
97. Climate Emergency  At the Full Council meeting in October 2019 the Council 
of the Isles of Scilly signed up to a declaration of a ‘Climate Emergency’ with a 
commitment for the Authority to be carbon neutral by 2030. The Council is therefore committed to encouraging and engaging with its partners and other local businesses and organisations to adopt similar ambitions to become carbon neutral by 2030.To reflect this commitment it is important that development proposals demonstrate a sustainable approach in terms of design, con struction and occupation on a 
proportionate basis.
 
 
98. When considering all development proposals, there will be a presumption in favour 
of sustainable development, to reflect the NPPF. To achieve this purpose, the Local 
Planning Authority will proactively work with applicants, island businesses and the community, to find solutions that enable proposals to be approved, wherever possible, in accordance with the Local Plan, unless material considerations indicate 
otherwise. This proactive approach will ensure that any development improves the 
social and economic well -being of the islands where appropriate and relevant, whilst 
protecting or enhancing the environment.  
 
99. While the Local Plan supports development that meets the social and economic objectives of the is lands’ community and businesses, it must also ensure that this 
objective is not at the expense of the islands’ outstanding environment, and development must therefore meet the policies set out in the outstanding environment section. The Local Plan has an overarching commitment to protect the environment, 
as part of the wider task of balancing economic and social objectives.  
  
100. In order to achieve sustainable development, ensure the most efficient use of land 
and protect the environment, development should be directed towards brownfield 
sites wherever possible. Due to the limited amount of brownfield sites, some 
greenfield land will be required to meet the social and economic requirements of the islands, particularly for much- needed new homes. 
 
 
101. Climate Chang e The importance of understanding climate change locally is 
echoed in the NPPF, which requires Local Planning Authorities to adopt positive strategies towards dealing with climate change. The NPPF identifies a number of 
factors which need to be considered over the longer term.
11 For the Isles of Scilly 
this means a particular focus on securing sustainable energy and drinking water 
supplies, improved waste water treatment, more effective waste management and 
recycling and avoiding areas at risk of flooding, as part of the requirem ent to adapt to 
the effects of climate change. Development that protects against the impacts from coastal flooding or erosion will be encouraged, including measures that improve 
coastal defences, and protect water resources and the most productive agricult ural 
land.
 
 
11 CE01 National Planning Policy Framework 2019  (Paragraph 20 and Chapter 14)   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
 
102. Zero and Low Carbon Development  The Climate Change Act 2008 
places legally binding targets for the UK to achieve an 80% reduction in greenhouse 
gas emissions by 205012 and 34% by 2020, against 1990 baseline levels. The Local 
Plan can make a major contribution to achieving these targets locally, through the  
Spatial Strategy.  Mitigating and adapting to climate change is achieved through 
criteria -based policies, which will also guide decision- making. The Local Plan, read 
as a whole, seeks to shape new and existing development through its policies and 
by supporting sustainable design, more effective site waste management and enhanced biodiversity. To support the islands’ resilience to a changing climate and to 
tackle climate change locally, the Council is committed to ensuring that all new 
developments have as low a carbon impact as practically possible.   
103. It is recognised that the Building Regulations are the primary means of ensuring energy efficiency in buildings, through its control over constr uction. The planning 
system does, however, have a role in promoting zero and low -carbon development 
through good design practices. Although the Local Plan is not proposing to apply an 
additional sustainability standard, support will be given to proposals t hat exceed 
current Building Regulations. Since 2007 the Isles of Scilly Design Guide, a 
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD), has promoted sustainable design.  
POLICY SS1 Principles of Sustainable 
Development  
(1) Development proposals will be permitted where they make a positive 
contribution to the social, economic and environmental needs of the Isles of Scilly 
in a manner that does not compromise the ability of future generations to meet 
their own needs and to  enjoy the islands outstanding environment, by:  
 
a) conserving and enhancing the outstanding natural, built and historic 
environment;  
b) locating, designing and constructing development where it makes a 
positive contribution to reducing the islands’ carbon foot print and 
consumption of natural resources;  
c) improving accessibility and creating a network of safe and well -connected 
routes by integrating measures that encourage and promote walking, 
cycling and electric vehicles as part of any new development wherever 
opportunities allow;  
d) promoting the value of biodiversity, geodiversity and soils, including the 
potential contribution from natural capital13 and ecosystem services14; 
e) taking into account the long -term implications of climate change and rising 
temper atures for flood risk, coastal change, water supply, biodiversity and 
landscapes;  
 
12 CE11 2008 Climate Change Act  
13 Natural capital can be defined as the world’s stocks of natural assets which include geology, soil, air, water and all living 
things. 
14 Ecosystem services are the benefits provided by ecosystems that contribute to making human life both possible and worth 
living and include provisioning, regulating, supporting and cultural benefits of natural environmental processes.   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
f) promoting cohesive and resilient communities on each island; and  
g) generating and sustaining economic activity.  
 
104. Sustainable Design The detailed design of buildings and use of materials 
have provided the islands with character and identity. The Council will seek to 
maintain and strengthen the character and identity of each island and the 
distinctiveness of areas within them by ensuring that development is undertaken 
using nat ural, sustainable materials and styles that complement those found in the 
local area, and which avoid proliferating the use of unacceptable or unsustainable 
resources. This approach does not require traditional construction methods and 
materials, given the viability and sustainability costs of sourcing such materials, but 
about ensuring designs and materials are otherwise sustainable in a complementary 
and appropriate manner.  
 
105. Much of the identity of an area is derived from a combination of distinctive local 
building types, materials, layouts, the relationship between buildings, and making use of natural features. The pattern of development varies across the five inhabited 
islands. On St Mary’s there will often be a discernible pattern of development, with 
either a historic core or obvious later modern developments with a particular style. 
New development should complement distinctive local features and patterns, with 
regard give n to the orientation and character of the immediate area. The Isles of 
Scilly Design Guide supplements Policy SS2, and sets out the detailed design 
characteristics of the islands.  
 
106. All new buildings should be carefully designed to respect and enhance thei r 
surroundings. Buildings that are out of scale can detract from the character and 
amenity of an area. A building’s scale, including its height and massing (the 
combined effect of its footprint, volume and shape) determines its impact on views, 
skylines, a nd its relationship with surrounding buildings and spaces, as well as on 
neighbouring and wider amenity.  
 
107. New buildings should be of a similar scale to other buildings in the surrounding area, 
unless they are required to reflect a development’s function or to create a landmark 
in an appropriate location. In such cases, larger -scale buildings may be appropriate, 
provided that important views and vistas from the public realm are retained, 
especially those of landmark features.  
 
108. Developments are generally mor e attractive if they have a degree of visual interest. 
The range of styles and materials used should be limited, to avoid a disjointed 
appearance. Visual interest can be provided through detailing, provided this does not 
detract from the character of an ar ea. Original and innovative designs can be used to 
help raise the standard of design in an area, although it is important that such  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
designs do not detract from the visual unity of areas that already have a successful 
and compatible mix of styles and materi als.  
 
109. Given the high environmental quality and finite amount of land, the efficient use of land will be supported where development is appropriately designed and sited in sustainable locations.  
 
110. Extensions or alterations can have a cumulative impact on the character of the area, 
and can overwhelm an existing building to the extent that its original character and/or symmetry is significantly eroded. Proposals should therefore be subsidiary to the 
original building and not of a dominant scale, and take into account the wider 
impacts upon the environment. Policy LC9 should be applied specifically to domestic extensions.  
 
111. As part of the commitment to maintain and enhance the natural environment, consideration should be given to incorporating measures to increase biodiversity through, for example, following the guidance set out in ‘Building with Nature’.
15  As a 
minimum, bird and bat boxes should be incorporated into the design of buildings or extensions, with measures to reduce any impacts from current threats to biodiversity on the islands, including rats.  
POLICY SS2 Sustainable Quality Design and 
Place -Making  
(1) Development will not be permitted if it is considered to be of poor or 
unsustainable design. New development must be of a high -quali ty design and 
contribute to the islands’ distinctiveness and social, economic and environmental 
elements of sustainability by:  
a) respecting and reinforcing the character, identity and local distinctiveness 
of an area whilst not stifling innovation, and with the scale, density, layout, 
height, mass and materials responding positively to the existing townscape, 
landscape and seascape setting;  
b) ensuring that development does not dominate or interrupt important public 
views, key landmark buildings or significant cultural and heritage features;  
c) making efficient use of the land whilst respecting the character of the site 
and surrounding ar ea and neighbouring land uses;  
d) safeguarding the amenity of individuals and properties by creating a high -
quality environment that addresses issues of privacy, overlooking, 
overshadowing, overbearing impacts and unreasonable noise and 
disturbance;  
e) providin g high -quality and clearly defined safe private, semi -private and 
public spaces, including recreational facilities and green infrastructure 
where appropriate;  
f) ensuring that buildings can easily be altered and adapted to meet changing 
social and economic co nditions and are resilient to climate change, 
 
15 CE14 Building with Nature   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
including features to mitigate or enable rapid recovery from a flooding 
event where recommended in a Flood Risk Assessment;  
g) providing opportunities for achieving measurable net gains in biodiversity 
by ensuring  that natural and semi -natural features are created and 
enhanced as integral elements of the design, through the provision of 
features such as bird and bat boxes, and by incorporating measures that 
support the removal of any threats to the islands’ biodive rsity;  
h) promoting physical activity by incorporating Sport England Active Design 
principles16 wherever appropriate;  
i) requiring sensitively designed adverts and signage that are appropriate 
and sympathetic to their local setting in terms of scale, design a nd 
materials;  
j) incorporating measures to reduce any actual or perceived opportunities for 
crime or anti -social behaviour, and which promote safe living environments;  
k) minimising the consumption of resources by requiring sustainable 
construction and design by :  
  
I. incorporating high standards of energy efficiency and maximising 
opportunities for the micro -generation of renewable, low-carbon and 
decentralised energy, and where appropriate plugged into the Smart 
Grid;17 
II. incorporating passive design measures fo r heating, cooling, ventilation 
and natural light, to reduce overall energy demand and improve energy 
efficiency;  
III. using natural resources more prudently, including the use of locally 
sourced, recycled or low-carbon materials in construction where they 
are available and represent a viable option;  
IV. reducing pressure on water resources and increasing re -use by 
incorporating effective water management measures, including 
Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems, green roofs and water -saving 
devices, and rain/grey water collecting and recycling facilities; and  
V. providing appropriate vermin -proof waste and recycling storage 
appropriate for the scale of development proposed, and provision for 
kerbside waste and recycling collections consistent with the island s’ 
waste management practices.  
 
(2) Development proposals that involve the construction or conversion of buildings 
will need to be supported by a statement of Sustainable Design Measures (SDM) 
and a Site Waste Management Plan (SWMP).  
 
112. Re-Using Buildings  The re- use of previously developed land and buildings is 
a sustainable way of reducing the need to construct new buildings, and reduces the 
depletion of greenfield land. The Agricultural Buildings of Scilly project, which was carried out in 1995, sought to identify all existing traditional agricultural buildings on 
the islands. Many of these buildings still remain, and it is vital that any re- use of 
these, as well as other non- agricultural buildings, is sympathetic to the character and 
 
16 CE15 Sport England Active Design Principles  
17 The Smart Grid is one of the projects of the Smart Island Programme and concerns smart technology for hom es.  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
scale of the existing structures and surrounding landscape character. The re- use of 
any existing historic or traditional building, particularly those agricultural buildings 
listed in the Agricultural Buildings of Scilly Project, should be accompanied by a 
structural survey to ensure it can be viably converted.  
 
113. To support growth and expansion of the rural economy, existing buildings that are suitable for conversion should be used for small -scale business uses, to help sustain 
the rural economy without creating the need for new buildings in the countryside. 
Employ ment uses will often require only minor alterations to the structure or exterior 
of the building, thereby maintaining a traditional appearance in the rural scene; and, in the case of buildings of historic or architectural merit, their original character.   
 
114. Policy SS3 allows for the re -use of non- residential buildings as new homes. Allowing 
residential use needs to be balanced against the importance of retaining buildings that are capable of helping the islands’ economy.  
 
115. Conversion to residential use will only be allowed if it is specifically required to meet 
a permanent local housing need or for staff accommodation, and it has been demonstrated that commercial uses (excluding holiday lets) are not viable. In certain circumstances, residential use specifically for a holiday letting opportunity may be 
justified as an appropriate means of preserving a building of particular architectural 
or historic merit because it is the only means of funding its restoration and retaining its original features. In these circ umstances, evidence should be provided 
demonstrating the reasons why a commercial proposal would not be appropriate for 
preserving the building.  
 
116. Buildings constructed of temporary or short -life materials, or which are derelict or in 
an advanced state of disrepair, are not considered suitable for re- use. The extent of 
adaptation required to bring them into use is likely to have an impact on the landscape similar to that of a new building. It is recognised, however, that for sites 
closely related to existing built-up areas, a replacement building that does not have a 
significantly greater impact may be a prudent use of a previously developed site, 
particularly where it can be demonstrated that a good proportion of the existing 
materials could be re- used.   
 
117. The re- use of traditional buildings with architectural or historic merit will be positively 
encouraged. The retention of buildings that are not in keeping with their surroundings, or are visually intrusive because of their location, form, bulk or general 
design, will be discouraged.   
118. The aim of re- using traditional buildings is to protect their character by maintaining 
original or traditional structures, built form, architectural detail, materials and general design, whilst minimising new buildings. However , where proposals for alternative 
use require the creation of new ancillary buildings and/or extensions, these will be  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
considered on their own merits. Uses ancillary to the new use of the building, such 
as additional car parking or open storage, must not have an impact on the surrounding landscape, including any extension of the curtilage of the development 
into the countryside. Account will also be taken of amenity issues such as noise, 
smell or external illumination.  
 
119. The character of the landscape could be jeopardised if the many small -scale 
agricultural buildings that are still capable of continued use were used for more lucrative purposes, thereby generating the potential demand for new buildings. It is 
important not to permit a change of use of an agri cultural building if a new building 
would be required on an agricultural holding to fulfil the function of the building being 
converted, unless the existing building is no longer suitable for agricultural use.  
 
120. Existing buildings may provide homes for wil dlife, particularly nesting birds and 
roosting bats, which are statutorily protected. Every opportunity should be made not only to avoid the disturbance of protected species, but also to enhance their 
provision by incorporating measures such as bat or bird boxes integrated into the 
building, in accordance with Policy SS2g and Policy SS3e. Additionally, opportunities 
should be made for biodiversity net gain, including habitat restoration and recreation, 
and measures to reduce any impacts from current threats  to biodiversity on the 
islands including rats.  
POLICY SS3 Re -use of Buildings  
(1) The re -use of redundant buildings for commercial use will be permitted 
provided that:  
a) the building is structurally sound and capable of conversion without 
substantial rebuilding, extension or alteration;  
b) the proposal would not result in the requireme nt for another building to 
fulfil the function of the building being converted;  
c) the proposed use is restricted primarily to the building;  
d) the development would not harm its immediate setting or the amenity of 
adjoining/neighbouring properties or land use s; and  
e) suitable nesting and roosting sites for birds and bats are incorporated into 
the design.  
 
(2) The re -use of traditional or historic buildings, worthy of retention for residential 
use will be permitted provided that all the above criteria are met and that:  
a) the proposal is to address a local housing need or staff accommodation, 
and is subject to  appropriate occupancy restrictions in accordance with 
Policies LC2 and LC4; or  
b) the proposal is for a holiday let on the basis that it has been demonstrated 
that there are no other viable means of protecting and retaining the 
building; and 
c) the building is of local traditional architectural or historic merit, worthy of 
retention; and   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
d) the proposal is supported by a structural survey to demonstrate the 
amount of repair or rebuilding required to convert the building to the 
proposed use.  
 
(3) The re -use of non -traditional buildings for residential use will only be permitted 
provided that all of (1) criteria a)- e) are met and where the proposal is to address a 
local housing need or staff accommodation and is subject to appropriate 
occupancy restrictions in accorda nce with Policies LC2 and LC4.  
 
(4) Any demolition or re -roofing of a building should not result in harm to any 
protected species. A Preliminary Environmental Assessment should be submitted 
to demonstrate the impact of the proposal on any protected species  present 
within of using the site.  
 
121. Retail  Retaining locally accessible shops, services and facilities is a primary 
aspect of maintaining a sustainable community. The protection of retail business is 
therefore recognised both nationally and locally as an important aspect of planning.  On St Mary’s, the main centre of Hugh Town supports a wide range of business activities and is the islands’ primary retail centre. The resident population of St 
Mary’s and the off -islands provide year -round support for ret ail businesses that 
contribute positively to the commercial mix and viability of Hugh Town. During the 
main tourism season, the demand for retail and ancillary services increases; this is 
reflected in the emergence of mobile trading vehicles during the sum mer months, 
despite some of the town’s ground- floor retail spaces remaining empty.  
 
122. Retail includes shops for food and groceries, convenience stores, chemists or 
pharmacies, newsagents and clothes shops. Ancillary retail uses are usually located within a t own centre and can include banks, cafes, restaurants, public houses, 
hairdressers and estate agents. These ancillary uses can create a crossover into the 
evening that is important to the local economy, particularly for tourism.   
 
123. The loss of retail and ancillary retail uses can have a negative impact upon the 
vibrancy and vitality of a town centre, which in turn can impact upon the tourism 
industry, as well as the ability of businesses to operate on a year -round basis, as 
local residents find alternative w ays of shopping. The increase in the reliability of 
internet shopping will continue to have an impact upon shopping habits. Given the 
remoteness from the mainland and the nature of the community on the islands, it is vital that the policies of the Local Pl an set out appropriate criteria to resist the 
unnecessary loss of retail and ancillary retail uses within the Isles of Scilly.  
 
124. 
Mobile Trading  Mobile trading occurs within Hugh Town. Although such trading 
does not always require planning consent, an agreem ent with the land owner is 
needed. A Street Trading Licence will also be required from the Council’s Licensing 
Department. If the sale of goods is a on a fixed site, regardless of whether the  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
vehicle is mobile, both a Fixed Trading Licence and planning per mission would be 
required. Fixed traders must not give rise to amenity issues through, for example, 
noise or smells, and must ensure that pedestrian and highway safety is maintained 
when trading is in operation, in accordance with Policy SS4.  
 
125. Recreation The islands have a wealth of publicly accessible beaches and 
permissive footpaths across all of the inhabited islands. The total amount of dedicated recreation sport and play spaces on the islands is around 15.8 hectares, in 
addition to a nine- hole golf course on St Mary’s. This equates to around 6.9 hectares 
per 1,000 population, or 69 m
2 per head of population.18 In addition to dedicated 
recreation sites, there are seasonal water sports available on all inhabited islands, 
including gig- rowing, sailing, stand- up paddle boarding, kayaking, windsurfing and 
snorkelling, as well as a plethora of beaches which are all freely accessible to the community and visitors.  
 
126. All of the inhabited islands are walkable communities with co- located community 
facilities, an d given that the Local Plan does not seek to plan for a growth in the 
population, over the plan period there is no identified need to provide further dedicated recreation sites or play pitches for sporting activities. It is, however, important that existing dedicated outdoor recreation and play spaces are retained 
and enhanced, to support the community’s needs, as well as to provide 
enhancements for the islands’ visitors.  
 
127. 
Safeguarding Community Facilities National policy states that the planning 
system ca n play an important role in facilitating social interaction and creating 
healthy, inclusive communities. This chimes with the Council’s Corporate Plan,19 
which aims to enhance the quality of life on the Isles of Scilly by enabling healthy lifestyles, in dependent living and access to good- quality healthcare.   
 
128. The NPPF requires Local Planning Authorities to work with other authorities and providers to assess the quality and capacity of infrastructure for social care, to 
ensure that local strategies to improve health and social and cultural well -being are 
addressed through the planning process.
20 Government policies also encourage 
care in the community, to help people remain in their home and live independently within the community.  
 
129. Schools and associated educational facilities are provided on St Mary’s (primary and 
secondary schools), Tresco (primary school for the islands of Tresco and Bryher), St 
Martin’s (primary school) and St Agnes (primary school). St Mary’s also has boarding 
acco mmodation for secondary -school students who would normally reside on an off -
island. It is important that these facilities are safeguarded. The Five Islands School is 
 
18 CE17 Recreation Sites on the Isles of Scilly  (Agenda Item 10, Appendix B)  
19 CE18 Council of the Isles of Scilly Corporate Plan  
20 CE01 National Planning Policy Framework 2019   Paragraph 72 of NPPF 2019:   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
part of a Multi -Academy Trust (MAT), and the Council, as the Local Education 
Authority, has an ambition to work with the academy trust to ensure that there is 
sufficient suitable housing on the islands to support the education workforce. It is 
equally important that the existing educational infrastructure is safeguarded and that 
future needs ar e delivered, particularly in relation to new homes. Provision for staff 
accommodation, including that required by the MAT, is supported under Policy LC1 
and Policy LC4.  
 
130. An isolated island community requires the availability of community services and facilities to support social sustainability, including those for leisure, recreation and 
sport. To address this issue and reflect Government guidance, support will be given for new community facilities or for the change of use of buildings to facilitate such uses. Additionally, t he loss of a facility or service that supports the islands’ 
community, including open space, sport and recreation, will be resisted unless it is adequately demonstrated that it is no longer viable, suitable or needed. Any proposals for the change of use of a community facility or service should provide 
evidence to demonstrate that there is no longer a need for the specific service or facility in the longer term; that a suitable replacement service or facility can be provided; or that  there is an existing similar service or facility accessible to the local 
community. A s listed in Policy SS4, to demonstrate that the loss is justifiable, 
evidence should be provided of attempts to market the property for its current and alternative uses, within appropriate publications and at an appropriate value, for a 
minimum period of 12 months.  
 
131. In relation to the provision of community facilities, there is an ongoing project to 
deliver integrated health, social care and housing solutions for the islands’ 
community. This project is known as ‘Building Blocks for the Future’ and is subject to 
a One Public Estate bid;
21 this is a Government initiative22 to encourage publicly 
funded services to co- locate in order to achieve savings, free- up property for other 
uses, and ensure better customer -focussed delivery of services. Specific to this 
project is the integration of health and social care, including the Park House Residential Care Home. Park House itself is a dated structure not designed for the 
future needs of the islands, and it has limitations as a residential care home, given 
the increased levels of complexity of need.  
 
132. Although it is known to be a development that is likely to come forward over the plan period, there is no specific site to allocate. It is likely that the preferred approach 
would be the replacement of Park House Residential Care Home with the construction of a new purpose- built integrated health and social care hub with a 
particular focus on frail elderly people. This project, which will respond to the anticipated increase in the proportion of the population aged over 65, could be one of 
the first in the UK to integrate social care and NHS services at one site, sharing 
 
21 CE19 Building Blocks for the Future: One Public Estate Bid  (Agenda Item 16)   
22 CE20  One Public Estate Initiative   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
resources and making significant savings. Policy SS4 seeks to ensure that 
appropriate support is given to providing the most appropriate site for the delivery of a new integrated health and social care facility on the islands.  
POLICY SS4 Protection of Retailing, Recreation 
and Community Facilities  
(1) Development for new retailing and community facilities, including recreation 
spaces and an integrated health and social care facility, will be supported where:  
a) it is appropriately designed, scaled and located in accordance with other 
policies in the Local Plan; and  
b) it does not harm the amenities of the surrounding areas and maintains 
pedestrian and highway safety.  
 
(2) Development (including the change of use of existing premises) that involves 
the loss of ground -floor retail units, ancillary retail or publ ic houses, within the 
defined Town Centre of the Policies Map, will only be permitted if it can be 
demonstrated that the use is no longer, or cannot be made, commercially viable.  
All applications that result in the loss of such facilities must be supporte d by 
appropriate marketing (for a minimum period of 12 months) and a financial 
viability assessment to support the proposal.  
 
(3) Development that would result in the loss, or prejudice the use of a 
recreational or sporting facility, as defined on the Poli cies Map, or other 
community or cultural service or facility, will not be permitted unless it can be 
clearly demonstrated that:  
a) there is no longer a need for the specific facility or service by the 
community, including over the longer term; and  
b) a need for other permitted uses or other facilities and services has been 
explored and is not required; or  
c) a replacement facility or service is provided that is accessibly located to 
the local community and of at least equivalent standard; or  
d) in the case of a loc al commercial service, it cannot be continued and made 
viable over the longer term.  
 
(4) In respect of (3) c), planning conditions or obligations will be used to ensure 
that the replacement provision, where this is essentially required, is secured at an 
appropriate time in relation to the redevelopment of the site/building.  
 
(5) Where the case for a change of use is accepted, with respect to Parts (2) and 
(3) above, favourable consideration will be given to:  
a) Use Classes that fall within Class E, Class F.1 a nd Class F.2 of the Use 
Classes Order* before other employment uses are considered; or  
b) When it can be demonstrated that compliance with (3)a) above is not 
possible then a change of use to housing in accordance with Policy SS3 
and Policy LC3 may be permitte d. 
* The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) (Amendment) (England) Regulations 2020 (SI 2020 No.757)  
133. Physical Infrastructure The islands are recognised as being carbon- intensive, 
due in part to outdated and inefficient infrastructure, and heavy reliance on imported  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
fossil fuels and electricity to meet the community’s needs, as identified in the Energy 
Infrastructure Plan.23 This high carbon intensity contrasts with the opportunities for 
self-sufficiency presented by the islands’ location and natural environment. In 
recognition of a ‘climate emergency’ the Council have made a commitment to seek to achieve carbon neutrality by 2030, through its own activities and operations.  
 
134. In addition to this inefficient energy infrastructure, historically the islands have had 
limited investment in improving or modernising their water or sewerage 
infrastructure. Much of the islands’ waste wat er is dealt with by private treatment 
plants or septic tanks, with only Hugh Town and Old Town on St Mary’s having a 
comprehensive, albeit aged, public sewerage network. The underinvestment in infrastructure in part reflects the lack of strategically planned development that could 
potentially leverage the investments to improve infrastructure. Although the Local 
Plan seeks to strategically plan for affordable new homes in response to existing 
housing needs, it is not promoting significant growth. Nonetheles s, new development 
will have to ensure that there is no increased burden on the existing infrastructure.  
 
135. In order to address legacy infrastructure systems and to ensure compliance with the 
Water Framework Directive, significant investments are planned for  the islands’ 
sewerage and water network over the plan period. It is therefore not considered 
necessary to levy developers for infrastructure contributions particularly as this would impact on the viability of delivering the necessary affordable homes. Dev elopment 
will, however, be expected to include any necessary or appropriate connections to comprehensive water and sewerage systems, wherever possible, rather than perpetuate further private systems.  
 
136. The planned investment will significantly improve the m anagement of water supplies 
and foul waste water. Policy SS5 seeks to ensure that any improvements to the 
existing infrastructure take place before the implementation of any significant 
development, including the housing allocations identified in Policy LC 6, particularly if 
existing networks are inadequate for the housing proposed. In addition, Policy SS6 
seeks that new developments minimise water usage through both design measures 
and technological improvements, to ensure that environmental impacts are 
minimised.    
 
137. The Smart Islands programme seeks to capitalise on the opportunities presented by 
the islands to enable an appropriate transition from a carbon- intensive community to 
a low -carbon community. In order to achieve this transition, it is necessary t o 
improve the islands’ existing physical infrastructure to create more holistic and 
modernised systems. These challenges include improving the resilience, reliability 
and management of the energy network, securing reliable sources of renewable energy, reducing fuel poverty and tackling the cost of waste disposal. It also includes 
significant improvements in the islands’ sewerage and drinking water infrastructure 
 
23 CE21 Isles of Scilly Energy Infrastructure Plan 2016   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
through planned investments over the plan period. The Smart Islands programme is 
intended to meet these challenges through, for example, the provision of energy 
management systems and affordable, reliable and locally generated energy, and 
through renewable sources and the use of waste.  
 
138. The planned infrastructure investments are intended to address m any of the current 
infrastructure deficiencies. These investments are likely to take place over the plan 
period, to enable the sustainable development proposed in the Local Plan. The timing of new development, however, will need to take into account any pl anned 
investment at the time, to ensure the necessary infrastructure is available to support 
any proposal. As such, the timing of development may need to be phased to 
minimise the impact on existing resources, and to take into account planned investments and improvements in essential infrastructure. In some cases, the 
development itself may be required to provide or improve existing infrastructure to 
make the proposal acceptable.
 Planning conditions and/or legal agreements will be 
used to ensure that necess ary improvements are obliged, if required, to phase 
development in line with planned infrastructure investments.  
 
139. The provision of infrastructure should be taken into account when estimating the 
costs of a scheme and its viability, as well as connecting to or building in the 
capability to easily connect to any future Smart Island or similar energy grid. Where a propos al to deliver affordable homes, on an allocated housing site, has been made 
unviable by the level of infrastructure required, the Council will work with the developer to address the issue. 
 
POLICY SS5 Physical Infrastructure  
Development proposals, wher e they comply with other relevant policies within this 
Local Plan, will be supported where they are:  
(1) evidenced by the necessary existing or planned physical infrastructure to 
enable its delivery; or  
(2) for new physical infrastructure where this makes a positi ve contribution to 
the sustainability of the islands.  
140. Water and Waste Water  As of April 2020 South West Water extended their 
license to cover the islands are therefore now the Water Authority for the Isles of Scilly.   
 
141. The water supply for St Mary’s comes from the groundwater abstraction wells at 
Higher Moor and Lower Moor.  There are five borehole abstraction wells: Venns, 
Carrs and Hales at Higher Moor, and Rocky Hill and Joneys at Lower Moor. The 
water supply for St Mary’s is supplemented by the desalination plant, located on the 
east side of the island. The desalination is used t o improve the quality of the water 
and help the ground water levels to re- charge and reduce the risk of saline intrusion. 
There are three reservoirs on St Mary’s, all in the form of above-  or below -ground 
storage tanks. All water extracted from groundwater  boreholes or the sea is treated  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
and distributed via the water pumping and treatment station at Porth Hellick above 
Higher Moor.  
  
142. There are five water abstraction boreholes on Bryher that supply fresh water. These are all located just to the north east of  Great Pool. Two replacement tanks and 
sampling facilities have been installed on Bryher to improve the water facilities on the 
island.  
 
143. Tresco Estate supplies drinking water via a whole- island distribution system that 
includes appropriate blending and treatment. The Estate also manages waste water on Tresco and has a whole- island sewerage system with a screening plant. It also 
operates strict exclusion zones around its boreholes to mitigate the risk of any 
contamination of the water supply.  
 
144. On St Agnes and St Martin’s, water is provided through a combination of the Duchy of Cornwall and private boreholes, with waste water disposed of through private treatment plants, mostly in the form of septic tanks. Water supply on St Agnes is 
sourced from Big Pool SSS I in the north- west corner of the island, protected from the 
north and west by sea defences. St Agnes depends on the aquifer for its fresh water 
supplies via borehole abstraction. The water supplies on St Martin’s are drawn from 
private boreholes, supplemented with rainwater collection tanks. Borehole water 
supplies on both St Agnes and St Martin’s are vulnerable to pollution from agricultural chemicals and septic tank seepage.  
 
145. The water environment of the islands is important for a number of reasons, not least its ecological value and as a source of drinking water for the islands’ residents and visitors. There are legal requirements through the Water Framework Directive
24 to 
give full consideration to the quality and quantity of ground and surface water  bodies, 
in order to aim to achieve ‘good’ status or ‘good ecological potential’ in all water bodies by 2027. As the Council has a role in supporting the delivery of these 
objectives, it is essential that development does not cause deterioration in the status 
of any bodies of water on the islands.  
 
146. Promoting more efficient use of water will be essential to help balance the needs of 
the community and the environment. Policy SS6 uses the proposed higher Building 
Regulations requirement for housing and the BRE EAM,
25 for non- residential, to 
secure increased water efficiency; such as, for example, rainwater harvesting and 
grey water recycling. Alternative approaches to securing the equivalent level of water 
efficiency sought through criteria d) and e) of Policy SS6 wil l be considered where 
supported by appropriate evidence.  
 
 
24 CE22 Water Framework Directive  
25 CE23 BREEAM:  Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
147. As waste water can be harmful to both the environment and human health, it is 
necessary to ensure that sewerage disposal is appropriately managed.  Groundwater 
on the Isles of Scilly is vulnerable to contamination. The soils are shallow and 
groundwater flows through the fractured granite aquifers with elevated nitrate and bacteria levels. Regulations require landowners to obtain a permit from the Environment Agency to discharge sewage effluent close t o boreholes and wells that 
provide a drinking water supply.   
 
148. Any development proposal must ensure that there is adequate infrastructure 
available or provided, and it must not lead to a deterioration in water quality and 
water resources.  Foul drainage is a particularly important consideration, as this falls 
under Environmental Permitting Regulations requirements.  Applications will need to 
consider the effect on designated marine and terrestrial areas, as well as the 
proximity to boreholes and fragile groundwater reserves.    
 
149. With the exception of Tresco, the off -islands have limited capacity for the disposal of 
foul drainage because of the reliance on septic tank systems, some of which are in 
close proximity to private drinking water boreholes; a situation t hat elevates the risk 
of cross -contamination. The amount of land on the off -islands that is considered 
suitable and safe for the siting of septic tank drainage fields is also limited.  
 
150. Policy SS6  protects the environment and public health by requiring connections to 
existing networks that are fit for purpose, and with the appropriate existing or 
planned capacity where available.  As a last resort, proposals must provide a new 
private package treatment system appropriate to the scale of developm ent proposed. 
The installation of new sewage treatment packages should obtain the necessary 
permit from the Environment Agency, in accordance with the General Binding 
Rules.
26 
POLICY SS6 Water and Waste Water Management  
(1) Development that requires a new connection to mains or private drinking or 
waste water systems will be permitted provided that:  
a) it does not result in the deterioration of, and where possible assists in 
improving water quality, to support the attainmen t of the requirements of 
the Water Framework Directive;  
b) it complies with national policy and guidance in relation to flood risk;  
c) it does not result in a risk to the quality of groundwater, and there is no risk 
to public or private water supplies;  
d) all new h omes (including replacement dwellings and conversions) achieve a 
water consumption standard of no more than 110 litres per person per day;  
e) all new non -residential developments of 500 sqm or more achieve the 
BREEAM107 ‘excellent’ credit required for water c onsumption; and 
f) it does not impact on habitats and designated sites  
 
26 CE24 General Binding Rules   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
Criteria d) – f) need to be satisfied unless it can be demonstrated that it is not 
financially viable to do so.  
 
(2) If neither a mains nor package waste -water treatment plant is feasible to 
deliver the requirements of a new development, then a system incorporating 
septic tanks may be considered, provided there are no adverse environmental or 
public health effects from the installation.  
 
151. Flood Risk The islands are a flooded landscape that was originally connected to 
Cornwall until around 10,000 years ago. The rising sea level created the islands of St 
Agnes, Annet and the Western Rocks at around 3000 BC. The other modern- day 
islands remained a single island until a period from around 1000 BC onwards. This 
process of inundation is ongoing, and the predicted rise in sea level varies from 15 
cm to 60 cm over the next 75 years. As such, the islands are, and will remain, vulnerable to coastal flooding.  
 
152. Development will be permissi ble where it complies with the NPPF and national 
guidance, takes account of local evidence and strategies (including the Local Flood Risk Management Strategies (LFRMS) and the Shoreline Management Plans 
(SMP)), and incorporates appropriate mitigation. To assist in the process, the 
Environment Agency is mapping the islands in terms of flood risk zones,
27 which will 
be rolled out during the plan period.  
 
153. The LFRMS for the Isles of Scilly was published in 201728 and states that the primary 
flood risk for the islands will be from coastal flooding. Coastal flooding occurs when 
the sea level rises above the level of coastal land. It is exacerbated by tidal 
movements, ground sea swell, strong winds or other extreme w eather conditions, as 
well as low atmospheric pressure and/or heavy rainfall.  
 
154. The Isles of Scilly Climate Change Strategy 2011 indicates that the climate change impacts for the region include the likelihood of warmer, drier summers, milder, wetter 
winters , and rising sea levels. In addition, the area will be subject to more extremes, 
including increases in intense downpours, both in terms of volume and frequency; 
shorter return periods for high- water levels at the coast; storm surge levels being 
predicted to exceed current levels; as well as an increase of around 1 m in average 
annual offshore wave heights by 2080. High spring tides are predictable, but weather 
conditions can create storm surges and groundswell that add to the water levels. 
Future predictions indicate that the islands can expect an increased level of flood 
risk, due to a combination of rising sea levels (at a rate in the South West that is faster than the rest of the UK); more intense storm activity, with storm surge levels 
that exceed current levels; along with increased offshore wave heights.  
 
27 CE25 Flood Map for Planning  
28 CE26 Local Flood Risk Management Strategy 2017   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
 
155. The higher frequency and ferocity of storm events will increase the severity and 
incidence of tidal flooding and the rates of coastal erosion. Given that it is not viable 
to continually raise the height of sea defences, the maintenance and strengthening 
of existing defences, both man- made and natural, will be important to protect 
property and critical infrastructure. The islands will need to adapt to flooding by 
developing effective mitigation and recovery measures.  
 
156. Historic flooding events have affected all of the inhabited islands in recent years, with 
certain areas known to be at greater risk than others. Within these areas, the LFRMS 
and SMP advocate a range of approaches, including taking no acti ve intervention 
(NAI), Holding The Line (HTL), and Managed Realignment (MR). Areas known to be 
at a higher risk from coastal flooding and erosion are below the 5- metre contour (5 
metres Above Ordnance Datum (AOD), Newlyn), and are identified on the Policies Map of this Local Plan. Development proposals in these areas should be avoided where possible, or subject to a Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) as required by Policy 
SS7,  to ensure that vulnerable uses are protected and risks mitigated.   
 
157. The submission of a site-specific FRA will be required, to ensure that development 
proposals that have to take place in areas at risk of flooding are resilient to those risks. A FRA must demonstrate a knowledge of the flood risks and ensure that the 
physical damage of floodi ng on homes and businesses is both minimised and 
recovered quickly (i.e. the time it takes to make the property usable/habitable again, 
with more advice provided by the Flood Repairable House guidance
29). Further 
policy and guidance on undertaking a Flood Risk Assessment can be found on the 
Environment Agency website and National Planning Practice Guidance on Flood 
Risk and Coastal Change.30   
 
158. As of 2019, a £3.4 million Sea Defence Works and Dune Management Project is 
being prepared by the Council, with funding from the ERDF31 and the Environment 
Agency. This project is anticipated to take place during the plan period.  
 
159. Where appropriate, development proposals need to consider adequate and 
appropriate drainage systems to direct flood waters without putting other areas at 
risk, as well as the use of permeable surfaces. This requirement could include the identification of appropriate sites for containing those flood waters during storms, 
prior to their release at times of low tide or when the storm event abates. Sustainable 
Drainage Systems (SuDS
32) will have an important role in the management of 
 
29 CE27 Flood Repairable: Planning to Recover Quickly and make your home flood repairable  
30 CE28  Flood Risk Assessment for Planning  
31 European Regional Development Fund.  
32 Sustainable urban drainage systems (SUDS) can be used in all types of development to provide a natural approach to 
managing drainage in order to prevent water pollution and flooding, and they can create or enhance green spaces and habitat 
for wildlife.     Information Classification: PUBLIC 
rainfall and surface water, particularly in low -lying or flood- prone areas, as well as 
helping to improve water quality.  
 
160. During the plan period, the following areas have already been identified as likely to 
be subject to flood and coastal risk -management works.  
St Mary’s Location  Existing Defence  Potential or already identified 
Enhancement  
The Mermaid Wall  Sea wall.  Storm damage repairs.  
The Quay to 
Customs House Existing building line 
and stop logs. Assessment of defence line and 
development of adequate standard of 
defence, including third party assets.  
Customs House to 
Carn Thomas  Sea wall and 
secondary wall.  Storm damage repa irs, development of 
adequate standard of defence.  
Porthmellon  Embankment (south 
end), sand dune, sea 
wall (north end).  Sand dune management plan, rock 
armour to protect south end, sea wall 
repairs at north end.  
Porthloo  Bank.  Rock armour and toe protection for bank.  
Pelistry Ledges  - Management of cliff recession.  
Porth Hellick  Gravel Bank.  Replenishment.  
Old Town Slip to 
Old Town Church  Sea walls and 
embankment.  Storm damage repairs.  
Demountable defence at east end of bay.  
Old Town Quay to 
Tolman Point  - Management of cliff recession.  
Porthcressa, Little 
Carn to Sally Port  Sea wall.  Storm damage repairs.  
Porthcressa, 
Slipway to 
Playground  Rock armour, sea 
wall. Management of cliff recession.  
Garrison, Sally 
Port to Morning 
Point  - Management of cliff recession.  
 
St Martin’s 
Location  Existing Defence  Potential or already identified 
Enhancement  
Higher Town West 
End Rock armour / 
revetment.  Replenishment.  
 
Tresco Location  Existing Defence  Potential or already identified 
Enhancement  
South Beach / 
Pentle Bay  Sand dunes.  Dune management plan, dune toe 
protection.  
New Grimsby, 
Quay to Flying 
Boat Club slip  Sea wall and rock 
revetment. Storm damage repairs.  
Replenishment.  
New Grimsby Quay  Breakwater.  Storm damage repairs.  
 
Bryher Location  Existing Defence  Potential or already identified 
Enhancement   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
Great Porth North 
end Bank, sea wall and 
rock revetment.  Repairs to damaged revetment.  
Great 
Popplestones  Rock revetment and 
sea wall.  Repairs to damaged revetment.  
Little Popplestones  Embankment and 
sand dune.  Replenishment.  
Potential leat instatement.  
Church Quay 
access  Limited rock 
revetment.  Development of defence line.  
 
St Agnes  Existing Defence  Potential or already identified 
Enhancement  
Pereglis Slip to 
Ginamoney Carn  Embankment.  Replenishment and strengthening.  
Ginamoney Carn to 
Browarth Point  Embankment with 
concrete revetment.  Repairs to damaged revetment.  
Browarth Point to 
Kallimay Point  Embankment with 
concrete revetment, 
sea wall.  Repairs to damaged revetment.  
Repairs to sea wall. 
The Quay to Turks 
Head Slip  - Management of cliff recession.  
161. Whilst there is no development permitted on the uninhabited islands, it is known that 
sea inundation and coastal erosion continues to impact upon important heritage, 
including Scheduled Monuments and important wildlife features such as nesting sites 
for storm petrels. The Heritage at Risk Register33 identifies a number of problems as 
a direct result of coast erosion.  
POLICY SS7 Flood Avoidance and Coastal Erosion  
(1) Development proposals to build below the 5 metre contour (5 metres above 
Ordnance Datum, Newlyn) or in other areas shown to be at risk of flooding or 
coastal erosion, as set out in the policies map, will not be permitted unless an 
appropriate and proportionate Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) demonstrates how 
the flood risk will be managed, and that:  
a) the development, taking climate change into account, does not create a 
flood risk over its lifetime to existing or prop osed properties and/or 
surrounding land;  
b) appropriate acceptable mitigation and recovery measures can be 
undertaken to ensure no significant adverse impact on human health or the 
natural and built environment as well as cultural heritage; and  
c) if there is an y doubt, the precautionary principle37F  will apply.  
 
(2) All major developments, regardless of location, should also be accompanied by 
a proportionate Flood Risk Assessment and appropriate sustainable drainage 
system.  
(3) Natural dune restoration and works connected with flood resilience and 
coastal defence will be supported where any natural and historic environment 
designations, that may be affected, have been adequately addressed in 
 
33 CE29 Heritage at Risk -  South West Register 2018   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
accordance with Policy OE2 (Biodiversity and Geodiversity) and OE7 (His toric 
Environment).  
162. Renewable Energy  The electricity distribution network operator (DNO) is 
Western Power Distribution (WPD). As established in the Energy Infrastructure Plan 
(EIP) 2016, all energy on the islands is imported, other than a small number of photovoltaic (PV) installations. During 2018 the Smart Islands project progressed a 
number of solar installations, including permitted development installations of a 
number of solar panels on suitable Council houses. Planning permission was also granted for a solar garden at St Mary’s Airport and on the roofs of the Council’s 
waste site building and the on St Mary’s Fire Station building, both at Porthmellon. 
Whilst these installations will increase the provision of a renewable source of energy managed by a Community Venture, the two major non- renewable energy demands 
remain for electricity and petroleum products. The level of import, and especially the 
isolated nature of the islands, results in an energy supply that can be vulnerable to 
interruption, though historically this has been classified as ‘reliable’ when considering 
Ofgem
34 targets.  
 
163. Western Power Distribution’s 33 kilovolt (kV) electricity subsea cable, installed in 1988 with a capacity of 7.5 MW, became damaged in March 2017 and was unable to 
supply the islands with electricity. Whilst the provision of energy for islanders was 
maintained, this was provided by generation at the islands’ 5.7 MW diesel power station on St Mary’s.   
 
164. In addition to the diesel power station on St Mary’s, there are two satellite power stations on Bryher and St Agnes, each with twin 180 kW diesel generators (enough for current average demand). St Mary’s, Tresco and St Martin’s are on a loop of 
power distribution cables, allowing supply to be back -fed if there is an issue with the 
supply cables. Bryher and St Agnes are on spurs from this loop, and the lack of 
opportunity to back -feed has required two local backup power stations.  
 
165. The major issues with the current electricity supply are the potential requirements to replace the sub- sea cable from the mainland and the backup power station on St 
Mary’s. These are likely to be delivered and funded by Western Power Distribution 
as part of the standard investment programme, and may not be required over the 
current plan period.  
 
166. Renewable energy generation for the islands will improve the reliability of the islands’ 
electricity supply. The Government has set a UK target to deliver 15% of the UK’s 
energy consumption from renewable sources by 2020, and also has an ambition that by 2020, 12% of heating should come from renewable sources. At a local level, the 
Smart Island  programme establishes a target that seeks to achieve a 40% reduction 
 
34 OFGEM  is the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets:   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
in energy bills for residents by 2025, and for 40% of island energy demands to be 
met through renewable generation by 2025.  Additionally and as referenced earlier in 
this document, the C ouncil of the Isles of Scilly have signed up to a declaration of a 
‘climate emergency’, which sets a target to ensure the Council is carbon neutral by 2030.  
 
167. Policy SS8 is designed to promote renewable and low -carbon energy schemes, 
whilst ensuring that adverse effects are satisfactorily addressed, including any 
cumulative landscape and visual impacts and potential negative effects on nature 
conservation interests. Community -led initiatives, in appropriate locations, are also 
encouraged for renewable and lo w-carbon energy schemes.  
 
168. In 2015, the Government published a Written Ministerial Statement (WMS) that introduced a requirement to fully assess any development site suitable for on- shore 
wind power generation as part of the Local Plan process. This is required to demonstrate that t he planning impacts affecting the islands have been fully 
addressed. Whilst the 2016 EIP does consider the potential of both onshore and offshore wind to assist in the delivery of a sustainable energy supply for the islands, 
no site has been subject to a f ull assessment. Due to the scale of the islands, it has 
not been possible to identify a site for onshore wind.  
  
169. Whilst the Council is supportive of renewable energy, wind turbines are, by their very 
nature, likely to be intrusive in such an intimate landscape such as the Isles of Scilly. Although there would appear to be potential to exploit wind as a renewable source of 
energy, opportunities are likely to be limited due to the high potential of harming the 
landscape and tranquillity of the islands. The i slands are particularly sensitive to 
intrusive developments.  
POLICY SS8 Renewable Energy Developments  
(1)   Except for proposals for on -shore wind energy generation, development  
proposals for renewable energy that contribute towards creating sustainable 
island communities, including the implementation of projects that form the Smart 
Islands programme, and any other community programme or project that seeks to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions and move towards a carbon neutral island 
environment,  will be supported where they:  
 
a) contribute towards meeting domestic, community or business energy 
needs within the islands;  
b) conserve the scenic beauty, landscape, seascape, cultural heritage or 
historic environment of the islands, including any cumulative and inter -
visibility impacts;  
c) protect and enhance biodiversity and the maintenance of wildlife 
populations such as sea birds;  
d) they provide environmental enhancement and community benefits 
wherever possible;   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
e) they would not have a significant adverse effect on the amenity of local 
residents in terms of noise, dust, odour, reflected light, traffic or visual 
intrusion;  
f) there would be no significant adverse effects on airport radar, air traffic 
control and teleco mmunications systems; and  
g) they contribute directly to energy conservation.  
 
(2) Proposals should include details of associated developments, including 
ancillary buildings and transmissions lines, which should be located below ground 
where possible in orde r to reduce the visual impact. Where appropriate, planning 
permissions will be subject to conditions that require the implementation of a 
satisfactory restoration scheme following decommissioning of the equipment and 
apparatus.  
 
170. Travel and Transport  The development of an affordable, efficient and 
reliable integrated transport system between the mainland and each island is 
essential to meet the long- term social and economic needs of the Isles of Scilly. 
Transport between the mainland and the islands relies solely on private transport for 
the movement of people and goods. Tourism, commerce and industry are also 
dependent on the transportation of goods and people by sea and air. The geographic 
isolation of the islands makes access to key services such as education and 
healthcare difficult to achieve locally and places a cost on the provision of goods and 
services in general. As such, it essential that the islands transport infrastructure in 
relation to air, land and sea is protected and improved wherever possib le, including 
all of the quays and slip- ways on each island, St Mary’s airport and Tresco Heliport.  
POLICY SS9 Travel and Transport  
The islands’ transport links are identified on the policies map.  
(1) Development proposals that prejudice the effectiveness and efficiency of the 
operation of transport links and associated infrastructure will not be permitted.  
(2) Support will be given to proposals that improve the islands’ air and sea links 
and associated infrastructure.  
171. Managing Movement and Sustainable Travel Although each of 
the five inhabited islands is geographically small in scale, there remains a high 
proportion of cars, particularly on St Mary’s. As of 2018, there were 906 vehicles 
registered to travel on the roads of St Mary’s.35 To encourage sustainable modes of 
transport and minimise unnecessary car travel, the location, design and layout of 
development will need to encourage walking and cycling, with the amount of off -
street car parking limited. All routes and access points in new  development must be 
safe and functional for all users, including those with mobility or sensory difficulties. 
All of these requirements can be achieved through good design and the control of the scale and/or type, location and layout of new development.  
 
35 CE30 Registered Vehicles on St Mary's 2018  DfT Statistics   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
 
172. The Local Plan supports the drive towards cleaner vehicles by seeking provision of 
charging points for electric vehicles in relation to residential as well as non-
residential developments. Where there is a proposal for new commercial or 
residential development, then there is a requirement to include electric vehicle charging points in car -parking areas. This requirement chimes with the 
Government’s commitment to promote sustainable transport as set out in the NPPF. This supports development that is designed to enable the charging of plug- in and 
other ultra- low emission vehicles in safe, accessible and convenient locations.
36 
POLICY SS10 Managing Movement  
(1) Development that has the potential to generate vehicular movements and car 
parking will be permitted provided that:  
a) provision is made to support and promote the use of sustainable transport 
such as walking, cycling and electric vehicles, where appropr iate;  
b) it does not have an adverse impact on the function, safety and character of 
the local highway network; and  
c) an appropriate level of off -street cycle and car parking and electric vehicle 
charging is provided, taking into account the scale and type of development 
and the accessibility of the location to facilities and services.  
(2) Development that generates significant amounts of movement must be 
supported by a Transport Assessment and Travel Plan.  
 
36 CE01 National Planning Policy Framework 2019  Chapter 9: Promoting Sustainable Transport, paragraph 110.   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
Our Outstanding 
Environment 
 
 
173. The Isles of Scilly has an outstanding world- class environment that 
underpins the quality of life and the economy of the islands. 
Consequently,  the policies in the Local Plan aim to safeguard the rich 
environment and heritage of the islands,  so as to maintain its world- class 
qualit y and distinctiveness, whilst carefully managing and promoting 
sustainable development , to support a strong and viable community and 
economy.  
Protecting and Enhancing the Natural 
Environment 
 
174. The distinctiveness and richness of the islands ’ environment is reflected in the 
plethora of national and international designations. The entire islands are designated 
as an A rea of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) and Heritage Coast , reflecting the 
quality of the landscape and seascape.  The richness and quality of the islands ’ Aims 1. Maintaining an outstanding and world -class environment , and ensur ing 
that its distinctive and significant seascape and landscape, heritage and 
nature conservation assets are protected,  valued and enhanced. 
5. Engendering and supporting a strong, vibrant and healthy island 
community with an improved quality of life for its residents.  
6. Adapting to the effects of climate change on people, wildlife and places 
by increasing resilience, matching the vulnerability of land uses to flood 
risk, and managing surface water in the most sustainable way. 
7. Minimising carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases , and supporting  
measures that contribute to carbon neutrality and mitigate against the effects of climate change. 
 Issues : Environment | Economy   
  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
biodiversity and geodiversity is reflected in the protection afforded to 26 Sites of 
Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) spread over 25 sites , and the internationally 
recognised Special Protection Area (SPA), R amsar Wetland and Special Area of 
Conservation (SAC). The quality of the historic environment is recognised,  as the 
entire islands are designated a Conservation Area,  and Scilly has the densest 
concentration of archaeology in the UK , with 238 Scheduled Monuments.  
 
175. Landscape and Seascape  The character of the islands’ landscape and 
seascape is one of outstanding quality and beauty. The outstanding environment 
and the diversity and distinctiveness of the islands are important both to the quality 
of life of its communities and the economic prosperity of the Isles of Scilly as a whole. Consistent with the primary purpose of conserving the natural beauty of the AONB, as established through the Countryside and Rights of Way Act,  when 
considering proposals for development great weight  will be afforded to the islands’ 
landscape, seascape and scenic beauty and the aims and objectives of the AONB Management Plan. Proposals that contribute towards meeting the economic or social needs of the islands will be supported where they are situated on appropriate sites 
and of a scale and design that conserves and enhances the natural beauty in accordance with Policy OE1.  
 
 
176. The characteristics of the islands’  landscape are assessed in detail in ‘The Isles of 
Scilly Landscape Character’  (2008) , which identified 5 landscape character areas for 
the Isles of Scilly. Landscape also has a time dimension and the ‘ Historic Landscape 
Characterisation Study’  (2007) has looked at a range of issues that are impacting on 
the islands’ landscape, some of which are t he result of pressures for new 
development. Other pressures include changes in land management, such as declining fieldscapes due to abandoned bulb fields, and the removal or deterioration of stone hedges and shelter fences. Similarly, the AONB Management Plan identifies a range of issues that are forcing change to the important landscape and biodiversity of the islands. As well as changes in land management practices, these range from climate change, the introduction and spread of invasive spec ies, to pres sure from 
fisheries  and wider recreational and commercial pressures to develop the islands by 
exploiting their natural beauty. 
 
 
177. Heritage Coast The Isles of Scilly was defined as a Heritage Coastal area in 
1974, and covers 64 km of coastline around the islands. The NPPF requires planning policies and decisions in relation to Heritage Coastlines to be consistent with the special character of the area and the importance of its conservation. Major development on the islands is unlikely to be appropriate unl ess it is compatible with 
its special character. On the Isles of Scilly there is, in particular, the potential for maritime development to impact upon the purposes of the Heritage Coast.
 
 
178. To protect the distinctiveness and wild landscape and seascape natur e of the 
islands ’ archipelago, development on the uninhabited islands will not be permitted. 
Development in such locations could irrevocably compromise the environmental qualities of these islands. Given the Local Plan’s  focus on ensuring the viability of  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
communities on the inhabited islands, there are no circumstances in which 
development could be justified on any uninhabited island, without clearly demonstrating it will have no adverse effects on protected sites and provides overriding benefits for the community as a whole.
 
POLICY OE1  Protecting and Enhancing the 
Landscape and Seascape  
(1) Development will only be permitted where it aligns with the statutory 
purpose of Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB), and therefore 
conserves and enhances the islands’ landscape, seascape and scenic beauty. 
Development must take into account and respect:  
a) the distinctive character, quality, scenic beauty and sensitivity of the 
landscape and seascape;  
b) the undeveloped and special character of the Heritage Coast;  
c) other qualities , such as important features and views, dark skies and 
tranquillity , and having regard to the AONB Management Plan ; and  
d) the Isles of Scilly Landscape Character Study and any successor or 
associated documents.  
 
(2) Development will not be supported on the uninhabited islands.  
 
179. Biodiversity and Geodiversity All biodiversity and geodiversity is 
important  and represents the variety of life, providing us with essential resources. 
Biodiversity and geodiversity also make valuable contributions to people’s well -being 
and play a key role in climate- change mitigation. The Local Plan aims to prevent 
harm to these assets and to achieve a net gain for biodiversity and geodiversity 
wherever possible. A Biodiversity and Geodiversity Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) (2007) provides more information on these matters.  This SPD will 
be updated to reflect the requirem ents of this Local Plan.  
 
180. Scilly is fortunate that it supports a wealth of biodiversity, including internationally 
and nationally important habitats, plants and animals. In particular, t he islands host a 
number of rare and declining species, including 13 s pecies of seabird such as the 
lesser black-backed gull, European s hag, puffin, Manx shearwater and storm petrel.  
 
181. Geodiversity is connected and integral to biodiversity  and the foundation of our 
natural environment.  Geodiversity is seen in the islands ’ land-forms ; it includes the 
variety of rocks, minerals and soils that support biodiversity and ecosystems , as well 
as providing essential resources to sustain life, such as drinking water, a limited 
amount of recycled materials for construction, and the soils for growing crops.     
 
182. Biodiversity  net gains will be required in addition to any mitigation and compensation 
measures  across the islands to enhance the environment in line with the objectives 
of the DEFRA’s 25 year plan: A Green Future (2018)
37, A Natural Choice for 
 
37 CE31 A Green Future: Our 25 Year Plan to improve the Environment   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
Securing the Value of Naturel (2011)38 and the NPPF.39 Net gains will be measured 
against the metrics published by DEFRA. As part of this commitment to net -gains , 
regard will be given to the implications of a changing climate, to ensur e that habitats 
are protected and enhanced to support their resilience to such changes.  
 
183. International Sites  The islands’ Special Area of Conservation (SAC), Special 
Protection Area (SPA) and Ramsar Wetlands  receive the highest level of protection 
for the ir ecological value, and are subject to the legal tests set out in the Habitat 
Regulations. These tests do not permit development unless it can be demonstrated 
that it would not have an adverse effect on the integrity of the designated site, 
whether direct  or indirect, having regard to avoidance or mitigation measures. The 
presumption in favour of sustainable development, as set out in the NPPF, does not 
apply to development assessed as likely to have a significant effect on such sites.  
 
184. National Sites  Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) and Marine 
Conservation Zones receive protection at a national level. Development inside or 
outside these protected sites, alone or in combination with other proposals, will only be permitted in exceptional circumst ances where the benefits of the development 
unequivocally outweigh the impacts on the sites’ features and on the network of national sites.  
 
185. 
Protected Species  Legislation protects certain species of wild plants, birds 
and mammals, including bats, largely through the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Protected species known to be present on Scilly include the lesser white- toothed 
shrew, otherwise known as the Sc illy shrew. This mammal is absent from mainland 
Britain but is found on the Isles of Scilly. It is mostly associated with the seashore and feeds on a variety of invertebrates, including small crustaceans that live amongst rocks on the seashore. It is protected from being killed or taken under the Wildlife and Countryside Act, and is a Cornwall Red Data Book species. As indicated above, the Isles of Scilly supports notable bird populations that are primarily associated with intertidal and marine habitats or semi -natural terrestrial habitats. 
Protected birds and their nests (while in use or being built) and eggs of all wild birds are protected against taking, damage and destruction.
40 It is also an offence to kill, 
injure or take any wild bird.  
 
186. Bats are al so a protected species. 7 species of bat have been recorded as present 
on the islands, although only 3 species of bat are resident; the Common pipistrelle bat (Pipistrellus pipistrellus), the Soprano pipistrelle bat (Pipistrellus pygmaeus) and Brown long -eared bat (Plecotus auritus). The Isles of Scilly hold the UK’s 
southernmost population of Common pipistrelle bats.  
 
187. 
Trees  Ancient and veteran trees are not precisely defined, but are broadly trees 
that are of particular importance due to their biological, aesthetic or cultural interest 
 
38 CE32 The Natural Choice: Securing the Value of Nature  
39 CE01 National Planning Policy Framework 2019  Paragraph 170  
40 CE34 Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
because of their age, and include trees that are relatively old for the species.41 
Although the islands do not have any ancient woodland, there are considered to be 
‘veteran’ trees that are irreplaceable on account of their age, size or condition. A 
particular example is the mature stands of elm trees on St Mary’s, given that t he 
Isles of Sc illy is one of the last places where adult elms  exist in the UK. Research on 
specific lichens demonstrates that although they are in decline elsewhere in Britain, 
the mature elms on Scilly provide a habitat for the rare lichen species Bacidia 
incompta (elm lichen). There are mature lines and small woodlands of elm trees 
scattered around St Mary’s, including around Carn Friars, Holy Vale and Watermill.42 
Aged veteran trees are of cultural, historical, landscape and nature conservation value; they can be f ound as individuals or within groups. Development resulting in 
the loss or deterioration of veteran trees should not be permitted unless there are 
wholly exceptional reasons, together with suitable compensation.  
 
188. Undesignated H abitats  Much of the biodivers ity on the islands is not 
specifically designated. Nonetheless, undesignated but locally rich wildlife habitats provide a range of social and economic benefits and are important in allowing the natural environment to adapt to climate change through linking and buffering 
protected sites. These habitats include trees, woodlands, hedgerows and stone walls, as well as features of the landscape that function as wildlife corridors and stepping stones. These help the migration, dispersal and genetic exchange of wi ld 
species. Development should not adversely impact on local sites, and should provide the opportunity to strengthen the islands’ biodiversity network as appropriate. Where significant harm cannot be avoided, suitable alternative locations should be considered.  
 
189. 
Assessing Development Proposals  Development will be permitted 
where its purpose is to support the maintenance, enhancement or restoration of 
existing wildlife sites, and environmental opportunities such as those identified in the 
Isles of Scilly Nat ional Character Area (SE01- SE04) 43 and Natural England’s 
IPEN’s44 report, which is the Improvement Programme for England’s Natura 2000 
sites, as well as the AONB’s Management Plan 2015– 2020. In addition, 
opportunities to incorporate biodiversity in and around developments will be 
encouraged in accordance with Policy SS1(d) and SS2(g). Policy OE2 follows good practice by adopting an approach that advocates avoidance, mitigation and compensation where development has any adverse effect on biodiversity or geodiversity interests.  
 
190. Where the natural environment is likely to be affected by development proposals, this should be highlighted at the pre- application stage to determine what level of 
assessments are required. Development proposals that have the potential to impact upon biodiversity or geodiversity will need to be accompanied by an ecological statement which describes the ecological value of the site, any contribution made by 
 
41 CE35 Veteran Trees: A Guide to Good Management, Natural England  
42 CE36 Natural History Museum: the last stand of the Elm Tree  
43 CE36 Isles of Scilly National Character Area, Natural England (NE507)  
44 CE38 I mprovement Programme for England’s' Natura 2000 Site, Isles of Scilly Complex 2014   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
the asset’s setting, and the nature and extent of any impact of the propos ed 
development. The level of detail should be proportionate to the asset’s importance, 
in order to understand the potential impact of the proposal on its significance. The statement should outline any mitigation measures and the steps to be taken to enhanc e biodiversity features (such as the potential to increase impacts from non-
native species or disturbance through, for example, noise, lighting, recreational pressure, trampling or domestic pets). Where appropriate, the ecological statement should include measures to manage the biodiversity interests, as part of the proposal.  
 
191. Depending on the development and its location, further searches may be required for wildlife information, to properly assess a proposal. A range of environmental organisations hold data, including the Isles of Scilly Wildlife Trust, the Environmental Records Centre (ERCISS), RSPB and British Trust for Ornithology. Advice will need to be obtained on the level of detail required for wildlife information and any surveys that need to be carried out, with the work undertaken by a competent and accredited 
ecologist. A Construction Environment Management Plan (CEMP) may be required 
in some cases, to avoid impacts on, for example, breeding species, and to remove non-native invasive species. Fur ther information on the standard of surveying and 
reporting required is set out in the Biodiversity and Geodiversity SPD.  
 
192. Development should seek to avoid any adverse impacts and maximise the opportunity to enhance and secure measurable net gains in biodi versity and 
geodiversity, in accordance with Policy SS2. All impacts on the natural environment should be addressed sequentially, in accordance with the principle of the ‘mitigation 
hierarchy’:
45  
Avoid  
Mitigate  
Compensate  
 
193. When significant impacts are likely, then the first priority should be to relocate the development to another site. If impacts cannot be avoided, then mitigation needs to be considered. Where mitigation is not possible, as a last resort, full compensation should be provided to replace the lost habitat. All proposals should identify biodiversity and geodiversity enhancements that will be included.  
 
194. The purpose of Policy OE2 seeks to set out a positive strategy to ensure that important biodiversity of the islands is safeguarded; to ensure resilient habitats into the future that support wildlife and species and improve ecosystem functions, whilst respecting the evolution of the cultural landscape of the islands. One of the fundamental aims of the Local Plan is to protect biodiv ersity, avoid any net -losses, 
and deliver biodiversity net -gains. Development proposals will also need to avoid or 
minimise harm to sites of geodiversity interest.  
 
 
45 CE01 National Planning Policy Framework 2019  section 15   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
POLICY  OE2  Biodiversity  and Geodiversity  
(1) Development proposals will be permitted where they conserve and enhance 
biodiversity and geodiversity, giving particular regard to ecological networks and 
areas with high potential for priority habitat restoration or creation, and should:  
a) Protect the hierarchy of international, nationa l and local designated sites in 
accordance with their status;  
b) Retain, protect and enhance features of biodiversity and geological interest 
(including supporting habitat and commuting routes through the site and 
taking due account of any use by migratory sp ecies) and ensure 
appropriate and long-term management of those features;  
c) Contribute to the restoration and enhancement of existing habitats and the 
creation of wildlife habitats and linkages between sites to create and 
enhance local ecological networks;  
d) Seek to eradicate or control any invasive non -native species present on 
site; and  
e) Be required to contribute to the protection, management and enhancement 
of biodiversity and geodiversity.  
 
(2) Development proposals must:  
a) apply the mitigation hierarchy to all proposals;  
b) demonstrate how they conserve or enhance biodiversity and ecosystem 
processes;  
c) follow local guidance on biosecurity to control the spread of invasive non -
native species; and  
d) ensure proportionate and appropriate biodiversity net-gain is secured.  
 
(3) Development proposals will not be supported where significant and harmful 
direct or indirect effects on biodiversity and ecosystem processes are identified, 
unless:  
a) the need for the development clearly outweighs the harm caused; and  
b) an appropriate scheme is proposed that will secure compensation and net- 
increases in biodiversity.  
 
(4) Development proposals will not be permitted where a detrimental impact is 
identified to geodiversity sites unless the need for development outweighs th e 
harm caused.   
 
Avoidance, Mitigation and Compensation for Biodiversity and Geodiversity 
Impacts  
(5) Development should avoid adverse impacts on existing biodiversity and 
geodiversity interests as a first principle, and enable measurable net gains by 
desi gning -in biodiversity features and enhancements and opportunities for 
geological conservation alongside new development, in accordance with Policies 
SS1 and SS2. Where adverse impacts are unavoidable, it must be demonstrated 
that the development cannot be reasonably located on an alternative site that  
would result in less or no harm to biodiversity or geodiversity interests; and 
impacts must be adequately and proportionately mitigated. If full mitigation cannot 
be provided, compensation will be required as a last resort. Clear arrangements 
for the long -term maintenance or management of the mitigation and compensation 
need to be provided.   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
 
 
195. Environmental Quality  Maintaining an exceptional environment is a 
prerequisite for the safety, health, well- being and quality of life of the islands’ 
communities. Planning has an important role to play in ensuring that new 
development does not have, and is not at risk from, adverse environmental effects. It is especially essential that the quality of the environment, including air, soil and groundwater and surface water supplies, is protected from any contamination and pollution.  
 
196. 
Pollution  The impact of pollution is a material planning consideration,  as it can 
result in environmental damage as well as health issues. Of particular relevance to 
the Isles of Scilly is the damage that pollution can cause to the special qualities of 
the islands , including their tranquillity, dark night skies and habitats that support a 
diversity of wildlife.  
 
197. Nationally , among the core land- use planning principles that  underpin both plan -
making and the promotion of sustainable development  is the requirement  to reduc e 
pollution. The planning system should ensure that new and existing development 
does not contribute to, and is not adversely affected by, unacceptable levels of pollution,  with land remediated where appropriate. The control of processes or 
emissions relating to pollution is subject to approval under other pollution control 
regimes which fall outside the scope of planning powers .
46 The focus of the planning 
system is on whether development is an acceptable use of land on a particular site, and the im pacts of its use.  
 
198. Although not a particular problem on the islands, applications for development that are either likely to generate,  or are sensitive to,  pollution will require the submission 
of the relevant assessment based on current guidance and/or bes t practice. Advice 
on which assessment method to use can be obtained from the Council’s 
Environmental Health service. Where mitigation measures are proposed, the Council 
will need to be convinced that the proposed measures will be effective with respect to human health, water sources and the wider environment. The provision of these 
measures should be in place at an early stage of the development.  
 
199. The islands are particularly a ffected by radon gas emissions , which can impact upon 
human health within unventilated buildings. For new development , this is controlled 
through the Building Regulations .
47 In order to ensure appropriate design that does 
not result in long- term harm from radon gas emissions, developers are advised to 
seek guidance from a Building Inspector.  
 
200. Noise  and Vibration Noise pollution is excessive noise created by man-
made sources that  cause disturbance or annoyance and can affect wildlife and 
 
46 CE01 National Planning Policy Framework 2019  paragraph 183  
47 CE39 Guidance on Radon protectiv e measures in new buildings, extensions and refurbishment projects , 2008   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
sensitive areas, including areas known for their  tranquillity. It often occurs as a result 
of industrial operations or transportation.  
 
201. Development sensitive to noise and vibration,  such as residential , will not be 
permitted in areas where the existing levels of noise or vibration are too high, or 
could become excessive, unless it can be satisfactorily demonstrated that appropriate mitigation can reduce disturbance to acceptable levels.  
 
202. Air Quality Clean air is an essential element of a good- quality life . Clear air is 
considered to be very good on the islands, as evidenced by the rich diversity of lichen communities present all over Scilly,
48 with 665 species having been recorded 
since 1970.49 The importance of protecting lichens is also a strong incentive to 
minimise air pollution.  
 
203. The three main contributors to air pollution on the Isles of Scilly are petrol and diesel vehicles, the a irport and the diesel electricity station. None of these indi vidually or in 
combination has a significantly adverse impact on air quality , and consequently there 
are no Air Quality Management Areas (AQMAs).  
 
POLICY OE 3 Managing Pollution  
(1) A development proposal that has the potential to generate pollution, including 
of ground, water, noise, vibration, light or air, will only be permitted where it can 
be demonstrated that there would not be any adverse impact on human health, the 
natural env ironment or general amenity.  
 
(2) Where development is proposed on land that is suspected to have historically 
generated any pollution, then a site environmental survey may be required before 
development is permitted. The Phase 1 report will identify any potential 
environmental risks that cannot be mitigated through an environmental 
management plan. The report will make recommendations as to whether a Phase 2 
Intrusive Ground Investigation is required.  
 
204. Light Pollution Light pollution is artificial light that illuminates areas that are 
not intended to be lit. The intrusion of overly bright or poorly directed lights can 
cause glare and wasted energy, can adversely  impact on nature conservation,  affect 
people's right to enjoy their proper ty, and harm people’ s health. Most tangibly, i t can 
also severely affect views of the night sky. The NPPF is clear that planning policies should limit the impact from light pollution on local amenity, intrinsically dark 
landscapes  and nature conservation, primarily through pr omoting and requiring 
good- quality design in order to reduce such light pollution and the impacts that it 
causes .
50 
 
 
48 CE37 Isles of Scilly National Character Area, Natural England (NE507)  
49 CE40 ERCCIS Isles of Scilly Biodiversity Audit 2008  
50 CE01 National Planning Policy Framework 2019  Paragraph 180   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
 
205. Policy OE5  seeks to reduce light pollution by only permitting essential and 
appropriate lighting proposals  that incorporate good lighting management and 
design,  in order to remove unacceptable adverse impacts on the visual character of 
the landscape, seascape and historic built environment;  on wildlife and habitats; and 
on local visual amenity and safety.  
 
 
 
206. Lights should only be provided where needed , and be appropriately shielded, 
directed to the ground and sited to minimis e any impact on adjoining areas. Lights 
should also be of  a height and illumination level that is  the minimum required to 
serve their purpose.  The British Astr onomical Association,  together with the 
Campaign for Dark Skies (CfDS) , has carried out research on the impacts of light 
pollution.51 Light pollution has more serious effects than not being able to see stars . 
Poor lighting can also impact on more intangible health c oncerns , particularly blue, 
white and overly bright lights. The impact of artificial light on wildlife can also be very 
disruptive. Further guidance on lighting will be the subject of supplementary planning guidance,  which will guide developments of appropriate lighting and will be a 
material planning consideration for planning applications.  
 
207. Dark Skies The dark sky is important to the islands as an Area of Outstanding 
Natural Beauty , with Dark Sky Discovery Sites identified for each inhabited island.  
Island  Site  Dark Sky Discovery Site  Class  
St Martin’s  Cricket Pitch, Pool Green  Milky Way Class  
Tresco  Playing Fields  Milky Way Class  
Bryher  Community Play Park  Milky Way Class  
St Agnes  Cricket Pitch  Milky Way Class  
St Mary’s  The Garrison  Milky Way Class with hosted events  
208. The Council for the Protection of Rural England (CPRE) produced interactive 
satellite images , captured at 01:30am throughout September 2015. These show that 
the Isles of Scilly is England’s darkest district. In order to maintain this distinction, it is important to control light pollution,  to ensure, as far as possible, that our existing 
dark skie s are protected and maintained.  
 
209. In order to protect the quality of the islands’ dark skies for the benefit of residents, visitors and wildlife, planning policies need to ensure that only appropriate and essential lighting is installed. Policy OE4 aims to reduce the installation of 
unnecessary lighting on building projects and in connection with land use planning. The Council intends to produce supplementary guidance for developers and 
householders through island specific good practice advice leaflets in or der to guide 
appropriate lighting.  
 
51 CE41 Campaign for Dark Skies (CfDS): Blinded by the Light? 2009   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
POLICY OE4  Protecting Scilly’s Dark Skies  
(1) Development proposals that include external lighting will only be permitted 
where it can be demonstrated that the lights are essential for safety, security or 
community reasons, and where details are provided of attempts to minimise light 
pollution, including:  
a) costs to the environment (including the unnecessary use of electricity);  
b) skyglow (visible glow caused by scattering and reflection from clouds and 
the atmosphere);  
c) light nuisance (creating amenity nuisance, highway hazards and restricted 
views of the night sky); and  
d) glare (over -bright and poorly directed lights that dazzle or discomfort those 
who need to see, by concealing rather than revealing).  
 
210. Wast e and Recycling  National waste planning policies are set out in the 
National Planning Policy for Waste (NPPW) 201452 which should be read in 
conjunction with the NPPF. All Local Planning Authorities should refer to the NPPW 
when discharging their responsibilities in relation to waste management. It is crucial 
to understand that waste management policies are based on a proportionate 
evidence base, to ensure that there is sufficient waste management capacity for 
development that is proposed over the plan period. This is particularly pertinent 
when considering the very small scale of the islands, the level of anticipated development, and options for routes to disposal.  
 
211. Responsibility for planning the islands’ waste management rests with the Council of 
the Isles of Scilly. Domestic and commercial waste  and recycling collections on St 
Mary’s are undertaken by the Council , whereas the off -island arrangements are 
secured through private contractors on behalf of the Council. Most  domestic and 
commercial waste and recycling, including that from the off -islands,  is taken to the 
Waste and Recycling Centre on St Mary’s. This site has sufficient capacity for the 
level of development anticipated over the plan period, as a result of the 
redevelopment of the waste site at Porthmellon. This redevelopment has 
transformed the site by removing legacy lan dfill and  an aging incinerat or to a modern 
household waste and r ecycling centre.  This redevelopment has enabled extensive 
recycling rates increasing from  0% in 2014,  to just over  27% in 2018 . Figures 
published in Spring 2019 show the islands rec ycling rates are now over 30%, hitting 
30% for the first time in September 2018 and up to 34.8% in January and February 2019.  
 
212. Currently , black -bag domestic and commercial waste,  as well as dry mixed recycling,  
are shipped to the mainland for disposal. During the plan period,  it is anticipated that 
further new facilities and management practices will be introduced, for each island 
that provide an on- island solutions, which could include compositing and thermal 
 
52 CE42 National Planning Policy for Waste   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
treatment . Such facilities and practices  will not only  reduce the cost of waste 
disposal , but it could also be used for beneficial purposes, including the generation 
of energy and heat and compost to enhance the islands soil. Such initiatives are 
integral  to deliver ing the spatial planning vision of the Local Pla n. To ensure all 
existing waste sites are safeguarded over the plan period, they are shown on the policies maps and protected from prejudicial development under Policy OE5.  
 
213. It is important for the i slands’ sustainability that the principles of waste and recycling 
are embedded at the start of any development project. In particular , there is a  need 
to ensure that development projects have the necessary provision for the segregation of waste,  so that it  can be accommodated by the islands ’ waste transfer 
facility and recycling centre at Porthmellon. 
 
 
214. Given the limited space and density of residential areas, particularly in Hugh Town, it will be important for new developments to provide convenient kerbside collection 
points for household waste and recycling collection s, as well as external storage for 
recycling and residential waste,  in accordance with Policy SS3 . 
 
215. Larger -scale developments will need to incorporate adequate and permanent areas 
for the storage and disposal of waste, potentially including new ‘bring- sites’ for 
recyclables,  to ensure that public spaces are not used to store such items where 
they can become hazardous and unsightly.   
 
216. 
Construction and Demolition  Wast e from construction and demolition 
should be minimised, managed and re- used,  either on site or elsewhere on the 
islands , where lawfully compliant, such as Pendrathen Quarry on St Mary’s,  in 
accordance with Policy SS3 . Where re- use on site or elsewhere on t he islands is not 
possible , due to, for example, expected harmful impacts on the environment, 
appropriate off -site waste management or disposal will be required.   
 
217. All proposals for development will need to demonstrate the management of waste in accordance with the waste hierarchy : to reduce, re -use and recycle. A Site Waste 
Management Plan (SWMP)  will be required to accompany proposals for 
development where waste is generated; this  includ es construction waste,  as well as 
ongoing waste generated by the intended use. This should include the potential for 
appropriate local re- use of inert materials and top- soils, in order to reduce transport 
and help reduce construction costs.   
 
218. Whilst the existing waste management sites on the islands, as identified on the 
policies maps, are considered to be adequate over the plan period, opportunities for land to be utilised for waste management will be considered. Particularly where this presents opportunities for more efficient management of waste or provides fac ilitates  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
for the co -location of waste sites and energy -from-waste outputs, as part of 
achieving sustainable communities.  
 
219. Depending on the scale and nature of the development, the SWMP  should include a 
waste audit53 to provide the following information:  
 
a) the likely nature and volumes of waste generated through construction;  
b) how the design and layout of the development will minimise the amount of 
waste generated during the construction phase and the steps taken to 
separate and re- use appropriate wastes on- island, where there will be no 
harmful impact upon the environment or local amenity;  
c) how and where waste that cannot be re- used will be managed in accordance 
with the waste hierarchy including the potential for local re- use; 
d) details of how was te will be managed sustainably once the site is operational 
e.g. incorporating storage space for recycling materials; and 
e) a bio- security plan setting out control measures to prevent the introduction of 
non-native species.  
POLICY OE 5 Managing  Waste  
(1) Existing waste sites are identified on the Policies Map. Development proposals 
that could prejudice use of these sites for the essential processing of waste for the 
islands, will be refused.  
 
(2) All  development proposals must demonstrate best practice  in addressing 
waste management solutions, must align with the waste hierarchy, and a site 
waste management plan (SWMP) must be submitted to support planning 
applications.   
 
(3) Construction and demolition waste should be minimised and must be managed 
and re-used on-island where there will be no harmful impacts. Where re -use on -
island  would result in an environmental risk to  human health,  biodiversity, the 
historic environment, the amenity of neighbouring properties or land uses, or the 
water environment, then appropriate off -island management or disposal will be 
required.   
 
(4) Significant proposals, including for major development, must demonstrate how 
the construction and operational phases of the development will be consistent 
with the principle of sus tainable waste management, through a waste 
management plan to include a waste audit, which should be submitted with the 
application.  
 
(5) Waste facilities for re -use, recycling, composting and the generation of 
heat/energy , or the co -location of such uses,  will be permitted where they improve 
the sustainable management of waste on the islands and accord with other 
relevant policies in the Local Plan.  
 
 
53 CE43 Waste Audit Guidance: Paragraph 49: Ref ID: 28- 049-20141016   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
220. Minerals  The NPPF requires the Local Plan to facilitate the sustainable use of 
minerals, and to ensure that there is a sufficient supply of minerals to provide the 
infrastructure, buildings, energy and goods required.54 Particularly pertinent for the 
islands is the requirement to identify as far as possible the contribution that recycled 
materials would make to the supply of minerals, before considering extraction of 
primary materials. 
 
221. Currently the Isles of Scilly has no land- won mineral extractions. Known stock -piles 
or land banks of reclaimed materials are limited to private holdings with only limited 
supplies directly owned and controlled by the Council. Historically, mineral extraction 
has taken place on the islands , with known quarry sites at the Garrison, Carreg dhu, 
Tremelethen, Bishop view, Porthcressa/Buzza, Bay View, Pendrathen and Peninnis 
on St Mary’s. The last of these sites ceased operations in the 1980s, when Pendrathen Quarry stopped extracting granite. N one of the sites benefit from extant 
planning permission to re- commence quarrying activities. Materials for building 
projects make use of reclaimed and recycled materials or required amounts are imported in specific ally as and when demand arises.  The site at  Pendrathen 
continues to provide a valuable source of reclaimed and recycled inert materials from 
construction, demolition and excavation projects, in accordance with a permit from the Environment Agency.  
 
222. The islands are heavily designated by natural and historic environment al 
designations of local and national importance.  Whilst it is recognised that some small 
scale and limited demand may arise over the plan period, the existence of these 
designations, the limited supply of land and the fact that there are no active quarries 
currently, underpins the policy position of not promoting the re- establishment of a 
quarrying on the islands , over the plan period . 
 
223. Modern construction practices have become the common method for development projects on the islands , with only the re- use of traditional and historic building or the 
repair/construction of traditional stone walls requiring larger amounts of granite. T he 
delivery of affordable homes  is not anticipated to require traditional construction 
methods on the basis of the current lack of supply of materials on- island and the cost 
of importing sufficient supplies.  To overcome some of the barriers to cost -effectively 
deliver affordable homes, it is expected that  off-site construction methods and  other 
modern means of construction will be used,  rather than using a more traditional and 
mineral -heavy, construction methods.  
 
224. One of the objectives of the Local Plan is to ensure that the built tradition, character, 
distinctiveness and historic environment of the islands is conserved and enhanced,  
so that the cultural heritage of Scilly is protected. As part of this process , 
encouragement will be given to use locally sourced and sustainable materials, with 
 
54 CE01 National Planning Policy Framework 2019  Paragraph  203   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
an emphasis on the re -use of recycled and secondary materials, as advocated by 
Policies OE5 and OE6 and the requirements for SWMPs. This position represents an 
appropriate and proportionate approach in the context of the NPPF, which advocates a steady and adequate supply of aggregates. Given the scale of development 
anticipated over the plan period and the island’s exceptional environmental quality, it 
would be inappropriate to advocate mineral extraction.  
 
225. Of particular relevance to the sustainable approach, adopted through Policies OE5 and OE6, is that SWMPs will be required as part of the Local Validation Checklist.  
This requirement is in order to provide details of how any excess and usable local 
materials are to be re- distributed in the case of demolition or excavation works, or 
sourced in the case of new building projects. It is anticipated that annual monitoring of the Local Plan will create a picture of sources of building materials for development on the islands.  
 
POLICY OE 6 Minerals  
Support will be given to the use of construction materials and minerals already on 
the islands, through the use of recycled and secondary materials to minimise the 
requirement for any direct extraction. Site Waste Management Plans (SWMPs) will 
be required to suppo rt development proposals, and will include measures to 
recycle and recover inert construction, demolition and excavation materials for re -
use in building works, thereby also reducing transportation costs and carbon 
emissions.  
 
Protecting and Enhancing the  Historic 
Environment 
226. National planning guidance  advises that L ocal Planning Authorities should set out a 
positive strategy for the conservation and enjoyment of the historic environment, 
including heritage assets most at risk through neglect, decay or other threats. The 
Isles of Scilly is fortunate to have a wealth of heritage assets that represent a distinctive, unique and irreplaceable resource that make i t an exceptional historic 
place.  
 
227. Many of the heritage assets on the islands are statutorily prot ected by being, for 
example, designated Scheduled Monuments or L isted Buildings. Additionally , the 
Historic Environment Record (HER) contains a large number of known non -
designated assets that also contribute to the local distinctiveness and heritage of the islands. All of these heritage assets are an irreplaceable resource that should be conserved in a manner appropriate to their significance. As such, a positive and 
proactive strategy should be established for the conservation, enjoyment , and where  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
possib le, the enhancement of the historic environment, including those assets 
considered most at risk of neglect, decay and other threats.  
 
228. The Isles of Scilly offer a unique combination of heritage components. The maritime 
and marine heritage includes a large number of harbours and quays, the remains of 
a shipbuilding industry, lighthouses, daymarks and lifeboat stations. The islands also have a wealth of intertidal and underwater archaeological sites, including prehistoric remains of over 700 wreck sites, five of which are designated under the Protection of 
Wrecks Act 1973. The surrounding sea also conceals the submerged landscape of 
ancient settlements, within the wide expanses of shallow subtidal and intertidal 
environments that have been flooded by rising sea -levels over the centuries. It has 
long been thought that the islands in their current form are a result of past marine transgressions that flooded early archaeological sites, making the archipelago a valuable laboratory for studying progressive sea- level rises within an historical 
context. These submerged and intertidal remains have led to the identification of the 
Isles of Scilly as the ‘lost land of Lyonesse’ –  a legendary, low -lying country that 
once extended westwards from Land’s End to Scilly , as encapsulated in Arthurian 
legend.  
 
229. On land,  the known heritage stretches back to truly ancient remains, including the 
high number of Bronze Age ritual burial monuments with impressive entrance 
graves, the Iron Age and Romano- British cist burials, the Roman o-Celtic site on 
Nornour , as well as early Christian foundation chapels and hermitages. In addition to 
the immense ancient archaeology, the later medieval period also remains visibly 
apparent on the islands. The ruins of Ennor Castle on St Mary’s are a reminder that Old Town was the seat of secular rule during the medieval period, whilst the old 
church of St Mary dates to Norman times. On Tresco there are the remains of St Nicholas Priory , where the monks of Tavistock Abbey presided over the northern 
islands , and which now form the core of the world- famous Tresco Abbey Garden, a 
Grade 1 Historic Park and Garden.  
 
230. Over the last 400 years , a large and complex series of castles, forts, blockhouses, 
breastworks, walls and other military installations developed, emphasising the strategic importance and position of the islands. As such, the islands boast an unrivalled sequence of fortifications; medieval and Tudor defences; Civil War installations when the islands were the last Royalist stronghold; early 18th- century 
massive defence works on the Garrison, commissioned and supplemented during the Napoleonic Wars; gun batteries and other innovative defence works from the turn of the 19th century; World War I flying boat stations; and World War II pillboxes and airfield installations.   
 
231. An intrinsic component of the character of the historic landscape is the pattern of settlement, fields and lanes with field boundaries. Together , these reflect the 
evolution of the islands over 6, 000 years of human impact on the la nd form, starting  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
when the first settlers ventured across the sea from West Cornwall. The lack of 
development on the islands has enabled whole landscapes to survive in a relatively 
unaltered state.  
 
232. As well as having landscape value, field boundaries are of archaeological and historic importance, illustrating how the landscape has changed and developed. The islands’ walling techniques are distinct from those of the mainland,  and in some 
respects differ from island to island, although there are broad similar ities in the suite 
of boundary types. With the progressive loss of traditional dry -stone walling skills, 
some field boundaries are losing their original character.  
 
233. In the latter part of the 19th century, the introduction of intensive flower farming produc ed narrow bulb strips bounded by Cornish hedges , and more particularly , high 
'fences' of hardy species , to protect the tender flowers. These bulb strips, which 
often subdivided earlier fields, are now one of the most distinctive features of the 
Scillonian landscape.  
 
234. The vernacular architecture of the islands is typified by low granite cottages , once 
roofed with rope thatch; this was  later replaced with ‘ scantle’ slated roofs , with small 
Delabole ‘peggies ’ bedded in lime mortar and laid in diminishing cours es. The 
traditional vernacular also includes box sash windows and sturdy plank doors. Wreck 
wood was used extensively in buildings throughout the islands.  
 
235. Some 16th and 17th- century domestic buildings survive, such as Pier House, 
together with a few elegant 18th- century and early 19th- century properties, including 
Hugh House (built as the officers' mess), Veronica Lodge, Newman House, Lyonesse and Lemon Hall on St Mary's , and Dolphin House on Tresco.  
 
236. In the 19th and early 20th century, the influence of the Dorrien- Smith family and the 
Duchy of Cornwall is evident in the development of a certain ‘ house- style' of robust 
and rather severe public buildings. On St Mary's, these include the parish church, Town Hall and Hugh Town post office. On Tresco, the Abbey , built by Augustus  
Smith  and situated close to the ruins of the Benedictine priory, is now surrounded by 
the famous Abbey Garden.  
 
237. Further significant structures of this period are the first glasshouses that were used 
to produce early flowers in the initi al years of the flower industry. Few of these huge 
timber -framed buildings survive,  but those that remain make an important 
contribution to the economic and architectural heritage of the islands. Often they are attached to older granite buildings roofed wi th scantle slate or Bridgwater clay tiles 
brought over as ships' ballast. These once served as animal shelters or hay barns , 
but were given new life as packing sheds for flowers. A survey of the farm buildings on Scilly has shown that many have become disused and fallen into disrepair, as they no longer fulfil the needs of present -day farming.   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
 
238. General approach  to protecting and enhancing the 
historic environment of Scilly. Heritage assets are irreplaceable and 
should be retained wherever possible. One of the important aims of the Local Plan is 
to conserve and enhance the historic environment for the benefit of f uture 
generations, and this needs to be achieved through a clear heritage strategy based 
on the following principles:  
Principles  
Ensure that the historic environment continues to contribute to the special character, 
identity and quality of life of the Isl es of Scilly.  
Ensure the conservation and enhancement of the historic environment of the islands for 
future generations, including both designated and undesignated heritage assets, their 
settings and the wider historic landscape.  
Ensure that the interplay of the historic and natural environment, which is key to the 
special character of the islands, is fully understood and considered.  
Increase public understanding, awareness and enjoyment of and access to our heritage, 
for both residents and visit ors. 
Support the vital tourist economy of the islands, recognising that heritage is a key 
element.  
Ensure that the historic environment is used as a key driver and focus for inward 
investment, regeneration and re -development, particularly within the isla nds’ settlements.  
Explore ways in which new developments can be successfully integrated with the existing 
historic environment.  
Create and support strong partnerships between public, private and voluntary sectors.  
Support organisations applying for funding, and maximise the opportunities for external 
funding to benefit the historic environment.  
Ensure that heritage assets and their settings, as well as the wider historic environment, 
are appropriately managed and maintained, whether in public or pri vate ownership.  
239. Assessing Development Proposals Where heritage assets are likely 
to be affected by development proposals, these should be identified at the pre-
application stage. Applications for development should describe the significance of 
any heritag e asset affected, including any contribution made by their setting. The 
level of detail shoul d be proportionate to the asset’ s importance, in order to 
understand the potential impact of the proposal on its  significance. Essentially , an 
application should c learly demonstrate what is significant about any heritage,  and 
how that significance would be affected by the proposal, whether a material change of use or physical development.
 
 
240. The Cornwall and Isles of Scilly HER55 should be consulted as a minimum to 
determine whether or not a heritage asset is likely to be affected,  and its 
significance. The national online repository of historic designations can be found on 
 
55 CE44  Heritage Gateway   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
the Heritage Gateway or the National Heritage List for England,  which is available 
through Historic England’s website.  
 
241. The Planning Department should be contacted to determine the level of information 
required to support a planning application. In some circumstances, a Heritage 
Assessment may be required.  
 
242. The setting of heritage assets is often essential to their character and legibility. The 
setting can be the immediate surroundings , but may often include land some 
distance away , where the context of the heritage asset can be appreciated. 
Insensitive development or changes to the landscape can affect the significance of the asset and the ability to appreciate it within its surroundings. Proposals for development will need to address their impact on the setting,  and seek to preserve 
those elements that make a positive contribution to the significance of the asset. In considering proposals that  affect Listed Buildings, the Council has a statutory duty to 
consider the impact of development on their setting.
 
 
243. Development proposals affecting important heritage assets  will be permitted 
provided they do not detract from the significance, character and setting of an asset. Particular support will be given where a proposal better reveals the significance of 
the asset.
 
 
244. The harm or loss of part or the whole of any  heritage asset will need to be justified,  
on the basis that  much of the historic environment is  irreplaceable and should be 
retained wherever possible and feasible. Where the proposal would result in the substantial harm or loss of a designated heritage asset  of the highest significance,
56 
evidence will be required that there are considerable public benefits to justify its loss , 
or that there are no other mechanisms for supporting the retention of the asset.  
 
245. The merits of an alternative use may be considered where this would retain the heritage asset , provided that  it would not result in the loss of its important elements. 
It would also be important to ensure that any alternative use is capable of funding the 
conservation of the asset. Should the substantial harm or loss, either in whole or in part, be agreed, a clear indication that there are detailed plans and delivery mechanisms for the proposal’s implementation will be required. The condition of an historic  asset resulting from deliberate damage and neglect will not be taken into 
account in any decision. 
 
 
246. In order to advance the understanding of the significance of the asset to be lost, where permission is granted,  appropriate conditions and/ or planning obl igations may 
be used to ensure that heritage assets are appropriately recorded, conserved or 
enhanced. Measures secured may include provision for a proportionate recording of 
 
56 CE01 National Planning Policy Framework 2019   Paragraph 194(b)     Information Classification: PUBLIC 
assets prior to commencement of any works , and which will be made publicly 
available.  
 
247. Conservation Area The special architectural and historic interest of the 
islands was recognised in 1975 when all of the inhabited islands were designated as 
a Conservation Area under the Civic Amenities Act. As a result , it is necessary for 
the character and appearance of each island to be preserved or enhanced by any 
development. In considering proposals, account will be taken of  how well the design 
and location of the development has considered:  
Key conservation area considerations  
The characteristics and context of the site and surroundings in terms of, for example, 
important buildings, spaces, landscapes, walls, trees and views into or out of the area;  
The form, scale, size and massing of nearby buildings, together with materials of 
construction.  
248. Proposals should demonstrate that they will make a positive contribution to the 
character and quality of the Conservation Area, which will be  at least equal to or 
better than the existing situation. Not all buildings within the Conservation A rea 
contribute to what is important in terms of its character or significance. Proposals 
that would result in an enhancement of the Conservation Area through the alteration or replacement of those buildings that do not make a positive contribution will be supported.  
 
249. Whilst the current Conservation Area boundary includes  all of the islands, there is 
merit in exploring, through a C onservation Area assessment and management plan, 
whether there are areas that would benefit from exclusion from this designation. Such an assessment would highlight the importance of those genuinely significant historic elements  of the built -up areas of each island. Ar eas such as the industrial 
estate and waste site at Porthm ellon, for example, do not merit inclusion in a 
Conservation Area designation. Applying Conservation Area principles to such areas diminishes the value that this designation conveys for genuinely im portant parts of 
the islands. The Council will seek to carry out regular reviews of its Conservation Area boundary, as required by the Town and Country Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990, which makes it  a positive legal duty to ass ess such 
boundaries.  
 
250. 
Listed Buildings Listed Buildings are those that appear on the Secretary of 
States ‘List of Buildings of Special Architectural or Historic Interest’, prepared by the Department of Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS).  The statutory body responsible for 
maintaining the National Heritage List for England (NHLE)
57 is Historic England.  
 
 
57 CE45 Search the National Heritage List for England   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
251. Listed Buildings are grouped into three grades, indicating their relative importance.  
These are Grade I (one), II* (two- star) and II (two), with Grade I the most important.  
The majority (116 out of 128) of L isted Buildings on the islands are Grade II. 
Contrary to popular misconception, when a building is added to the  NHLE, the whole 
of the building (both internal and external)  is listed , as well as its curtilage . All three 
grades are subject to the same legislation.  
 
252. The listing of a building confers a significant degree of protection,  and special 
attention must be paid to maintain its character. Permission in the form of L isted 
Building Consent is required for any works of demolition, extension or alteration that 
affect the character of the building as one of special architectural or historic interest.  
This consent is entirely separate from any need to obtain planning permission.  
 
253. In assessing either planning or L isted Building applications, proposals should 
consider factors such as materials, layout, architectural features, setting, scale and 
design. Proposals that allow for viable uses that are compatible with the conservation of the fabric of the building and its setting will generally be supported.  
 
254. The intention is to produce guidance notes on Listed Buildings, which would include details on the responsibilities of owners and how to apply for Listed Building 
Consent, the implications f or development in the Conservation Area , and guidance 
for householders and property owners on the wide- ranging Article 4 Directions. 
Existing Article 4 Directions
58 will be reviewed and updated in line with current 
regulations on permitted development. These will be available on the Council’s 
website and sent to householders as appropriate.  
 
255. Scheduled Monuments The islands contain a wealth of S cheduled 
Monuments which constitute an irreplaceable resource for, and record of, the Isles of 
Scilly’s evolution. These are remains, buildings or structures of national importance,  
protected under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979. Any works affecting a monument will require Scheduled Monument Consent from the 
Secretary of State for th e Department of Culture Media and Sport (DCMS) , in 
addition to any permission or consents required from the C ouncil under the Planning 
Acts. To protect the integrity of monuments , including the below -ground 
archaeological remains , preservation should take place in situ wherever possible.  
 
256. 
Archaeology  Areas that have multiple heritage assets (both designated and 
non-designated) have been defined as A rchaeological Constraint Areas (ACA).  All of 
the ACAs on the islands have been identified on the Policies Map.  In these areas it is 
likely that development proposals may also require archaeological monitoring,  
guided by a W ritten Scheme of I nvestigation (WSI) that sets out how archaeological 
 
58 CE46 Article 4 Directions on the Isles of Scilly    Information Classification: PUBLIC 
findings are managed, recorded and published.  The ACAs were defined in 1995 
through funding by English Heritage (Historic England) and the Council of the Isles of 
Scilly. Their purpose is to indicate the location of recorded archaeological remains and hist oric sites and structures. For  non-designated heritage asset s, development 
proposals should take into consideration any impact upon archaeology within these areas.  
 
257. Development that would involve ground disturbance in areas of known 
archaeological potential should be sensitively designed and located. A desk based 
archaeological assessment and,  in certain circumstances , a field evaluation will be 
required. Where appropriate, archaeological remains should be preserved in situ 
with development being sensitivel y designed and located to allow their retention or 
minim al harm . Where this is not possible or feasible, a programme of archaeological 
investigation, excavation and recording prior to commencement  will be required.  
 
258. Where an application affects or has the potential to affect heritage assets with an 
archaeological interest, including S cheduled Monuments, within the curtilage of a 
Listed Building or archaeological constraint area, applications must include an 
appropriate desk -based assessment and, where necessary, a field evaluation which 
may need to include full excavation, examination and recording.  
 
259. 
Registered Parks and Gardens  The islands contain one R egistered 
Park and G arden:  Abbey Garden on Tresco, which is designated as Grade I. The 
site dates back to the mid- 19th century and comprises 6 hectares of gardens and 
around 24 hectares of ornamental plantations , through which a series of walks pass  
an ornamental lake. The site occ upies a ridge of high ground that  drops north to the 
Great Pool, south of which stands the principal building of Tresco Abbey. The designation includes the principal building of the Abbey, kitchen gardens , as well as 
a series of terraced gardens and pleasure grounds.  
 
260. 
Non-Designated Assets Non-designated heritage assets do not have 
statutory protection,  but have a degree of significance which merits consideration in 
planning decisions. These assets include locally important and traditional buildings , 
and non -scheduled archaeological remains. These assets and features make an 
important contribution to the historic character of that area. The merits of a 
development affecting an undesignated heritage asset will be balanced against the scale of the harm or loss , either directly or indirectly, to the significance of that 
heritage asset.  
 
261. 
Heritage at Risk  The Council will monitor buildings or other heritage assets at 
risk through neglect, decay or other threats. Deliberate neglect of a heritage asset is not sufficient justification for development resulting in harm or complete loss. 
Solutions will be sought for assets ‘at risk’ through discussions with owners and,  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
where appropriate, encouraging development schemes that would ensure the repair, 
restoration and maintenance of the asset. As a last resort, the Local Planning 
Authority would use its statutory powers to protect the asset.  
 
POLICY  OE7  Development affecting Heritage  
(1) Great weight will be given to the conservation of the islands irreplaceable  
heritage assets. Where development is proposed that would lead to substantial 
harm to assets of the highest significance, including undesignated archaeology of 
national importance,  this will only be justified in wholly exceptional circumstances, 
and substantial harm to all other nationally designated assets will only be justified 
in exceptional circumstances. Any harm to the significance of a designated or non -
designated heritage as set must be justified.  
 
(2) Proposals causing harm will be weighed against the substantial public, not 
private, benefits of the proposal , and whether it has been demonstrated that all 
reasonable efforts have been made to sustain the existing use, find new uses, or 
mitigate the extent of the harm to the significance of the asset; and whether the 
works proposed are the minimum required to sec ure the long -term use of the 
asset.  
 
(3) In those exceptional circumstances where harm to any heritage asset can be 
fully justified, and development would result in the partial or total loss of the asset 
and/or its setting, the applicant will be required to secure a programme of 
recording and analysis of that asset, and archaeological excavation where 
relevant, and ensure the publication of that record to an appropriate standard in a 
public archive.   
 
(4) Proposals that will help to  secure a sustainable f uture for  the islands ’ heritage 
assets,  especially those identified as  being at greatest risk of loss or  decay, will be 
supported.  
 
(5) Conservation Area  
Development within  the Isles of Scilly Conservation Area will be permitted where:  
a) it preserves or enhances the character or appeara nce of the area and its 
setting;  
b) the design and location of the proposal has taken account of:  
I. the development characte ristics and context of the area,  in terms 
of important buildings, spaces, landscapes, walls , trees and 
views within, into or out of the area; and  
II. the form, scale, size and massing of nearby buildings, together 
with materials of construction.  
 
(6) Listed Buildings  
Development affecting Listed Buildings , including alterations or changes of use, 
will be supported where:  
a) it protects the significance of the heritage asset and its setting , including 
impacts on the character, architectural merit or hi storic interest of the 
building; and   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
b) materials, layout, architectural features, scale and design respond  to and 
do not detract from the L isted Building; and 
c) a viable use is proposed that is compatible with the conservation of the 
fabric of the building and its setting.  
 
(7) Scheduled Monuments and Archaeology  
Proposals that preserve or enhance the significance of Scheduled Monuments or 
Archaeological Sites, including their setting, will be supported where measures 
are to be taken to  ensure their protection in  situ based upon their significance.  
Where  developmen t would involve demolition or removal of  archaeological 
features, this must be fully justified , and provision must be made for excavation, 
recording and archiving by a suitably  qualified person(s)  prior to work 
commencing , to ensure it is done to  professio nal standards.  Development within 
the Garrison on St Mary’s (i.e. any land or building within the Garrison Wall 
Scheduled Monument) and its setting should accord with the Garrison 
Conservation Plan 2010 (or any successor plan). Proposals that would result in 
harm to the authenticity and integrity of the Garrison as a strategically important 
coastal defensive site should be wholly exceptional. If the impacts of a proposal 
are neutral, either on the site’s significance or setting, then opportunities to 
enhanc e or better reveal significance should be taken.  
 
(8) Registered Parks and Gardens  
Planning permission for development that preserves or enhances  the special 
historic landscape character and interest of the  Tresco Abbey  Garden , including 
its setting , will be granted  where:  
a) It is demonstrated that the proposal seeks to protect original or significant 
designed landscapes, their built features and setting; or  
b) The proposal includes restoration or reinstatement of historic landsca pe 
features to original designs  using appropriate evidence, or  that the 
proposed works  better reveal their setting.  
 
(9) Non -designated Local Heritage Assets  
Development proposals that positively sustain or enhance the  significance of any 
local heritage asset and its setting will be  permitted. A lterations, additions and 
changes of use should respect the character, appearance and setting of the local 
heritage asset in terms of the design, materials, form, scale, size, height and 
massing of the proposal.  Proposals involving the full or  partial demolition, or 
significant harm to a local heritage asset will be resisted unless sufficient 
justification is provided and the public benefits outweigh the harm caused by the 
loss of the asset.  
 
(10) All development proposals should  be informed by  proportionate  historic 
environment s assessments  and evaluations (such as heritage  impact 
assessments, desk -based appraisals, field evaluation  and historic building 
reports)  which identify the significance of  all heritage assets that would be  
affected by a  proposal, and the  nature and degree of any effects ; and which 
demonstrate, i n order  of preference, how any harm will be  avoided, minimised or 
mitigated.  
  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
Building a Strong 
Living Community 
 
262. The housing policies in this  section aim to ensure that the housing needs 
of the communities on the Isles of Scilly are addressed, whilst ensuring 
that the level of housing development is compatible with protecting the 
outstanding quality of the environment. The focus is on enabling the 
delivery of homes to address the future needs of those people who live 
and work on the islands. The policies provide a framework that aims to 
deliver a better mix of new homes in terms of affordability, size and type,  
to help create a more balanced and sustainable island community.  
New Homes  – What to build?  
263. Housing Requirements  The NPPF requires L ocal Planning Authorities to 
enable the delivery of a wide choice of quality homes. This framework advocates an 
evidenced- based approach,  to ensure that the Local Plan meets the full, objectively 
assessed needs of the market and for affordable homes, including identifying key 
sites that are critical to the delivery of the housing over the plan period.  
 
264. The housing strategy for the plan peri od is set out in Policy LC1,  and establishes the 
requirement to deliver up to 105 affordable homes over the Local Plan period (2015–2030). New h omes will primarily be  delivered on land specifically allocated for 
development in Hugh Town and Old Town on St Mary’s . As windfall homes have 
historically provided a good mechanism for housing delivery, it is considered that a proportion of the local housing need will continue to be delivered through this route. 
The housing allocations set out in Policy LC6  demonstrate that these sites could 
deliver around 105 homes.  
 
265. 
Affordable Homes  Affordable homes are defined in the NPPF as “ affordable 
housing for sale or rent, for those whose needs are not met by the market (including Aims  3. Creating a balanced local housing market that provides housing choice 
and meets the existing and future Local Housing Needs  enabling economic 
prosperity.  
 Issues : Housing | Environment | Infrastructure | Economy   
  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
housing that provides a subsidised route to home ownership and/or is  for essential 
local workers)”. Eligibility is determined by a range of factors, including local incomes 
and house prices.  Affordable homes s hould remain at an affordable price or rent for 
future eligible households.  
 
Social rented 
homes  Should generally be owned by local authorities or 
private registered providers, with rents determined 
nationally.  
Affordable rented 
homes  Has to meet all of the following conditions:  
(a) the rent is set in accordance with the 
Government’s rent policy for Social Rent or 
Affordable Rent, or is  at least 20% below local 
market rents (including service charges where 
applicable);  
(b) the landlord is a registered provider, except where 
it is included as part of a Build to Rent scheme (in 
which case the landlord need not be a registered 
provider); and  
(c) it includes provisions to remain at an affordable 
price for future eligible households, or  for the subsidy 
to be recycled for alternative affordable housing 
provision. For Build to  Rent schemes afford able 
housing for rent is expected to be the normal form of  
affordable housing provision (and, in this context, is 
known as Affordable Private Rent).  
Intermediate  
homes  Are available  for sale or rent at a cost above social 
rent, but below market levels.  These can include 
shared equity (shared ownership and equity loans) 
and intermediate rent, but not affordable rent.   
 
266. Given the costs of construction and the viability of residential development in the 
Isles of Scilly, it may be necessary to permit open- market housing in order to deliver 
affordable homes through cross -subsidisation. Policy LC1  therefore establishes an 
approach that aims  to deliver as many affordable homes as possible,  with flexibility 
for allowing some open- market housing to enable delivery. Development proposals 
solely to meet the demands of the open market are not sustainable on the islands , 
and will be resisted.  
 
267. Vacant Building Credit  is a Government inc entive to encourage brownfield 
land development and allows for an equivalent amount of floorspace as a financial credit equivalent to the existing gross floorspace of relevant vacant buildings .  When 
the existing floor space is calculated, then favourable consideration will be given to 
an equivalent -size residential use and affordable housing contributions may be 
required for any increase in floorspace.  
  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
268. Open -Market Homes  are defined as private housing for rent or sale where 
the price is established in the open market. To ensure the islands remain socially 
sustainable, the Local Planning Authority will seek to achieve as many affordable 
homes as possible in any proposed residential scheme, whilst recognisi ng that some 
open- market homes may be required to enable delivery  of affordable homes . Where 
open- market residential development is justified as an enabler to deliver affordable 
homes, the amount permitted will be dependent on the results of a detailed via bility 
assessment.  The viability assessment will be required to set out the development 
cost of a proposal through an ‘open book’ procedure,  to determine the amount and 
type of open- market housing needed to deliver the required affordable homes.   
 
269. In order  to enable verification of any viability assessment submitted, the Council may 
have assessments independently verified through a third party. The costs of verification will be passed on to the developer.  
 
270. In permitting open- market housing as a mechanism to deliver affordable homes by 
providing sufficient finance and funding, consideration will be given to applying a sequential approach. The sequential approach will, in the first instance, seek to 
restrict the enabling ‘open m arket’ housing to ensure that it is used only as a 
‘principal residence’ through a planning condition,  in order  to bring down the ‘open 
market’ value to levels more equitable to the mainland. Such a restriction would 
ensure that homes meet Local Housing Ne eds, and prevent their use as second 
homes or as an investment opportunity to be used as holiday accommodation. The 
islands are vulnerable to their own popularity as a destination for both holidaymakers and second- home owners, a situation that constrains t he availability of permanent 
homes , and results in house prices and rents that are unaffordable to many local 
people.  
 
271. Pure ‘open market’ housing on the Isles of Scilly is considered to be socially unsustainable development, as it would add to the existing housing problems by 
fuelling more second- home ownership and holiday accommodation, in conflict with 
the sustainability tests of the NPPF. This approach chimes with the statutory 
objectives of meeting the economic and social well -being needs of the islands ’ 
communities within an AONB.  
 
272. The National Planning Policy Framework indicates that to determine the minimum 
number of homes needed in an area,  a local housing need assessment conducted 
using the standard method detailed in the Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) should 
be carried out. On this basis the minimum number of new homes needed for the 
Isles of Scilly is 0 dwellings per year, which primarily reflects a decline in population 
of the islands in recent years. However, the PPG also identifies that it might be 
appropriate for an authority to plan for more housing than the standard method 
indicates, including where a Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) identifies a significantly higher need for housing than the standard method.  
  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
273. The Isles of Scilly Strategic Housing Market Assessment (2016) and its associated 
updates identify 105 new households likely to form during the plan period which are likely to be in need of affordable housing.  
 
274. One of the seven identified strategic aims of the plan is to creat e a balanced local 
housing market that provides housing choice and meets the existing and future Local Housing Needs , thus enabling economic prosperity. In line with this the Council is 
keen to stem the recent trend of population decline, particularly as i t has b een 
working -age individuals and families who have predominantly left the islands, locally 
exacerbating the national trend of an ageing population. Stemming population decline and reducing the average age of the islands’ population is essential to the economic and social sustainability of the Isle of Scilly. The lack of affordable housing and less expensive market homes on the islands is thought to have been a key factor in the recent outmigration of working- age individuals and households.  
 
275. Notwithsta nding the standard method local housing need figure of 0, it is therefore a 
justifiable approach for the plan to provide for 105 additional homes during the plan period, with as many as possible of these being affordable homes.  
 
276. As part of the sequential approach, occupancy restrictions  will only be waived where 
the viability of a site submitted on an ‘open book’ basis clearly demonstrates that the value of the open- market housing is compromised to the extent that it would not be 
possible to deliver a sufficient amount of affordable homes on a particular site; or that it would result in a notable increase in the number of open- market homes that 
would be required to deliver affordable homes, to the detriment of the environment 
and t he availability of existing or planned infrastructure.  
 
277. Given the unique circumstances of the Isles of Scilly and the overwhelming need to provide affordable homes to meet the Local Housing Needs , the Local Plan does not 
set a target for either affordable or open- market homes .  The approach to housing 
delivery in this Plan is to prioritise affordable homes to meet Local Housing Needs, 
through a rural exceptions approach and to ensure the islands outstanding environment is not harmed. The indicative figure for affordable homes needed in Scilly over the plan period 2015- 2030 is 105. O pen-market homes will only be 
permitted  on sites allocated specifically for housing and on larger windfall sites, but 
only when required to deliver affordable homes . 
 
278. This approach is appropriate in a constrained and isolated island community, given 
the small size of the five inhabited islands, landscape sensitivity and capacity and is 
consistent with protecting the intimate landscape of the Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty.  
 
279. In very exceptional circumstances, particularly on difficul t-to-develop sites, financial 
contributions may be sought to provide affordable homes elsewhere on the islands. This exceptional approach will only be used where there is a demonstrable benefit from building more affordable homes elsewhere, rather than providing them on site.   
  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
POLICY LC1 Isles of Scilly Housing Strategy to 2030  
(1) All new homes must contribute towards the creation of a sustainable, balanced 
and inclusive island community by making a positive contribution to addressing 
the local housing needs of present and future generations, through the provision 
of:   
a) affordab le homes, either on the sites specifically allocated for housing in 
Policy LC6, or through windfall sites elsewhere on the five inhabited 
islands, in accordance with Policy LC7;   
b) appropriate staff accommodation to support the continuity and viability of 
businesses and organisations , in accordance with Policy LC4 . 
(2) Open -market housing will be permitted, but only as a mechanism for the 
delivery of affordable homes on sites allocated on the Policies Map, and as set out 
in Policy LC6, where : 
a) the ratio  is in favour of affordable homes ; and  
b) it is demonstrated through a viability assessment that such provision is the 
only viable option to enable the delivery of affordable homes ; and  
c) it has been established that no other form of grant funding or cost 
subsidisation is available.  
(3) On windfall sites, affordable homes to meet a Local Housing Need  through 
Policy LC7, or staff accommodation through Policy LC4, will be permitted. Only for 
larger developments of 5 or more new dwellings, would any consi deration be 
given to permitting an element of open market housing , as a means to deliver 
affordable homes.   
(4) Any open -market homes justified to facilitate the delivery of affordable homes 
will be conditioned to be occupied as principal residence homes only, unless:  
a)   viability and market considerations demonstrate that it is not possible to 
deliver the maximum number and type of affordable homes; or  
b)   it will lead to an excessive number of additional houses that would 
adversely impact on the env ironment and/or infrastructure.  
 
280. Qualification to occupy affordable housing  In meeting the 
islands’ social and economic well -being needs whilst protecting the environment, the 
Local Plan housing strategy as set out in Policy LC1 aims to  deliver new homes to 
meet the needs of the islands’ community. The eligibility to occupy the homes 
provided, which are intended to meet Local Housing Needs  in both the short and 
long term, will be assessed in accordance with P olicy LC2 . 
 
 
3 Balanced Housing Stock 
POLICY LC2 Qualifying for Affordable Homes  
All new affordable homes will be subject to occupancy restrictions, to ensure they 
will be occupied in perpetuity by a person or persons (and their dependants) with  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
a local housing need, as their principal residence throughout the year. A local 
housing need is where:  
(1) The property would be occupied  sole private residence , where a need  cannot 
be met by the local housing market; and  
(2) They need to live permanently on the islands due to their employment 
circumstances and work commitments; or  
(3) They have been continuously resident on the islands for at least five years and 
require new accommo dation as a result of the requirement to:  
a) vacate tied accommodation; or  
b) relocate to more suitable accommodation due to a medical and/or mobility 
condition; or  
c) relocate to smaller/larger accommodation due to under/over -occupation; or  
(4) They are a former r esident who has previously lived permanently on the Isles of 
Scilly for a continuous period of at least five years, and who:  
1) has been away for educational or training purposes, or to obtain work 
experience or professional or technical accreditation; or  
2) is currently employed by the armed forces or merchant navy and whose main 
residence will be on the islands; or  
3) is retired from the armed forces or merchant navy; or  
4) needs to provide substantial care to a relative who has lived continuously on 
the islands for at least five years (‘substantial care’ means that the 
requirement for such care has been identified by a medical doctor or relevant 
statutory support agency).  
 
281. Type and Mix of Homes  An agreed type and mix of affordable housing,  
including tenures , will be determined through local evidence of housing need and 
viability at the time of submitting a proposal for planning permission. Housing 
proposals must meet the specific Local Housing Needs at the time it is proposed, particularly i n terms of size, type and tenure. As demonstrated in the 2016 SHMA, 
most new homes should either be one or two- bedroom in size, to reflect Local 
Housing Needs.  
 
282. A Balance of Homes The Isles of Scilly, as with the rest of the population of 
the United Kingdom, has an increasingly ageing population; that is , a greater number 
of people living on the islands over the age of 65 years . This trend is projected to 
increase, with the working- age population projected to decrease, over the plan 
period. Evidence s uggests that on the Isles of Scilly , population increases are 
predicted in those over 65 years , and particularly those aged over 85. An ageing 
population will have implications for suitable housing provision now and in the future in terms of specialist hom es, both in the affordable and market housing sectors .  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
 
283. Some form of disability, either temporary or permanent, can affect everyone at some 
stage of their lives. The Council will seek to ensure that the housing needs of older people and those with mobility  or sensory impairments are met across all tenures, 
and that these groups are not restricted in their choice of homes. Developers and other agencies will be encouraged to provide dwellings that will enable more people to remain in their homes if they becom e disabled or infirm , and to live as 
independently as possible in the community. In order to support the ageing population and the specific needs of people with disabilities, the Council will encourage all new dwellings to be made accessible and adaptable.  
 
284. The SHMA indicates that a far greater amount of housing of various types will be needed to meet older people’s needs and rising aspirations in the future. New housing specifically provided for older people must meet high standards of accessibility and am enity relevant to their needs. One of the projects of the Smart 
Islands programme
59 will seek to facilitate access to emerging online healthcare 
initiatives, as well as smart metering in relation to utilities such as electricity, water 
and telecommunications. Such technologies should be considered during the design 
stage of any proposed residential development.  
 
285. As there is a finite amount of land for new development, which is heavily constrained by multiple designations, coupled with affordability issues for the local community, it is necessary to ensure that all new homes constructed remain reasonably affordable.  To meet this objective, new homes should have good internal space standards, 
whilst ensuring that they are not excessive in size and scale. The Government’s 
Nationally Described Space Standards (Technical Housing Standards),
 60 or any 
successive guidelines, will be used to guide the size of accommodation to achieve a 
balanced housing stock that remains available to meet Local Housing Needs into the 
future. This approach is appropriate in a remote and isolated location, given the limited land supply and few opportunities for building, and is consistent with 
protecting the intimate landscape of the Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, as set 
out in Aim 1.  
 
Policy LC3 POLICY LC3 Balanced Housing Stock  
(1) All new residential develo pment must contribute towards the creation of 
sustainable, balanced and inclusive island communities by ensuring an 
appropriate mix of dwelling types, number of bedrooms  and tenures, taking 
account of what is in demand at the time , imbalances in the housin g stock, and 
viability and market considerations.  
(2) All new homes must offer a good standard of accommodation by being 
constructed in accordance with the minimum Nationally Described Space 
 
59 CE47 Smart Islands  
60 CE48 Housing Technical Standards    Information Classification: PUBLIC 
Standards (Technical Housing Standards) (or any replacement stand ards)  and no 
more than 30% above these minimum standards, as a maximum;   
(3) All homes will be encouraged to be accessible and adaptable in accordance 
with Building Regulations Requirement M4(2) or any successor regulations.  
(4) Wheelchair users’ homes wi ll be encouraged to be constructed in accordance 
with Building Regulations Requirement M4(3) or any successor regulations, and 
will be encouraged where a specific local need for a wheelchair -adaptable or 
accessible home is identified.  
(5) All affordable homes permitted under LC6 and LC7, including custom/self -
build, must be affordable by size and type to local people and will remain so in 
perpetuity,  
(6) All affordable homes will be subject to a condition removing permitted 
development rig hts in respect of extensions, to ensure they remain of a size that 
meets the affordability needs of the islands.  
 
286. Staff Accommodation  As a small island -based community , there is a need 
for Scilly to retain a balanced workforce. Clearly , staff accommodation needs cannot 
be met outside the islands , due to the expense and logistics  of commuting to and 
from the mainland. Where the skills are not available in the local community , there is 
a need to recruit to the islands from elsewhere. Polic y LC4 recognises that additional 
staff accommodation may be required for businesses or organisations. Such 
accommodation could comprise small -scale seasonal worker s’ accommodation to 
meet the particular needs of agriculture, fishing  or tourism, as well as a range of 
longer -term accommodation for businesses and organisations that require staff to 
relocate to the islands on a permanent or semi -permanent basis. Longer -term staff 
accommodation may need to cater for families , unlike shorter -term accommodation 
for more transient staff.  
 
287. Unusually large staff accommodation dwellings in relation to the needs of the business, or expensive construction in relation to the income the accommodation can sustain, will not be permitted. Due to the small  scale of the islands,  it will be 
possible for workers in most occupations to live anywhere on the island and be within reasonable distance of the business location. However, very occasionally the 
nature of a business may make it essential for someone to live on, or in close proximity to , the business  premises . All staff accommodation should be 
commensurate with the needs of the business.  
 
288. Whilst the plan supports the need to deliver staff accommodation that meets the accommodation needs of multiple businesses in one development, i n order to retain 
staff accommodation for its intended use, a restrictive condition will be included on any planning approval under
 Policy LC4 , limiting its occupation to persons who are  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
employed to work  on the islands . This would not prevent t he accommodation from 
being used as staff accommodation for multiple businesses.  
 
POLICY LC4  Staff Accommodation  
(1) New staff accommodation for businesses and organisations will be permitted 
where:  
a) an appraisal is submitted demonstrating that there is a functional  and 
operational  need for the proposed accommodation  that cannot be met by 
existing suitable acco mmodation available in the area ; and 
b) the size and type of the proposed accommodation  is appropriate to the  
functional and operational need s of the business or organisation ; and 
c) on St Mary’s the proposed accommodation  is within or adjoining  an existing 
settlement unless it involves the re -use of an existing building in accordance 
with Policy SS3; or  
d) on an off -Island the proposed accommodation  is located within an existing 
building or adjacent or well  related to the existing business consistent with 
Policy LC7.  
(2) All staff accommodation permitted will be subject to occupancy restrictions . In 
addition to the above, seasonal  staff accommodation  will only be permitted where 
it: 
a) is located in an area that relates well to the business where possible, with 
the exception of the re -use of buildings; and 
b) does not cause harm to residential amenity through staff working unsociable 
hours.  
(3) W here staff accommodation is required  for a new business, the development 
will only be supported where it is demonstrated that the business is v iable in the 
long term, supported by a business plan for a minimum of five years .  
 
 
289. Removal of Occupancy Restrictions  It is accepted that there will be 
circumstances where staff accommodation is no longer required for the purpose for 
which it was originally intended. Any application to remove an occupancy condition 
for staff accommodation will need to demonstrate that the need for which the 
dwelling was originally approved no longer exists. There are many other ‘occupancy 
restrictive’ conditions known to apply to various types of residential accommodation. 
Any applications to remove these will be dealt with on their indivi dual merits.  
 
290. Policy LC5  below sets out the criteria that will apply to any application to remove any 
restrictive occupancy condition and thereby  ensure that such accommodation can 
remain available where possible. An applicant would be expected to appropri ately 
market the accommodation for a reasonable period (at least 12 months) at a realistic 
market price for the type of dwelling,  to establish whether it could meet the existing 
functional needs of a qualifying person or business. Evidence demonstrating how this requirement has been investigated will need to be included to support any application to vary or remove a restrictive occupancy condition.  
  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
POLICY LC5  Removal of Occupancy Conditions   
(1) Planning permission for the removal  of an occupancy restriction on residential 
accommodation will only be permitted  where it can be evidentially shown  that:  
  
a) there is no longer a continued need for the accommodation  for any 
business or organisation on the islands ; and 
b) the property has been marketed locally for an appropriate period (minimum 
12 months) at an appropriate price.  
 
(2) In the event that staff accommodation is no longer required in connection with 
a business and depending on the type and location of the accommodation, a n 
alternati ve condition w ill be imposed restricting occupancy to a principal 
residence home that would be available to meet a Local Housing Need.  
 
New Homes  – Where to build?  
291. Housing Allocations  Allocating a site for new homes in the Local Plan 
establishes the principle that the development for housing is acceptable. Site 
allocations provide certainty both to developers and the community , to help 
understand what may happen in the area or on their island in the future. They also help the Council and other service and utility providers to look at the cumulative impact of development and plan for future needs, such as school places, as well as the capacity of energy, telecommunications, sewerage and water infrastructure.  Policy LC6  identifies seven housing sites on St Mary’s that have been assessed as  
viable, suitable and achievable locations to build new homes.   
 
292. The housing allocation sites, set out below,  are strategically allocated for housing 
that deliver s affordable homes. In accordance with t he housing strategy set out in 
Policy LC1 , it is essential that all forms of grant funding and subsidy are explored,  to 
facilitate the delivery of 100% affordable homes. Only in exceptional circumstances in the interests of viability can open- market housing be considered on sites allocated 
for housing, again in accordance with Policy LC1. Each site should also be developed with an appropriate mix of dwelling types, sizes (in terms of number of bedrooms) and tenures to meet Local Housing Needs, in accordance with Policy LC3.  
 
POLICY  LC6 Housing Allocations  
The following s ites are allocated on the Policies  Map for housing development over 
the plan period. In addition to all other relevant policies in this plan each site has 
specific development requirements as set out below.  
 
H1: 0.54ha Former 
Secondary School, 
Carn Thomas, Hugh 
Town, St Mary’s  A residenti al development of around 26 homes of an 
appropriate scale and design, which will require:   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
i. Appropriate connections and upgrades to water and 
sewerage, with any planned improvements taken into 
consideration; and  
ii. An appropriate heritage assessment to guide the 
design of the scheme, to ensure no harm to the 
setting  and protect the significance  of designated 
and undesignated heritage assets , in the vicinity of 
this site, given its prominent location.  
H2: 0.2ha Former 
Primary School, 
Carn Thomas, Hugh 
Town, St Mary’s  A residential development of around 7 homes of an 
appropriate scale and design, which will require:  
i. The retention/conversion of the original and 
traditional buildings, enhanced to a high standard of 
design; and  
ii. Appropriate connections and upgrades to water and 
sewerage, with any planned improvements taken into 
consideration.  
H3: 0.53ha Land at 
to the west side of 
Old Town Road on 
the north of Ennor 
Castle, Old Town, St 
Mary’s  A residential development of around 15 homes of an 
appropriate s cale and design, which will require:  
i. Appropriate vehicular and pedestrian access;  
ii. Appropriate connections and upgrades to water and 
sewerage, with any planned improvements taken into 
consideration;  
iii. Design and access measures to protect and  enhance 
the setting of Ennor Castle, including:  
• maintenance or enhancement of the historic 
landscape character through careful design of 
density, style, fabric and variety for new 
homes and garden boundaries, infor med by 
those existing in the historic core of Old Town 
and through retention of existing boundary 
banks and trees;  
• retention of the existing trackway on the south 
to ensure continued access to the rear  (west 
side) of the development; and  
iv. Impacts of surface  water run -off (on the adjacent 
SSSI) to be avoided; and  
v. Heritage assessment and archaeological monitoring 
of groundwork.  
H4: 0.44ha Land to the 
north east side of 
Ennor close, Old 
Town, St Mary’s  A residential development of around 13 homes of an 
appropr iate scale and design which  will require:  
i. Appropriate vehicular and pedestrian access;  
ii. Appropriate connections and upgrades to water and 
sewerage with any planned improvements taken into 
consideration; and  
iii. Heritage assessment and archaeological monitoring 
of groundwork.   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
H5: 0.42ha Land to 
the south of 
Launceston Close, 
Old Town St Mary’s  A residential development of around 12 homes of an 
appropriate scale and design which  will require:  
i. Appropriate vehicular and pedestrian access;  
ii. Appropriate connections and upgrades to water and 
sewerage with any planned improvements taken into 
considerati on; and  
iii. Heritage assessment and archaeological monitoring 
of groundwork.  
H6: 0.37ha Land to 
the south east of 
Ennor Close, Old 
Town, St Mary’s  A residential development of around 11 homes of an 
appropriate scale and design which  will require:  
i. Appropriate vehicular and pedestrian access;  
ii. Appropriate connections and upgrades to water and 
sewerage with any planned improvements taken into 
considerati on;  
iii. Heritage assessment and archaeological monitoring 
of groundwork; and  
iv. Investigations as to potential tidal flood risk including 
appropriate mitigation measures.  
H7: 0.65ha Land to 
the east of Ennor 
Close, Old Town, St 
Mary’s  A residential development  of around 20 homes of an 
appropriate scale and design which  will require:  
i. Appropriate vehicular and pedestrian access;  
ii. Appropriate connections and upgrades to water and 
sewerage with any planned improvements taken into 
consideration;  
iii. Heritage assessment and archaeological monitoring 
of groundwork; and 
iv. Measures to reduce future amenity issues for 
occupants of new housing a nd to minimise conflict 
with the operational and safety requirements of St 
Mary’s Airport.  
H8: 0.4ha Land at 
Sandy Banks, 
Porthmellon, St 
Mary’s  A residential development of around 12 homes of an 
appropriate scale and design which will require:  
i. Appropriate vehicular and pedestrian access;  
ii. Appropriate connections and upgrades to water and 
sewerage with any planned improvements taken into 
consideration;  
iii. Heritage assessment and archaeological monitoring 
of groundwork; and  
iv. Investigations as to potential tidal flood risk including 
appropriate mitigation measures.  
 
293. Windfall Sites Windfall sites arise where a sustainable site suitable for 
development becomes  available and where it has not been specifically allocated for 
housing in the Local Plan. Windfall sites provide opportunities for small scale 
residential development, including one- off homes  and custom/self -build  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
opportunities . Historically windfall site s have made a positive contribution to the 
delivery of affordable homes for the community across all of the islands.   
 
294. Policy LC7  allows for windfall sites to come forward for affordable housing to meet 
Local Housing Needs . In particular, this policy provi des an opportunity for custom 
and self-build homes  for those on the Custom and Self -Build Register.  
 
295. On St Mary’s windfall,  developments will only be permitted where the site is within or 
adjoining  an existing settlement  or built -up area,  and where the proposal complies 
with any other relevant policies elsewhere in this Local Plan. Existing settlements 
include those shown on the Policies Maps:  
 
S1 Hugh Town  
S2 Old Town  
S3 Porthloo  
S4 McFarlands Down/Telegraph  
S5 H oly Vale  
S6 Normandy  
S7 High Lanes  
296. Off-Island Homes During the plan period any future homes required to meet 
the housing needs of the off -island communities will be delivered through windfall 
development, rather than on sites specifically allocated for housing. This f lexible 
approach will ensure that new homes are permitted on the off -islands in response to 
the needs of off -islands communities in accordance with Policies LC1  and LC7. The 
number and type of new homes should therefore be in response to the identified needs of a particular off -island community.  Wherever possible, new homes should 
be well related to an existing settlement or group of existing dwellings and in all cases appropriate in scale, character and appearance to the site and the surrounding area or wi der landscape.  
 
297. All development proposals on a windfall site on St Mary’s or the off -islands will be 
required to comply with other relevant policies in the Local Plan. In relation to scale, design and layout, proposals will need to accord with Policy SS2 .  
 
298. All new homes permitted on windfall sites will need to meet the housing requirements of the community in accordance with Policy LC1 . In addition,  any 
residential development permitted will be subject to secure arrangements to ensure the accommodation is retained to meet local housing needs of the islands, in accordance with Policy LC2.  
 
POLICY LC 7 Windfall Housing  
(1) Proposals for new homes, including custom and self -build, will be permitted:  
 
a) On St Mary’s where the site is within or adjoining an existing settlement as 
shown on the Policies Map; or   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
b) On the off -islands where new homes are required to meet a Local Ho using 
Need specific to that off -island.  
(2) All new homes will be required to meet Local Housing Needs in accordance 
with Policies LC1, LC2 and LC3.  
 
Existing Homes  
299. Replacement Dwellings  Renovating existing homes is often a more 
sustainable and environmentally friendly approach than replacing existing dwellings 
in their entirety. Where the existing dwelling is not considered suitable for retention, 
the replacement home should be well sited in relation to the existing site and 
buildings, not visually intrusive, and not significantly larger than the dwelling it 
replaces. Where a replacement home is considered appropriate, it must have a 
lawful planning use as a dwelling, and not have been demolished prior to the 
determination of the associated plann ing application, and/or its use abandoned. 
Replacement dwellings should be sited within the lawful curtilage of the existing dwelling, unless significant environmental benefits would result from its repositioning.
 
 
300. The impact of a replacement dwelling is likely to be greater with increases in size,  
especially in relation to the surrounding area. Any increase in the size and scale of a replacement dwelling can also have implications in relation to its affordability. Any 
planning application for a replacement dwelling can take into account the size of extension that could be sought. In order to apply  a consistent approach, the increase 
in scale of a replacement dwelling will be restricted,  to ensure it is no larger  than a 
previously enlarged property.
 
 
301. Where a replacement dwelling is proposed, it must be demonstrated that the overall 
energy performance of the building will be improved where it is viable to do so, in 
accordance with Policy SS1 and Policy SS2.  
 
302. Residential Extensions  Due to the exceptional quality of the environment, 
many of the usual permitted development rights for householders on the islands are removed through Article 4(2) Directions. As a result , there is a higher proportion of 
planning applications submitted for extensions and alterations to existing properties. It is therefore necessary to guide homeowners as to what would be considered 
acceptable in the context of the islands.   
 
303. Additional spac e created by an extension to a dwelling, or the erection or alteration 
of outbuildings or other structures to provide ancillary accommodation, can be an 
acceptable means of addressing changes in household space requirements. In supporting extensions and al terations, it is important to strike an appropriate balance 
to ensure the protection of amenity of neighbouring residents and the character of the locality.    
  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
304. As all homes on the islands command higher than the national average house price, 
larger homes are therefore less likely to be affordable to the community, who have 
on average, lower incomes when compared to the national average. Consequently, proposals for extensions should not result in an imbalance in the existing housing stock, and ensure the retention of an appropriate mix of homes available to the 
community.  
 
305. To prevent an imbalance of house types and sizes, and to help retain affordable 
homes , proposals that seek to extend an existing property significantly, by more than 
30% above the m inimum for the size of property,  will be resisted unless there is a 
demonstrable proven need for a larger home.   
 
306. For ancillary accommodation, which is accommodation required for immediate members or relatives of the existing household (and not for use as lettable holiday accommodation), standards of privacy and amenity may be relaxed in relation to the 
main dwelling. In such circumstances , the occupation of the accommodation will be 
tied by condition to the occupation of the main dwelling. The scale and design of  an 
extension should be in accordance with the Isles of Scilly Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document.  
 
307. Where an extension or major refurbishment is proposed, it must be demonstrated 
that the overall energy performance of the building will be improved, where it is 
viable to do so, in accordance with Policy SS1 and Policy SS2.  
 
308. Alterations and modifications to existing buildings and dwellings, including proposed 
extensions, outbuildings and annexes, must be of an appropriate scale and subservient in relation to the existing building, taking into account the site location and the cumulative impacts of previous extensions and development on the site where appropriate.  
 
POLICY LC8 Replacement Dwellings  and 
Residential Extensions, Alterations and Ancillary 
Accommodation  
(1) The alternation, enlargement, replacement or substantial rebuilding of a lawful 
dwelling will be supported  subject to compliance with the following requirements:  
a) The size, siting and design, as well as the use of materials, of the proposal 
would not be more visually intrusive in the landscape or have a harmful 
impact upon the amenity of neighbouring properties.  
b) Where a proposal results in an increase in size (either in relation to number 
of bedrooms, floors, usable floor space or footprint) of the original dwelling 
then this should meet, and be no greater than 30% above as a  maximum, 
the minimum space standards as set out in the Nationally Described Space 
Standards (Technica l Housing Standards) (or any replacement standards); 
unless clear justification is provided as to why a larger home is required.   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
(2) A replacement dwelling or an extension or alteration to an existing dwelling will 
not be permitted to include any self -cont ained holiday letting accommodation 
unless this already lawfully forms part of the existing property, secured through 
planning permission or a lawful development certificate.  
(3) All planning applications for replacement dwellings, extensions or alteratio ns 
that increase the number of bedrooms relative to the existing dwelling should:  
a) proportionately improve the overall energy performance of the building and 
accord with the principles set out in Policies SS1 Principles of Sustainable 
Development and SS2 Su stainable Quality and Design; and  
b) ensure there is sufficient space within the existing curtilage to 
accommodate the proposal without resulting in overdevelopment of the site 
or adversely impacting on residential amenity space and parking provision; 
and 
c) be supported by calculations of the existing and proposed internal 
habitable floor space and the number of  proposed permanent occupants.  
POLICY LC9 Residential Extensions and Ancillary Accommodation  
309. Homes in Multiple Occupation (HMO ) A HMO is a property that is 
shared by three or more tenants who are not living together as a family , and who 
share basic amenities such as a kitchen, bathroom or toilet facilities , but have 
separate bedrooms. The change of a home to a HMO for up to 3– 6 people is 
permitted development. Where there is a mixed HMO and private dwelling, or the 
HMO is shared by more than six  people, then planning permission is required.   
 
310. Unlike the UK mainland, the Isles of Scilly does not have high numbers or concentrati ons of HMOs, which are often established as a means of providing low -
cost accommodation for students or young professionals. Locally , HMOs are 
established largely to provide accommodation for seasonal staff.  
 
311. In order to accommodate the need and demand for HMOs, while ensuring the future 
balance of established communities, Policy LC10 provides  guidance for developers 
and prospective landlords in order to minimise the potential social, environmental 
and economic impacts of HMOs on communities.  
 
POLICY  LC9 Homes in Multiple Occupation  
(1) In order to support mixed and balanced communities and to ensure that a 
range of household needs continue to be accommodated throughout the islands , a 
material change to a House in Multiple Occupati on (HMO) will be permitted where:  
a) the use would not cause a detrimental impact upon adjacent and 
neighbouring residential amenity or neighbouring land uses; or  
b) the immediate area is not already imbalanced by a concentration of such 
uses and where the development would not create such an imbalance.  
  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
(2) D wellings in use as Class C4, mixed C3/C4 use, and HMOs in sui generis use 
will be considered to be HMOs.  
 
Building a Strong 
Working 
Community 
 
312. The islands are a place where a variety of employment needs have to be 
met to support a working community. It is important that those 
employment needs are consistent with protecting Scilly’s  natural and 
historic landscape, particularly as the economy is largel y underpinned by 
its exceptional environment.  
 
313. Conserving and enhancing the natural beauty, wildlife and cultural heritage does not 
need to conflict with supporting vibrant, healthy and productive living and working communities.  
 
314. Nationally , the Government is committed to securing sustainable economic growth in 
order to create jobs and prosperity, building on the country’s inherent strengths and meeting the twin challenges of global competition and a low -carbon future. Whilst the 
islands do not fit well within the mainland ‘growth’ context, it is nevertheless Aims  4. Creating a more competitive, diverse and resilient economy based on an 
exceptional and inspirational environment that can adapt to change and 
challenges and maximise opportunities by building on its strengths and 
underpinned by effective infrastructure and an appropriately available and 
skilled workforce. 
 Issues : Economy  | Community Facilities  
  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
important to create a sustainable economic environment to improve prosperity and 
productivity , and make the islands nationally and internationally competitive.  
 
315. Employment  The economy of the Isles of Scilly is unusual in many ways. It is 
remarkably self -contained and dominated by tourism , with high levels of very small 
businesses. The cost of living is high and there are low levels of unemployment. These factors make the economy particularly vulnerable to economic and financial 
shocks,  and to any downturn in the tourism trade.
 
 
316. Sustaining a successful economy will require businesses to be able to evolve and 
adapt to new challenges and to develop new opportunities. It will also be necessary to recognise that the future stability of the community is linked to  a strong economy , 
and that change will be required and therefore supported where it is necessary and sympathetic. 
 
 
317. As there are no specific essential employment developments identified in the Local Plan over the plan period, t he policies in this section seek to encourage proposals  
that will help strengthen and diversify the islands’ economy and, wherever possible, lead to a rise in average incomes whilst sustaining a high- quality environment. A s 
the quality of the environment underpins the economy, it would be inappropriate to encourage any development that threatens to undermine its world- class status.  In 
setting out a positive framework to promote the sustainable growth and diversification of the economy , and enable changes for businesses, the Local Plan 
seeks to support appropriate development under Policy WC1 .
 
 
318. Given the islands’ location, size and physical environment, the options for creating a 
more competitive and diversified economy will be challenging, and it is probable that 
any enhancement of the economy will mean that successful new businesses will be trading in niche markets, will offer specialist services , or provide high- value/low -bulk 
goods. Linked to a more competitive and diversi fied economy is the provision of a 
more reliable, resilient  and year -round transport service to the mainland and 
between each island , more affordable homes,  good- quality office space,  the ability to 
recruit and retain skilled and adaptable staff , and good business support services.
 
 
319. The Smart Islands programme and similar sustainable programmes , as well as the 
availability of superfast broadband,  provide an opportunity  to diversify the economy 
and create employment opportunities that offer higher -skilled and better -paid jobs ; 
through, for example, enabling a range of research, technology and knowledge-based business es and organisations to develop or relocate to the Isles of Scilly. The 
Smart Islands programme in particular provides a significant economic opportunity 
that responds positively to national policy and takes advantage of the geographic 
location and small scale of the Isles of Scilly. The concept of Smart Islands positions the Isles of Scilly as an innovation test -bed, providing a place where new innovative  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
systems and technologies can be tested and developed , then replicated elsewhere 
in the UK and beyond. The Smart Islands initiative has been recognised by Central 
Government in the 2017 Industrial Strategy ‘ Building a Britain F it for the F uture ’,61 
and has the potential to support a sustainable economic future for the islands .  
 
320. Agriculture and horticulture, through flower -growing in particular, has helped create 
the islands’ distinctive landscape. Sustainable farming practices are essential for maintaining the characteristic landscapes of the islands . Traditionally , farming on the 
islands has been on a small scale , and it has limited capacity for physical expansion. 
However, farming remains an important aspect of what makes Scilly  distinct and 
contribut es to its sustainability and self -sufficiency. Similarly, fishing is an in 
important part of the islands’ culture and heritage, and is practised on a small scale. Supporting the growth and diversification of agriculture,  horticulture and fishing,  
particularly where it contributes to local food production, is critical to the islands ’ 
future and long- term prosperity.
 
 
321. Tourism over the plan period is likely to remain the largest part of the economy , and 
so it is especially important that the tourism s ector is supported in improving the 
quality of its offer , and that it responds to the expectations of visitors. A key 
challenge for tourism is to maximi se the quality of its product and provide an offer 
that appeals to a range of visitors, including opening up to, or creating, new tourism markets and niches. Improving quality, attracting new markets, extending the season and improving productivity will res ult in a more resilient, competitive and sustainable 
visitor economy, which in turn provides better  career opportunities and wages.
 
 
322. Policy WC1  sets out a general employment policy to apply to all types of 
employment development. Appropriate employment and business development are 
encouraged where they avoid negative impacts , so that the economic benefits 
arising from the islands’ exceptional  environment can be maintained,  and its special 
qualities are not compromised.  
 
POLICY WC1  General Employment Policy  
Development proposals that strengthen, enhance and diversify the islands’ 
economy will be supported where they are appropriately designed, scaled and 
located, in accordance with other policies in the Local Plan . 
 
323. Where businesses grow and intensify their activity , support will be given to extend or 
provide new premises , provided there is no unacceptable impact on the appearance 
and character of the landscape and other special island qualities. The aim of the Local Plan i s to enable successful businesses to expand appropriately without 
causing harm. Encouragement will be given to home- based businesses, the 
 
61 CE47 Industrial Strategy White Paper,  2018   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
expansion of existing businesses , as well as new development in response to 
economic opportunities.   
 
324. Home -Based Busi nesses  Where development can be accommodated as 
part of a residential use or it is compatible with the area, then it will be supported 
under Policy WC2.  The impacts of the business w ill require  that the capacity of the 
infrastructure and road network , including car parking and other infrastructure 
pressures , is acceptable,  and that the use does not harm the amenity of the area,  or 
result in visual harm to the landscape as a result of extensions or polluting activities , 
including noise, odour and light.  
POLICY WC2  Home -Based Businesses  
(1) Small -scale home -based businesses will be supported in residential properties 
including:  
a) the change of use of existing buildings, or  
b) small -scale extensions, or  
c) the use of ancillary buildings where they are well  related to existing 
buildings ; or  
d) new buildings within the domestic curtilage, where no suitable buildings 
exist for conversio n. 
(2) Development proposals will be supported  if there are no unacceptable 
adverse impacts as a result of the specific use, in accordance with other relevant 
policies in the Local Plan.  
 
325. New Employment  Development  There are a number of existing 
employment sites across the inhabited islands; these have a variety of business or 
storage uses. Such  sites comprise an important element of the island economy and 
provide local job opportunities. Within the boundaries of existing employment  sites, 
proposals for redevelopment or intensification through extensions or new buildings will be permitted,  provided there is no significant harm to the landscape,  and that 
proposals deal comprehensively with the whole site. Proposal s that involve the 
extension of the site boundary into the countryside will be considered on their 
individual merits. Open storage will only be permitted if it is not visually intrusive.  
 
326. In order to minimise the wider impacts of new employment developments, it is 
appropriate to encourage these to be located in already built -up areas. This would 
minimise both visual impacts and the need for new infrastructure, as well as reduce 
the number of vehicle movements, as such locations are more likely to be accessible to the islands’ workforce. Proposals for  new employment developments are 
supported under Policy WC3, where it is appropriate to steer such development into 
already built -up areas, or areas where harm to the wider landscape can be 
minimised, unless it can be demonstrated that a rural site is necessary due to the 
nature of the business proposal.   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
POLICY WC3 New Employment Development  
(1) The redevelopment  or extension of buildings or erection of new buildings for 
employment use will be permitted provided that proposals accord with Policy 
WC1, and where :  
a) it is well integrated within an existing settlement; or  
b) it is in the countryside where the business activ ity and scale is appropriate 
to its location and demonstrates a functional and/or operational 
requirement to be in such a location; or  
c) it is an extension to an existing business where relocation would be 
impractical or unviable; and in all cases  
d) it does not result in an unacceptable impact on the environment or 
residential amenities , in accordance with other relevant policies within the 
Local Plan .   
 
327. On St Mary’s i t is important that Porthmellon Business Park/Industrial Estate is  
safeguarded as an important resource for the islands. Policy WC4  seeks to ensure 
that this site remains available for prospective businesses  and industrial uses . Policy 
WC4  seeks to safeguard other parts of the islands from industrial or commercial 
development , by minimising  the need to develop new sites. Protecting business and 
industrial sites on any of t he islands, from alternative uses , ensures that the impact 
upon residential amenity , as well as on landscape character and environmental 
quality , is minimised.  
 
POLICY WC4 Alternative Uses for Business or 
Industrial  Land and Buildings  
(1) On St Mary’s proposals that result in the loss of business or industrial premises 
or land, within Porthmellon Business Park/Industrial Estate, as identified on the 
Policies Map, will only be permitted where :  
a) a clear case is made that the premises site is no longer required to meet the 
economic needs of the islands’ ; or 
b) the current activity is causing or could cause  harm to the character of the 
area or the amenities of residents;  or 
c) it would result in the provision of better quality premises or space as part of 
a mixed use scheme;  
d) it would not result in the loss of existing car parking or the free movement of 
vehicles; and  
e) it would not have a significant detrimental impact on the  integrity and  
operation of any  remaining businesses.  
 
(2) On the Off -Islands, proposals that result in the loss of lawfully operating 
business use or land essential for a viable and lawfully operating use or business, 
will be permitted where it accords with a)-e) above.  
  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
328. Tourism The Local Plan aims to support the islands’ ambition to be an 
internationally competitive visitor destination, capitalising on Scilly’s  exceptional 
environment. As such, the Local Plan will seek to support  the development and 
diversification of sustainable tourism , leisure  and recreational  developments that 
benefit the economy of the islands,  to match and protect its exceptional environment. 
Support will therefore be given to proposals for the provision of tourist and visitor 
facilities in appropriate locations where these cannot be met by existing facilities;  as 
well as  for the retention and development of local services and community facilities , 
which could include local shops, meeting places, sports venues, cultural buildings, public houses and places of worship.   
329. A strong tourism economy will help support and maintain services and community 
facilities on the islands, especially on the off -islands , and contribute to the 
management of the environment. Fundamentally , tourism supports vital transport 
links connecting the islands to the mainland,  as well as between the islands.   
 
330. Given the importance of tourism , it is essential  that the tourism sector is ready to 
continually improve its offer and respond to the needs of visitors. New tourism 
development should enrich and enhance the islands’  assets and resources , rather 
than harming the very character, quality and beauty that make them attractive to visitors and residents.  
 
331. New visitor accommodation will be supported where it improves the quality and choice of existing tourism and responds to the changing needs and expectations of visitors , without reducing the housing stock available to meet the communi ty’s 
needs . It will be important to ensure a balance between the types of  accommodation 
offered, to appeal to the widest range of visitors . There is an expectation that new 
tourism accommodation will be sustainable in terms of water and energy usage, and proposals must comply with Policies SS1 and SS2.  
 
332. To sustain the islands as a sustainable and competitive visitor destination, it is 
necessary to support, wherever appropriate, improvements to existing visitor accommodation. Development proposals, however, that would result in the loss of 
existing  housing stock will be resisted,  whether this is serviced accommodation or 
self-catering, as this can exacerbate the housing problems of the islands. Reverting 
holiday letting accommodation back to permanent residential use , and resisting the 
loss of permanent homes to other forms of tourism accommodation, can have 
benefits of reducing the need for mor e housing development.  
 
333. The re- use or extension of existing tourism accommodation and the provision of 
appropriately designed, scaled and sited new buildings can play an important part in 
the tourism industry , through the creation of self -catering accommodation or local 
craft or artists’ studios, for example. Such development needs to be sensitively designed and sited so as to not have an adverse impact on the landscape,  as 
required in Policy OE1 and Policy SS2.  
  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
334. The provision of new or the expansion of exi sting tourist accommodation sites, 
including camping, chalets or other forms of self -catering accommodation, may 
cause visual intrusion and harm to the landscape. This  impact  could, in some 
circumstances, be minimised by effective, high- quality screening. It would,  however , 
be inappropriate to allow the rapid expansion of such sites , due to the scale of the 
landscape and the likel ihood of  harm.  
 
335. Proposals should help support other elements of the rural economy. For example,  
the extension of a public house t o provide tourist accommodation may help to 
support viability, which in turn will benefit the local community.  
 
336. Staff accommodation is an important aspect of supporting the tourism industry. 
Where new or expansions of businesses are proposed that require additional staff accommodation,  this would need to be in accordance with Policy LC4 . If 
accommodation approved or already provided is no longer needed to support a 
business, Policy LC5 seeks to ensure that any change of use meets local housing 
needs , unless it is otherwise demonstrated to meet the criteria for other uses.  
 
POLICY WC5 Visitor Economy and Tourism 
Developments  
(1) Proposals for  new or upgraded tourism development will be permitted where 
they:  
a) make a positive contribution to  creating a sustainable, diverse and modern 
tourism economy; and  
b) are located in sustainable an d accessible locations; and  
c) are appropriate to the site and its surroundings in terms of activity, scale 
and design; and  
d) do not result in an unacceptable impact on the environment or residential 
amenities , in accordance with other relevant policies in the  Local Plan; and  
e) in the case of conversions, do not result in the loss of homes that would 
otherwise be available for permanent occupation, unless there are wider 
public benefits demonstrated to offset the loss of permanently available 
homes.    
 
(2) Proposals for tourism development s will be particularly encouraged subject to 
a) – e) above , and where it is demonstrated that they would:  
 
a) extend the tourism season and increase productivity and wages in tourism;  
b) support the promotion and interpretation  of the island s’ heritage;  and 
c) provide a viable and appropriate use for under -used buildings where they 
can be converted and are worthy of retention , and in accordance with 
Policy SS3.  
 
(3) In relation to serviced accommodation (hotels or guesthouses) deve lopment 
proposals that would involve the loss of existing and lawfully operating serviced 
accommodation, either in whole or in part, will only be permitted where:   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
a) an alternative form of tourism accommodation, including self -catering 
accommodation is provid ed, which is of benefit to the islands’ overall 
tourism accommodation offer and where any existing element of permanent 
residential accommodation (e.g. for owners or staff) is retained; or  
b) it is for another economic, community or mixed economic and commun ity 
uses (including retail, leisure,  restaurant or café) providing it complies with 
(1) a)-e).  
 
(4) Proposals for the change of use of lawfully operating serviced accommodation 
to residential dwellings will only be permitted where the accommodation is for the 
permanent occupation by staff or is otherwise meeting a local housing need, in 
which case an  occupancy restriction will be imposed.  
 
(5) Proposals for a change of use of a dwelling where an informal bed and 
breakfast has been operating (and has not been subject to formal planning 
approval) or for any additional holiday letting accommodation with in the curtilage, 
will not be permitted under (1) above, unless a certificate of lawful use has been 
obtained to demonstrate that the use of the property as a C1 guesthouse is lawful.  
 
(6) In all cases, proposals must demonstrate a reduction in waste, water and 
energy consumption, supported by the incorporation of clear sustainable design 
measures, in accordance with Policies SS1 and SS2. Applications will need to be 
supported by justification as to how the above is being addressed by the proposal.  
 
Monitoring and 
Implementation 
337. The Local Plan’s policies will be implemented in two ways. Firstly, the plan has a 
strategic policy to deliver 105 affordable homes over the plan period, through land 
specifically allocated for housing as well as through windfall sites.  Secondly, its development management policies set detailed and specific criteria for  types of 
development or specific planning issues, against which (alongside other  statutory 
development plan policies, national policies and material considerations)  planning 
applications for development will be assessed.  
 
338. The Council of the Isles of Scilly have a statutory responsibility to set the overall 
parameters  in terms of monitoring. Monitoring of the Local Plan takes place on an 
annual  basis.  Within this context, in order to understand the Plan’s impact on the 
islands’, the impact and effectiveness of its policies will be regularly monitored.  
Monitoring is an important part of the Local Plan process, helping to ensure that the  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
Plan remains relevant, effective and up to date. The way in which we will monitor the 
Local Plan’s policies is set out in the Monitoring Framework below.  
 
339. Particular attention will be paid to monitoring the indicative level of need for  
affordable housing and the number of affordable dwellings permitted each year. This  
reflects the priority which the Plan gives to providing affordable housing to meet local  
needs. Policy MI -LC1 sets out the indicators that will be used to determine whether  
affordable housing need is being met and the process for determining whether a review of the Plan may be required.  
 
340. Reflecting experience of rural affordable housing delivery, in applying policy M1- S1 
the Local Planning Authority will have regard to:  a) the cumulative number of 
affordable dwellings that have been permitted since the start of the plan period;  and 
b) any affordable dwellings under construction and completions since the start of the 
plan period.  
 
341. If monitoring shows that affordable housing delivery is below the threshold set out in 
the policy, evidence from up to date housing need surveys  will be assessed. If this 
also indicates that t here is a shortfall in the delivery against  proven need then it will 
help to decide to trigger a rev iew. 
 
MI1: Monitoring and Review of Affordable Housing 
Need and Provision  
(1) The Local Planning Authority will review, and if necessary, update the plan 
within 5 years of its adoption. Until the plan is reviewed, and if necessary updated, 
permission will not be granted for more than 105 new homes (including any 
already granted perm ission since the start of the plan period).  
The review will include (but will not necessarily be limited to):  
a) An assessment to understand the impact of recreational pressures on the 
islands’ natural environment designations and their habitats and species 
likely to arise from (a) more than 105 new homes ; and (b) tourist activity 
and the potential for any necessary mitigation measures; and  
b) An assessment of the potential for the plan to support maximisation of 
renewable energy in the Isles of Scilly.   
342. In order to report the results of monitoring the Local Planning Authority will produce an Authority Monitoring Report (AMR) which will specifically detail the progress that has been made in achieving the objective of this Local Plan. The AMR will be a guide as t o whether there is any need to make adjustments to the Plan or particular 
policies and what changes should be proposed at the next review.  
 
343. The Local Planning Authority will also monitor the impact of planning application 
(development management) decisions and appeal decisions on a continuous basis  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
against the objectives underpinning the policies contained in this Local Plan. The 
Authority will do this by using its Planning Application database (Uniform ) which is 
used to record all planning applications. U niform  is linked to the Authority’s 
Geographical Information System (GIS) which maps all relevant natural and built environment resource constraints and designations which, along with relevant planning policies, inform decisions made in response to planning applications. In addition to monitoring local changes, the Authority will need to respond to any relevant changes in Government policy and r eview policies accordingly.  
 
344. 
The Monitoring Framework  The indicators set out in the Monitoring 
Framework will be used to monitor the impact of the policies within each section of the Local Plan. The majority of indicators are relevant to numerous policies and 
these links are shown in the first  column of the Framework.  
   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
Page Left Blank  
 
   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
 
Isles of Scilly Local Plan 2015 -2030 Monitoring (Calendar Year)  As of end of December in each calendar year  
Statistics at Point of Adoption  Source  2019  2020  2021  2022  2023  2024  2025  
                  
1. Population and Demography  
                  
Population  
Total  
Census/ONS:  2302              
St Mary's  1723              
St Agnes  85             
Bryher  84             
Tresco  175             
St Martins  136             
                  
Indices of Deprivation (LD - Least Deprived, MD - Most Deprived)  
Overall Indices of Multiple Deprivation (IMD) Score  
Indices of Multiple 
Deprivation  40% LD              
Income  10% LD              
Employment  10% LD              
Education  20% LD              
Health  10% LD              
Crime  30% LD              
Housing  30% MD              
Environment  10% MD              
Income Deprivation (Children)  10% LD              
Income Deprivation (Old People)  20% LD              
                  
Housing  
No of Households  SHMA  989              Information Classification: PUBLIC 
Second Homes  195             
Other Homes' assumed to be holiday lets  190             
Privately Owned/Shared  412             
Social Rented Homes  187             
Private Rented Homes  390             
No on Council Tax Database  Council Tax and 
NDR (Internal 
ONLY)                
No Paying Non -Domestic Rates                
No on Council Housing Waiting List  Housing Department 59             
No of Priority Cases on Council House Waiting List  12             
                  
2. Designations  
                  
Historic  
Total Heritage at Risk Entries  
Link 32             
Scheduled Monuments  238             
At Risk  32             
Conservation Area  1             
At Risk  0             
Listed Buildings  128             
At Risk  4             
Grade i  4             
At Risk  2             
Grade ii*  8             
At Risk  0             
Grade ii  116             
At Risk  1             
Registered Parks  1             
At Risk  0              Information Classification: PUBLIC 
Protected Wrecks  5             
At Risk  0             
                  
Natural Environment  
SSSI  
Link  26             
Total area (ha)  558.12              
Favourable condition  334.41              
Unfavourable Condition - Recovering  223.71              
Unfavourable Condition - No Change  0             
Unfavourable Condition - Decline  0             
Part Destroyed  0             
Destroyed  0             
SAC Link  1             
MCZ  Link  1             
SPA IFCA  1             
Bat Roosts  AONB Management 
Plan 
Monitoring/IoSWT  28             
TPOs  Uniform/ArcGIS  1             
                  
3. Policy Monitoring  
                 
Sustainable Scilly Policies (SS1 - SS10)  
Sustainable Design Measures submitted or conditioned  16             
Biodiversity Enhancements submitted or conditioned  15             
Site Waste Management Plans submitted or conditioned  21             
Travel Plan submitted or conditioned  0  0           
Transport Assessment submitted or conditioned  0  0           
                   Information Classification: PUBLIC 
Infrastructure  
Environment Policies (OE1 - OE7)  
Permitted Renewable Energy Developments  Uniform  1              
Kw Output    5415              
Permitted Water Infrastructure Developments  Uniform  0             
Completed Water Infrastructure Developments  Building Control  0             
Permitted Waste Management Facility  Uniform  0             
Completed Waste management facility  Building Control  0             
Permitted Sewage Infrastructure  Uniform  0             
Completed Sewage Infrastructure  Building Control  0             
Permitted Minerals Development  Uniform  0             
                  
Housing  
Living Communities Policies (LC1 - LC10)  
Permitted Total C3 Dwellings  Uniform  0             
Completed Total C3 Dwellings  Building Control  0             
Permitted S106 Dwellings  Uniform  0             
Completed S106 Dwellings  Building Control  0             
Permitted Staff Accommodation  Uniform  1              
Completed Staff Accommodation  Building Control  0             
Permitted Restricted Local Need Dwellings (Not S106)  Uniform  0             
Completed Restricted Local Need Dwellings (Not S106)  Building Control  0             
Permitted Holiday let Dwellings  Uniform  7              
Completed Holiday Let Dwellings  Building Control  0             
Permitted Accessible dwellings  Uniform  0             
Completed Accessible dwellings  Building Control  0             
Any NEW C3 Dwellings Permitted above max NDSS  Uniform  1             
Any NEW C3 Dwellings Permitted below min. NDSS  Uniform  0             
Domestic Extensions permitted above max NDSS  Uniform  2             
Domestic Extensions permitted below min NDSS  Uniform  0              Information Classification: PUBLIC 
                  
Economy  
Working Community Policies (WC1 - WC5)  
No of Permission for Net -gains in employment  (not 
holiday lets)  
Uniform  1              
B1 Use Class  44.75              
B2 Use Class                
B8 Use Class  28.12              
Sui Generis                
No of Permission for Net -loss in employment  (not 
holiday lets)  
Uniform  0             
B1 Use Class  (square metres)                
B2 Use Class  (square metres)                
B8 Use Class  (square metres)                
Other Mixed/Sui Generis  (square metres)                
Net gains in employment completed  Building Control  1              
Net-loss in employment completed  0             
No of Permission for Net -gains in retail  
Uniform  0              
A1 Use Class  (square metres)                
A2 Use Class  (square metres)                
A3 Use Class  (square metres)                
A4 Use Class  (square metres)  22.5             
A5 Use Class  (square metres)                
Other Mixed/sui Generis  (square metres)                
No of Permission for Net -loss in retail  
Uniform  0             
A1 Use Class  (square metres)                
A2 Use Class  (square metres)                
A3 Use Class  (square metres)  72.87              
A4 Use Class  (square metres)                 Information Classification: PUBLIC 
A5 Use Class  (square metres)                
Other Mixed/sui Generis  (square metres)                
Net-gains in retail completed  Building Control  0             
Net-loss in retail completed  0             
Net gains in agriculture permitted  Uniform  1              
Net-loss in agriculture permitted  0             
Net gains in agriculture completed  Building Control  1              
Net-loss in agriculture completed                
No of permission for Net Gains in C Uses (not C3 Uses)  
Uniform  0             
C1 Use Class (square metres)                
C2 Use Class (square metres)                
C2a Use Class (square metres)                
C4 Hotel Guest Houses/Hotels (square metres)                
No of permission for Net Losses in C Uses (not C3 
Uses)  
Uniform  0             
C1 Use Class (square metres)                
C2 Use Class (square metres)                
C2a Use Class (square metres)                
C4 Hotel Guest Houses/Hotels (square metres)                
Net Gains in C Uses Completed  Building Control                
Net Losses in C Uses Completed                
 
 
 
  Information Classification: PUBLIC 
 
   
 
 