 www.leeds.gov.uk/localplan
Adoption Version
Leeds Local Plan  
Development Plan Document 
September 2019Core Strategy Selective ReviewProposed Policy and Paragraph Changes to the Adopted Leeds 
Core Strategy 2014  
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
Text for insertion after the Contents Page 
  Updating the Core Strategy  
i. T
he Core Strategy was originally adopted in November 2014
ii. A
n update of the Core Strategy was adopted in 2019, which focussed on the following
selected areas of policy:
• Reviewing the housing requirement in Policy SP6, with a Plan period of 2017 – 2033
• Consequential changes to Policy SP7 concerning housing distribution
• Introducing new minimum space standards for new housing in Policy H9 and new
accessibility standards in Policy H10
• Updating policy requirements for affordable housing by amending Policy H5
• Reviewing the requirement for green  space in new housing developments by
amending Policy G4 and making minor amendments to Policies G5 and G6
• Incorporating new national policy regarding Code for Sustainable Homes by updating
the wording of Policy EN2
• Introducing a new Policy for Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure EN8
ii. T
he updated policies and text have been incorporated into this single updated Core
Strate gy Document
i
v. It should be noted that the Plan period of 2017 - 2033 applies to Policy SP6.
The percentages relating to the distribution of housing land and allocationscontained in Policy SP7 apply to the period 2012 to 2033. Other Policies of t
he
pl
an adopted in 2014 continue to work to the original plan period of 2012 -
2028. These include policies SP9 and EC2 which set out the requir ed
q
uantities of general employment and office space; policy H7 which sets t he
q
uantity of accommodation required f or Gypsy and Travellers and Travelli ng
S
howpeople and policy EN6 which sets out quantities of waste to be pl anned
f
or. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Policy  SP6:  Review of Leeds’ Housing  Requirement  [The following text will replace section 4.6 of the Core Strategy 2014]  
 
4.6. Housing Development  
 
4.6.1.  It is anticipated that the population of Leeds will rise from  784,458 in 2017 to 
856,819 in 2033.  This raises  major  challenges  for Leeds  in seeking  to meet  the 
complex demographic needs of the ex isting population, together with the 
implications of an ageing and growing population over the Plan period. It is 
important that planning for such growth forms part of an overall strategy, which gives emphasis not only to a sufficient housing land supply i n appropriate 
locations but also the quality, type and affordability of homes in meeting local needs. This needs to be achieved within an overall framework, which gives priority to delivering sustainable development, promoting regeneration and job growth, whilst maintaining local character, distinctiveness and environmental 
quality.  
 
4.6.2.  Within this context, the following Housing growth principles have been established.  
i. Ensure housing growth is linked to the creation of sustainable neighbourhoods throughout the City (see Spatial Policy  1), 
ii. Set a realistic  target  for the delivery  of new homes  (see Spatial  Policy  6), 
iii. Ensure housing growth targets reflect local housing needs, now and in the future,  in terms  of tenure,  type and size, (see Spatial  Policy  6 and Policy  H4), 
iv. Enhance the distinctiveness of existing neighbourhoods and quality of life 
of local communities through the design and standard of new homes (see 
Policies H9, H10, P10 and EN2),  
v. Facilitate the development of brownfield and regeneration sites, (see Spatial Policies 1, 3 and 6), 
vi. Agree a range of mechanisms to deliver additional affordable homes, (see Policy  H5), 
vii. Work  in partnership  to find ways  to facilitate  housing  growth  (see Section  6 
Implementation and Delivery) . 
 
4.6.3.  Spatial  Policy  6 sets out the housing  requirement  for Leeds  over the period 2017  
– 2033.  The requirement  draws  upon evidence of the Strategic  Housing  Market 
Assessment 2017 and Government consultation paper “Building the Right Homes in the Right Places”. The policy will be implemented through the identification of land supply in the Site Allocations Plan and a Housing Implementation  Strategy.  Regard will be had also to past delivery of housing 
within each HMCA between 1st April 2012 and 31st March 2017.  
 
4.6.4.  The net requirement  of 51,952 dwellings  is converted to a gross  requirement  by 
taking account of the anticipated loss of dwellings over the plan period, estimated as 150 dwellings per annum based on recent trends of demolition in Leeds. To account for demolitions and other dwelling losses of 150 dwellings per annum (2,400 over the  plan period) the gross housing requirement for the 
plan period of 2017 – 2033 is 54,352  dwellings.  
 
4.6.5.  As a large  post-industrial  city Leeds  will continue to experience continual  urban 
regeneration and renaissance involving the recycling of prev iously developed 
land (PDL) for windfall housing and other uses. Leeds has a long and well recorded history of windfall housing being delivered as a source of land for 
development.  Windfall comprises two components: dwellings of schemes of 
less than the S HLAA threshold (less than 5 dwellings in most cases) and 
dwellings of schemes that were unpredicted in the SHLAA.  This has been 
continuously monitored by the City Council since the 1980s. There is no 
evidence to change the allowance of 500 dwellings per annum set out in the original Core Strategy; the equivalent of 8,000 dwellings over the plan- period. 
This stock of supply reduces the level of land to identify from 54,352 dwellings 
(gross) to 46,352 dwellings (gross).  
 
4.6.6.  In reflecting the wider and longer term aspirations of the District (and its City 
Region role) the housing requirement takes into account the benefits of 
economic uplift. However, the Council will need to closely monitor the delivery and implementation of the housing requirement, including the roles and responsibilities of house builders throughout Leeds, seek to ensure effective build -out rates and assess any causes of under -delivery. Notwithstanding this, 
departure from the European Union, could potentially impact upon these aspirations, r equiring a local solutions approach. This overall approach is 
intended to ensure that the City is as resilient as possible in delivering agreed priorities whilst managing unforeseen change against the context of national planning policy and its penalties f or under delivery.  
 
 
SPATIAL POLICY 6: THE HOUSING REQUIREMENT AND ALLOCATION OF HOUSING LAND  
 
The provision of 51,952 (net) new dwellings will be accommodated between 2017 and 2033,  with a target  that 3,247  dwellings  per year should be delivered.  
 
Delive ry of 500 dwellings  per annum  (8,000  over the plan period)  is anticipated 
on small and unidentified sites.  
 
Guided by the Settlement Hierarc hy, the Council will identify 46,352 dwellings 
(gross) to support the distribution in Spatial Policy 7, using the following 
considerations:  
i. Sustainable locations (which meet standards of public transport accessibility – see the Well Connected City chapter), supported by 
existing or access to new local facilities and services, (including Educational and Health Infrastr ucture),  
ii. Preference for brownfield and regeneration sites,  
iii. The least impact on Green Belt  purposes,  
iv. Opportunities to reinforce or enhance the distinctiveness of existing neighbourhoods  and quality  of life of local communities  through the design 
and standard of new  homes,  
v. The need for realistic lead- in-times and build- out-rates for housing 
construction,  
vi. The least negative and most positive impacts on green infrastructure, green corridors, green space and nature conservation,  
vii. Avoiding areas of flood risk and only where this is not possible, then mitigating flood risk.  
 
 Distribution of Housing Land 
 
4.6.7.  The Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) 2017 shows there are 
unmet  housing  needs  for affordable housing  and for a range of types  and sizes 
of market dwellings in all parts of Leeds. The Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) 2017 shows that Leeds has a large stock of brownfield housing sites within the Main Urban Area. However, in providing a choice and compet ition in the market for land and to meet local needs throughout the 
District the delivery of the spatial strategy of the Core Strategy will depend upon having a wide portfolio of sites in different housing  markets.  
 
4.6.8.  Policy SP7 provides an indication of the overall scale and distribution of 
development  that will need to be planned for (combining  information from the 
SHMA and SHLAA) in different Housing Market Characteristic Areas. The percentage figures in the second column, are intended as a guide rather than 
rigid targets. These areas were agreed through the SHMA 2011 and reflect functional submarkets. The distribution reflects the quantum of housing growth that accord with the housing growth principles and overall spatial strategy (the focus upon opportunities within the Settlement Hierarchy) and the potential availability of suitable sites (derived from the SHLAA). Areas with the highest potential include the City Centre, Inner Areas, North Leeds and East Leeds where opportunities for development of prev iously developed land and 
regeneration are greatest. Major growth can also be accommodated in the outer  
areas  of Outer  South East and Outer  South  West  including  a combination of 
previously developed land opportunities in the Major Settlements but urban extensions  too. These provide sustainable locations  in terms  of public  transport 
connections, proximity to jobs and avoidance of special landscape. The other areas  provide opportunity  for modest  growth,  including  urban  extensions  where 
appropriate.  
  SPATIAL POLICY 7: DISTRIBUTION OF HOUSING LAND AND ALLOCATIONS  
 
The distribution of housing (excluding windfall) will be planned based on Housing Market Characteristic Areas as follows:  
 
Housing Market Characteristic Area  Percentage  
Aireborough  3% 
City Centre  15.5%  
East Leeds  17% 
Inner Area  15% 
North Leeds  9% 
Outer North East  8% 
Outer North West  3% 
Outer South  4% 
Outer South East  7% 
Outer South West  11% 
Outer West  7% 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Policy  H5: Review of Affordable Housing  Policy  [The following text will replace paragraphs 5.2.12 – 5.2.17 of the Core Strategy 2014.]  
 
 Affordable Housing 
 
5.2.12 In conformity with national planning guidance, affordable housing will be 
required to meet  local needs  informed by the Leeds  Strategic  Housing  Market 
Assessment (SHMA 2017) and the Economic Viability Study  2017.  
 
5.2.13 The Strategic Housing Market Assessment (2017) identifies an annual need of 1230 affordable housing dwellings across Leeds. It also suggests that 67.2% of affordable dw ellings are needed for affordable or social rent (as 
defined in the NPPF . See definitions in Affordable Housing Definitions Table 
in the Glossary. ), and 32.8% are needed for intermediate tenures as defined 
in the NPPF  Policy H5 translates this need into requirements for affordable 
housing that have been viability tested. It should be noted that Leeds City Council is investing heavily to improve the City Centre and Inner Areas of Leeds and it is expected that progressive regeneration activity will improve the strength of these housing markets so that higher affordable housing targets can be achieved through Plan Review in the early 2020s. Targets are set for provision of affordable housing in the 4 affordable zones with a mix of affordable types relating to l ow earnings of  households.  
 
5.2.14 The 40% and 60% requirement for a mix of Intermediate and Social Rented affordable dwellings (as defined by the NPPF), means that developers are expected to provide a mix of affordable dwellings that will be affordable to households on low and very low earnings or income. Social Rented (as defined by the NPPF) is the label for types of affordable housing typically  
rented  by registered  providers  which  is affordable  to very low earning and low 
income households. Intermediate affordable housing sits between the price of market housing and the price of social rented affordable housing. Typically intermediate affordable housing will include shared ownership and other  
discounted sale products.  The City Council  calculates  benchmark  prices to 
establish the price at which Social Rented and Intermediate dwellings should  
be made  available  by developers.  In practice  this means  that dwellings should 
be made available by developers to Registered Providers at prices which are affordable enough for households on these earnings: households on lower  
quartile  earnings  for Intermediate  affordable  housing;  households  on lower 
decile earnings for Social Rented affordable housing. Registered Providers  
are then expected to make  the affordable dwellings available  for the tenures  
expected.  
 
5.2.15 For affordable  dwellings  to be suitably  integrated throughout  the development 
this means that the affordable dwellings ought to be mixed in with the corresponding size and type of market dwellings on a site. For example, in a development with a mix of houses and flats, the affordable provision should be partly mixed in with the houses and partly with the flats.  
 
5.2.16 Build  to rent developments  in Leeds  can either  provide affordable housing  on- 
site as advised in national  guidance  or in line with the first paragraphs  of Policy  H5. If developers prefer to pay a commuted sum in lieu of on- site provision, 
this should be calculated on the basis of paragraph 5.2. 17.4. Regarding 
requirements in national gui dance, consultation currently suggests 20% of 
total dwellings as “Affordable Private Rent” dwellings with rents to be 20% 
lower than market rents in the local area and agreement of eligibility criteria with secure arrangements that continue in perpetuity.  
 
5.2.17 For development schemes led by Registered Providers for social housing  the 
Council will take a flexible approach to determining the appropriate quantity and type of affordable housing taking into account the needs of the area and the wider benefits of  development.  
 
5.2.17.1  Purpose built student accommodation will not be required to provide affordable  housing.  
 
5.2.17.2  Secure arrangements in the form of S106 agreements, must be agreed to 
ensure delivery and that affordability embodied within affordable housing is 
maintained for future people of Leeds in housing need in perpetuity.  
 
5.2.17.3  Applicants may choose to demonstrate via individual viability appraisals that  
there are exceptional site circumstances which mean the affordable housing  
target  cannot  be met on specific schemes . In such  cases,  where evidence in 
accordance with the National Planning Guidance principles for carrying out a 
viability assessment is submitted, a departure from the affordable housing  
policy may be justified. Where developments are expected to take more than 
five years to complete, the Council will normally expect permitted schemes  to 
make  provision for a review  of the scheme’s  viability,  to determine whether the 
level of affordable housing being provided across the scheme as a whole is appropri ate. The Government currently expects Local Plan policies to be 
reviewed after 5 years and the minimum targets set out in Policy H5 are likely to be reviewed in any event as part of this  process.  
 
5.2.17.4  As a general principle, commuted sums should be calculated to ensure that 
the required quantity and type of affordable dwellings can be delivered in the 
locality of the development, assuming involvement of Registered Providers. This will be equivalent to the differential between affordable price and market price ( free of restrictions) with adjustment for any locality delivery costs. 
Locality  can be defined as the surrounding  streets  or whether  the site is within 
a defined settlement or established neighbourhood but this will be a matter of judgement depending on size of site and character of the area; postcode sector boundaries may be helpful indicators. Locality is important for calculating  sums not necessarily  for determining  where commuted  sum money 
is spent, which may include strategic priorities elsewhere in Leeds. Provision 
that results in 4 or less affordable dwellings may be converted into an equivalent financial  contribution.   
POLICY H5: AFFORDABLE HOUSING  
On major * housing developments, affordable housing provision should be provided 
on-site at the target levels specified in the following zones:  
 
Zone  Minimum Target  
1 35% 
2 15% 
3 7% 
4 7% 
 
The mix of affordable housing should be designed to meet the identified needs of 
households as follows:  
  40% affordable housing for Intermediate or equivalent affordable tenures  
 60% affordable housing for Social Rented or equivalent affordable  tenures  
 
The affordable units  should be a pro-rata mix in terms  of sizes  and house types  of the 
total housing provision, unless there are specific needs which indicate otherwise, and they should be suitably integrated throughout a development  site. 
 
Affordable housing provision should be on site, unless off site provision or a financial 
contribution can be robustly justified.  
 
Build -to-rent developments shall provide either:  
 
i) on-site, according  to national  policy  advice,  currently  20% Affordable Private  Rent 
dwellings at 80% of local market rents administered by a management company 
with appropriate arrangements for identifying households in need, including city council nomination rights, which apply in perpetuity,  or 
ii) on-site, the percentage of affordable housing specified for zones 1- 4 and mix of 
Intermediate and Social Rented types of affordable housing set out in the first paragraphs of this Policy  at affordable housing benchmark rents  administered by 
either a registered provider or a management company with appropriate arrangements for identifying households in need, including City Council nomination rights, which apply in perpetuity , or 
iii) a commuted sum in lieu of on -site provision of affordable housing of option ii). 
  
Departures from this policy should be justified by evidence of viability considerations . 
 
* Major development means either:  
• provision of 10 or more dwellings (or where the number of dwellings is not known, 
development is to be carried out on a site having an area of 0.5 hectares or more) or  
• provision of a building or buildings where the floor space to be created would be 1,000 square metres or more;  
• or development on a site  having an area of 1 hectare or more;  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
Policy  H9: New Policy  on Minimum  Space 
Standards -Nationally Described Space Standard  [The text below should be inserted after Policy H8 of the Core Strategy 2014]  
 
Minimum Space standards for new dwellings  
 
5 2.40.1  There has been growing concern that the internal space of new dwellings is 
getting smaller with implications for accessibility, for sustainability and for quality of life including health. This section seeks to improve the quality of housing provided in Leeds to create a healthy and sustainable living environment for current and future generations.  
 
5 2.40.2  Policy H9 covers internal space within new dwellings setting requirements for the Gross  Internal  (floor)  Area  of new dwellings  at a defined level of occupancy 
as well as floor areas and dimensions for key parts of the home, notably 
bedrooms, storage and floor to ceiling height. These reflect exactly the 
Nationally Described Space Standards (NDSS) of  2015.  
 
5 2.40.3  The standard  Gross  Internal  Areas  set out in Policy  H9 are organised by storey 
height  to take account  of the extra  circulation  space  needed for stairs  to upper 
floors, and deal separately with one storey dwellings (typically flats) and two 
and three storey dwellings (typically houses). These are set out in the  table 
below.  
 
5 2.40.4  Individual dwelling types are expressed with reference to the number of bedrooms (denoted as ‘b’) and the number of bedspaces (or people) that  can 
be accommodated within these bedrooms (denoted as ‘p’). A three bedroom (3b) home with one double bedroom (providing two bed spaces) and two single bedrooms (each providing one bed space) is therefore described as 3b4p.  
 
5 2.40.5  This allows for different combinations of single and double/twin bedrooms to be 
reflected in the minimum Gross Internal Area standards. The breakdown of the minimum Gross Internal Area therefore allows not only for the different combinations of bedroom size, but also for varying amounts of additional living, dining, kitchen and storage space; all of which are related to the potential  
occupancy.  
 
5 2.40.6  Regarding development of Purpose Built Student Accommodation, the  NDSS 
were not designed with student housing in mind. There are clear differences between student and general housing in that students live in student accommodation for only a fixed period of time, other accommodation (communal rooms) is often provided and there are no standards for dwellings with 7 or more bedrooms. Provision of reasonable space standards is still important for student accommodation, and this will need to be judged on a case by case basis, and via the application of any national standards t hat might be 
created in the future. Houses in multiple occupation (HMOs) are not dwellings (class C3 of the use class order), so the space standards of Policy H9 will not apply to proposals for new HMOs. Nevertheless, it is reasonable for HMOs to provide adequate levels of amenity for residents in terms of space, light and 
ventilation. Further guidance will be provided through supplementary planning guidance.  Any future changes to Government Guidance on NDSS will be taken 
into account in decision making in p lanning applications.   
5 2.40.7  Applicants may choose to demonstrate via individual viability appraisals that 
there are exceptional site circumstances which mean the minimum space standards cannot be met on specific schemes.  In such cases, where evidence in accordance with the National Planning Guidance principles for carrying out 
a viability assessment is submitted, a departure from Policy H9 may be justified.  
 
 
POLICY H9 –  MINIMUM SPACE STANDARDS  
 
All new dwellings must  comply with the following standards:  The standard requires that:  
 
a. the dwelling provides at least the gross internal floor area and built -in 
storage area set out in Table 1 below  
b. a dwelling  with two or more  bedspaces  has at least  one double  (or twin)  
bedroom  
c. in order to provide one bedspace, a single bedroom has a floor area of at least 7.5m2 and is at least 2.15m  wide 
d. in order to provide two bedspaces, a double (or twin bedroom) has a floor area of at least  11.5m2 
e. one double (or twin bedroom) is at least 2.75m wide and every other 
double (or twin) bedroom is at least 2.55m  wide 
f. any area with a headroom of less than 1.5m is not counted within the 
Gross Internal Area unless used solely for storage (if the area under the stairs is to be used for storage, assume a general floor area of 1m2 within the Gross Internal Area)  
g. any other area that is used solely for storage and has a headroom of 900 - 
1500mm  (such  as under  eaves)  is counted  at 50% of its floor area,  and any 
area lower than 900mm is not counted at  all 
h. a built -in wardrobe counts towards the Gross Internal Area and bedroom 
floor area requirements, but should not reduce the effective width of the room below the minimum widths set out above. The built -in area in excess 
of 0.72m2 in a double bedroom and 0.36m2 in a single bedroom counts towards t he built -in storage  requirement  
i. the minimum floor to ceiling height is 2.3m for at least 75% of the Gross Internal Area  
 
Departures from this policy should be justified by evidence of viability considerations  
 
Minimum gross internal floor areas and storage (m2) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Where a one person flat has a shower room rather than a bathroom, the floor area may be reduced from 39m2 to 
37m2. 
 
Development of student accommodation and houses in multiple occupation (HMOs) 
will not be subject to the space standards as set out in the Table above. Instead such 
development shoul d reflect the NDSS with appropriate adjustments to address the 
particular characteristics of these types of development. They should also meet standards of general amenity for occupiers to include adequate space, light and ventilation. Further guidance wil l be provided through a Supplementary Planning 
Document.  
 
Notes  
i. The Gross  Internal  Area  of a dwelling  is defined  as the total floor space  measured 
between the internal faces of perimeter walls that enclose the dwelling. This includes partitions, structural  elements, cupboards, ducts, flights of stairs and 
voids above stairs. The Gross Internal Area should be measured and denoted in square metres  (m2).  
ii. If the area under the stairs is to be used for storage, assume a general floor area of 1m2 within the Gross  Internal Area  
iii. The standards are organised by numbers of storeys to take account of extra circulation space needed for stairs between floors.  Number of 
bedrooms  Number 
of bed 
spaces 
(persons)  1 storey 
dwellings  2 storey 
dwellings  3 storey 
dwellings  Built in 
storage  
1b 1p 39 (37) *   1.0 
2p 50 58  1.5 
2b 3p 61 70  2.0 4p 70 79  
3b 4p 74 84 90 
2.5 5p 86 93 99 
6p 95 102 108 
4b 5p 90 97 103 
3.0 6p 99 106 112 
7p 108 115 121 
8p 117 124 130 
5b 6p 103 110 116 
3.5 7p 112 119 125 
8p 121 128 134 
6b 7p 116 123 129 4.0 8p 125 132 138  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Policy  H10:  New Policy  on Accessible Housing 
Standards  Accessible housing  
5.2.40.8  Changes to national planning policy and the Building Regulations in 2015 
enable Local Authorities to require the provision of accessible dwellings as part  
of new residential  developments  to meet  the needs  of residents.  In Leeds there 
is an evidenced  need  for housing  which is suitable for disabled people, older 
people and families with young children.  The provision of dwellings which meet 
the optional accessible housing standards provided in Part M volume 1 of the Building  Regulations can help meet this need.  
 
5.2.40.9  The optional accessible housing standard M4(2) ‘accessible and adaptable 
dwellings’ contained within Part M volume 1 of the Building Regulations  
provides a higher level of accessibility and adaptability than standard dwellings (‘standard dwellings’ are those which meet the requirements of M4(1) of Part 
M volume 1 of the Building Regulations). The optional accessible housing standard M4(3) ‘wheelchair user dwellings’ provides a standard for dwellings which are accessible for wheelchair  users or can easily be adapted to be 
suitable for wheelchair users.  
 5.2.40.10  15.8%  of households  in Leeds  contain 1 or 2 members  with a disability,  23.2% 
contain a member aged 65 years or over and 11.8% contain a child aged 4 years  or younger,  3.3%  of households  contain a wheelchair  user who requires 
adaptations to their home to ensure it is more accessible for them now or anticipate they will need adaptations in the next 5 years (SHMA Household Survey 2017). All of these residents could benefit from the design features of M4(2) accessible and adaptable dwellings, or M4(3) wheelchair user dwellings.  
 
5.2.40.11  Under the Building Regulations the housing standards contained within Part M 
volume 1 only apply generally to new -build dwellings. The Building Regulations 
define stud ent accommodation as hotel accommodation in relation to Part M, 
with accessible  hotel  accommodation, and therefore student accommodation,  
is covered by Part M volume 2 of the Building Regulations. For this reason, 
planning policy requirements for accessible housing do not apply to purpose  
built student accommodation.  
 
5.2.40.12  M4(3) of Part M volume 1 of the Building Regulations ‘wheelchair user dwellings’ provides 2  standards:  
 
• wheelchair adaptable dwellings,  
• wheelchair  accessible  dwellings.  
 
Wheelchair adaptable dwellings are homes that are designed to be easily 
adapted to meet the needs of wheelchair users. Wheelchair accessible 
dwellings are homes which are readily usable by wheelchair users at the point 
of completion, and provide all the necessary fixtures and fittings  specified by 
the standard.  National policy states that planning policy requirements for 
wheelchair accessible homes should only be applied to those dwellings where the local authority is responsible for allocating or nominating a person to live in that dwelling. Unless the Local Authority has this responsibility, wheelchair 
user dwellings required by this policy should be M4(3) wheelchair adaptable 
dwellings.  In most cases it is expected that market housing for sale and 
specific affordable dwellings provided through planning requirements will be 
wheelchair adaptable. Only where Leeds City Council is nominating a wheelchair user as an occupier will wheelchair accessible dwellings be required.  5.2.40.13  Where  M4(2) and M4(3)  dwellings  are to be provided within  the same block  or 
share the same ap proach route, the approach route and block communal 
arrangements from the highest category of dwelling  served should be  provided.  
 
5.2.40.14  Where the size of development means that the percentage requirements for M4(2) or M4(3) dwellings  generate less than 1 dwelling,  if the figure  generated 
is 0.5 of a dwelling or more this should be rounded up to 1 dwelling, if it is below 0.5 then the dwelling does not need to be  provided . 
 
5.2.40.15  To provide choice for people who require accessible housing, the breakdown of size, type and tenure of M4(2) and M4(3) dwellings should reflect the breakdown of housing proposed overall as closely as possible, unless there is evidenced need for additional accessible housing in one particular  tenure.  
 5.2.40.16  Whilst  dwellings  in accordance with the optional  accessible  housing  standards 
should be agreed in terms of their size and form on submitted drawings,  the 
provision of  accessible housing should be secured via planning condition. This 
allows the building control body to check dwellings compliance against the 
provisions of the applicable optional building regulations  standards  (M4(2) or 
M4(3)).  
 5.2.40.17  Planning conditions should specify:  
• Which and  how many dwellings  within the development are required to 
satisfy M4(2) * accessible and adaptable dwellings  standards  
• Which and  how many dwellings  within the development are required to 
satisfy M4(3) * wheelchair adaptable dwellings  standards  
• Which and  how many dwellings  within the development are required to 
satisfy M4(3) * wheelchair accessible dwellings  standards  
*contained within Part M volume 1 of the Building Regulations  
 
5.2.40.18  Applicants may choose to demonstrate via individual viability appraisals that 
there are exceptional site circumstances which mean the accessible housi ng 
requirements cannot be met on specific schemes.  In such cases, where 
evidence in accordance with the National Planning Guidance principles for carrying out a viability assessment is submitted, a departure from Policy H10 may be justified.  
 
          
 
    H10. ACCESSIBLE HOUSING STANDARDS  
 
New build residential developments should include the following proportions of 
accessible dwellings:  
 
• 30% of dwellings meet the requirements of M4(2) ‘accessible and adaptable  
dwellings’ of Part M Volume 1 of the Buil ding Regulations.  
 
• 2% of dwellings  meet  the requirement  of M4(3) ‘wheelchair user dwellings’ of  Part 
M Volume 1 of the Building Regulations.  Wheelchair user dwellings should meet 
the M4(3) wheelchair adaptable dwelling standard unless Leeds City Council is  
responsible for nominating a person to live in the dwelling.  
 
 
Where the scale of development would generate more than one accessible dwelling, 
the mix of sizes, types and tenures of M4(2) and M4(3) dwellings should reflect the 
mix of sizes,  types  and tenures of the development  as a whole  as closely  as possible  
(unless the applicant can demonstrate an evidenced need locally to provide accessible 
housing in dwellings of a particular size, type and / or tenure.  Locally will normally 
mean the Designated Neighbourhood Area, or where this is not defined, will mean 
relevant settlement, or ward if the site lies within the main urban area) .   
 
The required number,  mix and location of accessible dwellings should be clearly 
illustrated on drawings and via planni ng condition.  
 
Departures from this policy should be justified by evidence of viability considerations . 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Policy  G4: Review of Green Space in Residential 
Development  Policy  [The text below should replace paragraphs 5.5.9 – 5.5.18 of the Core Strategy 2014. ] 
 
Green Space  
 
Introduction and Aims  
 
5.5.9 The overall aim of the Core Strategy green space policies is to use the 
development process through the Local Plan to strategically deliver the best 
type and the best quality of green space to where it is most needed in Leeds.  
Standards (Surplus and Deficiencies)  
 
5.5.10 Leeds is a City which benefits from good overall provision of green space. 
However, this is not distributed evenly across the City and as a result, some 
areas  have very little local green space  and some  of it is of a poor quality.  Policy 
G3 sets standards for the quantity, accessibility and quality of green space to 
be expected in Leeds derived from evidence of Leeds’ Open Space and 
Recreation Assessment. Whilst it is recognised that the existing urban form of 
Leeds  offers limited  scope  to achieve all of the standards,  particularly  in the inner 
areas, the most needs to be made of the development opportunities that do 
arise to optimise quantity, accessibility and quality as  appropriate.  
[Nb Policy G3 which was not part of the CSSR .sits here .] 
New Housing Development  
 
5.5.11 People moving  into  an area or general  increases  in population place  a greater 
burden on existing green space. Therefore it is appropriate that new housing 
development makes provision to address this burden by 
• providing green space on-site, 
• providing green space off-site, 
• providing commuted sums in lieu of on- site provision. Sums can be used  to 
provide green space, to enhance exis ting green space or to improve 
connections to existing green space or 
• a combination of these  options.  
The calculation of green space provision in Policy G4 is based upon a green space requirement for different sizes of dwellings. Where it is agreed that only 
part of this requirement is provided as new green space (on or off -site) the 
remainder should normally be provided as a commuted sum (see below for 
calculation).  
Eligible Development  
 
5.5.12 Green space will be sought from developments of 10 or more dwellings (class 
C3 of the Use Class  Order).  Residential  institutions  (Class  C2 of the Use Class 
Order) will not be expected to provide green space. Any other  developments 
(sui generis or mix of C2 and C3 use classes) will need to be judged on their 
merits.  
 Determining if on- site or off -site provision (including contributions) will be appropriate  
 
5.5.13 Different parts of Leeds have different needs and opportunities for green  space 
provision. Inner city areas often have the highest needs and the least 
opportunities  for new provision. There will also be a number of individual site 
circumstances that will need to be considered in deciding when green  space 
ought to be provided on- site or  not. 
5.5.14 Factors requiring  on-site provision include  one or  more of the following : 
 
i) Local deficits of existing green space,  
ii) Sufficiently  large,  suitably  shaped  and reasonably  level sites to 
accommodate green space,  
iii) Distances  from existing  green spaces exceeding  the standards  of Policy  G3. 
The quality of existing green space will also need to be taken into  account,  
iv) Lack of other residential development sites nearby that could deliver green space , 
v) The development  generating a need for play facilities  that does  not currently 
exist in the  locality , or 
vi) Potential   to combine  green  space  provision with requirements for 
Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems.  
Provision of Green Space  
 
5.5.15 Provision of new green space needs to be appropriate to the needs of the 
development and locality. The key consideration will be the surpluses and/or deficiencies  of different types of green space in the local area. The standards 
of Policy G3 including accessibility distances can be used identify particular deficiencies applicable to each development site and this can help determine what types of green space ought to be provided.  
5.5.16 Determining the appropriate location of green space within a development will 
be a matter for discussion depending on the circumstances of the locality, site 
and development  proposed.  Aggregated,  fragmented spaces,  scattered  across 
developm ent sites will not be acceptable due to their limited functionality. 
However, it is recognised that there is a role for smaller areas of green space 
like ‘pocket  parks’  in densely  developed areas,  subject  to suitable  management 
arrangements being in place.  
5.5.17 It is important that any new green space of any typology is planned, situated 
and designed to make a positive contribution to the overall design concept    and 
character of  development.  
 
5.5.18 As the green space  requirement  is expressed as an amount  of green  space per 
dwelling, high density developments (65dph (net)) usually found in or on the 
edge of town centres may generate requirements for green space that cannot 
be delivered on- site. For such schemes an expected level of 20% of green 
space should be provided on-site, with the residual being provided off -site or in 
the form of a commuted sum . However, it is accepted that there may be 
particular site circumstances to justify a higher or lower quantity than 20% on-site. 
5.5.18.1  Any provision of new green space will need to be accompanied by appropriate 
arrangements to secure the on- going maintenance of the space. Where the 
City Council is asked to adopt spaces, a financial contribution will be required 
to cover maintenance. Where independent or private arrangements are t o be 
used the Council will need to be satisfied  that these are robust,  efficacious  and 
legally enforceable. In particular the Council will be need to be satisfied as to the quality of the maintenance and that any legacy arrangements associated with the private company  passing  on their obligations  or becoming insolvent  do 
not result in the Council accepting the extra maintenance cost  burden.  
5.5.18.2  Where new green space is provided it should be openly  accessible  to the public. 
Exceptions may be for operational reasons such as security of allotments or 
membership of sports  clubs.   
5.5.18.3  Where a need for play facilities is identified careful consideration should be 
given to safety and security issues. If security cannot be ensured through appropriate siting  of play facilities,  it may be appropriate to seek  a different  type 
of green  space irrespective of  need.  
5.5.18.4  Some  forms  of green space suffer  in terms  of usability  due to poor drainage (for 
example sports pitches). Any new green space should have acceptable and appropriate levels of sustainable  drainage.  
5.5.18.5  Where green  space provision is to be accepted off -site it needs to be 
reasonably related to the development. In most cases this should mean within the accessibility distances specified in Policy G3, but exceptions could inc lude 
sites connected by high frequency public transport corridors or green space 
additions to City Parks or strategic facilities that would be used by residents of 
the development.  
Financial Contributions  
 
5.5.18.6  As an alternative to provision of green space,  financial  contributions  may (where 
appropriate and in compliance with the policy) help meet the demands of new residents on existing green spaces. Leeds has calculated green space 
contributions in the same way for many years based on the costs of laying out 
space, maintenance and a factor for the expected number of children in a 
development:  
• Agreeing  the quantity  of the green  space requirement  that will be converted 
into a commuted sum, ie the remainder not delivered on- site or  off-site. 
• Laying out costs. Standard laying out costs for Green Space.  
• The established practice is to add a per -child contribution factor, of which 
ten percent will be required for flats and 62% for houses (thus 10%/62% of 
number of flats/houses multiplied by per -child contribution amount).  
• A 10 year maintenance sum for the relevant quantity of green space.  
• A maintenance cost for on- site play space if other arrangements are not 
made.  
• All of the above will be adjusted annually using a SPONS index  figure.  The Council will provide a detailed calculation on its website updated annually 
with the latest SPONS figures. If green space is to be laid out by the developer 
for adoption by the City Council, a 10 year maintenance sum should be 
calculated.  
5.5.18.7  As long as national planning policy specifies that not more than 5  S106 
contributions can be pooled toward particular projects, it will be necessary for 
planning  obligations  to be specific about  the green space  improvement  that is to 
be made. Leeds City Council, having regard to local need and opinion, will advise developers what green space improvement (including improving access 
to green space) projects require funding. Schemes must be reasonably  related 
to 
the development  site; in most  cases  this should mean within  the accessib ility 
distances specified in Policy G3, but exceptions could include schemes connected by 
high frequency  public  transport  corridors  or improvements  to City Parks  or strategic  
facilities  that would be used by residents  of the development   
POLICY G4: GREEN  SPACE IMPROVEMENT AND NEW GREEN SPACE 
PROVISION  
 
Residential developments of 10 dwellings or more will be required to provide the 
following  quantities  of on-site green space  per residential  unit or where  this quantity  of 
green space is unachievable or inappropriate on- site, equivalent off -site provision, 
financial contribution or combinations thereof should be  sought1: 
 
1 bedroom  dwelling  23sqm  
2 bedroom  dwelling  33sqm  
3 bedroom  dwelling  44sqm  
4 bedroom  dwelling  54sqm 
5 or more bedroom dwelling 66sqm 
Student  bedspaces  18sqm  
 
In determining whether this quantity of provision should be delivered on- site, off -site 
or as a commuted sum,  consideration of the circumstances set out in paragraph 5.5.14 
will indicate whether green space should be provided on-site. 
 
Where the factors of paragraph 5.5. 14 require  green space to be provided on site:  
 
a) The type of green space provided should be decided taking account of the 
following  factors:  
 
i) Calculations of local surplus and deficiency  
ii) Mix of dwellings and need for play  facilities  
iii) Practicality of on- site delivery  
iv) Policy & proposals of an applicable Neighbourhood Plan 
 
b) Arrangements for on- going maintenance must be agreed  
c) Green space should be accessible to members of the public  
d) Green space should positively contribute to the overall design and character  of 
development (see paragraph 5.5.17)  
 
If off- site financial contributions are to be accepted the core components of the 
calculation are as follows:  
 
• The costs of laying out  space  
• Maintenance (general and play facilities)  and 
• A per -child factor (see paragraph 5.5. 18.6 above)  
 
Financial contributions will be used effectively to meet local needs for green space.  
 
1.  Where  conflict arises between the requirements of Policy G4 and any specific green space site requirements 
in either the Site Allocations Plan or Aire Valley Leeds Area Action Plan, then the specific site requirements 
within the Allocations Plans will take precedence  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Policy G5: Open space provision in the city centre  [A minor  amendment  in italics  is made to G5 regarding  on-site commuted  sums  in lieu.   The 
italicisation will be removed when the text is consolidated into the Core Strategy ] 
 
 
POLICY G5: OPEN SPACE PROVISION IN THE CITY CENTRE  
 
… 
 
In areas  of adequate open space supply or where it can be demonstrated that not all 
the required on site delivery  of open  space  can be achieved due to site specific issues, 
contributions in lieu of provision will be required towards identified open space and 
publi c realm  projects .  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Policy G6: Protection and redevelopment of existing 
green space   
[A minor amendment in italics is proposed to G6 to continue the protection of 
pedestrian corridors in the City Centre protected in the UDP.   The italicisation will be 
removed when the text is consolidated into the Core Strategy ] 
 
POLICY G6: PROTECTION AND REDEVELOPMENT OF EXISTING GREEN 
SPACE  
Green space (including open space and pedestrian corridors  in the City Centre)  will 
be protected from development unless one of the following criteria is met:  
i There is an adequate supply of accessible green space/open space within the analysis  area and the development  site offers  no potential  for use as an alternative 
deficient open space type, as illustrated in the Leeds Open Space, Sport and 
Recreation Assessment,  or, 
ii The green space/open space is replaced by an area of at least equal size, 
accessibility and quality in the same locality,  or 
iii Where supported by evidence and in the delivery of wider planning benefits, 
redevelopment proposals demonstrate a clear relationship to improvements of 
existing green space quality in the same locality.   
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
Policy  EN2 Review  of Policy  to reflect  Written 
Ministerial Statement of 25th March  2015  [The text below should replace paragraphs 5.5.36 –  5.5.38 of the Core Strategy 2014.]   
Sustainable Design and Construction 
 
5.5.36 The Vision for Leeds (2011– 2030), City Priority Plan (2011– 2015) and Council 
Business Plan (2011- 2015), commit the City as a whole and the Council 
specifically, to make Leeds a lower carbon City. City carbon reduction targets  
are to reduce CO 2 emissions  by 40% between 2005 and 2020.  At the same  time 
climate change adaptation needs to be addressed systematically and 
progressively in regard to the built environment and development across the 
City. To ensure there is a consistent approach to development improvements the Building Research Establishment’s (BRE) approach has been identifi ed as 
an independent and systematic methodology based on a robust environmental 
weighting system that covers a wide range of sustainable construction issues 
yet allows flexibility in relation to site and developer options for non- residential 
development. F or residential development, requirements for energy efficiency 
are contained within the Building  Regulations and Policy EN1 of the Core 
Strategy. 
5.5.37 The Council will require developers to apply the Building Research 
Establishment Environmental Assessment Method (BREEAM), to major non-  
residential development in the District. As the additional costs of attaining 
improved sustainable construction outcomes are best met by economies of scale,  this requirement  applies  only to major  development  of over 1,000 square 
metres. In cases involving conversions, refitting, refurbishment, and historic buildings,  a pragmatic  approach  will be taken  with the expectation that the BRE 
methodology will still be applied, with agreed areas of lower achievement if shown to be appropri ate. The BRE methodology allows for flexibility across a 
wide range of environmental areas, and consistently improves key  
environmental issues, covering improvements to; energy and CO
2 emissions,  
water use, materials, surface water run- off, waste, pollutio n, health and well - 
being, management and ecological value. For residential development, 
requirements for energy efficiency are contained within the Building 
Regulations  and Policy EN1 of the Core Strategy . 
5.5.38 Growth in Leeds means extra demand for water.  Ad ditionally, climate change 
predictions indicate an increasingly erratic weather pattern which is likely to lead 
to extreme weather events including droughts.  For these reasons Leeds expects all major residential development to meet the tighter optional water standard in building regulations as required by Policy EN2.  
5.5.38.1  The term in the policy “where feasible” means that where it is not technically  
possible to meet the standard or if it would be harmful to heritage objectives then the policy requirements will not be sought.  
 
 
 
POLICY EN2: SUSTAINABLE DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 
 
Non-residential developments of 1,000 or more square metres (including conversion) 
where feasible are required to meet the BREEAM standard of ‘excellent’.  
 
Residential developments of 10 or more dwellings (including conversion) where 
feasible are required to meet a water standard of 110 litres per person per day.   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Policy EN4: DISTRICT HEATING  [A consequential minor amendment deleting one sentence to Paragraph 5.5.49 to reflect 
changes to Policy  EN2 and deleting duplicate text . 
 
5.5.49 The Department of Energy and Climate Change’s (DECC) document, The 
Future of Heating (2013) says, “Local authorities are in the best position to 
undertake the Energ y Master planning of areas suitable for heat networks and 
the initial assessment of the feasibility of projects. They are well placed to act as ‘brokers’,  for example putting  together  prospective promoters  of projects  with 
prospective providers  and customers  for heat.”  In addition,  local authorities  are 
encouraged to consider low carbon and renewable heat networks through the National Planning Policy Framework published in 2012. The framework encourages local planning authorities to identify opportunities for development that can draw  their energy  supply  from decentralised,  renewable  or low carbon 
energy supply systems and for co- locating potential heat customers and 
suppliers.  Future  Energy  Yorkshire  have completed  a study  which  recommends 
the establ ishment of a strategic body (‘Energy Leeds’) whose role would be to 
take responsibility for the delivery of energy related activities. These activities could include the co- ordination and delivery of heat networks. Heat distribution 
is most likely to be vi able in areas of higher density. Opportunities exist around 
Leeds City Centre (for example major development proposals for the Victoria Gate area, in the provision of an new energy centre, low carbon heating, cooling, electricity generation and potentially  other utilities), the Aire Valley, the 
universities and St James University Teaching Hospital, as a consequence  of 
high heat loads,  which  offer the potential  for low carbon energy for local  
communities.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
Policy EN8: New  Policy on Electric Vehicle Charging  [The text below will be inserted after Policy EN7: Minerals of the Core Strategy 2014]  
 
Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure  
 
5.5.63 Air quality has become a major area of concern in Leeds.  The 2008 Ambient 
Air Quality Directive (Directive 2008/50/EC) sets legally binding limits for 
concentrations in outdoor air of major air pollutants that impact public health such  as particulate matter  (PM10  and PM2.5)  and nitrogen  dioxide (NO2). This 
is also transposed into the UK Air Quality Standards Regulations 2010. Leeds 
was identified in December 2015 by DEFRA as one of six locations in England that is not expected to meet air quality standards by  2020.  
5.5.64 Air quality problems in the district are mainl y attributable to transport and this 
means that it is necessary for Leeds to implement measures to ensure a reduction in transport emissions. Planning policy has a key role to play in this through a number of policies and mechanisms that interact together,  including 
the appropriate location of development according to a settlement hierarchy. This includes the inclusion of a choice of sustainable means of travel, so that people are encouraged to choose other means of travel than the private car and through t he provision of a network of green infrastructure that can help to 
mitigate poor air quality. However, given the need for action now to prevent air pollution becoming worse, it is necessary to increase provision of EVCPs in new homes and all other premises . These requirements will be monitored and the 
policy may be updated accordingly as new technologies  emerge.  
 
 
 
 
  POLICY EN8: ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE  
 
All applications  for new development  which  include provision of parking  spaces  will be 
required to meet  the minimum  standard  of provision  of electric  vehicle  charging points. 
This requires:  
i) Residential: 1 charging point per parking space and 1 charging point per 10 
visitor  spaces  
ii) Office/Retail/Industrial/Education: charging points for 10% of  parking spaces 
ensuring that electricity infrastructure is sufficient to enable further points to be added at a later  stage.  
iii) Motorway Service Stations: charging points for 10% of parking  spaces ensuring 
that electricity infrastructure is sufficient to enable further points to be added at a 
later stage  
iv) Petrol Filling Stations: provision of fast charge facilities.   
Appendix 1a: Core Strategy Policies Adopted in 2014 that are superseded or amended by 
Policies of the Core Strategy Selective Review  
 
Core Strategy Policy Adopted 2014  Fully Superseded by CSSR 
Replacement  
SP6 THE HOUSING REQUIREMENT 
AND  
ALLOCATION OF HOUSING LAND  SP6 THE HOUSING REQUIREMENT 
AND  
ALLOCATION OF HOUSING LAND  
SP7 DISTRIBUTION OF HOUSING 
LAND AND ALLOCATIONS  SP7 DISTRIBUTION OF HOUSING 
LAND AND ALLOCATIONS  
H5 AFFORDABLE HOUSING  H5 AFFORDABLE HOUSING  
G4 NEW GREEN SPACE PROVISION  G4 GREEN SPACE IMPROVEMENT 
AND NEW GREEN SPACE 
PROVISION  
EN2 SUSTAINABLE DESIGN AND 
CONSTRUCTION  EN2 SUSTAINABLE DESIGN AND 
CONSTRUCTION  
Core Strategy  Policy Adopted 2014  Amended  by CSSR  
G5 OPEN SPACE PROVISION IN THE 
CITY CENTRE  G5 OPEN SPACE PROVISION IN THE 
CITY CENTRE  
G6 PROTECTION AND 
REDEVELOPMENT OF EXISTING 
GREEN SPACE  G6: PROTECTION AND 
REDEVELOPMENT OF EXISTING 
GREEN SPACE  CORE STRATEGY GLOSSARY  
 
 Term  Explanation  
 Affordable Housing  Affordable Housing Definitions Table  
Policy H5 (Broad Definition)  Policy H5 (Detailed Types)  Conformity with NPPF 2018 
Annex 2 Glossary  
Social Rent or equivalent 
tenures.  This is housing rented 
at rates which are generally 
affordable to households in the 
lower decile of earnings.  
Benchmark transfer prices and 
rents are published annually to reflect affordability for lower 
decile earners in Leeds.  Social rent  a) Affordable housing for rent . (a) 
the rent is set in accordance with the Government’s rent policy for 
Social Rent  
Equivalent tenures.  a) Affordable housing for rent. (a) 
the rent is set in accordance with the Government’s rent policy for 
Affordable Rent  
Intermediate or equivalent  
tenures.  This is housing made 
available at below market rents 
or prices which are generally 
affordable to households in the 
lower quartile of earnings. 
Benchmark transfer prices and 
rents are published annually to 
reflect affordability for lower 
quartile  earners in Leeds.  Intermediate or submarket rent 
– the intermediate affordable 
units are rented out at rents 
above those of social rent but 
below market rents.  a) Affordable housing for rent. (a) 
…. Or is at least 20% below local 
market rents (including s ervice 
charges where applicable)  
Shared equity/shared ownership 
– the occupier buys part of the 
house and pays a discounted 
rent on the remaining part, 
which is owned by a RSL.  
Low cost homes for sale / 
discounted sale –  the occupier 
buys the house at a fixed 
percentage below its cost on the 
open market.  When the house 
is sold on, this same percentage 
discount is passed onto the next 
buyer.  c) Discounted market sales 
housing: is that sold at a discount 
of at least 20% below local market 
value. Eligibility is determined with 
regard to local incomes and local house prices. Provisions should be 
in place to ensure housing remains 
at a discount for future eligible 
households.  
d) Other affordable routes to home ownership: is housing provided for 
sale that provides a route to 
ownership for those who could not 
achieve home ownership through 
the market. It includes shared 
ownership, relevant equity loans, 
other low cost homes for sale (at a 
price equivalent to at least 20% 
below local market value) and re nt to buy (which includes a period of 
intermediate rent). Where public 
grant funding is provided, there 
should be provisions for the homes 
to remain at an affordable price for 
future eligible households, or for 
any receipts to be recycled for 
alternative a ffordable housing 
provision, or refunded to 
Government or the relevant 
authority specified in the funding 
agreement.  
 
 SPONS  An External Works and Landscape Price Book which is updated annually to provide costings for hard and soft 
landscaping and related external works. It is widely used by the industry and provides a national benchmark for 
the cost of laying out green space . 
 For more information, please  contact:  
Policy and Plans  Group  
Merrion  House  
Merrion  Way 
Leeds, LS2 8BB 
Email : CoreStrategyReview@leeds.gov.uk  
www.leeds.gov.uk/localplan  
Core Strategy  Selective  Review  
Adoption Version  
Leeds  Local  Plan Development 
Plan Document  
September  2019  