Leicester Local Plan 
2020 to 2036
Leicester Local Plan 
2020 to 2036
Submission (Regulation 19 publication) Plan 
January 2023
If you need help to read this document or require it in another format please call 
0116 454 0085 or email planning.policy@leicester.gov.ukContents
Foreword 7
1. Introduction  9
2. A Profile of Leicester : A Spatial Portrait 16
3. Vision for Leicester 26
4. Strategy for Leicester 29
5. Housing 46
6. Climate Change and Flood Risk  70
7. Health and Wellbeing  85
8. Delivering Design Quality  91
9. Central Development Area  111
10. Heritage  142
11. Culture and Tourism  151
12. Employment 159
13. Town Centre and Retai l 178
14. Open Space, Sports and Recreation  204
15. The Natural Environment 217
16. Transportation  224
17. Future Minerals and Waste Needs  253
18. Development and Infrastructure  260
19. Neighbourhood Planning  266
20. Planning Enforcement  269
21. Monitoring 271Appendices
1. Housing Trajectory (September 2022) 275
2. Heritage Local Lists 276
3. Retail Hierarchy and Neighbourhood Parades 293
4. Infrastructure List 296
5. How the Policies will be Delivered 302
6. Housing Site Allocations (Non-strategic) 310
7. Glossary 3147Foreword
Leicester is a proud and self-confident historic 
city with a rich heritage of buildings, a widely 
based economy and a wonderful diversity in its 
people.  
The Leicester Urban Area has grown dramatically 
over recent decades, with a combined population 
now of almost 650,000. At the same time as 
we face the challenge of climate change, that 
pressure of growth is forecast to continue.    
Following substantive consultation, this 
publication (Regulation 19) local plan shows how 
we respond to the pressure of growth and how it 
shapes the city of the future. Although the Local Plan must be focused on the 
administrative area of the city council it must also take proper account of the 
fact that the Leicester Urban Area now extends far beyond that boundary and 
that the city is set at the heart of a wonderful county. (See Diagram 1 overleaf)  
Issues of housing, shopping, our economy and transportation cannot be 
discussed in isolation. Reflecting our interdependence, the Strategic Growth 
Plan agreed with our partner district councils and the county council sits behind 
this Local Plan.   
We have sought to secure full and ongoing co-operation from partners to 
enable the plan to deliver both Sustainable City and County growth. 
I hope that a wide range of organisations and interested people, both within 
the administrative boundary and beyond it, will want to comment on the plan 
before it is formally submitted to the Secretary of State later this year.  The 
coming months offer us all a unique opportunity to help shape our city for the 
next 15 years and beyond.    
Sir Peter Soulsby, 
City Mayor.
Sir Peter Soulsby8Diagram 1. The Leicester Urban Area 
Hinckley and 
BosworthCharnwood
BlabyHarborough
Oadby and WigstonNARBOROUGH ROAD
AYLESTONE ROADLONDON ROAD
WELFORD ROADHINCKLEY ROADHUMBERSTONE ROADMELTON ROAD GROBY ROAD
© Crown copyright and database rights 
2022. Ordnance Survey 100019264.Leicester City Administrative Boundary
District Council boundariesM1
M1 M69Glen/f_ieldBirstall
Thurmaston
Scraptoft
Oadby
WigstonGlen ParvaKirby Muxloe
Leicester
Forest East
Braunstone T ownMark/f_ieldMountsorrel
RothleySileby
SystonQueniborough
Thurcaston
Anstey
Groby
Ratby
Desford
Narborough
Broughton
AstleyCountesthorpe
Kibworth Harcourt
Kibworth BeauchampHoughton
on the Hill
BlabyLEICESTER91. Introduction
101.1 In 2021 the Government published a revised National Planning Policy 
Framework (NPPF). The NPPF requires local planning authorities like Leicester 
City Council to support sustainable development and to plan positively for it, by 
preparing new local plans.    
1.2 Leicester City Council has produced this Local Plan, which sets out the 
vision and objectives for the growth of the city over the next 15 years.    
The plan will:
• Identify broad locations for development
• Allocate strategic development sites
• Set clear policies that guide decisions on planning applications
• Indicate how the plan will be delivered and how progress will be monitored 
1.3 Its purpose is to provide the overall strategic and spatial vision for the future 
of the Leicester Urban Area.    
1.4 The Local Plan must be flexible to allow for future changes in circumstances, 
including different policy frameworks or changes to the local, regional or 
national economy. Proposed development needs to be viable. This is important 
as the current economic climate presents significant challenges for place 
shaping. The Local Plan will provide the framework and certainty that will 
attract investment to Leicester allowing us to guide investment in ways that the 
community has signed up to.    
1.5 A range of evidence has been prepared by the council to underpin the 
Local Plan, including that which was undertaken to inform the previous Local 
Development Framework Core Strategy process.    
1.6 The Local Plan will become the development plan for the city. It sets out the 
vision and framework for future development for the plan period 2020 to 2036. 
It will replace the existing Core Strategy (2014) and saved policies from the 
2006 Local Plan.    
1.7 The Local Plan will be used to manage development through the 
determination of planning applications, making it clear where development is 
acceptable and helping to provide certainty for the local community. This will 11help to ensure that development is planned, co-ordinated, well designed and 
will make a positive contribution to the city.
Figure 1. Key Stages in Preparing the Local Plan (Current stage in red)  
Consultation on the 
Submission Plan (Reg 19) Public consultation on 
Key Issues and Options
Public consultation on Emerging Options &
Development Management Policies  etc.
Public consultation on the 
New Draft Local Plan (Reg 18)
Submission of Local Plan to Secretary of 
State and Planning Inspectorate
Independent Public Examination 
of submission LP
Adoption of LP by the Council
1.8 The Local Plan does not contain detailed policies for waste and minerals. 
These will be set out in a separate Leicester Waste and Minerals Local Plan 12which will contain detailed guidance about the allocation of sites for waste 
disposal and protection for potential mineral sites. 
How has the plan been developed?   
1.9 Since 2014, the council has undertaken a range of consultation exercises 
on various stages of developing its Local Plan. These consultations have 
considered all aspects of planning policy, although the fundamental focus has 
always been around the level of growth and how that growth is delivered. The 
plan has also taken into account changing national guidance.
What other issues have we considered in preparing the Local Plan?    
1.10 In addition to national policies, we have complied with various European 
level regulations.  The plan has been subject to a Strategic Environmental 
Assessment (SEA) to assess the plan’s environmental impacts. A Sustainability 
Appraisal (SA) has also been undertaken to assess not only the environmental 
effects of the plan but also the economic and social.  The council has also 
produced a Habitats Regulations Assessment/Appropriate Assessment 
(HRA), Equalities Impact Assessment (EIA) and has undertaken a Public Health 
Impact Assessment (PHIA) as part of public consultation on the plan.    
Relationship to other Strategies   
1.11 The Local Plan has been informed by the aims of other city-wide plans and 
strategies including:  
• Climate Emergency Strategy and Action Plan (2021)
• Economic Recovery Plan – First Steps (2020)
• Joint Health and Wellbeing Strategy and Action Plan (2019)
• Air Quality Action Plan (2015 – 2026)
• Draft Local Transport Plan (2022)
• Leicester Cycling and Walking Improvement Plan (2019)
• Leicester and Leicestershire Tourism Growth Plan (2019)
 
  13Duty to Co-operate   
1.12 Satisfying the council’s responsibilities through the Duty to Co-operate is 
vital to the delivery of an acceptable Local Plan.  The councils of Leicester and 
Leicestershire have a strong and long-established record of commitment to 
joint working with each other and with other public bodies. The preparation of 
the plan has involved engaging constructively, actively and on an ongoing basis 
with neighbouring authorities, key stakeholders and public bodies with regards 
to planning and economic matters.     
1.13 The process relating to Duty to Co-operate (DtC) sets out the need for 
the councils to work closely together on cross boundary and wider strategic 
issues and to assess the critical interdependencies,  such as transport, housing 
and employment needs, retail and waste.  To demonstrate effective and on-
going joint working strategic plan-making,  authorities should prepare and 
maintain one or more statements of common ground, documenting the cross-
boundary matters being addressed and progress in co-operating to address 
these matters.     
The Leicester and Leicestershire Strategic Growth Plan   
1.14 The eight local authorities in Leicester and Leicestershire Housing Market 
Area (HMA) together with Leicestershire County Council and the Leicester & 
Leicestershire Local Enterprise Partnership (LLEP) have prepared a Strategic 
Growth Plan (SGP) that sets out the aspirations for delivering growth in the 
Leicester and Leicestershire HMA. It sets out, in broad terms, the amount 
and location of future growth (housing, economic, infrastructure) that the 
Leicester and Leicestershire HMA (Housing Market Area) will be expecting to 
accommodate until 2050.   The Plan and supporting evidence is available on the 
website. (llstrategicgrowthplan.org.uk) 
1.15 To ensure that the Leicester and Leicestershire HMA housing and 
employment need is fulfilled up to 2036 a Statement of Common Ground 
(SoCG) has been sought with each local authority within the Leicester and 
Leicestershire HMA. This sets out how the Leicester and Leicestershire HMA 
employment and housing need will be met, including how any need that cannot 
be accommodated within individual local authorities will be dealt with.   14How to use this Plan   
1.16 The plan should be regarded as one comprehensive publication and it 
is important that individual policies contained within the Local Plan are not 
viewed in isolation.   For example, health and wellbeing is influenced by many 
factors such as good design, employment opportunities, open space and sport 
provision and the availability of quality housing. Policies will therefore be cross 
referenced with other policies in the plan where appropriate. Policy objectives 
may sometimes compete, so their context will be weighed against one another 
in decision making to secure an optimum outcome.   
1.17 An ‘Atlas of Proposed Changes’ has also been produced, which illustrates 
the changes that we are proposing to make to the Policies Map that was 
adopted in January 2006. It comprises changes arising from the Leicester Core 
Strategy as well as the policies and proposals contained in this draft local plan 
and proposals map.   
1.18 The full evidence and supporting Statements of Common Ground, 
underpinning this Local Plan and polices are set out on the council’s website. 
This evidence will be kept under review up to adoption of this plan. 
Weblink to be added 
Review of the Plan   
1.19 The NPPF (2021) states that to be effective, Local Plans need to be kept 
up to date and that strategies and policies should be reviewed, to assess 
whether they need updating. Local planning authorities must review local plans 
at least once every 5 years from their adoption date. The council is committed 
to working in co-operation with partners, stakeholders and the community to 
continue to review and adapt our planning policies to meet these requirements.   15Further Information   
1.20 For further information about this document, the Local Plan process or 
previous consultation documents please contact the Planning Policy team using 
the details below:   
Planning Policy Team   
City Hall   
115 Charles Street   
Leicester LE1 1FZ   
Email:  planning.policy@leicester.gov.uk   
Website: www.leicester.gov.uk/localplan162. A Profile of Leicester:  
A Spatial Portrait   
172.1 This chapter provides a broad overview or ‘snapshot’ of the physical 
characteristics of the city as well as the current social, economic and 
environmental conditions in Leicester. These provide the foundation from 
which the vision and spatial strategy are built. These are set out later in this 
document.    
Location 
2.2 Leicester is a predominately urban area located in the centre of the county 
of Leicestershire. The Leicester Urban Area covers the administrative area 
of the city, as well as and other settlements such as Thurmaston, Birstall, 
Glenfield, Leicester Forest East, Braunstone Town, Syston, Anstey, Glen Parva, 
Oadby, Wigston, and Scraptoft. The population of the area is approximately 
650,000. Leicestershire County covers an area of 215,600 hectares and has a 
population of just over 1 million.    
2.3 The administrative area of the city council covers nearly 7,500 hectares, 
with a population of about 368,300 making it the largest city in the East 
Midlands (ONS 2022 Census). The area provides housing, employment, 
shopping, public administration, leisure, health care at three hospitals and 
further and higher education facilities. Over recent years there has been 
substantial investment in the Highcross shopping centre, Haymarket, 
‘Connecting Leicester’ project, and facilities such as the Curve & Performing 
Arts Centre and St Margaret’s Bus station and the Railway Station. Other 
substantial investment has been made at the Phoenix Arts Centre, schools and 
health centres as well as provision of new housing schemes across the city e.g. 
Ashton Green and the Waterside Regeneration Area. 
2.4 The city’s two universities, University of Leicester and De Montfort 
University are highly acclaimed nationally and internationally and have a 
combined total of 43,100 students (as registered in the 2017/18 academic 
year). Also in Leicestershire, there is Loughborough University.    
2.5 The city is at the heart of the national road network with quick and easy 
links to major motorways including the M1, M69, and M6. Leicester is just over 
one hour away from London via the midland mainline. East Midlands Airport is 
30 minutes away and Birmingham airport is approximately a 50-minute drive 18from the city centre. This makes Leicester easily accessible from all major UK 
cities, Europe and international locations.     
The Community – Population and Demographics  
2.6 Leicester is the largest city in the East Midlands with a population of around 
368,600 in 2021. The 2021 census data first release shows that Leicester 
Local Authority area’s population grew faster than all the England core cities 
between 2011-2021 at 11.8% and is one of fastest growing cities in the country. 
Furthermore, Leicester’s population density is now the third highest outside 
of London (showing the fourth largest increase after Slough, Watford and 
Cambridge). 
2.7 Leicester is also one of UK’s most youthful and dynamic populations with 
a median age that is younger than other major cities including Birmingham, 
Manchester, Nottingham, Bristol, and Edinburgh. The large proportion 
of younger people in Leicester reflects the student population attending 
Leicester’s two universities and inward migration to the city.   
Population Projections
Figure 2. Population Growth
Source: ONS, 2016-based population projections  192.8 Figure 02 shows the projected population growth in Leicester compared to 
England.   The figure anticipates a year-on-year population increase in Leicester 
over the next 20 years.   It estimates a 7.5% increase between 2016 and 2026.   
In the longer term we estimate a 16% increase by 2041. This rate is higher than 
that expected for England (12%) over the same period.   
Diversity  
2.9 Leicester is home to a rich and diverse range of ethnic and faith 
communities with 28% of the population (Source: Census 2011) born outside of 
the EU.  Almost half of Leicester’s residents classify themselves as belonging to 
an ethnic group that is not white. It is the UK’s most diverse city with 240 faith 
groups and more than 70 languages spoken by the residents. Leicester also 
has one of the country’s largest Asian communities (37% of the population), 
with 28% of all residents defining themselves as of Indian heritage and 9% as 
other Asian groups. At 3.8%, Leicester’s African community is a notably larger 
proportion of the population than that for England (1.8%).    
People with a Disability   
2.10 In 2011 over a quarter (32,447 - Source: Census 2011) of city households 
included a person with a long-term health problem or disability that limits the 
persons day-to-day activities and has lasted or is expected to last at least 
12 months. This includes problems that are related to old age.   A quarter of 
Leicester households in which at least one person has a long-term health 
problem or disability (7,909) also includes dependent children. By 2036 there 
will be an additional 19,361 households either already experiencing health 
problems or likely to develop health problems within 10 years. As expected, 
the incidence of disability in the city is highest in areas where the population 
is older (such as Thurncourt) and lower where the population is younger (for 
example, the city centre).   
Climate Change and Air Quality   
2.11 A Climate Emergency Strategy was adopted in 2021 and the Climate 
Emergency Action Plan and Local plan implementation will be monitored, 
to safeguard the future growth of the city. The council has developed a 
programme of action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and prepare for 20changing climate in the Emerging Climate Action Plan for the city. This plan sets 
out the carbon reduction and climate change actions we are taking, alongside 
other goals such as increasing levels of walking and cycling, improving air 
quality, minimising waste, increasing recycling, and protecting and enhancing 
biodiversity and our open spaces.    
2.12 The Local Plan has an important role in helping the council to meet its legal 
requirement to comply with national and regional targets. Measures need to be 
put in place to minimise traffic emissions and minimise emissions from new 
development to assist Leicester to become a low emission city.     
Economy  
2.13 The local economy is characterised by a very strong and diverse small 
business community. It has a larger manufacturing sector than the national 
average.  Leicester continues to have a strong manufacturing base compared 
to the rest of the UK.  The city has a high proportion of people employed in the 
public sector, which is understandable as the city is the natural focus in the sub 
region for education, health and local government.   
2.14 However, the recent pandemic has put immense pressure on local 
businesses. Therefore, sufficient quality employment land needs to be 
maintained in the city to ensure that a strong and diverse economy can be 
sustained.     
2.15 The growing confidence and strength of the city economy is well 
evidenced through major inward investment and a significant number of new 
jobs including IBM, Hastings Insurance and Mattioli Woods, together with other 
new office-based businesses such as PPL PRS and Octopus Energy. In addition, 
the city council developments of the Dock, LCB Depot, Friars Mill, Food Park, 
Makers Yard and The Gresham have provided much needed new workspaces 
for small businesses.    
Homes    
2.16 Leicester has a high number of households that live in rented and 
overcrowded accommodation. The total social housing stock consists of 
approximately 20,000 properties city wide, a large proportion of which is made 21up of 1-3 bedroom properties. Over the past 15 years house price increases in 
Leicester (189%) have been higher than regional (154%) and national (158%) 
rates of growth. The city also sees notably higher levels of overcrowded, 
concealed and shared households, which is in part influenced by its diversity 
and student population. A net need of 17,871 affordable housing dwellings in 
the city (over the plan period) has been identified in the Local Housing Needs 
Assessment (2022), based on new government guidance. Delivery to address 
the emerging Housing Crises is a key priority.
2.17 A key challenge for the Local Plan is to deliver sufficient housing 
throughout the plan period. However, due to the constraints and lack of supply 
of suitable developable land within the city’s administrative boundary, the city 
council will continue to work with the Housing Market Area (HMA) partners to 
ensure that any housing need that cannot be accommodated in the city can be 
sustainably located within the HMA as a whole. This is in line with the Strategic 
Growth Plan (SGP) and the agreed Leicester & Leicestershire Statement of 
Common Ground on Housing & Employment Need (June 2022). 
2.18 It is also important that the plan responds to the needs of specific groups 
such as older persons, gypsy and travellers and students.    
Transport    
2.19 The regional transport strategy context has been established through the 
‘Midlands Connect Strategic Transport Plan for the Midlands - Fairer, Greener, 
Stronger’ published in April 2022. This identifies key priorities for regional 
level transport investment to support a more productive, prosperous, and 
sustainable economic development of Leicester and Leicestershire. Transport 
for East Midlands (TfEM) provides leadership on strategic transport issues in 
the East Midlands, agrees major investment priorities and provides collective 
input into the work of the Midlands Connect, the Department for Transport and 
its delivery bodies. TfEM and Midlands Connect have agreed a joint statement 
of working together to promote eight key investment priorities for the East 
Midlands. 
2.20 A Strategic Transport Priorities document was published in Autumn 
2020 which has been developed alongside the Strategic Growth Plan for the 
city and county which has a plan period to 2050. These plans were prepared 22together by Leicester City and Leicestershire County Councils to ensure that 
the long-term development needs and associated transportation requirements 
are co-ordinated and will also support the future prosperity of Leicester and 
Leicestershire.   
2.21 Leicester City Council has secured £70m from the Department 
for Transport’s Transforming Cities Fund.  This is delivering significant 
improvements to Leicester’s transport network.  For example, transforming 
public transport provision and improving and connecting city centre transport 
interchanges would help support the majority of new growth in Leicester for the 
next 5 years. In addition, a Leicester Enhanced Partnership Bus Plan published 
in Spring 2022 sets out an ambitious and inspiring way forward for transport, 
building upon recent and major investments. A new Local Transport Plan (LTP) 
is also currently in development.     
2.22 The Leicester Urban Area faces many different challenges and 
opportunities for transport over the lifetime of the local plan and beyond. 
Key issues that will have a significant influence on transport include climate 
change and air quality, growth and development and its impact on traffic levels, 
changing population and health.     
Heritage   
2.23 Leicester is an ancient Iron Age settlement that was held as a high-
status tribal centre near the east bank of the River Soar over 2,000 years 
ago. It became a significant capital city at the time of the Roman Conquest of 
Britain (around AD43). Much of the city was rebuilt following the arrival of the 
Industrial Revolution in mid-1700s, and more communities migrated to Leicester 
after World War II. Leicester has a rich and varied historic environment which 
contributes to our knowledge and understanding of the past. The historic 
environment has wider social, cultural, economic and environmental benefits to 
the city. It helps define an area, creates a sense of place and serves as a focal 
point for civic pride, tourism, inward investment and the creation of jobs.   
2.24 Leicester has a rich history from Roman, Saxon and Norman times and in 
more recent centuries became one of the most significant centres for textile 
and hosiery manufacture in the UK. It has 11 Scheduled Monuments, over 397 23Listed Buildings of special architectural or historic interest and 25 Conservation 
Areas.   
2.25 Careful management of the historic environment is necessary to ensure its 
importance is recognised and that it can continue to contribute to the success 
and growth of the city.    
Changing City Centre and Retail  
2.26 Technology is changing the way we shop. We are now buying goods more 
frequently online and via mobile phones. The Covid-19 pandemic and impact of 
lockdown measures (both local and nationally) have also added to the pressure 
that our high streets and operators are facing. This has implications for the 
type of physical stores we require. Leicester’s city centre like many others, is 
promoted as a destination with a range of shopping and leisure activities. The 
way that people do their food shopping is also changing.  
2.27 These trends raise a series of challenges for how the local plan shapes 
change and supports our city centre, town centre, district and local centres 
across the city. The introduction of “Class E” in September 2020 placed a wide 
range of uses, which included retail, food, financial services, gyms, healthcare, 
nurseries, offices and light industry into a single use class. This measure will 
introduce greater flexibility for operators and will broaden the range of uses 
that we see within town centres that do not require planning permission. In 
the same way, Class E gives greater flexibility to Class E uses that are located 
outside of defined shopping centres. 
Key issues include:   
• How to integrate new retail development with a wider range of uses within 
the city centre especially in light of the recent changes to the use classes 
order
• How to balance demand for leisure uses and particularly the night time 
economy with growing residential use of the city centre
• How to support our town centres and district and local centres in providing a 
range of shops and services that meet the needs of all groups in society24Education    
2.28 Leicester’s educational attainment is below the UK average 28% of 
Leicester’s residents having no qualifications against a figure of 22% for 
England (Source: 2011 Census).    
2.29 The percentage of people in Leicester with higher education qualifications 
is lower than in the rest of England. However, there is some evidence that this 
gap is reducing. Spatially, the areas with lowest educational attainment are the 
outer estates to the west of the city and the inner-city areas.    
2.30 The University of Leicester, De Montfort University, Leicester College 
and other sixth form colleges including Gateway College play an important 
role in the city. However, an area of concern is the low retention of graduates, 
especially medical graduates from the city’s two universities. In general, 
educational attainment can be closely linked to income levels, employment 
opportunities and deprivation. Improving education and skills is also a priority 
for the city.   
Open Space and Green Infrastructure    
2.31 Leicester’s open space network consists of a variety of spaces of 
differing size, quality and function, comprising almost 25% of the city area. 
Approximately half of the open space network is in the green wedges, which 
were allocated in 2006.     
2.32 The River Soar and Grand Union Canal corridor that flows from south to 
north through the city centre is an important resource for wildlife and connects 
many open spaces along its path.    
2.33 The city’s green infrastructure includes a network of multifunctional open 
spaces including, waterways, formal parks, gardens, woodlands, street trees, 
green corridors, nature reserves and links to open countryside. These areas 
are intrinsically linked and are valuable in the maintenance and enhancement 
of biodiversity. They also provide opportunities for sport and recreation and 
contribute to wider environmental benefits, including managing flood risk.    25Health and Wellbeing    
2.34 Life expectancy in Leicester is lower than the England average. Whilst this 
has improved over the past decade it has shown a slower improvement than 
England overall.   
2.35 Leicester’s diverse population is marked by a greater number of younger 
people and lower number of older residents than the national average. There 
is a persistent gap in health between Leicester and England overall. The health 
gap between the more deprived and the more affluent communities within 
Leicester has remained unequal.     
2.36 New and existing communities need the appropriate health and 
community infrastructure to support their needs and wellbeing. This is an 
important issue for the new Local Plan.  Environmental issues such as air quality, 
the provision of open spaces and leisure opportunities, and access to education 
and employment can all affect health and wellbeing.    
Waste and Minerals    
2.37 As a unitary authority, Leicester City Council is a waste and minerals 
planning authority. This responsibility involves identifying waste arising from 
all sources within the administrative boundary of Leicester and the Leicester 
Urban Area and requirements for minerals including aggregates and how these 
will be sourced.   263. Vision for Leicester   
   
  
273.1 The vision and objectives form the heart of the Local Plan and are built 
from the foundations laid out in the spatial portrait. They take into account the 
council’s corporate priorities and strategies. The council has utilised a range of 
previous consultations (See Figure 01) and evidence to help formally shape the 
vision and objectives for the city for the next 15 years.
The Vision  
A confident city with a reputation as a cosmopolitan, creative and academically 
rich place, in which businesses thrive and there is strong sustainable growth in 
housing, jobs and skills.    
A place where all people who live, work and enjoy the city feel proud to belong 
to our city and that our city belongs to them.   
3.2 Below are the key objectives which inform and support the overarching vision:  
Objective 1: Support the delivery of new homes balanced with economic growth 
to meet the needs of all people.
Objective 2: Prepare for, limit and adapt to climate change. 
Objective 3: Support economic growth, maximise employment opportunities 
and support businesses to grow.
Objective 4: Improve the health and wellbeing of local residents. 
Objective 5: Ensure new development is of a high-quality design and layout 
which reflects local context and circumstances.
Objective 6: Enabling the right infrastructure for the city to grow and thrive. 
Objective 7: Conserve and enhance the identity, character and diversity of the 
city’s built and heritage assets.
Objective 8: Protect and enhance the natural environment including green 
infrastructure and biodiversity.
Objective 9: Make efficient use of existing transport infrastructure by helping to 
reduce the need to travel by car and improve accessibility to jobs and services.28Objective 10: Enhance the vitality and viability of our city centre, town centres 
and district and local centres.
Presumption in Favour of Sustainable Development  
3.3 The government expects the planning system to actively encourage 
growth, giving local people the opportunity to shape communities, whilst 
ensuring sufficient housing to meet local need and support economic activity. 
This approach is entirely consistent with the council’s vision and aspirations 
for Leicester. In this context it is important that the planning system does 
everything possible to support economic growth and sustainable development.   
3.4 In accordance with the National Planning Policy Framework 2021 (NPPF), 
all the policies within the local plan have been prepared with a presumption in 
favour of sustainable development.   
Policy VL01. Presumption in Favour of Sustainable Development  
a) When considering development proposals, we will apply the presumption in 
favour of sustainable development contained in the National Planning Policy 
Framework (NPPF)
b) The city will work pro-actively with applicants to find solutions so that 
appropriate proposals can be approved wherever possible to secure 
development that improves the economic, social and environmental 
conditions in Leicester
c) Planning applications that accord with policies in the local plan will be 
approved unless material considerations dictate otherwise
d) Where there are no policies relevant to the application, or relevant policies 
are out of date at the time of making the decision, then the council will grant 
permission unless material considerations indicate otherwise, taking into 
account whether:
• Any adverse impacts of granting permission would significantly and 
demonstrably outweigh the benefits when assessed against the policies 
in the NPPF taken as a whole; or  
• Specific policies in the NPPF indicate that development should be 
restricted294. Strategy for Leicester 
 
 
 
304.1 This chapter presents the main components of our Strategy. It contains the 
council’s strategic policies for different parts of the city. It sets out the type, 
scale and broad locations of where new homes, infrastructure, open spaces, 
employment uses and shops will be developed in the period up to 2036. See 
Diagram 2 Growth in the Leicester Urban Area. 
 
4.2 All aspects of development must meet rigorous standards of social, 
economic and environmental sustainability. The council has undertaken an 
appraisal of all the reasonable planning options for the Local Plan assessed 
against a range of objectives and sustainability criteria and this has guided the 
draft strategy.   
 
The Leicester and Leicestershire Strategic Growth Plan  
4.3 This Local Plan covers the period to 2036 in the context of the Strategic 
Growth Plan (SGP) which enables effective cooperative working with other local 
planning authorities in the Leicester and Leicestershire Housing Market Area 
(HMA) over the plan period. 
 
4.4 The Strategic Growth Plan has been prepared by the ten partner 
organisations in Leicester and Leicestershire to provide a long-term vision that 
will address the challenges that the area faces, and the opportunities presented 
for growth. The plan sets out an agreed strategy for the period to 2050, which 
will be delivered through Local Plans. 
 
4.5 The key strategic planning issues affecting Leicester and Leicestershire are 
as follows: 
• Securing major strategic infrastructure investment to support planned 
housing and economic growth
•  In declaring a climate emergency, ensure that development in the city 
achieves very low carbon dioxide emissions
•  Meeting in full the requirement for housing across the Strategic Housing 
Market Area and thus accelerating the delivery of new homes
•  Meeting the need for employment land across the Functioning Economic 
Market Area (FEMA)31•  Aligning substantial housing and employment growth, such that the need to 
travel is reduced with enhanced opportunities to use public transport and 
active travel methods
•  Meeting the majority of long-term future housing and employment land needs 
in strategic growth locations
•  Encouraging healthy and active lifestyles to improve the health and wellbeing 
of local residents
 
4.6 To ensure that the Leicester and Leicestershire HMA housing and 
employment need is fulfilled up to 2036, Leicester & Leicestershire Statement 
of Common Ground on Housing & Employment Need (June 2022) has been 
produced and agreed by the following local authorities within the Leicester and 
Leicestershire HMA:
•  Oadby and Wigston Borough Council
•  North West Leicestershire District Council
•  Leicestershire County Council
•  Blaby District Council
•  Oadby and Wigston Borough Council
•  Melton Borough Council
Sustainability Appraisal  
4.7 The city council has carried out a sustainability appraisal process, to 
assess the social, environmental and economic effects of the plan from the 
outset. This will help ensure that decisions contribute to achieving sustainable 
development. 
 
4.8 The sustainability appraisal is integral to the plan making process and 
performs a key role in providing a sound evidence base for the plan. The 
sustainability appraisal facilitates the evaluation and choice of alternatives. 
It also helps demonstrate that the plan is the most appropriate, given the 
reasonable alternatives. 
 
Strategy for Leicester: How much new development is required? 
4.9 A key aspect of the Local Plan is to identify the amount of new jobs and 
homes needed and translating these into the provision of sufficient land.  
 321. Housing - Chapter 5 
4.10 The National Planning Policy Framework requires councils to calculate 
their local housing needs based on a standard methodology. For Leicester, the 
local housing need is 2,464 dwellings per annum (39,424 homes over the plan 
period) which includes the 35% uplift for large cities. The local plan identifies a 
target of 1,296 dwellings per annum. About 20,730 homes will be delivered over 
the plan period, with the remaining housing need being apportioned as agreed 
in the Statement of Common Ground (SoCG).  
  
Proposed Options for Meeting Housing need in the city  
•  Prioritisation of new housing development on brownfield sites in the Central 
Development Area and attracting more people to live in the city centre
•  Delivery of housing on sites within the city (outside the Central Development 
Area) that are housing allocations in the Local Plan or that have current 
planning consents. This includes the completion of development at Ashton 
Green
•  Ensuring the efficient use of land and seeking to achieve higher densities in 
the right locations whilst ensuring a suitable mix and type of housing
•  Seek development of new strategic locations for housing - former Western 
Park Golf Course; east of Ashton Green; Land north of the A46 bypass; and 
land west of Anstey Lane
•  Remodelling and improvement of sites in existing residential areas to increase 
housing supply and create more balanced communities
•  To continue working on the SoCG with authorities within the Housing Market 
Area (HMA) to agree the spatial distribution of housing need that cannot be 
met in the city
 
4.11 Even with these sites coming forward there will not be enough housing 
land in the city given its tightly drawn administrative boundaries and lack of 
developable and viable sites. The spatial distribution of the city’s housing need 
that cannot be met, in addition to any other unmet need arising within the 
Housing Market Area (HMA) has been agreed in the Leicester & Leicestershire 
Statement of Common Ground on Housing and Employment Need (June 2022).
 332. Employment - Chapter 12 
4.12 As well as providing new homes it is vitally important that the city’s 
economy is supported and able to grow, providing new jobs and investment 
into the city. For a number of years,  the surrounding areas have grown jobs 
faster than the city. Increasingly, industrial land is being redeveloped for 
alternative uses. Prior to the employment land at Ashton Green no significant 
new employment land has been provided within the city’s boundaries for many 
years. Fourteen hectares at Bursom Business Park (around Hoods Close and 
Ashton Close) was the last significant addition over 25 years ago.  Appropriate 
provision is needed, in order to augment the city’s economy. 
 
4.13 The 2020 Economic Development Needs Assessment (EDNA) identified 
the city as needing 65 hectares of employment land. Therefore, the council is 
fully supportive of the following economic growth projects: 
•  Continued delivery of offices - A priority for the city centre with two 
proposed office allocations around the railway station and at Southampton 
Street
•  Pioneer Park (at Abbey Meadows) - Science, research and innovation 
building, adjacent to the new University of Leicester Space centre
•  Cultural Quarter - Business start-ups and creative industries
•  New Manufacturing - High quality new employment areas at former Western 
Park Golf Course, Beaumont Park, and land east of Ashton Green
•  Retention of existing employment land that is ‘fit for purpose’, including textile 
areas and neighbourhood employment areas
4.14 Provision of housing sites is a priority, so 23 hectares of employment 
need will be met outside the city boundary as agreed in the Leicester & 
Leicestershire Statement of Common Ground on Housing & Employment Need 
(June 2022).
3. Central Development Area  -  Chapter 9
4.15 The aim of the Central Development Area (CDA) is to enable the city 
council to direct, optimise and encourage investment, whilst managing 
development appropriately within a local context so that it delivers high quality 
design. This in turn creates certainty and developer confidence. Nine important 34distinctive character areas (see Diagram 6) have been identified with a specific 
vision for each.  
 
4.16 The overall objectives for this area are: 
•  Promoting the growth of the city centre as the sub-regional focus for 
commerce, retailing, culture, leisure and entertainment
•  Providing around 6,286 dwellings
•  Enriching the retailing experience by protecting and enhancing the historic 
environment through heritage led regeneration
•  Promoting tourism - this plays an important role in the city’s economy and 
there are significant opportunities to grow both the visitor and business 
tourism markets in the coming years
•  Enabling and facilitating the provision of top-grade offices
 
4. Infrastructure - Chapter 18 
4.17 Our planned growth must be supported by infrastructure and facilities 
which are deliverable at the appropriate time and in the right locations.   An 
Infrastructure Assessment covering the city has been undertaken to establish 
infrastructure needs resulting from planned growth, the costs and sources 
of funding, and responsibility for delivery. The city council will work closely 
with neighbouring authorities on needs arising from growth and development 
beyond the city boundary. This requires consideration of interdependent 
infrastructure and critical dependencies beyond the city’s administrative 
boundary.     
 
5. Retail and Leisure Growth - Chapter 13 
4.18 The city council commissioned a new retail & leisure study in 2021 to 
establish the need for new comparison and convenience shopping floorspace. 
The study also considers future leisure needs. 
 
4.19 There will always be a need for new shops and leisure facilities to 
accommodate increased demand, or to replace outdated facilities. As 
shops adapt to the convenience of internet shopping through innovation, 
experience and technology, it will become more important than ever that such 
developments are in the right locations.  
 354.20 The new local plan will support shopping centres in the retail hierarchy 
as the most sustainable location for retail development and other main town 
centre uses. The city centre will be the preferred location for retail, cultural and 
leisure uses. Beaumont Leys town centre has a role serving retail and leisure 
needs in the north-west sector of the city. District and local centres can meet 
more local needs.  
 
6. The Green Infrastructure Network – Chapters 14 and 15 
4.21 Throughout the city and in the wider Leicester area there is a network 
of open spaces, parks, wildlife areas, nature reserves, greenways, rivers and 
waterways that connect the heart of the urban area to the wider countryside. 
This green network provides walkways, leisure routes, cycleways, places for 
formal and informal play, recreation, a place for people to see and experience 
wildlife and natural places on people’s doorstep. The network also includes 
areas for flood alleviation, Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems (SuDS), 
allotments, sports pitches and plays a key part in helping to improve air quality 
and reduce water pollution. It consists of green wedges and open spaces. 
The River Soar and Grand Union Canal have an important role in providing a 
strategic green/blue infrastructure corridor that runs through the city.
 
4.22 Notwithstanding the pressures to deliver growth in the city and wider area, 
protection and enhancement of this green network is an important element of 
this plan’s strategy.  
4.23 The plan will position the city’s response to The Environment Act 2022, 
in terms of policy to support delivery of Biodiversity Net Gain and work on the 
Leicester and Leicestershire Nature Recovery Network.36Diagram 2.  Growth in the Leicester Urban Area.
Hinckley and 
BosworthCharnwood
Blaby HarboroughOadby and Wigston
© Crown copyright and database rights 
2022. Ordnance Survey 100019264.Strategic Growth areas
Central Development Area
Employment Growth
Retail Growth
City Centre
Green Wedges
Leicester City Administrative Boundary
District Council boundariesM1
M1M69Glen/f_ieldBirstall
Thurmaston
Scraptoft
Oadby
Wigston Glen ParvaKirby Muxloe
Leicester
Forest East
Braunstone T ownRothley
SystonQueniborough
Thurcaston
Anstey
Groby
Ratby
Narborough
Broughton
AstleyCountesthorpeBlaby37Location of Development 
•  The city centre  will continue to be designated as a strategic location for 
housing. This creates greater opportunity for a range of housing densities as 
described in the housing chapter (Chapter 5)
•  The development of strategic housing sites at the former Western Park 
Golf Course, land east of Ashton Green, land north of the A46 bypass, 
and land west of Anstey Lane will be brought forward so that they can 
provide a readily developable alternative location for new housing. Housing 
development at Ashton Green will continue to be built out during the plan 
period
•  To build on Leicester’s economic growth and competitiveness, a priority 
will be to ensure a balanced supply of employment land and premises is 
available to meet the needs of local and new business and to attract inward 
investment
•  The development of strategic employment provision will be included, 
at the former Western Park Golf Course, east of Ashton Green, and the 
Beaumont Park site will be brought forward so that they can provide a 
readily developable alternative location for new employment and for existing 
business to expand sustainably. Development at Ashton Green’s Business 
Park will continue to be built out during the plan period
•  The city centre will also be the preferred location for retail, cultural and 
leisure uses that serve the city and the wider Leicester Urban Area, and for 
professional offices
Policy SL01.  Location of Development 
 
Development will be located in accordance with the spatial strategy outlined 
below and as shown on Diagram 2  Growth in Leicester. 
 
Housing 
The Government’s standard methodology identifies the amount of new housing 
that should take place in Leicester by 2036. An overall housing need of 39,424 
homes across the plan period has been identified for Leicester. The city council 
will work with districts within the Housing Market Area (HMA) and with partners 
in the public, private and voluntary sectors, to ensure the delivery of housing as 
part of sustainable mixed communities. 38Leicester City Council will work towards a target of providing 20,730 dwellings 
over the plan period from 2020-36 (1,296 dwellings annually) to contribute 
towards identified need within the city. 
Residential development will take place in the following locations in the city: 
• 6,286 homes in the Central Development Area (CDA)
• 1,838 Homes in the following strategic sites
 ◦Former Western Park Golf Course
 ◦Land East of Ashton Green
 ◦Land north of the A46 bypass
 ◦Land west of Anstey Lane
• The remaining 1,230 homes will be built on smaller non-strategic sites 
elsewhere in the city (see Appendix 6)
• The city council will continue to work with authorities within the Housing 
Market Area(HMA) to agree the spatial distribution of housing need that 
cannot be met in the city. About 18,694 homes from our identified housing 
need will be accommodated in the neighbouring districts as part of their 
targets through their local plans
Employment  
Evidence in the 2020 Economic Development Needs Assessment (EDNA) 
2021 identifies the amount of new employment development that is needed in 
Leicester by 2036 as being:
• 46,000 sqm offices
• 67ha land for light / general industry and small scale storage and distribution 
use
• Additional land for Strategic distribution uses (over 9000 sqm in size) will not 
be provided within the city’s boundary
  
High Quality Economic Development Areas 
Recognising the priority of residential development, to minimise unmet housing 
need, only around 44ha of land is proposed for allocation within the city’s 
boundaries, including new employment development (light industry (E(g)iii), 
general industry (B2) and small scale storage and distribution (B8) uses) in the 
following three strategic employment sites -  former Western Park Golf Course, 
east of Ashton Green and Beaumont Leys Park and other local sites (See Table 
8 in Chapter 12).39The remaining unmet employment need will be redistributed as agreed in the 
Leicester and Leicestershire Housing and Employment need Statement of 
Common Ground (June 2022).
 
New Office Development  
 
Land will be allocated for new offices at two sites: 
• The station car park and former Campbell Street sorting office for major 
office development providing a minimum of 20,000 sqm of new offices
• Land around Phoenix Square (between Burton Street, St George’s Way, 
Southampton Street and Morledge Street) being mixed-use office led 
development, with some residential use, providing a minimum of 20,000 sqm 
office floorspace and a maximum of 200 residential units (Use Class E(g)i/
C3)
Former Western Park Golf Course 
 
4.24 The Local Plan identifies 52.1 ha of land in the western part of the city 
within the Leicester city administrative boundary. This land forms part of a 
larger area which lies within Blaby District Council but is owned by LCC. The 
two councils plan to work together in bringing the wider piece of land forward 
for development.  
 
4.25 The former Western Park Golf Course (FWPGC) is one of the five strategic 
key sites and will help to bring forward approximately 412 houses, provision 
for self-build/ custom-build plots, about 3.48 ha  of open space and 9.74 ha of 
employment land.  
 
4.26 A Masterplan will be required to develop the site for housing, employment, 
household waste recovery centre, green infrastructure, Biodiversity Net Gain 
and open space that is in keeping with the character of the surrounding area. 
Due regard will need to be given to the surrounding green wedge and will need 
to be in compliance with the rest of the policies in this plan. The site will be 
brought forward for development through joint working with agents, builders, 
developers, infrastructure providers and Blaby District Council. The city council 
owned land in the district of Blaby has been promoted through Blaby’s ‘call for 
sites’ as part of their local plan evidence. 40Policy SL02. Strategic Site 1: Former Western Park Golf Course 
 
Leicester City Council will work in partnership with developers and partners to 
deliver former Western Park Golf Course, identified as a strategic development 
location in the spatial strategy and as shown on the Policies Map. The 
development will provide: 
 
Housing  
• 412 homes, 30% of which will be expected to be  affordable in accordance 
with Policy Ho04
• Homes of a range of tenures, types, and sizes, in accordance with Policy  
Ho03
• High quality design, in accordance with Policy DQP01 and other design 
policies in this plan
• Self-build / custom build plots in accordance with Policy Ho06
• Gypsy and Traveller pitches (7 permanent pitches) in accordance with Policy 
Ho12
 
Employment 
• 11.24 ha of employment land for Class E (g)iii , B2 and B8 uses
• Household Waste Recycling Centre, around 1.5 ha
Open Space  
• 3.48 ha of public open space
• Measures to achieve Biodiversity net gain
  
Delivery  
• Leicester City Council as landowner will work jointly with the promoters, 
development partners and Blaby District Council to ensure the timely 
delivery of the site and establish the mechanisms for securing the 
infrastructure needed to enable the development of this site;
• Delivery of the site must be based on a master plan with an associated 
delivery and a phasing plan.41Land to the east of Ashton Green 
4.27 The Local Plan identifies about 53 hectares of land to the east of Ashton 
Green. This site comprises two sites which are land to east of Leicester Road 
adjacent Ashton Green (49.85 hectares) and land north of Birstall Golf Course 
(4.55 hectares). The larger site has been identified for residential development 
and a secondary school. The indicative capacity is that 670 dwellings can 
be accommodated on the site. The smaller parcel has been identified for 
employment use.  
 
4.28 The site will require a masterplan to develop the housing, green 
infrastructure, Biodiversity Net Gain, open spaces, sustainable urban drainage 
systems (SUDS) and be in keeping with the character of the surrounding 
area. Due regard will need to be given to the surrounding green wedge and 
be in compliance with the rest of the policies of this plan. The site will be 
brought forward for development through joint working with agents, builders, 
developers, and infrastructure providers. 
Policy SL03. Strategic Site 2: Land to the east of Ashton Green 
 
Leicester City Council will work in partnership with developers and partners to 
deliver land to the east of Ashton Green identified as a strategic development 
location in the spatial strategy and as shown on the Policies Map. The 
development will provide: 
Northern Zone
 
Housing  
• 670 homes, 30% of which will be expected to be affordable in accordance 
with Policy Ho04
• Homes of a range of tenures, types, and sizes in accordance with Policy 
Ho03
• High quality design in accordance with Policy DQP01 and other design 
policies in this plan
• Self-build / custom build plots in accordance with Policy Ho06
Facilities and services 
• A secondary school with about 1,200 students capacity   and any associated 
infrastructure42Open Space 
• Around 4.94 ha of open space
• Measures to achieve Biodiversity Net gain
 
Southern Zone
Employment
• Although this site is 4.55 ha gross, most of this will needed to provide the 
green infrastructure. 2.4 ha will be built out as employment land for Class E)
g)iii, B2 and B8 uses
Delivery  
• Leicester City Council as landowner will work jointly with the promoters and 
development partners to ensure the timely delivery of the site, establishing 
the mechanisms for securing the infrastructure needed to enable the 
development of this site
• Delivery of the site must be based on a master plan with an associated 
delivery and a phasing plan
Land to the north of the A46 Bypass 
4.29 The Local Plan identifies about 33 ha of land to the north of the A46 
Bypass. A capacity of 420 dwellings has been identified on this site.  
 
4.30 The site will require a masterplan to develop the housing and green 
infrastructure, open spaces and sustainable urban drainage systems (SUDS) 
in keeping with the character of the surrounding area, with due regard to the 
surrounding green wedge and in compliance with the rest of the policies of this 
plan. The site will be brought forward for development through joint working 
with agents, builders, developers and infrastructure providers. 
Policy SL04. Strategic Site 3: Land north of the A46 Bypass 
 
Leicester City Council will work in partnership with developers and partners 
to deliver land to the north of A46 Leicester Western Bypass, identified as a 
strategic development location in the spatial strategy and as shown on the 
Policies Map. The development will provide:43Housing  
• 420 homes in total have been identified at this location. 30% of which will be 
expected to be affordable in accordance with Policy Ho04
• Homes of a range of tenures, types, and sizes in accordance with Policy 
Ho03
• High quality design in accordance with Policy DQP01 and other design 
policies
• Self-build/custom build plots in accordance with Policy Ho06
• Retention of the on-site pond
 
Open Space 
• To be defined in combination with environmental and biodiversity 
enhancements through the masterplanning process
Delivery  
• Leicester City Council as landowner will work jointly with the promoters and 
development partners to ensure the timely delivery of the site and establish 
the mechanisms for securing the infrastructure needed to enable the 
development of this site
• Delivery of the site must be based on a master plan with an associated 
delivery and a phasing plan
Land west of Anstey Lane 
4.31 The Local Plan identifies 17 hectares of land at this strategic location 
which comprises three parcels of land. The parcels of land are land north of 
Billesdon Close (12.8 hectares) with a site capacity of 240 homes; The Paddock 
(4.5 hectares) with a capacity of 84 dwellings; and a small parcel of land to the 
south of Gorse Hill Hospital (0.5 hectares) with a capacity of 12 dwellings. In 
total, this strategic site has an indicative capacity of 336 dwellings.
 
4.32 The site will require a masterplan to develop the housing, green 
infrastructure, open spaces, and sustainable urban drainage systems (SUDS) 
and be in keeping with the character of the surrounding area. Due regard will 
need be given to the surrounding green wedge and be in compliance with the 
rest of the policies of this plan. Subject to a comprehensive access solution, 
including adjacent sites in Charnwood and Blaby, the site is suitable for 
housing.  44Policy SL05. Strategic Site 4: Land west of Anstey Lane 
 
Leicester City Council will work in partnership with developers and partners to 
deliver land west of Anstey Lane identified as a strategic development location 
in the spatial strategy and as shown on the Policies Map. The development will 
provide:
 
Housing  
• 336 homes across three parcels, 30% of which will be expected to be 
affordable in accordance with Policy Ho04
• Homes of a range of tenures, types, and sizes in accordance with Policy 
Ho03
• High quality design in accordance with Policy DQP01 and other design 
policies in this plan
• Self-build / custom build plots in accordance with Policy Ho06
Facilities and services
• Cross boundary co-operation between key stakeholders will be needed 
around education provision on this site.
Open Space 
• To be defined in combination with environmental and biodiversity 
enhancements through the master planning process
Delivery  
• Leicester City Council as landowner will work jointly with the promoters and 
development partners to ensure the timely delivery of the site establishing 
the mechanisms for securing the infrastructure needed to enable the 
development of this site, including transport and access in an integrated and 
comprehensive manner, with emerging sites in Blaby and Charnwood
Delivery of the site must be based on a master plan with an associated delivery 
and a phasing plan 
Beaumont Park
4.33 The Local Plan identifies about 20 hectares of land within Beaumont Park, 
the eastern portion of which is suitable for employment development. The site 
will be brought forward for development by the city council.45Policy SL06 Strategic Site 5:  Beaumont Park
Leicester City Council will work to deliver employment development, on land 
within Beaumont Park, identified as a strategic location, in the spatial strategy. 
The development will provide:
Employment
•  7.14 hectares of employment development within the wider 19.72 ha site
• Approximately 25,000sqm of floorspace for light Industry (E(g)(iii)), general 
industry (B2) and storage and distribution (B8) uses (with ancillary offices 
only)
• In addition to the general planning requirements, development will need 
to address, ecology, trees, land contamination, design quality and sports 
provision.  
• Gypsy and traveller transit site that could accommodate 12 caravan spaces465. Housing 
 
47Evidence Base 
5.1 There are several background studies that will underpin policies in this plan. 
The main technical studies for this chapter are published on our website and 
will be updated as and when new studies are undertaken and completed.  
 
• Local Housing Needs Assessment 2022
• Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Needs Assessment (2017)
•  Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Needs Assessment (Partial Update 
2019)
•  Strategic Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment (SHELAA) 
(2022)
•  National Space Standards Local Evidence (2022)
•  Central Development Area (CDA) Capacity  Study (2022)
•  Leicester and Leicestershire wide Housing and Employment Needs 
Assessment (2022)
Background 
5.2 The NPPF suggests that local planning authorities should deliver a wide 
choice of high-quality homes that widen opportunities for home ownership 
and create sustainable, inclusive, and mixed communities. To achieve this, 
it is necessary to ensure that new housing developments are well designed, 
sustainably located, contribute to a good quality of life and meet the needs of 
the city’s residents. 
 
Strategic Growth Plan
5.3 The Strategic Growth Plan (2018) sets out the aspirations for delivering 
growth in the Leicester and Leicestershire Housing Market Area (HMA). It 
sets out, in broad terms the amount and location of future growth (housing, 
economic, infrastructure) that the Leicester and Leicestershire HMA (Housing 
Market Area) will be expecting to accommodate until 2050.  
  
5.4 To ensure that the Leicester and Leicestershire HMA housing need is 
fulfilled up to 2036, a Leicester & Leicestershire Statement of Common Ground 
on Housing & Employment Need (June 2022) has been agreed by each local 
authority within the HMA, with the exception of Hinckley & Bosworth Borough 48Council and Harborough Borough Council. The SoCG sets out how the Leicester 
and Leicestershire HMA housing need will be met, including how need that 
cannot be accommodated within Leicester will be dealt with. The Statement of 
Common Ground will be updated as appropriate.   
Housing Requirements and Supply    
5.5 In accordance with the Spatial Strategy (policy SL01) provision needs to be 
made for a minimum of 39,424 dwellings during the plan period 2020 - 2036 
(2,464 dwellings per year). The Local Plan housing target is 20,730 homes over 
the plan period or 1,296 dwellings per annum.
 
5.6 The Local Plan will seek to deliver this through a variety of options, in 
accordance with the NPPF  including existing commitments, housing allocations 
including strategic sites, capacity within the Central Development Area (CDA), 
suggested by an appropriate windfall allowance and the distribution of the 
remainder of the housing need within the HMA, which has been agreed in the 
Statement of Common Ground (SoCG).   
 
5.7 Extant outline and full planning permissions up to 31st March 2022 have 
been included in the commitments. This includes the student and older people’s 
housing with the appropriate conversion rate applied. A total of 9,410  dwellings 
(about 45%) will be met through commitments. Depending upon the status of a 
consent, these are likely to come forward within the first five years, or between 
6-10 years.   
 
5.8 A range of sites have been assessed and identified in the plan as new 
allocations. These include four strategic sites where around 1,838  (9%) 
dwellings will be developed. The plan also allocates other smaller sites (outside 
the Central Development Area) which have a capacity of 1,230 (6%) dwellings.  
 
5.9 The NPPF prioritises local planning authorities to promote the effective use 
of land in meeting the need for homes and other uses by making as much use 
as possible of previously developed land (brownfield land), while safeguarding 
and improving the environment. Based on the Central Development Area 
Capacity Study, the plan identifies the Central Development Area as a 
significant location for housing development with the majority being on 
brownfield land.  About 6,286 dwellings   (30%) is proposed in this area.  
 495.10 The NPPF also supports the development of windfall sites through 
planning policies as long as it is realistic and historic windfall rates have been 
considered along with expected future trends. It is estimated that about 2,354 
(11%) dwellings will contribute towards the city’s housing supply through the 
development of windfall sites. 
 
5.11 The council will also seek to achieve its overall housing need through 
joint working with neighbouring districts within the Leicestershire HMA. The 
remainder of the need of 18,694 homes  will be met within the HMA as agreed 
in the Leicester & Leicestershire Statement of Common Ground on Housing & 
Employment Need (June 2022) under Duty to Cooperate. 
 
5.12 Table 1 shows how the council’s housing requirement will be met over the 
plan period. 
 
Table 1: Housing provision from 2020-36 (This is subject to change).
Component  Dwellings  
A Housing Need 2020-36 (Standard 
Method 2021) 39,424 (2,464 dwellings per 
annum) 
BCompletions 2020-21 1,050
CCompletions 2021-22 842
DTotal completions 2020-22 (B + C) 1,892
 Commitments   
ECommitments: 
detailed and outline permissions9,410
F Saved previous Local Plan allocations 0  
G Windfall allowance 2,354 (214 dpa for 11 years)  
HAllocations identified in the draft plan 1,230
JCentral Development Area capacity work  6,286
KStrategic sites  1,83850Component  Dwellings  
LTotal anticipated supply within the city  21,118
MOverall supply (anticipated supply + 
completions) – D + L21,118 + 1892 = 23,010
NLocal Plan Housing Target (2020-36) 
(Approximate 11% buffer)20,730
OUnmet need 18,694
5.13 Housing provision in the early years of the plan will largely rely on existing 
housing sites being delivered through current planning permissions and 
allocations. Development of the strategic sites will happen towards the later 
years of the plan, which is mainly due to the infrastructure needed to support 
new housing.  
 
5.14 A detailed trajectory showing this is included in Appendix 1.
 
Housing Allocations 
5.15 A systematic assessment of a range of sites was carried out in order 
to identify draft housing allocations. The sites were identified through the 
Strategic Housing & Economic Land Availability Assessment (SHELAA 2022). 
Sites capable of accommodating 5 or more units or that had an area of 0.25 
hectares and above were considered and appraised before being allocated  . 
The sites were assessed for their suitability, availability and achievability, with 
a reasonable prospect that they will come forward for development at specific 
points in time within the plan period. 
 
5.16 The non-strategic allocations are listed in Appendix 6. 
Policy Ho01. Housing Allocations 
 
New housing will be delivered within the Local Plan on sites as identified in 
Appendix 6.  
Housing proposals will be supported where they:  
a) Provide an appropriate mix of housing as identified in Policy Ho03
b) Provide affordable housing in accordance with Policy Ho0451c) Provide infrastructure required to support the proposed development in 
accordance with Policy DI01
d) Achieve high quality design as set out in Policy DQP01 and other design 
policies
e) Respect the character of the area in compliance with the environmental, 
design and heritage policies in the Local Plan
f) Address site specific issues as set out in the Site Allocations document
Housing at Ashton Green
Housing Development on Unallocated Sites  
5.17 Other sites such as infill and backland development sites have not been 
allocated for residential development in the Local Plan but will come forward as 
windfall development sites. Over the last few years an average of 214 dwellings 
per year has been provided on such sites. 
 525.18 Housing development may be supported on sites that are not identified 
as allocations in the Local Plan where they are considered to be suitable and 
contribute towards meeting the city’s housing need.  
Policy Ho02. Housing Development on Unallocated Sites  
 
The council will support proposals in accordance with Spatial Strategy Policy 
SL01 which contribute towards meeting the local development needs. Planning 
permission will be granted for new residential development on  unallocated 
sites where: 
a) The proposals comply with relevant policies in this plan and any relevant 
supplementary planning documents
b) The proposals will be supported by existing infrastructure or provide new 
infrastructure as part of the development
c) The proposals are in accordance with design principles set out in Policy 
DQP01, other design policies in the plan and design guides/codes in 
order to provide a high-quality living environment and create sustainable 
communities
d) Respect the character of the area in compliance with the environmental, 
design and heritage policies
Meeting a Range of Housing Needs 
5.19 In order to meet the variety of needs in the city, a range of housing must 
be provided.  This includes affordable housing, student housing, older people’s 
housing, houses in multiple occupation (HMOs), self-build/ custom build 
housing and accessible housing.  
  
Housing Mix 
5.20 The Local Plan seeks to achieve a mix of balanced communities through 
the provision of a range of housing mix and types to ensure that new housing 
development meets the current and future needs of the city’s population. A 
range of homes including family homes, student housing, supported living and 
self-build/custom-build will be supported through the Local Plan policies. 
Table 2 shows the recommended mix of market housing and affordable housing 
for the city. Table 3 shows the housing mix as percentages.   
 53Table 2: Overall need for Market and Affordable Dwellings excluding impact 
of Right to Buy Sales (including affordable home ownership products) by 
property size.
Number of 
bedroomsAffordable 
Dwellings
Unable 
to afford 
market rentsAble to 
afford 50% 
First Homes, 
but not 70% 
First HomesAble to 
afford 70% 
First HomesTotal 
Affordable 
HousingTotal 
Market 
HousingTotal 
Housing
1 bedroom 1,702 95 521 2,318 1,948 4,266
2 bedrooms 4,231 200 587 5,019 4,782 9,800
3 bedrooms 7,312 262 599 8,173 13,076 21,249
4+ 
bedrooms2,276 56 29 2,361 1,431 3,792
DWELLINGS 15,522 613 1,736 17,871 21,237 39,108
C2 
Dwellings- - - - 316 316
LHN 15,522 613 1,736 17,871 21,237 39,424
Source: ORS Housing Model July 2022 – Note: Figures rounded up.
Table 3: Overall need for Market and Affordable Dwellings excluding impact 
of Right to Buy Sales (including affordable home ownership products) by 
property size as percentages.
Number of 
bedroomsAffordable 
Dwellings
Unable 
to afford 
market rentsAble to 
afford 50% 
First Homes, 
but not 70% 
First HomesAble to 
afford 70% 
First HomesTotal 
Affordable 
HousingTotal 
Market 
HousingTotal 
Housing
1 bedroom 9.5% 0.5% 2.9% 13.0% 9.0% 10.8%
2 bedrooms 23.7% 1.1% 3.3% 28.2% 22.2% 24.9%
3 bedrooms 40.9% 1.5% 3.4% 45.9% 60.7% 53.9%
4+ 
bedrooms12.7% 0.3% 0.2% 13.2% 6.6% 9.6%
DWELLINGS 86.9% 3.4% 9.7% 100.0% 98.5% 99.2%
C2 
Dwellings- 1.5% 0.8%
LHN 86.9% 3.4% 9.7% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
Source: ORS Housing Model July 2022 -  Note: figures rounded up.54Accessible and Adaptable dwellings   
5.21 For many years the council had sought a proportion of new affordable 
housing to be built to its own wheelchair accessible standard, a standard 
which allows for immediate occupation by a wheelchair user. It currently seeks 
a proportion of new affordable housing dwellings to be built to the nationally 
described wheelchair accessible standard.
Nationally described accessibility standards. 
 
5.22 These are split into three levels – M4(1), M4(2) and M4(3):
• Standard M4(1) is the default level and is the standard that every new home 
across the country should be built to, unless an individual council decides to 
adopt a higher standard
• Standard M4(2) is similar to the Lifetime Homes standard and was previously 
included in the city council’s Core Strategy (2014).  It requires homes to be 
designed in a way that makes them accessible and inclusive to meet the 
changing needs of the user over their lifetime for example, by ensuring step-
free access
• Standard M4(3) is a wheelchair accessible standard able to either be 
adaptable for occupation by a wheelchair user, or fully accessible for use 
immediately by a wheelchair user (M4(3) (2)(b) wheelchair accessible
 
5.23 Government guidance states that where an identified need exists, councils 
should clearly state in their local plan the proportion of new dwellings which 
should comply with these requirements. 55Policy Ho03. Housing Mix 
 
The Local Plan will seek to achieve a mix of house types, tenures and sizes, 
taking into account the evidenced needs, market conditions, viability, site 
specific circumstances and the housing mix as identified in Table 2 and Table 3, 
or in any future update of housing mix evidence.  
 
a) Proposals for residential development should seek to provide an appropriate 
mix and size of dwellings to meet the needs of current and future 
households in the city including family housing, extra care and accessible 
housing, having regard to the latest evidence of housing need
b) Proposals for supported living including retirement homes, sheltered homes 
and care homes will be supported and expected to meet the technical 
standard for access of Building Regulations 2015 Part M4(2) or any 
subsequent revisions
c) Proposals for wheelchair accessible dwellings will be expected to meet 
the technical standard for access of Building Regulations 2015 Part M4(3), 
or any subsequent revisions. At least 10% of affordable housing will be 
expected to meet the M4(3) technical standards. All homes will be expected 
to be accessible and adaptable standards (M4(2) technical standards)
Affordable Housing  
5.24 NPPF requires that affordable housing should be sought from all major 
schemes (10 dwellings or more) which should be provided on site. Only in 
exceptional circumstances will off-site contributions be acceptable. 
 
5.25 The Local Housing Needs Assessment 2022 states that Leicester has 
a total affordable housing need of 1,117 dwellings per annum for the period 
2020-36 (17,871 affordable homes over the plan period). The LHNA also notes 
that Leicester has a notably high level of overcrowded, concealed and shared 
households. 
 
5.26 The Local Plan will seek to achieve an affordable housing mix in 
accordance with the housing mix policy or any subsequent evidence update as 
mentioned in the housing mix section above.
 565.27 In line with government requirement, we will require 25% of affordable 
housing to be first homes. The remaining 75% will be for social/affordable rent 
as informed by the evidence or any future supplementary planning documents. 
The council will also achieve the affordable housing target through the delivery 
of schemes through private registered providers and the council’s own delivery 
programmes.   
Commuted Sums
5.28 The preference is for affordable housing to be delivered on-site in line with 
the NPPF. However, it is sensible for councils to also set out how a commuted 
sum would be calculated to provide transparency and clarity to developers. 
Separate guidance will be prepared setting out the amount of commuted sums 
payable taking into consideration any changes in viability. Until such time as 
the guidance is prepared, the council will calculate the commuted sum in line 
with current evidence (Affordable Housing SPD 2011) on a scheme-by-scheme 
basis. 
Policy Ho04. Affordable Housing 
 
a) The council will require 30% affordable housing of the total number of 
dwellings to be provided on all greenfield sites involving a major scheme 
(10 dwellings or more).  In the south east and Ashton Green areas shown 
on diagram 3 the Council will require 10% affordable housing of the total 
number of dwellings to be provided on brownfield sites involving a high-
density major scheme. The council will expect this requirement to be met. 
Any proposal below the percentage indicated will need to be fully justified 
through clear evidence set out in a viability assessment produced by the 
applicant. This assessment will need to demonstrate that grant funding 
sources have been fully explored
b) The type and mix of affordable housing sought will reflect Policy Ho03 or 
any other subsequent housing needs evidence. Each site will be expected 
to provide 10% of the affordable housing requirement to fully wheelchair 
accessible standards
c) Developers should not circumvent this policy by artificially subdividing sites 
and are expected to make efficient use of land. If a site comes forward as 
two or more separate development schemes, of which one or more falls 
below the appropriate threshold, the council will seek an appropriate level 57of affordable housing on each part to match in total the provision that would 
have been required on the site as a whole
d) Affordable housing should be provided on site and only in exceptional 
circumstances will contributions to make an equivalent provision elsewhere 
be acceptable. Affordable  housing should be available to those in housing 
need in perpetuity
e) The council will seek to achieve 25% of the overall affordable housing 
target as First Homes in compliance with the national policy . Remaining 
75% should be provided as social rent or affordable rent, in line with the 
evidence most recently published by the city council58Diagram 3. Affordable housing
© Crown copyright and database rights 
2022. Ordnance Survey 100019264.
Ashton Green
Central development area
South east Leicester
Leicester City Administrative Boundary59Housing Densities  
5.29 In considering the most appropriate and efficient density for a site, it will 
be necessary to consider the site and the context of the surrounding area. The 
use of innovative design and layout can enable higher density housing to be 
achieved without compromising the overall quality of the scheme. In seeking to 
achieve higher densities developers must have regard to creating good quality 
environments in accordance with Policy DQP01.  
 
5.30 The city council will be looking to achieve a higher density in the Central 
Development Area (CDA) of 75+ dwellings per hectare. Outside of the CDA, 
we will be seeking to achieve a minimum density of 35 dwellings per hectare. 
Schemes over 55 dwellings per hectare will be considered as high density. 
However, it is recognised that the achievable density of development proposals 
may vary, depending on site environmental and other constraints and therefore 
they will be assessed on their individual merits.  
  
Policy Ho05. Housing Densities  
 
The city council will support proposals that reflect the existing character of 
the areas, as well as which meet the locally identified needs of the city. The 
following density targets will be expected to be met: 
• Central Development Area – minimum of 75 dwellings per hectare
• Rest of the city – minimum of 35 dwellings per hectare
Self-build / Custom Build 
5.31 Custom build housing is where a developer with a site undertakes most of 
the design and building work in order to create a ‘custom built’ house on behalf 
of an individual. Self-build is where a private individual acquires a plot of land 
and organises the design and construction of their own home, either building it 
themselves or contracting a builder to undertake the work. 
 
5.32 Local authorities are now required to keep a register of individuals and 
groups who are seeking to acquire serviced plots of land in order to build 
houses for both of these house types. A self-build/ custom build register has 
been established in order to provide evidence of demand. The city council will 
support self-build and custom-build housing as evidenced by the local housing 60needs study. Sites proposed for 100% affordable housing will be exempt from 
the provision of self-build/ custom-build.   
Policy Ho06. Self-build/Custom Build  
 
Where sites provide for 10 or more homes consideration should be given to 
including either provision of serviced plots for self or custom builders, and/
or the provision of custom homes by other delivery routes subject to viability 
considerations and site-specific circumstances. 
Internal Space Standards 
5.33 The council recognises the importance of decent space standards to 
enable homes to be fully fit for purpose. For many years the council set out its 
own minimum floor areas for new build affordable housing. 
 
5.34 In March 2015 the government introduced a new Nationally Described 
Space Standard (NDSS) which deals with internal space within new dwellings 
regardless of tenure.  It sets out requirements for the Gross Internal (floor) Area 
of new dwellings at a defined level of occupancy as well as floor areas and 
dimensions for key parts of the home, notably bedrooms, storage and floor to 
ceiling height. Details of the space standards can be found on the Government 
website. 
 
5.35 Evidence demonstrates that some new homes that have been built in the 
city have been very small (some rooms providing as little floorspace as 13 sqm). 
To ensure good quality homes the council requires all new dwellings (Use class 
C3) to meet the National Described Space Standards, including conversions 
and change of use . New dwellings should provide a satisfactory environment 
for occupants and will be expected to meet the Government’s standard 
unless there is clear evidence to demonstrate that this would not be viable or 
technically feasible, and that a satisfactory standard of accommodation can still 
be achieved. 
Policy Ho07 . Internal Space Standards 
All proposals for new dwellings (Use Class C3) must meet the Nationally 
Described Space Standard (NDSS) as a minimum.61Purpose Built Student Accommodation (PBSA)  
5.36 Leicester is home to two major universities, De Montfort University (DMU) 
and the University of Leicester (UoL). The universities and their students 
have a positive impact on the local economy, boosting Leicester’s national 
and international profile, providing local companies with skilled graduates and 
seasonal/ part-time workers as well as purchasing local goods and services. To 
address the needs of the students the Local Housing Needs Assessment 2022 
identifies a further need of 4,800 bedspace to be provided over the plan period. 
However, the full impact of Covid and Brexit on future student housing need is 
not yet known. 
The Summit, student 
accommodation, Eastern 
Boulevard.
625.37 The construction and occupation of student accommodation also creates 
employment opportunities, supports local businesses and can deliver physical 
regeneration on disused sites and buildings. In recent years there has been 
a growth in the amount of purpose-built student accommodation (PBSA) 
schemes completed in the city. Evidence suggests that second and third year 
students (as well as first years) are now more likely to stay in PBSA. In general, 
there tends to be less disturbance to local residents reported (due to noise 
and litter) from purpose-built accommodation than student accommodation in 
Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMO’s).  
 
5.38 The council seeks to meet the housing needs of both the student 
population and local residents. High-quality purpose-built accommodation 
provides an alternative to the Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMO’s) that 
students have traditionally occupied and releases it to the general housing 
stock. This continues to form an important element of the council’s housing 
policy. However, if PBSA is to continue to be successful in the longer term, it 
needs to be in appropriate locations which will remain attractive to students 
and are sustainable.  
 
5.39 The main facilities e.g. temporary work, shops, bars and public transport 
interchanges that will be accessed by students are generally in the city centre 
and at the two main university campuses. To encourage sustainable travel 
new purpose-built student accommodation PBSA should be located within 
walking distance of the city centre and at least one of the campuses, or on 
a major public transport route which accesses these locations. A walkable 
neighbourhood typically has a range of facilities within a 10-minute walk, 
around 800m. However, this is only a general guide and has potential to be 
extended where good quality pedestrian or cycle routes are available.  
 63DM Policy Ho08.  Student Development 
 
New student development will be supported where: 
a) It is accessible by sustainable means from the city centre and is within 
reasonable walking and cycling distance of at least one of the two main 
university campuses   (ST01)
b) It lies outside and does not abut an Article 4 direction area, controlling HMO 
conversions
c) A travel plan manages beginning/ end of term traffic 
d) A parking management plan specifies the level of parking provision which 
is acceptable for all forms of vehicles including bicycles and powered two 
wheelers  (T07)
e) It includes communal facilities which are appropriate to the scale of 
development
f) A mix of uses is encouraged on the ground floor
 
Where necessary occupation will be limited to students in perpetuity. 
5.40 The council has sought to protect existing family accommodation across 
the city for which there is an identified need and regulate the over provision 
of HMOs in any one area. This has been by setting up Article 4 direction areas 
to restrict further HMOs within it. To ensure that PBSA contributes positively 
towards maintaining sustainable communities, the council will encourage 
student accommodation to be in appropriate locations outside of Article 4 
direction areas.  
 
5.41 Achieving well-managed student accommodation can help to minimise 
potential negative impacts on surrounding neighbourhoods.  The council will 
therefore expect all new student accommodation to have a robust management 
plan, along with a car parking management plan and a travel plan that 
addresses issues such as the beginning and end of term traffic.
 
Retention of Family Housing 
5.42 It is the council’s aim to retain good quality existing family housing. This 
will be informed by the Local Housing Needs Assessment 2022 or any future 
update to housing need evidence. Where the proposal is for the conversion of 
a residential property, which has 2 or 3 bedrooms to flats the council will not 
support the proposal subject to the new evidence provided by the study.  64Policy Ho09. Retention of Family Housing 
 
Planning permission will not be granted for the conversion of 2 or 3 bedroom 
houses into flats. Conversion of any properties with 4 or more bedrooms will be 
assessed on the following basis:
• Outside Article 4 HMO Control Areas, proposals will be assessed on their 
individual merits subject to compliance with Local Plan policies
• Within any Article 4 HMO Control Areas, proposals for conversion of family 
housing into flats will not be supported
Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMO’s) Class C4  
5.43 Conversion to shared houses for between 3 and 6 unrelated people, 
known as smaller HMOs currently has permitted development rights except 
in the defined areas of the city  where an Article 4 Direction applies and 
permission will be needed. The current extent of the areas is shown on the 
council’s website.  
 
5.44 In all areas, planning permission is required for all shared houses for 
more than 6 unrelated people, known as large HMOs. There continues to be a 
demand for HMOs and problems can arise when HMOs become concentrated in 
any one area, especially when combined with other existing non-family housing. 
This can detract from the amenity of neighbouring residential properties and 
have an adverse impact on the balance of the community. 
Policy Ho10. Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMOs) 
 
Planning permission will be granted for houses in multiple occupation if: 
a) The proposal will not  have an adverse impact on the character of the area 
and a mixed and balanced community can be maintained
b) The existing proportion of HMOs and other non-family housing within the 
area in which the proposed development is located does not amount to a 
significant concentration
Large HMOs 
In addition, for larger HMOs, conditions will be imposed on planning 
permissions so that the number of occupants cannot be increased without a 
further consent. 655.45 There are other issues that cannot be addressed directly by planning 
policy, such as policing matters or environmental nuisance. The city council 
will therefore continue to work with the shared housing landlords and local 
residents, the Universities and student accommodation providers to try to 
manage any conflicts between various sections of the community.   
Hostels 
5.46 There continues to be an occasional need for new hostels. Within the 
powers available to it, the city council aims to facilitate the provision of a range 
of accommodation to meet the special housing needs of all city residents. 
However, problems can arise when hostels become concentrated in any one 
area of the city. 
 
5.47 The following policy is aimed at protecting the residential character 
of an area and the amenity of neighbours, whilst providing a suitable living 
environment for occupiers.
Policy Ho11. Hostels 
 
Planning permission will be granted for new hostels and extensions to hostels 
provided that: 
a) This would not result in a concentration of such uses to the detriment of 
the character of the area, depending on the range of housing available, and 
there would be  no unacceptable impact on the amenity of neighbouring 
residential properties
b) Special consideration is given to the construction and internal arrangement 
of the premises to minimise potential noise disturbance to and from 
adjacent properties
c) Adequate accommodation, including garden and amenity space is provided 
to meet the needs of the residents
d) A suitable management plan is included as part of the proposal
Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople 
5.48 In helping to provide decent residential accommodation for all, the city 
council will meet the accommodation needs of gypsies and travellers and 
travelling showpeople.  
 665.49 The Government’s Planning Policy for Gypsy and Traveller Sites (PPTS 
2015) indicates that the council, in preparing their Local Plan, should:  
• Set pitch targets for gypsies and travellers and plot targets for travelling 
show people, which address the likely permanent and transit site 
accommodation needs of travellers in their area
• Identify and update annually a supply of specific deliverable sites sufficient 
to provide 5 years’ worth of sites against their locally set targets for travelling 
showpeople
• Identify a supply of specific developable sites, or broad locations for growth 
for years 6 to 10 and where possible for years 11-15
 
5.50 The Joint Leicester and Leicestershire Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling 
Showpeople Accommodation Assessment 2017 (Joint GTAA 2017) provides the 
evidence base for current and future need for gypsy, traveller and travelling 
showpeople accommodation in the city.  
 
5.51 An Addendum Report (September 2019) to the 2017 study has been 
undertaken for Leicester to review the outcomes of the main report and provide 
an update in respect of transit provision and the need for gypsy and traveller 
sites.   
 
5.52 These assessments identified the accommodation needs in the city as 
shown in Table 4. 
 
Table 4. Gypsy and Travellers: Identified need for additional gypsy and 
traveller households broken down by potential delivery method. 
 
Site Status GTAA    HNA    TOTAL 
 2016-
21 2021-
26 2026-
31 2031-
36 2016-
21 2021-
26 2026-
31 2031-
36  
Met Planning 
Definition (+25% 
Undetermined) 4 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 7 
Did not meet 
Planning 
Definition (+75% 
Undetermined) 0 0 0 0 9 3 4 5 21 
         28 675.53 The table above sets out the total need and the number of pitches that will 
need to be addressed for gypsies and travellers that meet or are likely to meet 
the “planning definition” and for those who do not meet or are unlikely to meet 
the “planning definition”.  
 
5.54 We need to plan to accommodate 7 permanent gypsy and traveller pitches 
in the city over the plan period to 2036. A site has been identified on Western 
Park Golf course in accordance with Policy SL02 to accommodate this need. 
 
5.55 There is a need for 21 pitches coming from gypsy and traveller households 
that did not meet or are unlikely to meet the planning definition, but these 
needs will be assessed through the Plan Policies, to deliver on the Local 
Housing Needs Assessment.  
 
5.56 For planning policy purposes, the definition of “gypsies and travellers” is 
set out in Annex 1 of the PPTS 2015. 
 
Table 5. Travelling Showpeople: identified need for additional plots 
 
Type 2016-21 2021-26 2026-31 2031-36 TOTAL 
Travelling 0 0 0 0 0 
Unknown 0 1 1 1 3 
Non-
travelling 0 0 0 0 0 
TOTAL 0 1 1 1 3 
 
Transit Sites
5.57 Transit sites help to address the level of unauthorised encampments in 
a local authority area. They are for short stays, contain a range of facilities 
and there is normally a limit on the length of time residents can stay. The 2017 
GTAA identified a current need for a transit site with a minimum of 12 caravan 
spaces (or managed equivalent) in Leicester City. The 2019 Addendum Report 
reviewed this need and confirmed support for the recommendation in the 2017 
study. The council  will also consider temporary seasonal arrangements to meet 
any additional transit needs during the summer months.685.58 Two sites have been identified that are capable of accommodating the 
need for a transit site that could accommodate a site of up to 12 caravan 
spaces. These are the strategic site at Beaumont Park (See SL06) and a smaller 
non-strategic site at Thurcaston Road/ Hadrian Road open space (See E01). 
Both the sites are also allocated for employment uses but it would also be 
possible to deliver transit sites within these allocations. 
5.59 In summary, the evidence base shows an identified need for: 
• Seven permanent gypsy and traveller pitches over the plan period (up to 
2036)
•  A minimum of 12 caravan spaces (or managed equivalent) in respect of 
transit provision
•  Two additional show people plots (over 10 years)
 
5.60 The city council will review the level of need periodically during the plan 
period.
5.61 The criteria below will be applied to all applications for new gypsy, traveller 
and travelling showpeople sites.  This includes applications for temporary 
stopping places and transit sites, which will still be required to meet all of the 
criteria, although the level of facilities provided on site should be appropriate to 
the type of site proposed. Other relevant policies in this plan will also apply. 
Policy Ho12. Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople 
 
Proposals for new gypsy, traveller and travelling showpeople sites will be 
supported where they meet the following criteria: 
a) The site should provide a safe environment for intended occupants and 
adequate on-site facilities should be provided for parking and vehicle 
manoeuvring, storage, play and amenity space
b) Sites should be provided with an appropriate level of essential services 
including access to drinking water, refuse collection and sewage disposal
c) There should be safe and convenient pedestrian and vehicular access to the 
site
d) There should be convenient access to schools, shops and other local 
facilities, preferably by walking, cycling or by public transport
e) Appropriate landscaping should be used to maintain visual amenity and 
provide privacy for occupiers69f) There should be no significant detrimental impact upon the amenity of 
nearby residents, businesses or the local environment  (DQP06)
 70
6. Climate Change and 
Flood Risk 
 71Evidence Base 
6.1 There are several background studies that will underpin policies in this plan. 
The main technical studies for this chapter are published on our website and 
will be updated as and when new studies are undertaken and completed.    
• Energy and Sustainable Design & Construction Study (2022)
• Leicester Carbon Neutral Roadmap and Evidence Base (2022)
• Leicester Climate Emergency Strategy (2020-2023)
• Leicester City Council’s Climate Emergency Action Plan (2020-2023)
• Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (2021)
• Water Cycle Study (2022)
• Draft Leicester Transport Plan (2022)
Background  
6.2 Climate change represents a grave threat to humanity and biodiversity 
requiring concerted action both to mitigate the level of future change and to 
adapt to the changes already taking place. The planning system has a key role 
in achieving both these goals. 
6.3 The 2008 Climate Change Act (as amended) commits the UK government 
to delivering a 100% reduction in carbon dioxide emissions and other targeted 
greenhouse gases by 2050 in order to help mitigate future climate change. 
Energy use from the built environment accounts for a significant proportion of 
the UK’s total carbon emissions.   
6.4 Leicester City Council declared a climate emergency in 2019. It has since 
developed a Climate Emergency Strategy and an accompanying Action Plan 
to play its part in tackling climate change. The city council’s ambition is for 
Leicester to become carbon neutral by 2030 or sooner and to adapt to the 
climate change that is already happening. However, climate change is not just a 
city problem. It also affects the wider Leicester Urban Area with more frequent 
intense rainfall events, heatwaves and drier summers are predicted across the 
region. A growing population and a need for substantially more housing will also 
put pressure on the environment. In view of this, the city council will look to 
work strategically with authorities in the Leicester Urban Area to find joined up 
solutions to climate change.     726.5 The policies in this chapter are aimed at addressing climate change. 
However, to be most effective they must be applied alongside policies in other 
relevant policy areas such as housing, transportation, the natural environment, 
open space, sports and recreation, and health and wellbeing which also seek to 
mitigate and adapt to climate change.  
6.6 It is anticipated that policies will be assessed and strengthened at the next 
plan review, to consider progressively increased levels of greenhouse gas 
reduction, culminating in a net zero emissions requirement as soon as possible 
and in alignment with national regulation.   
Energy and Carbon Reduction in Development  
6.7 The city council’s ambition is for Leicester to achieve net zero carbon 
emissions by 2030, which requires greenhouse gas emissions to be reduced 
as much as possible, with minimised annual and peak energy demand, and net 
zero carbon future proofed development. Building design will be expected to 
apply the energy strategy set out in points i) – iv) of Policy CCFR01. The energy 
strategy takes a ‘fabric first’ approach, so that, as far as possible, development 
‘locks in’ low carbon performance.   
Policy CCFR01. Sustainable Design and Construction  
All development should be designed, constructed, and maintained to 
minimise operational energy use and carbon emissions, while also preventing 
overheating. It should:  
• Minimise energy use, manage demand, and prevent overheating during 
operation. This should be achieved through passive design measures 
including optimised site layout, building orientation, form factor, massing, 
daylighting and control of solar gain, minimised heat loss from the building 
fabric through reduced U-values and thermal bridges, and increased air 
tightness; followed by utilising energy efficient lighting and services, 
including consideration of heat recovery and demand management 
technologies
• Further reduce carbon emissions through the use of zero and/or low 
emission decentralised energy, prioritising connection to district heating and 
cooling networks and utilising secondary heat sources
• Further reduce carbon emissions by maximising opportunities to produce 
and use renewable energy on site, utilising storage technologies73• Monitor, verify and report on energy performance
All new residential development should achieve a minimum 10% and all new 
non-residential development should achieve a minimum 20% reduction in 
carbon emissions beyond the requirement of Part L of the Building Regulations 
2013 through passive, fabric, and energy efficient design measures 
alone. Alternative targets to these will be provided once new National 
Regulations are adopted. 
Calculation methodology details and those uses which are included as 
exceptions will be detailed in a supplementary planning document. 
All new residential development will meet the Optional Standard of ‘Part G’ 
of the Building Regulations 2013 (or equivalent future legislation) which is a 
maximum of 110 litres per person per day. All new non-domestic development 
will meet the maximum credits available under BREEAM Wat 01 or an equivalent 
best practice standard. 
Measures to address the energy strategy and carbon emissions reduction 
target should be incorporated at the earliest stage of a development and 
maintained throughout its design, construction, and operation. 
The energy strategy requires that energy performance is monitored and 
verified. Developers should include a section in the Energy Statement which 
details how monitoring and reporting will be undertaken. Details and advice on 
monitoring, verifying, and reporting on energy performance will be provided in a 
supplementary planning document. 
6.8 As well as reducing carbon emissions, development should be adapted to 
expected changes in Leicester’s climate. It should be designed to be resilient 
to the increased risk of flooding, including measures to sustainably manage 
drainage from the development, and to the increased likelihood of hotter, drier 
summers and heatwaves. Application of the energy hierarchy should be used 
both to prevent overheating and to reduce carbon emissions, with the need 
for air conditioning avoided or kept to a minimum.   Water use should also be 
minimised.   
6.9 The city council supports reducing the contribution that Leicester’s existing 
buildings make to the city’s carbon emissions. Energy efficient retrofitting 
measures can play a significant role in meeting this reduction. Such measures 
can include external or cavity wall insulation, loft or roof insulation, solid or 74suspended floor insulation, and even extend to total retrofit of buildings and 
their systems. However, any proposed retrofit measures to existing domestic 
building stock will be considered against the criteria of the design and heritage 
policies in the Local Plan.  
Policy CCFR02. Whole Life-Cycle Carbon Emissions  
All developments shall identify and pursue opportunities to minimise whole 
life cycle carbon emissions. The following criteria should be considered when 
aiming to minimise whole life-cycle carbon:  
a)  Operational Energy – Developments should achieve high levels of energy 
efficiency, use low carbon heating sources, and be powered by renewable 
energy generated on site where possible, to minimise operational carbon 
emissions
b)  Embodied Carbon – Developments should meet best practice targets 
for reducing embodied carbon. Materials should have a reduced level of 
embodied carbon, for example through the re-use or recycling of materials, 
and be designed to be disassembled and re-used or recycled (rather than 
demolished) in accordance with circular economy principles
c) Developments above 1,000m2 or 100 dwellings must calculate whole life-
cycle carbon emissions and demonstrate methodology compliance through 
a nationally recognised Whole Life-Cycle Carbon Emissions assessment, 
e.g.  BS EN 15978 Sustainability of Construction Works – Assessment of 
Environmental Performance of Buildings – Calculation Method
Energy Statement 
6.10 Applicants should demonstrate how their proposal will meet the standards 
set out in policies relating to energy efficiency, overheating prevention, 
renewable energy generation, and carbon emissions reduction. Energy 
Statements ensure development follows the energy hierarchy and responds to 
any other energy and carbon related policy set by the city council. 75CCFR03. Energy Statement  
All major developments will be required to provide an Energy Statement as 
described in the supplementary planning document. All other applications can 
opt to either submit an Energy Statement or include a relevant section in the 
Design and Access Statement addressing the relevant policy areas. The Energy 
Statement will include details of the energy demand reduction and overheating 
prevention measures proposed and details of the low and zero carbon energy 
technologies included. Carbon emissions reduction achieved from each stage 
of the energy hierarchy must also be reported along with embodied carbon 
emissions reductions evidenced through a whole life-cycle carbon emissions 
assessment.   
Low Carbon Heating and Cooling   
6.11 In order to meet Leicester’s heating and cooling needs using low and 
zero carbon energy it is essential to increase the amount of decentralised 
and renewable energy technologies within the city. Providing on-site and 
decentralised energy systems can help to increase the supply of low carbon 
energy, improve the resilience of the energy network, and decrease pressures 
on grid infrastructure.   
6.12 Figure 3  sets out a heating and cooling hierarchy which prioritises 
the establishment and integration of future-proofed energy efficient and 
low carbon heating and cooling systems and technologies. For all major 
developments, applicants must apply the hierarchy, firstly, to identify the most 
appropriate heating/cooling system (ordered 1-4, from most preferable to least 
preferable), and secondly to identify the most appropriate heating/ cooling 
technology (ordered 1-4, from most preferable to least preferable). Applicants 
will be expected to set out in the Energy Statement how the hierarchy has been 
applied and to justify the design decisions made in light of this. 76Figure 3. Heating and Cooling Hierarchy  
First: apply the System Hierarchy
System Hierarchy
1. Connect to existing heat/cooling networks - 
where the network has a decarbonisation plan
2. Establish a site-wide heat/cooling network
3. Use building scale heat/cooling network
4. Use individual heat/cooling systems
Next: apply the Technologies Hierarchy
Technologies Hierarchy
1. Systems using renewable/waste energy sources
2. Low carbon and low emission technologies
3. Conventional systems which don’t use fossil fuel
4. Conventional systems using natural gas
6.13 Major development will be expected to connect to both existing and 
planned district heating networks (See diagram 4 for Leicester’s existing district 
heating network). If connection to a district heat network is not possible, 
developers will need to provide evidence as to why this is the case. Where 
a suitable district heating network is planned or under construction, but it is 
currently not possible to connect to it, development should be future proofed 
so that it is capable of connection to the network once it is operational. 77Diagram 4. Existing District Heating Network 
786.14 To reach net zero carbon it is essential to remove fossil fuels as far as is 
possible. Fossil fuels are not a compatible source of energy in a zero-carbon 
economy. For this reason, avoiding installation of gas heating is preferred. 
Efficient electric heating is capable of becoming net zero carbon as the grid is 
decarbonised and brings added benefits in the form of improved air quality and 
avoids the need for future wholesale system changes. Direct electric heating 
is compatible with a low carbon future, but the relatively high operating costs 
make it a less suitable option than electric technologies offering a high level of 
energy efficiency, such as heat pumps. It is therefore appropriate only for very 
low heat demand applications, or where, for technical reasons, more efficient 
electric options are not feasible. Applicants should provide justification for its 
use instead of more energy efficient systems such as electric heat pumps.   
6.15 Guidance detailing the methodology and providing advice for applicants 
will be provided in a supplementary planning document.
Policy CCFR04. Low Carbon Heating and Cooling  
To ensure that the most appropriate selection of a heating/cooling system 
for a development, targeting the lowest carbon emissions possible, all major 
developments must incorporate low or zero carbon heating in accordance with 
system and technology hierarchies described in Figure 3. 
Where it has been clearly demonstrated that connection to existing heating/
cooling networks are not feasible and/or viable (e.g. due to lack of heat & hot 
water demand and/or lack of heat network capacity), development near (within 
500m of a city council pre-identified network priority zone) existing or planned 
heat networks should be designed to allow for cost-effective connection at a 
later date by including the following features:  
a) Provision of centralised heating/cooling distribution in the form of a single 
accessible energy centre/plant room   
b) Suitable distribution, control systems and operating temperatures  
c) Safeguarded access routes for future external pipework through the site 
and into the energy centre/plant room   
d) Space within the energy centre/plant room for a future heat substation  
Building systems must comply with CIBSE CP1: Heat networks: Code of Practice 
(latest revision). 79Low Carbon Energy Projects  
6.16 Leicester City Council will support renewable and low carbon energy 
projects, including community led initiatives.   
6.17 Whilst wind turbines and biomass combustion technologies aren’t suitable 
in certain built-up areas, these technologies should not be ruled out entirely. 
The north-west of the city and surrounding area has been identified as a 
potentially suitable location for wind energy development proposals. Any wind 
energy proposals in this area would be subject to a site-specific feasibility 
assessment.
6.18 Any proposals should be designed to avoid compromising the development 
potential of nearby site allocations, potential visual, noise and other 
environmental impacts, including application of appropriate buffer zones, in the 
form of a detailed wind opportunity assessment. 
Diagram 5. Map showing buffer zones around residential properties, for the 
purpose of a wind opportunity assessment    
80(Source of Image © Amec Foster Wheeler, 2015 Climate Change Evidence 
Base) 
Policy CCFR05. Delivering Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Projects  
Proposals for new renewable and low carbon energy projects will be supported 
subject to the following: 
a) Impacts on the historic environment, local character, appearance, and 
landscape 
b) Impacts on ecology and biodiversity, including protected species and 
designated and non-designated wildlife sites (NE01) 
c) Impacts on residential amenity, including air quality, noise, traffic, 
recreation, and access (DQP06) 
d) For any proposals for wind turbine projects, consideration should be given 
regarding air traffic movement and safety, and impacts on electromagnetic 
transmissions, including radio, television, and phone signals
The Water Environment  
Flooding   
6.19 Flooding is a natural process that plays an important part in shaping our 
natural environment. However, flooding can cause damage, disruption and in 
extreme circumstances, loss of life. The risk of flooding is increasing due to 
climate change and urbanisation and surface water flood risk in Leicester is of 
a significance that is recognised nationally. A Local Flood Risk Management 
Strategy (LFRMS) has therefore been established for Leicester and is available 
on the Leicester City Council website. The City Council also has a dedicated 
Flood Risk Studies (leicester.gov.uk) webpage.  These webpages are regularly 
reviewed and updated with the latest information, and content will remain up to 
date throughout the Local Plan period.
Local Flood Risk Management Strategy (LFRMS)  
6.20 There are many sources of flooding, such as from fluvial, pluvial, sewer, 
groundwater, and reservoir sources. Fluvial flooding relates to flooding from 
rivers such as the River Soar and its tributaries. Pluvial flooding relates to 
flooding from surface water runoff.  Leicester City Council as the Lead Local 
Flood Authority (Ordinary Watercourses, Pluvial and Groundwater) will work 81closely with its partners (Environment Agency, Severn Trent and private 
developers) to manage flood risk across the city. 
6.21 The Environment Agency provides the most up to date information for 
flood risk within Leicester. This information is published by the Environment 
Agency and can be found at the website below. Using this information, a 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) has been produced and used to 
sequentially test development sites within this Local Plan. For some sites, a 
high level ‘exemption test’ analysis has also been carried out.    
Environment Agency link: www.flood-map-for-planning.service.gov.uk. 
6.22 Where new development is proposed on sites which lie in flood zones 
2, 3 or 3b and where the site has not been allocated in the Local Plan, the 
sequential test for flooding will need to be undertaken. The purpose of this is to 
direct development to areas with the lowest probability of flooding, but not to 
the exclusion of all other planning concerns.  The test is carried out by the local 
authority and is based on evidence provided by the applicant to demonstrate 
why the development cannot be located in an area at lower risk of flooding. 
6.23 If the sequential test can be passed then, for some forms of development, 
an exception test will also need to be undertaken. Where required, a developer 
must demonstrate that their scheme passes both the sequential and exceptions 
tests. Responsibility for determining whether the sequential and exception tests 
have passed, lies with the city council. Where applicable, planning application 
reports written by the city council, will address whether the proposal passes 
the sequential and exception tests, for development in Flood Zones 2, 3a and 
3b.  
6.24 Developers must also consider how their schemes would function during a 
flood event.   
6.25 The Planning Practice Guidance outlines flood risk vulnerability 
classification by development type and which is permitted for each flood zone. 
The decision on the vulnerability classification of a particular development lies 
with the local authority. 82Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS)  
6.26 Leicester is at a particularly high risk from surface water flooding. The 
Surface Water Management Plan (SWMP) addresses this in more detail and its 
findings have been used in the production of the Local Flood Risk Management 
Strategy (LFRMS).   
6.27 Topography, the drainage characteristics of the soil and how they lend 
themselves to SuDS, should be considered at the outset of the design process 
for all new development. SuDS mimic natural drainage, slow the rate of surface 
water runoff, improve water quality, provide visual amenity and biodiversity 
benefits, and have low maintenance requirements. SuDS guidance can be found 
on the city council’s website.    
6.28 Information shall be provided as to how the existing site is drained and 
how surface water runoff from the proposed development will be discharged 
once it has left the site. The aim should be to discharge surface run-off higher 
up the drainage hierarchy by using a combination of methods, including 
infiltration, a surface water body, surface water sewer/other drainage system, 
or a combined sewer. 
Water Quality 
 
6.29 There must be sufficient wastewater (including sewage treatment 
capacity) and water supply infrastructure available to serve all existing 
and proposed development. As a consequence of an increased population 
there may be a requirement for the expansion and/or upgrading of current 
sewage treatment works. Appropriate infrastructure should be put in place to 
effectively transfer and treat any increase in wastewater prior to development. 
Growth should not cause a deterioration in water quality or Water Framework 
Directive (WFD) status and must prevent deterioration in the status of aquatic 
ecosystems. Growth should not result in increasing the frequency or duration 
of spills within the network from Combined Sewer Overflows (CSOs) which 
would impact upon the water quality of watercourses. During the period of 
construction of new developments, surface water runoff from the site must 
not be allowed to have a detrimental impact on the water quality of any 
watercourses. This may require a scheme for the removal of suspended solids 
(and any other contaminates) to be put in place. 83Policy CCFR06. Managing Flood Risk and Sustainable Drainage Systems 
(SuDS)  
In assessing development, the following principles will be applied:
a) Development shall be directed away from areas with the highest risk 
of flooding in accordance with the sequential and exception tests. 
Developments which fall into the following categories must be accompanied 
by a Flood Risk Assessment:  
• Greater than 1 hectare in Flood Zone 1
• Changes of use of less than 1 hectare in Flood Zone 1 and where it could 
be affected by sources of flooding other than rivers and sea
• Any developments in Flood Zones 2 and 3
b) The development must be safe for its design lifetime and not increase flood 
risk elsewhere. This is achieved by implementing a sequential approach 
on site and/or by implementing flood mitigation measures to address any 
remaining flood risk. It should be noted that the use of temporary and 
demountable defences is not appropriate for new developments. Where 
possible the development should also reduce flood risk overall
c) For all development, SuDS are expected to be used to reduce surface water 
runoff and deliver other benefits, such as improving water quality, providing 
visual amenity, contributing towards achieving biodiversity net gain and 
having low maintenance requirements. It shall be demonstrated that the 
proposed SuDS will be managed and maintained throughout the lifetime of 
the development
d) Opportunities for the enhancement, including de-culverting of watercourses 
for biodiversity should be realised wherever possible, such as in parks and 
public open spaces
e) Adequate provision for safe access (including vehicular) to watercourses 
and flood defence structures must be provided to allow for maintenance 
and emergency works to be carried out by the relevant authority
f) New opportunities should be taken to provide access to a watercourse and 
its setting for recreational purposes
Planning permission will not be granted for development in Flood Zone 3b, 
except where it is for water-compatible uses, or essential infrastructure, or 
where it is on previously developed land and it will bring an overall reduction in 
flood risk when compared to the existing situation. All of the following criteria 
must be met:84• It will not lead to a net increase in development above the footprint of the 
existing building
• It will not lead to a reduction in flood storage (through the use of flood 
compensation measures on a level-by-level and volume-by-volume basis)
• It will not lead to an increased risk of flooding elsewhere
• It will not put any future occupants of the development at risk
Sustainable urban drainage scheme at Ashton Green857. Health and Wellbeing 
 
86Evidence Base 
 
7.1 There are several background studies that will underpin policies in this plan. 
The main technical studies for this chapter are published on our website and 
will be updated as and when new studies are undertaken and completed.  
 
• Joint Health and Wellbeing Strategy and Action Plan 2019
• Leicester Food Plan (2021 – 2026)
 
Background 
 
7.2 Health and wellbeing are positive attributes that enable individuals and 
communities to thrive, rather than simply being an absence of illness. Land use 
can be associated with significant health impacts on a local population, as well 
as exacerbating the existing problems of ill health in a community, including 
average and healthy life expectancy; levels of premature deaths owing to heart-
related and respiratory conditions; levels of child poverty; levels of childhood 
obesity; levels of physically inactive; levels of social isolation and reported 
quality of life for those aged 65+. 
 
7.3 This is a cross cutting topic which covers policy areas such as design, 
employment, transport, air quality, climate change, housing, the historic and 
natural environment. 
 
Health and Wellbeing Strategy 
 
7.4 One of the five themes of the Leicester Joint Health and Wellbeing Strategy 
and Action Plan 2019-2024 is ‘Healthy Places’, with the ambition ‘To make 
Leicester the healthiest possible environment in which to live and work’. There 
are four objectives attached to this ambition, all of which are supported in this 
plan: 
• Influence the environment to make healthier choices more accessible
• Ensure decent homes are within the reach of all citizens
• Improve air quality
• Develop and encourage healthy neighbourhoods and a sense of community
 
7.5 There are many other land use relevant objectives in the four other themes.
 877.6 The Strategy and Action Plan emphasises that the local areas in which 
people live, work and play, can support improvements in physical, mental health 
and wellbeing by affecting the degree to which people are able to access 
healthy lifestyles and enjoy happy, productive and satisfying lives.  
 
7.7 In addition there is a recognition that healthcare and other supportive 
infrastructure proportionate to the level of need generated by new and 
expanded developments, should be supported via adequate funding and good 
early stage planning and implementation.   
 
7.8 Building places and spaces that offer easy access to good quality green, 
blue and open spaces which apply ‘Active Design’ and sustainability principles 
in local area design and are purpose-developed for the communities they serve, 
help to transform physical locations into communities, where the spaces, places 
and amenities become collective assets.  A key principle is to make healthy 
behaviours the easier option. 
 
7.9 Healthy functional design also supports and delivers accessible, healthy 
and sustainable food choices and food growing opportunities. This contributes 
to greater social cohesion and community support systems, with residents 
both feeling and being safer. It also provides positive work and educational 
opportunities particularly through allocation of land for employment in areas 
of socio-economic deprivation and low employment. There are greater 
opportunities for incidental physical activity and other life-enhancing leisure 
activities. Also, functional design reduces the risks of infectious illnesses and 
exacerbation of long-term conditions that are due to overcrowding and cold/
damp environments.  
 
7.10 Allotments, orchards and community gardens can play an important 
role in enabling small-scale local food production, community engagement, 
educational benefits, supporting local biodiversity and providing a wildlife 
resource. By providing regular outdoor activity food growing can also help 
to improve health and reduce health inequalities (Leicester Food Plan 2021 - 
2026). 
7.11 Climate change has become, and will increasingly become, an issue of 
central importance to the health and wellbeing of our local communities. 
However, actions to mitigate climate change would also help mitigate health 88inequalities. For instance, increasing physical activity through active travel, 
making nutritious and sustainable food readily available and improving 
air quality and housing will reduce the risk of obesity, cardiovascular and 
respiratory disease, and will also contribute positively to the climate crisis (See 
Chapter 6: Climate Change and Flood Risk).
Bridge at High Cross Shopping Centre
7.12 The primary health care needs of the city are being looked at as part of the 
Local Plan Infrastructure Assessment. 
Policy HW01. A Healthy and Active City 
The city council is committed to reducing health inequalities, increasing life 
expectancy, improving quality of life and encouraging physical activity by: 
a)   Assessing major developments for their health impact. This will include 
how the development will contribute to improving health and reduce health 
inequalities. Where adverse impacts are identified, the development will 
be expected to demonstrate how it will address or mitigate these impacts 
(HW02)89b) Improving pedestrian and cycle access, to green and open spaces (DQP01, 
OSSR03 & T03)
c) Improving access for all, to the city’s health facilities and services; to 
leisure, sport and recreation facilities; and to protect and enhance where 
appropriate (see chapters 13  and 18)
d) Promoting high levels of regular exercise through active travel by making 
the public realm and pedestrian and cycle routes safer and more attractive 
and by promoting fifteen-minute neighbourhoods (T03)
e) Good design including inclusive design (DQP01, DQP03 and Chapter 16)
f) Seeking to improve air quality by tree planting and other methods (T02 and 
DQP04)
g) Encouraging opportunities for access to fresh food e.g. through the 
retention and provision of allotments, community gardens, orchards and 
innovative spaces for growing food, such as green roofs; particularly where 
there is demand for food growing space in the vicinity of the application 
site. This includes the temporary use of vacant or derelict land, the use of 
incidental open space in housing areas, and other open spaces where this 
does not conflict with other policy objectives or land use priorities
h) The inclusion of productive trees (including fruit trees) and plants, in 
landscaping proposals for new developments where appropriate (DQP04, 
h) The inclusion of productive trees (including fruit trees) and plants in 
landscaping proposals for new developments where appropriate (DQP04)
Health Impact Assessments (HIA)  
 
7.13 A Health Impact Assessment (HIA) is a useful tool in determining planning 
applications where there are expected to be significant impacts on health 
and wellbeing. They should be used to reduce adverse impacts and maximise 
positive impacts on the health and wellbeing of the population, as well as 
assessing the indirect implications for the wider community. 
 
7.14 HIA’s are usually forward looking and can be carried out at any stage in the 
development process but are best undertaken at the earliest stage possible. 
As a minimum, they should form part of the material submitted to support 
the relevant planning application. Any HIA’s  that are submitted will be quality 
assured by the council’s public health team.907.15 However, whenever possible, they should be prepared earlier to ensure 
that health and wellbeing is considered fully at the outset of the development 
planning process. Where development sites are near administrative boundaries 
the HIA will need to consider appropriate cross boundary issues.  
Policy HW02. Health Impact Assessments (HIA)  
 
a) In conjunction with policy HW01 all major development proposals will be 
required to demonstrate that they would have an acceptable impact on 
health and wellbeing. This should be demonstrated through a: 
• HIA where significant impacts on health and wellbeing would arise from 
that proposal; or 
• HIA Screening Report which demonstrates that the proposed 
development would not overall give rise to negative impacts in respect of 
health and wellbeing
b) Where a development has significant negative or positive impacts on 
health and wellbeing the council may require applicants to provide for the 
mitigation or provision of such impacts through planning conditions and/
or financial/other contributions secured via planning obligations and/or the 
council’s Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) charging schedule
7.16 However, whenever possible, they should be prepared earlier, to ensure 
that health and wellbeing is considered fully at the outset of the development 
planning process. Where development sites are near administrative boundaries 
the HIA will need to consider appropriate cross boundary issues. 
7.17 Major development proposals are more likely to have significant impact in 
terms of health and wellbeing, which is recognised by national guidance. As 
such a HIA will be required to support developments defined as follows: 
1. All forms of residential development where: 
• The number of houses provided is 150 or more; or 
• The site area is 5 ha or more and it is not known whether the development 
fall within sub-paragraph 1(i) 
2. All forms of urban development (not involving housing) where: 
• The area of development exceeds 1 ha; or 
• In the case of industrial development exceeds 5 ha
3. Waste Development91
8. Delivering Design 
Quality 92Evidence Base 
8.1 There are several background studies that will underpin policies in this plan. 
The main technical studies for this chapter are published on our website and 
will be updated as and when new studies are undertaken and completed.
• Townscape Analysis and Design Guidance - Evidence for Character Areas 
(2022)
• Tall Development in Leicester (2022) 
• Building for a Healthy Life (2020)
• National Design Guide (MHCLG) (2021)
• National Model Design Code (MHCLG) (2021)
Background
8.2 Places affect us all – they are where people live, work, and spend their 
leisure time. Good design ensures that new buildings and spaces function in 
a manner which is socially, economically, and environmentally acceptable. A 
place is made up of buildings, landscape and  infrastructure, some of which is 
likely to endure longer than the buildings themselves.
8.3 Well-designed places should be inclusive and available for people to enjoy 
as they spend  time in them, improve their health & wellbeing and to create 
feelings of safety, belonging and community cohesion. They should be visually 
attractive and sympathetic to local character and history. Places should be able 
to last for many years and accommodate a range of uses and activities that 
support the people of Leicester’s everyday lives. Good design is fundamental 
to the creation of well-designed, attractive , successful and sustainable places 
and to the  quality of life for us all.
8.4 To achieve this, new development must understand and respond to 
Leicester’s unique and locally distinctive context to integrate effectively into the 
built, natural and historic environment. It should promote the image of Leicester 
as an exciting modern city and improve the quality of life and health of the 
city’s residents. Landowners and developers must   undertake effective and 
meaningful engagement with communities and other interest groups.938.5 The use of design codes, briefs and masterplans will be supported to help 
deliver high quality design. The council will seek to work pro-actively with 
landowners and developers in the preparation of design documents to meet 
the council’s spatial objectives and design policies. In the absence of these, the 
National Model Design Code and National Design Guide will be used to assess 
development proposals. The council will require specifications for materials and 
construction sections and plans at planning application stage. This is to agree a 
quality benchmark and avoid a later diminished quality of  materials and design.
8.6 To ensure high design standards and good place making, all proposals for 
10 or more dwellings must demonstrate, through a design statement, how they 
have been designed to meet Building for a Healthy Life (or any subsequent 
standard) and the 10 characteristics of well-designed places as outlined in 
the National Design Guide. If ‘Building for a Healthy Life’ or the National Design 
Guide is superseded or replaced, then the council reserves the right to require 
compliance with any future standard. This would be fully addressed either as 
part of future plan review, or supplementary planning documents (SPDs) for the 
avoidance of doubt.
8.7 The council will produce a series of SPDs which will expand upon the 
policies within this chapter to set our design visions and expectations for 
achieving well- designed places. These include but are not limited to:
• Urban Design SPD
• Tall Development SPD
•  Character Areas SPD
•  Parking Standards and Design SPD
Policy DQP01.  Design Principles
Development will be permitted subject to consideration of the following design 
principles which are outlined more fully in the National Design Guide and 
National Model Design Code. 
Context, Character and Identity
a) Respond positively, informed by analysis, to the site and its local and 
wider context including its history and heritage, setting of heritage assets, 
townscape and streetscape, key views, natural and landscape features, site 
orientation and features to conserve and enhance94b) Respond positively, informed by analysis, to an area’s local character, 
distinctiveness and identity at all levels and scales, including typical 
characteristics and pattern of housing and streets to distinctive and 
prevailing features
c) Create or contribute to a new character and identity where an existing place 
has limited positive qualities
d)  Integrate well into their surroundings, so they relate well to them and 
contribute positively physically, visually and socially
e)  Provide a clear and robust design rationale, informed by the above, for the 
design concept and how it has evolved into the design proposal
Built Form
a) Contribute positively to its context in terms of scale, height, amount,  
massing, urban form, layout, siting, appearance, façade design and 
roofscape including fenestration, detailing and materials. Development 
which fails to respect and improve an area will be resisted
b) Create or strengthen a sense of place and make it easy for everyone to find 
their way around and through the pattern or arrangement of development 
blocks, streets, buildings and spaces to create memorable features, 
recognisable places and a coherent form of development
c) Consider development comprehensively and in a co-ordinated way to 
enable the efficient and most effective use of land, to allow a sustainable 
amount and mix of uses to support local facilities and transport networks – 
across multiple sites where possible  
d) Where needed to respond to the context, their townscape role and the need 
to increase densities, well designed bespoke home types will be required
Movement and Connections
a) Provide, maintain or improve the network of routes for all modes of 
transport within and through the development site ensuring connections to 
the wider area, taking into account existing communities and defined future 
development proposals whilst recognising the need for privacy and security 
in new development95b) Provide a clear and connected layout of different types of streets and 
spaces, a street hierarchy, to add to a sense of place and help people find 
their way around. Incorporate green infrastructure to create character, 
improve air quality and contribute to biodiversity.  Create streets which are 
designed as social spaces that encourage low vehicle speeds where the 
pedestrians and cyclists come first rather than simply as routes for cars and 
vehicles to pass through
c) Prioritise and encourage walking and cycling by providing routes that are 
safe, well connected, convenient and accessible for all including those with 
limited mobility
d) Provide well-integrated, conveniently sited, well landscaped and safe car 
and cycle parking that contributes positively to place-making and the public 
realm. It should not dominate the development or have a detrimental impact 
upon the appearance of the area
e) Maximise opportunities for improving and extending the existing network of 
public transport routes, pedestrian and cycling routes in the city
Public Realm
a) Create high quality public spaces that are appropriately located and 
connected into a network of routes, feel safe, secure and inclusive, are 
accessible to all and encourage social interaction
b) Make the best use of existing and new landscaping, materials, lighting, 
public art, and street furniture. Public spaces should be versatile to 
accommodate people with different needs and a range of activities to 
ensure the spaces are well-liked and well-used
c) Contribute to a vibrant and safe public realm by providing active frontages 
including appropriately sized, well-positioned and designed main entrances  
, lobbies and communal areas. Consideration will need to be given to 
the  types of homes  to maximise individual doors to streets. This is to 
encourage activity and engagement between buildings and spaces  and 
natural surveillance. Developments that incorporate living spaces on the 
ground floor will need to be well designed to balance the need for privacy 
and surveillance96Mix of uses
a) Provide an appropriate mix of uses and facilities within a development 
to meet the needs of the occupants and the neighbourhood which will  
support everyday activities and create  sustainable and walkable places
b) Provide a mix of homes tenures, types and sizes to create well balanced, 
stable and inclusive communities
Homes and buildings 
a) Provide well-designed homes and buildings that relate positively to the 
private, shared and public spaces and streets around them, contributing to 
social interaction and inclusion
b) Provide good quality internal and external environments for their users 
promoting health and well-being
c) Provide a clear distinction between public, communal, shared and private 
spaces  with well-designed boundaries and thresholds that are appropriate 
to the context
d) Use materials that are of high quality and made to last  
e) Provide homes and buildings with well-designed, well-positioned and 
well-integrated private    or shared external spaces. These need to be fit 
for purpose, easily accessed to encourage use and appropriate for their 
required use. Adjacent internal uses  need to be  safe and secure and 
consider how environmental factors may  affect usability
f) Consider the relationship between internal spaces, circulation routes 
and entrances, the need for daylight and ventilation (including integrated 
mechanical provision), the need for privacy, and the provision of external 
amenity space to provide high quality buildings
g) Consider the day to day use and functioning of buildings and places 
providing well considered design solutions for waste storage and 
management, services & utilities and cycle storage so that they are 
unobtrusive, and well-integrated to minimise visual impact and avoid clutter
Resources and Lifespan
a) Consider in the design at the outset, and provide for future management 
and maintenance for all areas for the lifetime of the development
b) Provide a layout, form and mix of uses that reduces the use of resources 
and follows the energy hierarchy97c) Create homes and external spaces that can adapt to the changing needs of 
their users and the way they live over time
d) Create buildings and spaces that are adaptable and flexible which can 
respond to changing social, technological and economic conditions. In 
particular, demonstrate the ability to adapt the size of homes (e.g. from 
small to larger homes) in higher density developments which contain a high 
proportion of smaller homes or cluster flats
Building for a Healthy Life and National Design Guide
a) All proposals for ten or more dwellings, should demonstrate, through a 
design statement, how they have been designed to meet Building for a 
Healthy Life standards and the 10 characteristics of well-designed places 
as outlined in the National Design Guide. Proposals that demonstrate a poor 
standard of design will not be acceptable
Tall Development 
 
8.8 Well-designed tall developments can make a positive contribution to 
Leicester, when located in sensible locations and where the context of 
the surrounding area is properly assessed and addressed. However, tall 
developments by their nature are very prominent in their context. This has 
meant that tall development has not taken the form of elegantly proportioned, 
one off tall buildings, or made a positive contribution to townscape and the 
image of the city. Tall developments on their own or together can have both 
significant scale and mass and can form a cluster of buildings.
8.9 What is defined as ‘tall’ is dependent on the surrounding context. The 
general prevailing height of the city centre of Leicester is 4-5 residential 
storeys. This reduces to residential 3 storeys in the fringe area. Therefore, this 
development plan defines tall development as:
• A development of any height which is substantially taller than the prevailing 
height of the surrounding area. This can be defined as 9 metres (broadly 3 
residential storeys) taller
•  A development where any element of built form is above 24 metres (8 
residential storeys)988.10 Tall development in the city centre is defined as above 24 metres and 
below 45 metres. Any development over 45 metres would be considered to be 
super tall in Leicester and would have a significant impact on the townscape  
of city & city centre. Therefore, there are very limited opportunities for super 
tall development at this scale. They would only be allowed in exceptional 
circumstances as defined by a future supplementary planning document.
8.11 Where tall development already exists on a site it should not be assumed 
that tall development of the same scale, mass and built form is acceptable. 
In addition, proposals to change the appearance of tall development will be 
assessed using the same design and locational criteria. 
8.12 Leicester City Council will produce a supplementary planning document 
to provide further guidance on tall development. This will provide further 
information relating to specific areas for consideration when proposing taller 
development in Leicester. It will identify:
•  Heritage assets
•  Views: including local townscape, local heritage, sky-line and views and 
vistas of city wide significance
•  Significant public spaces and parks
•  Transport hubs
•  Areas of the city undergoing growth and change (See Character Area and Tall 
Development in Leicester evidence base)
•  Local environment requirements and impacts
• Design quality expectations
8.13 Until the council adopts any supplementary planning documents, the 
existing character area evidence as defined in chapter 9 of this plan and the 
associated tall development in Leicester document should be considered.
8.14 The supplementary planning documents will also identify areas in the city 
which have potential for some tall development. It will also identify areas that 
are considered to be constrained and there is extremely limited opportunity for 
tall development.  99Policy DQP02. Tall Development   
Planning permission will be granted for tall development where it meets the 
following design and locational criteria:
a) Responds positively to context, including scale, mass, built form and 
proportions, composition, urban grain, streetscape, topography, public open 
spaces and landscape, rivers and waterways
b) Tall development should be well-proportioned in terms of slenderness when 
viewed from all frontages with well-design component parts, in particular 
how it meets the sky (top) and ground (base)
c) Has a positive impact on local townscape views, local  heritage views, 
Leicester’s skyline and views and vistas of city-wide significance
d) Will have a positive relationship with public spaces and parks
e) Any proposal is accompanied by a comprehensive assessment and analysis 
of considerations as identified in this policy
f) Has an appropriate or no impact on the local environment including 
microclimate (wind), air quality, night-time appearance, light pollution, 
overshadowing and the lack of sunlight and daylight within the development 
itself, and to neighbouring buildings, streets and public realm
g) Demonstrates adequate levels of privacy between adjacent properties and 
within the development
h) Demonstrates that there are no cumulative impacts from existing, 
consented and proposed tall development and that the arrangement and 
spacing of tall development will allow the individual built forms in a cluster 
to be read as one entity, for example, by providing clear visual breaks where 
the sky is visible, avoiding a merging of built forms to create an overbearing 
monolithic impact of both significant scale and mass
i) Will not prejudice the future development potential of adjacent sites
j) Exhibits an exceptional standard of architectural quality in scale, form, 
massing, proportion, silhouette  and facade materials and detailed surface 
design and articulation
k) Exhibits a design that reflects or references human scaled design 
appropriate to the context, townscape and heritage of Leicester and local 
street-based qualities
l) Provides uses and a design at street level that interacts with and 
contributes positively to its surroundings and context including providing 
generous, well designed public spaces around the base100
Jubilee Square
8.15 All buildings must be designed to present active frontages to maximise 
natural surveillance from buildings over the public realm, thereby reducing the 
scope for and fear of crime. This will largely be achieved by incorporating the 
optimum number of doors and windows into buildings at ground level and by 
ensuring the proposed use of this space allows active frontages.
8.16 The main access points to buildings, especially apartment buildings, must 
be via high profile and well-designed entrance lobbies positioned within the 
main façade of a building, which should address the public realm. Primary 
access points will not normally be allowed, to the side and rear of buildings.
8.17 Incorporating accommodation to the ground floor of apartment 
buildings that are built up to the public realm can be particularly challenging. 
Development should be designed to protect the privacy of ground floor 
residents.1018.18 Street clutter should be avoided through, for example, consideration of the 
location, numbers, need and design of street furniture and equipment.
8.19 Open space must be designed to a high standard with full consideration 
given to inclusive design, and to the relationship between the open space and 
the surrounding buildings It must be located where it can be accessed safely 
and conveniently.
Inclusive Design
8.20 For Leicester to be a “confident city” our neighbourhoods, buildings, 
streets and spaces need to be consistently designed to be accessible and 
inclusive. To help achieve this, developers should:
•  Adopt the principles of inclusive design from the earliest stages of the 
development planning process
•  Meet the latest inclusive design and access standards and good practice
•  Where necessary review and ‘rebalance’ other design priorities to ensure that 
inclusive design is given sufficient weighting
8.21 This applies to all planning and development schemes, including area-wide 
initiatives, public realm schemes, transport infrastructure, and both residential 
and non-residential development. Inclusive  design principles should also apply 
to internal layouts and design.
Policy DQP03. Inclusive Design
New developments should be of inclusive design so that they: 
a) Can be used safely, easily and with dignity by all so that they are convenient 
and   welcoming with no disabling barriers and all people can use them 
independently and without undue effort, separation or special treatment
b) Meet the particular access needs of disabled and older people, as well as 
people with other ‘protected characteristics’ (as required by the Equality Act 
2010)
c) Are designed for likely future demographic trends, particularly in relation to 
an ageing society and the need for Leicester to be a ‘dementia friendly’ city102Landscaping
8.22 The city council expects to see an integrated approach to the use of soft 
and hard landscape features. This should involve the use of existing landscape 
features, topography and areas of planting which have amenity or ecological 
value, planting and hard landscaping that contributes to the street scene and 
provision for adequate maintenance to be provided.
8.23 The city council has an established strategy for trees and will seek to 
protect trees which enhance the public amenity of Leicester by ensuring that 
development schemes take account of existing trees and by making Tree 
Preservation Orders where necessary. Any landscaping scheme should meet a 
high standard of inclusive design.
Policy DQP04. Landscape Design
Development will be expected to: 
a) Retain landscape features such as topography, hydrology and existing 
vegetation, woodlands, trees and hedgerows
b) Justify and mitigate the loss of any existing landscape features
c) Respect and give consideration to the protection and enhancement of 
irreplaceable habitats such as ancient woodlands and veteran trees
d) Consider aspect and shading, and avoid creating a later pressure for 
removal of trees and other features
e) Provide a landscaping scheme which forms part of an integrated design 
approach, including overall layout, access routes, lighting and street 
furniture
f) Provide a landscaping scheme that is designed to a high quality, including 
to high inclusive design standards, and provide a variety of functions, such 
as SuDS, play space and shading
g) Provide a landscape design statement to evidence commitment and 
concepts towards providing high quality landscape proposals
h) Ensure that the maintenance and management of existing and new 
landscaping is provided for a minimum of the first five years, including 
replacing any dead or vandalised stock and demonstrate that satisfactory 
long-term maintenance and management is secured
i) Ensure planting schemes take into consideration how the landscape will 
mature, seasonal changes and its relationship to biodiversity103Backland, Tandem and Infill Development
8.24 The need to provide new housing and promote sustainability can be met 
through redevelopment at higher densities and the development of infill and 
backland plots. These developments can meet elements of the city’s housing 
need and contribute to the supply of  housing. They must be well planned to 
avoid real or perceived harm to the amenity and privacy of existing and future 
residents, as well as harm to the character of a neighbourhood.
8.25 To assess access and highways requirements, discussion will be required 
with the local transport authority and / or any subsequent relevant guidance.
Housing at Ashton Green104Residential Amenity and New Development
8.26 With a move towards greater mixing of homes with other land uses the 
issue of amenity is of particular relevance.  It is important to provide residents 
with a quality living environment.
Policy DQP05. Backland, Tandem and Infill development 
Backland development for new dwellings will be acceptable subject to the 
following:
a) The development potential of adjoining land is not unreasonably prejudiced
b) Satisfactory access in terms of highway safety, highway function, perceived 
and actual safety can be provided
c) Development should minimise the number and frequency of vehicle 
accesses off an existing highway
d) Tandem development of single dwellings will not normally be acceptable
e) The number of dwellings, size, design and layout shall allow for space 
around dwellings, existing and proposed landscaping, car parking 
arrangements, and take account of the relationship to, and character of, 
neighbouring property and the area
f) Privacy, light, outlook and residential amenity shall be maintained for 
existing and new dwellings by careful regard to separation distances, 
window positions, orientation of dwellings, levels,  screening  and 
landscaping
g) Development shall be designed and assessed to allow for reasonable 
extensions to dwellings including through permitted development. 
Development that does not reasonably allow for permitted development will 
not normally be accepted
h) All backland development must be adequately drained following SuDS 
principles with no net increase on green field run off rates
i) Development will respect the historic environment. In conservation areas, 
back- land development will seek to ensure that the overall character and 
urban grain of the area is retained. Any new development will need to be 
sympathetic in terms of size, scale and design to its specific location105Policy DQP06. Residential Amenity
In determining planning applications, the following factors concerning the 
amenity   of existing and future residents will be taken into account, both 
individually and cumulatively with the existing situation:
a) Noise, light, vibrations, smell and pollution (air, water and ground) caused 
by the development and its use
b) Any impact to the visual quality of the area
c) The management of waste and potential litter problems
d) Additional parking and vehicle manoeuvring
e) Privacy, overshadowing, overlooking, overbearing impact and adequate 
natural light
f) Safety and security
g) Access to key facilities by walking, cycling or public transport to ensure 
adequate accessibility by sustainable methods
Recycling and Refuse Storage and Waste Management
8.27 The location and siting of recycling and refuse bins can create an adverse 
impact on the  visual quality of the street scene, reduce visual surveillance and 
prevent a means of access to the rear of properties. It is essential that new 
homes have adequate utility space inside and areas outside for the storage of 
segregated waste.
Policy DQP07. Recycling and Refuse Storage
a) Both new development and conversion schemes should have sufficient 
refuse storage space to allow segregated waste collection. Storage space 
for refuse bins and the appropriate provision of space for recycling facilities 
should be integral to the design of new development and, where possible, 
conversion schemes
b) Facilities should be secure, their impact on the street scene should be 
minimised, and access for collection and management should be provided.  
Where bins can only be stored at the front of properties, provision should be 
made for them to be screened from the street
8.28 Designs to meet Policy DQP07, should be in line with Leicester City 
Council’s Waste Management Guidance.106Shopfronts and Security
8.29 New shopfronts can enhance the street scene, and a case can sometimes 
be made for security shutters. The design of the shopfront will be expected 
to be an integral part of the design of the whole building and avoid crude 
fittings. If security shutters are necessary, then roller shutter housing should be 
mounted within the building and the shutter curtain must be well designed and 
complement the street scene.  Particular care will be taken with  applications on 
listed buildings and in conservation areas.
8.30 External security shutters should be seen as an exception and business 
owners should consider alternative measures such as internal shutters, 
demountable grilles, security cameras and alarm systems.
Policy DQP08. Shopfronts and Security 
The design of new shopfronts and roller shutters will be expected to be an 
integral part of the design of the whole building, consistent with it in quality and 
treatment of materials and proportioned to respond to the lines of the façade of 
which it forms a part.
In existing buildings, replacement shopfronts and roller shutters will normally be 
ap- proved only if they:
a) Maintain or improve upon the quality of the front they are to replace
b) Relate well to the building they are to occupy and to the street scene in 
materials, form and proportion
c) Are designed to be unobtrusive
d) Shutter curtains provide visibility into the shop when they are in place
e) Are of an appropriate material, design and finish, applied before installation
Signs and Banners
8.31 Advertisements and signs are practical necessities and can promote the 
economy of the city and  provide visual interest and vitality. The design of signs 
should be an integral part of the design of the building façade, which are design 
to respect the vertical emphasis   and advertisements which display ingenuity 
of design and detail  will generally be encouraged.
 
8.32 Over dominant, inappropriately designed and located signs, and those 
that cause unacceptable light pollution, will not be approved. The council will 107also control the display of banners, flags, and advertisement boards which 
cause unnecessary clutter. Particular care will be taken with advertisement 
applications on listed buildings and in conservation areas. Internally illuminated 
signage is unlikely to be acceptable on listed buildings. Levels of illumination  
should be in accordance with the table below.
Table 6. Internally illuminated signs: levels of Illumination
Illuminated area Zone 1 Zone 2
(Units in Candelas per 
m²)Medium district 
brightness areas (e.g. 
small town centres, 
urban locations).High district brightness 
areas (er.g. town and 
city centres with high 
levels of nightime 
activity).
Up to 10m² 800 1000
Over 10m² 600 600 
8.33 Media screens and mesh wraps are relatively new forms of advertising 
and will not be   acceptable where they have an unacceptable impact on visual 
amenity, highway or public safety. 
Policy DQP09. Signs and Banners Advertisement Design and Location
Consent will be given for signs and advertisements unless they:
a) Do not relate well to the building on which they are fixed and to the 
surrounding area
b) Have a harmful impact on visual amenity
c) Cause unacceptable light pollution or loss of amenity through excessive 
glare, light spillage or sky glow
d) Would have an unacceptable impact on highway safety
Projecting and Fascia Signs
8.34 A maximum of one projecting sign per frontage will normally be permitted. 
Fascia and projecting signs above the level of first floor windowsills will not 
normally be permitted.1088.35 The council will also control the display of banners, flags and other types 
of advertisements which produce an unacceptable cluttered effect on the 
street scene.
Media Screens
8.36 Media screens will be acceptable unless they:
a) Cause an unacceptable impact on visual amenity; or
b) Would have an unacceptable impact on highway safety; or
c) Would be contrary to criteria in relation to advertisement design
8.37 Media screens displayed in buildings where they are visible from the public 
realm should be designed so that they are well proportioned and well integrated 
within the existing shopfront and streetscape.
8.38 Free standing media screens in the public realm should not contribute 
to a cluttered environment, taking into account existing street furniture and 
advertisements. 
Mesh wrap advertisements
8.39 Mesh wraps that cover buildings, or large parts of buildings, will be 
acceptable unless they would:
a) Cause an unacceptable impact on visual amenity
b) Would have an unacceptable impact on highway safety
Architectural and Feature Lighting
8.40 The ‘Architectural and Feature Lighting Strategy’ found on the Leicester 
City website, for the city sets out an approach for identifying the best lighting 
opportunities within the city centre in order to enhance the quality of the night 
time environment in a coordinated way. Lighting proposals should aim to bring 
out the character of the city, highlight the rich heritage, add visual interest, 
enhance security and encourage the night time economy.
8.41 The approach to lighting a building should be carefully considered and 
the various options explored. In general, buildings with interesting architecture 
should be lit delicately, picking out and enhancing the best architectural 109features. A successful lighting scheme will have areas that are intentionally left 
dark and areas which are lit. The dark, light and shadow should all play together 
in a balanced way.
8.42 Designers are encouraged to discuss their proposals at early concept 
stage with building owners and planning officers before proceeding with 
detailed design work.  
Advertisement Hoardings
8.43 Advertisement hoardings that screen development sites can provide visual 
interest and stop derelict or vacant sites being visible from the street scene. 
However, advertisement hoardings can be detrimental to the street scene 
and harm the character of an area. The city council has successfully taken 
enforcement action against inappropriate hoardings. Temporary advertisements 
would be expected to be in place for a maximum of three years, plus the time 
taken to construct the development.
Policy DQP10. Advertisement Hoardings
Advertisement hoardings, including digital hoardings, will only be permitted to 
screen a derelict building or site, subject to the design being appropriate for 
the timescale of the redevelopment and subject to requirements to remove at a 
specified date. 
Advertisement hoarding signs in other circumstances, or other advertisements 
unrelated to the site, will not normally be permitted.
Changing Places and Public Toilets.
8.44 The need for public toilets is more prevalent amongst certain groups such 
as the elderly, disabled, children and people suffering from bladder or bowel 
conditions. The lack of provision can deter people going out in the community, 
increasing the risk of social isolation and poor mental health.  A changing 
places toilet provides important sanitary accommodation for people with 
multiple and complex disabilities who have one or two assistants with them .
8.45 Commercial development proposals are encouraged to assess the local 
provision of public toilets, and improve on/provide public toilets, including the 110provision of accessible toilets. Leisure providers are encouraged to provide 
public toilets or improve the accessibility of existing facilities. These should be 
in compliance with the following standards.
Policy DQP11. Changing Places Facilities 
In addition to standard accessible WCs, ‘Changing Places’ toilet facilities should 
be provided in larger buildings and complexes, such as: 
a) Major transport termini or interchanges
b) Sport, leisure and community facilities, including large hotels
c) Cultural centres, such as museums, concert halls and art galleries
d) Stadia and large auditoria
e) Shopping centres, major supermarkets and shop-mobility centres;
f) Key civic and community buildings
g) Educational establishments
h) Health facilities, such as hospitals, health centres and community practices111
9. Central Development 
Area 
 112Evidence Base
9.1 There are several background studies that will underpin policies in this plan. 
The studies for this chapter are published on our website. 
•  Townscape Analysis and Design Guidance – Evidence for Character Areas 
(2022)
•  Local Housing Needs Assessment (2022) 
•  Economic Development Needs Assessment (2021) 
•  Central Development Area Capacity Study (2022)
•  Leicester City Centre Offices Study (2019)
•  Tall Development Evidence in Leicester document 2022 
Background
9.2 The regeneration of Leicester is a key theme of this development plan. 
Detailed analysis of the central area of Leicester has identified areas which 
have distinctive characters and different development objectives. Within this 
central area a managed approach to change will be implemented. This is based 
on townscape character management (see Diagrams 6, 7 & 8), which seeks 
to maximise sustainable development opportunities and prioritises brownfield 
land. 
9.3 Major housing growth is planned for the Central Development Area (CDA) 
with at least 6,286 new homes planned by 2036. This is around 30% of the 
city’s planned housing provision withe the majority of this being provided on 
brownfield land. This area will make a significant contribution to addressing the 
city’s future housing needs. 
9.4 Much of the development activity needed to enable restructuring of the 
economy will occur within and around the city centre, within the Central 
Development Area. Leicester’s future economic prosperity will depend on 
making sure that it appeals to a skilled and mobile workforce as an attractive 
place to live and work. The quality of life, environment, housing, jobs and the 
cultural, leisure and retail offer of the city and central area in particular, will play 
a major role in this.1139.5 In order for development to come forward successfully, the provision of 
infrastructure to enable sites to be accessed and serve the existing and new 
communities is very important. Infrastructure includes education facilities, 
public realm, highways, and other transport improvements.  
Purpose 
9.6 The aim of the Central Development Area is to enable the city council to 
direct, optimise and encourage investment whilst managing development 
appropriately within a local context.  High quality design will be used to help 
create certainty and developer confidence whilst maximising development on 
brownfield land. 
Orton Square114Diagram 6. Central Development Area and the Character Areas 
Other regeneration areas
Central development area (CDA)
City centre
Central shopping core
N.B. Within the CDA, areas shown as white on 
the Character Areas plan are where other 
policies from the Local plan are already 
predominant, such as retail. (In Central Shopping 
Core) and protection of Parks, under Open 
Space policies.Character areas
© Crown copyright and database rights 
2022. Ordnance Survey 100019264.NARBOROUGH ROADWELFORD ROADLONDON ROADST. MARGARET’S WAY
HINCKLEY ROADHUMBERSTONE ROADBELGRAVE ROAD
GROBY ROADAbbey Meadows and
Pioneer Park
WatersideSt. Margaret’sBelgrave
Gateway
Mans/f_ield
Street Wharf Street
St. George’s
Cultural Quarter
Old Town
LRI and DMU
New Walk
University of
LeicesterLeicester City
Football ClubRailway
Station
Walnut Street115Policy CDA01. Central Development and Management Strategy
The Central Development Area (CDA) will be the focus of major housing 
development, employment, and physical regeneration to provide the impetus 
for economic, environmental, and social investment and provide benefits for 
existing and future residents. 
Within the CDA development proposals will be expected to take into 
account other relevant policies within this plan including those related to tall 
development (policy DQP02) and any Supplementary Planning Document the 
council may choose to produce, post adoption of this plan. New development 
within the CDA must be comprehensive, well co-ordinated and complement and 
build on delivery programmes and any additional planning documents. All new 
development within the character areas will be expected to follow the principles 
of townscape character management (See Diagrams 6 & 7 & Table 7).
Article 4 directions will be used where appropriate to protect specific uses 
which are required for the vitality and viability of the CDA.
New development in the Central Development Area will be required to:
• Create well balanced communities by providing a range of high-quality 
homes and employment opportunities to meet the needs of Leicester and 
support its goals of prosperity and economic growth
• Create high quality residential neighbourhoods which have access to a range 
of facilities 
• Create high quality, well designed, safe, urban environments that provide 
mixed use buildings and spaces which are based on the principles of 
townscape character
• Provide improved opportunities for leisure and cultural activity
• Promote continued investment in the major sports stadia and associated 
facilities including other relevant secondary uses such as hotels
• Promote continued investment in university related projects including 
university masterplans
• Improve opportunities for walking, cycling and public transport
• Improve accessibility to jobs, homes, services, and connectivity between 
areas including the riverside and water corridors
• Protect and enhance designated and other heritage assets and where 
the city council considers appropriate encourage the use of heritage-led 
regeneration116• Protect existing habitats and enhance or create new areas for wildlife
• Be comprehensive and co-ordinated, complementing and building on 
delivery programmes and supplementary planning documents
Defining the Character Areas
9.7 Following comprehensive assessment of the Central Development Area, 
the city council has divided the area into 14 distinct areas. These includes 
9 Character Areas and 5 other Regeneration Areas. These areas reflect 
the individual context of the area and are based on the area’s defining 
characteristics. (See Diagram 6).
 
9.8 The 9 Character Areas include:
•  Railway Station
•  Mansfield Street
•  St. Margaret’s
•  Wharf Street
•  Belgrave Gateway
•  LRI and DMU
•  St. George’s Cultural Quarter
•  Old Town
•  New Walk
Other Regeneration Areas
•  Waterside
•  Abbey Meadows and Pioneer Park
•  Leicester City Football Club
•  University of Leicester
•  Walnut Street
Character Areas - Policy Basis and the role of Future Guidance
9.9 These areas all have distinctive characteristics which the city council 
expects development to protect and enhance. The expected uses in each of the 
14 areas are set out in the individual policies below.1179.10 Within the character areas change is expected to be managed, depending 
on its character as is shown in Table 7 and Diagrams 7 & 8.
Character Area Evidence Base Documents 
9.11 The policies contained within this chapter are shaped by and build on the 
individual character area assessment evidence base documents which set 
out the council’s aspirations for these areas. A web link to each character area 
document can be found at the end of each policy.
Future Supplementary Planning Documents 
9.12 After the Local Plan is adopted the council will produce supplementary 
planning documents which will develop these areas further.  Priority will be 
given to those areas that will undertake significant change during the plan 
period. 
9.13 For each of the character areas, supplementary planning documents will 
set out the following: 
•  A vision for the area
•  A masterplan
•  Relevant special policy areas and development areas, where the council will 
work positively with landowners to deliver specific interventions
•  Specific design codes - These will be developed in collaboration with key 
stakeholders and communities. They will consider context, movement, 
nature, built form, identity, public space, uses, homes and buildings as set out 
in the National Model Design Code June 2021 and set clear expectations for 
achieving well designed places
9.14 These documents will establish the relevant townscape management 
options attributed to a particular area (that is described in the following pages) 
and will provide the basis to develop policies, objectives and clear guidance 
for development that is tailored to the circumstances and context of each 
character area. The documents will also focus on directing and prioritising 
development, provide townscape guidance specific to each character area, 
building heights, and identifying pro-active aims and interventions. This 
includes public realm, transport, heritage, and streetscapes.
 118Townscape Character Management 
 
9.15 Each character area will be managed based on the following principles 
depending on the overriding character of the area:  
•  Respect and protection of heritage assets
•  Evolution without significant change
•  Developing an area’s character
•  Intensification by increased density and higher density building types
•  Redevelopment
Table 7. Character Area Management Options 
 
Character 
Area 
management 
options Respect and 
protection 
of heritage 
assets Evolution 
without 
significant 
change Developing 
an areas 
characterIntensification 
by increased 
density and 
higher density 
building typesRedevelopment
New Walk X X    
Old Town X X    
St. George’s X X X   
LRI and DMU X X    
Belgrave 
Gateway   X   
Wharf Street   X   
St. Margaret’s     X 
Mansfield 
Street   X X  
Railway 
Station    X X 119Diagram 7. Character Area Management Options 
(Copyright, London Borough of Croydon) 
9.16 Diagram 8 overleaf, shows how this relates to each of the character areas. 
It includes the Waterside area, in addition to the nine character areas, as there 
is already a detailed supplementary planning document for this area. 
New Walk and Museum120Diagram 8. Character Area Development and Management Plan 
Criteria to Guide New Development in the Character Areas 
Character Area
 Development & 
Management 
Plan
1.  Respect and protection of heritage assets
2.  Evolution without significant change
3.  Developing an area’s character
4.  Intensification by increased density and  
 higher density building types
5.  Redevelopment
 1219.17 To successfully manage development within these areas, the following 
criteria are important for any development. 
1. Character and Identity
Development should enhance the character, identity and sense of place by 
considering the built, natural, and historic context, responding to it ecologically, 
socially and aesthetically. All development should contribute to the unique 
character of the area by protecting and enhancing existing heritage assets 
and achieving creative re-use, while ensuring that they will continue to make 
a significant contribution to the area as it undergoes change. All development 
should celebrate the Character Area’s local distinctiveness and create 
memorable places that are visually attractive and offer a unique experience to 
its users.
2. Cohesive, Vibrant & Inclusive Neighbourhoods
Ensure everyone’s health, safety, and quality of life creating buildings, streets 
and spaces that encourage people of all ages, backgrounds, and abilities to 
meet and mix. All development should use the appropriate built form, layout, 
scale, and mixture of uses and tenures to create a welcoming and attractive 
place for people to live work and visit. There should not be any differentiation 
between the quality of market and affordable housing.
3. Diversity
Within each Character Area variety, choice, and design sensory richness 
should be provided in keeping with local distinctiveness. Development should 
promote and create mixed-use communities through providing a diverse range 
of facilities, activities, and residential typologies with good access to public 
transport.
4. Ease of Movement
Ensure, improve, and promote ease of movement, accessibility, and 
connectivity within the Character Area and to the surrounding neighbourhoods. 
The use of creative and innovative solutions for reducing car-dominated 
streetscapes should be considered to promote safe and welcoming pedestrian 
and cycle movement. This is to allow direct and convenient access to existing 
and new local services, facilities, and open spaces. Active frontages and doors 
on streets, especially along main and secondary pedestrian connections will 
maximise natural surveillance over the public realm.1225. Legibility & Permeability
Ensure that each Character Area can be properly understood and easily 
navigated. There should be a positive relationship between the fronts and 
backs of buildings and structures, together with clearly defined public and 
private spaces, well-defined block and street pattern and distinctive townscape 
markers. Future development should enhance and create a clear and permeable 
hierarchy of streets, routes, and spaces to provide safe and convenient ease of 
movement by all users.
6. Public Realm and Landscape
Create a high-quality public realm with well-managed and maintained areas 
that incorporate natural features and new green infrastructure. Development 
and future changes within the Character Area should deliver attractive and 
well-located public realm and landscape features that contribute to a greater 
cohesion of the streetscape. Places for people to rest, meet and gather, 
together with the insertion of trees, landscaping and planting will encourage 
inclusivity and social integration, enhancing people’s quality of life and a place’s 
perception.
7 . Adaptability and Flexibility
Anticipate the need for change to buildings and outdoor spaces so that they 
function well today, last for the future and can adapt to changing needs. This 
includes accommodating the changing dynamics of family life, the needs of 
older people, the ways residential and workspaces are used, environmental 
changes and future expansion of the development.
8. Lifespan
Development should be robust, easy to use and to look after. Materials should 
be chosen in accordance with their function and context, with the ability to be 
maintained overtime and age well.123Policy CDA02. New Development Within the Character Areas  
 
Within the character areas as identified on the policies map, any new 
development will be expected to meet the following requirements. Further 
detail will be provided within subsequent supplementary planning documents: 
• New buildings and extensions to existing buildings will be expected 
to be built to a height in line with the tall buildings policy (DQP02 ‘Tall 
Development’)
• Nationally and locally listed buildings, other identified heritage assets, 
including the protection of key views will be protected and enhanced
• Non-listed buildings which have been identified as making a positive 
contribution to the townscape should also be retained where possible
• To improve connectivity both within the character area and to surrounding 
areas, development should seek to create new connections which improve 
the streetscape and enhance the quality of existing connections for 
pedestrians and cyclists
• New development should create active frontages which maximise natural 
surveillance and provide interest for passers-by. This will be of particular 
importance at ground floor level 
• New development should by its design improve the character and 
appearance of the character area
• New development should be designed to repair the building lines of streets 
especially on vacant plots to prevent fragmentation within the character 
areas
• Provide new green infrastructure which makes a significant contribution 
to the development’s place making and adds positively to the aims and 
objectives of the character area
Uses within the Character Areas and the Other Regeneration Areas 
 
9.18 The central development area will be the focus of major housing 
development, employment, and physical regeneration to ensure that the city 
remains a viable and sustainable location and that communities can develop 
and flourish. This will mean that at least 6,286 additional dwellings will be 
expected to be delivered within this area. 
9.19 To ensure that individual objectives are met within each of the character 
areas particular land uses will be encouraged. These are set out in the policy 
and supporting text below.  
 1249.20 Any new uses which come forward within these areas will need to be able 
to co-exist with the existing uses, based on the ‘agent of change’ principle. 
Development will be expected to provide suitable mitigation before the 
development has been completed.   
Granby Street
The Character Areas
The Railway Station
9.21 The vision for the railway station is for it to be a primary gateway and 
office destination within the city centre. It will be a vibrant and distinctive place 
that is easy to find, walk and cycle around. It will reconnect the railway station 
with the Culture Quarter and strength connections to the city centre. 
Railway Station Character Area objectives are to:
•  Manage building heights and massing in accordance with the townscape 
appraisal to positively respond to the context and future development 
objectives of the character area125•  Deliver a new railway station entrance that creates a new well designed
public space and public realm and reconfigures the transport hub to
strengthen its visual and physical presence
•  Improve the physical and visual connection between the Railway Station,
St. George’s Cultural Quarter, and future development to the east of thecharacter area. This will be through improved infrastructure, street and publicrealm improvements and creating direct legible routes
•  Allow a mix of uses in order to create an active and vibrant destination
•  Improve wayfinding and connections from the station to key city destinations
to the southwest, including both the Leicester Tigers and Leicester CityFootball Club stadiums
Policy CHA01. The Railway Station 
Within the area defined as the Railway Station Character Area on the adopted 
policies map, development will be expected to support Leicester City Council’s 
aspirations for high quality office development within this area. 
This will be achieved by: 
•Delivering a minimum of 20,000 sqm of high-grade office space (Class E(g)
(i))
•Delivery of improvements to this primary city gateway including the creationof new high quality public realm
•Strengthening pedestrian connectivity from the station to the city centre,improving the infrastructure and transport hub
•Allowing a mix of uses which are ancillary to support the office development,such as hotel, food and drink, and leisure where they do not detract orundermine delivery of this or other nearby character areas
Link to character area document 
Mansfield Street
9.22 The vision for Mansfield Street is to create an emerging commercial and 
city living community with Church Gate at its heart. It will be within with easy 
walking distance to city based services and facilities. Mansfield Street will be a 
place where the unique historic legacy of Leicester is enhanced and celebrated 
with a new identity created through the integration of the old and new.126Mansfield Street Character Area objectives are to:
•  Manage building heights and massing in accordance with the townscape
appraisal to positively respond to the context and future development
objectives of the character area
•  Deliver public spaces through enhancing the streetscape along main
pedestrian corridors and streets, with trees, planting, and places for peopleto rest, meet and gather
•  Ensure that Church Gate becomes the ‘neighbourhood heart’ that has a ‘new,
healthy and green’ street, which gives priority to pedestrians and cyclistsas well as providing areas for people to ‘dwell’. Trees and planting should beprovided along with active frontages to promote natural surveillance andactivity
•  Ensure that new development encourages the sensitive re-use and improves
the setting of currently isolated heritage assets by reconfiguring buildinglines, opening up connections and improving views to provide clear visualand physical links
•  Provide a safe, welcoming and pleasant pedestrian and cycle network that
creates a walkable city-living community and reintegrates Abbey Park intothe city
•  Deliver homes that offer a varied mix of dwellings in line with the housing
needs assessment. (Ho3 ‘Housing mix & type’)
Policy CHA02. Mansfield Street
Within the area defined as the Mansfield Street Character area on the adopted 
policies map, it is expected that development will be primarily residential led 
regeneration that supports and maintains the ongoing provision of a mix of uses 
in the area.
This will be achieved by:
•The provision of high-quality residential development (Class C3)
•Within the area of Mansfield Street that is also within the central shopping
core as defined by the adopted policies map, development should be retailfocused (Class E(a))
•Within the area east of Abbey Street new development should complementits existing commercial and industrial character of the area through theprovision of new business uses (Class E(c) & Class E(g))
Link to character areas document127St. Margaret’s
9.23 The vision for St. Margaret’s is to create a mixed-use neighbourhood, with 
homes for rent and sale. The area will have a new heart and will reconnect and enhance the historic setting of St. Margaret’s Church with its local industrial heritage. It will be a welcoming and well-connected place that celebrates its waterfront location and improves connectivity with Abbey Park and the city centre, making it a walkable destination for all.
St Margaret’s Character Area objectives are to:
• Ensure a comprehensive approach to development by delivering an area-
wide masterplan that sets out a deliverable and cohesive vision
•  Manage building heights and massing in accordance with the townscape
appraisal to positively respond to the context and future developmentobjectives of the character area
•  Improve connections between Abbey Park and the city centre through legible
gateways, enhanced and safe pedestrian and cycle routes and network ofgreen spaces
•  Provide well-designed public spaces adjacent to the canal to connect people
with the water and create active frontages and enclosure to Abbey Park
•  Enhance Foundry Square as St. Margaret’s ‘neighbourhood heart’ creating
a civic space for the whole community. Elevate the square’s townscapepresence through improved enclosure, public realm and changing thebuilding lines to reinstate prominence of St. Mark’s Church
•  Create a network of diverse public spaces along main pedestrian routes,
while enhancing the existing ones (St. Margaret’s churchyard, Corah Green,Foundry Square)
•  Create new east-west connections through the currently impenetrable and
illegible former Corah works urban block
•  Deliver homes that offer a varied mix of dwelling types in line with the
housing needs assessment. (Ho3 ‘Housing mix & type’)128Policy CHA03. St. Margaret’s 
Within the area defined as the St Margaret’s Character Area on the adopted 
policies map it is expected that development will be masterplan lead regeneration based around the creation of a new residential neighbourhood. This will be achieved by: 
•Delivering a balanced mix of residential types and tenures including housing
where feasible (Class C3)
•Allowing offices (Class E (g)i) and leisure uses where they are subordinate toresidential development
•Improving the connectivity with Belgrave Road /Golden Mile and east –westacross the area and continuing to improve connectivity and footfall to AbbeyPark from the city centre
•Achieve creative reuse of underused industrial architecture and heritageassets
Link to character areas document
Wharf Street
9.24 The vision for Wharf Street is to create a growing mixed-use 
neighbourhood that connects the city centre to surrounding communities. It 
will be a well-served, well-connected place, with a city living, neighbourhood 
identity and a new heart. Development will be expected to enhance local 
heritage and to establish its own identity. Industrial and employment 
are considered to be appropriate uses and they will be integrated to the 
neighbourhood.
Wharf Street Character Area Objectives are to: 
•  Manage building heights and massing in accordance with the townscape
appraisal to positively respond to the context and future development
objectives of the character area
•  Create a ‘neighbourhood heart’ for a growing community through a brand-
new well-designed public space in front of Lee Circle car park
•  Wharf Street South will become a ‘new, healthy and green’ street that gives
priority to pedestrians and cyclists as well as providing places to dwell. Treesand planting should be provided along with active frontages to promotenatural surveillance and activity129•  Reconfigure the street network around Lee Circle car park to maximise
walking and cycling and improve the settings of heritage assets
•  Provide a safe, welcoming, and pleasant street network to create a walkable
city-living community
•  Make changes to building lines where this is desirable and achievable
•  Deliver homes that offer a varied mix of dwellings in line with the housing
needs assessment (Ho3 ‘Housing mix & type’)
•  Allow for a mix of uses that will co-exist as an essential part of the area’s
character and contribution to the city centre
Policy CHA04. Wharf Street
Within the area defined as Wharf Street character area on the adopted policies 
map it is expected development will support the continued creation of an 
emerging residential neighbourhood. 
This will be achieved by:
•Ensuring that any new development complements the already emerging
residential neighbourhood including the existing mixed-use development
•Ensuring the delivery of a mix of residential development (Class C3)including housing where feasible
•Supporting new retail (Class E(a)) within the central shopping area andancillary food & drink uses (Class E(b)) elsewhere within Wharf Street
•Provision of new leisure and community facilities where they support theemerging new neighbourhood
•To make adequate provision for new public realm infrastructure (both on site& off site) where feasible
Link to character areas document
Belgrave Gateway
9.25 The vision for Belgrave Gateway is to create a well-served mixed-use 
neighbourhood that successfully balances its local neighbourhood character to 
the east, supports family homes, and its prominence to the west. It will enhance 
streets and spaces to safely connect surrounding communities to Abbey 
Park.  Its vibrant heart shared by the wider community will be enhanced.  The 
unique views of St. Mark’s Church will be protected. Industrial and employment 
uses are appropriate within this area and will be well-integrated into the 
neighbourhood.130Belgrave Gateway Character Area objectives are to:
•  Ensure a comprehensive and coherent approach to development between
Belgrave Gate, St. Margaret’s and Wharf Street character areas
•  Manage building heights and massing in accordance with the townscape
appraisal to positively respond to the context and future development
objectives of the character area
•  Improve connectivity between Abbey Park with the city through legible
gateways, enhanced, safe and welcoming pedestrian and cycle connectionsand a legible network of public spaces.
•  Redefine the relationship to the waterfront by providing enhanced public
realm next to the canal, increasing surveillance and activity to the edge of thewater and providing enclosure to Abbey Park
•  Better integrate employment and residential uses, allowing them to co-exist
and positively contribute to the area’s overall environment
•  Enhance Russell Square as Belgrave Gate’s ‘neighbourhood heart’ a key
placemaking area with a unique historic setting and views
•  Deliver homes that offer a varied mix of dwellings in line with the housing
needs assessment (Ho3 ‘Housing mix & type’)
Policy CHA05. Belgrave Gateway 
Within the area defined as Belgrave Gateway character area on the adopted 
policies map it is expected that development will support the overall aim of 
managed residential regeneration, as well the continuing roles of existing 
education, residential and employment uses within the area. 
This will be achieved by:
•Delivering new residential development (Class C3)
•Expanding and enhancing the existing Leicester College Campus (Class
F1(a))
•Supporting and enhancing the existing employment uses within the northernarea of Belgrave Gateway (Class E (g)iii, B2 & B8)
•Providing new hotel uses (Class C1) where it can satisfy the requirements ofa sequential test
•Facilitating the regeneration of the existing frontage along both sides ofBelgrave Gate to improve and encourage movement through the area and inturn improve connectivity with the adjacent Belgrave Road/ Golden Mile131•Enhancing this important gateway and its links to the city centre
•Continuing to improve connectivity and footfall to Abbey Park from the city
centre
Link to character areas document
Leicester Royal Infirmary and De Montfort University
9.26 The vision for Leicester Royal Infirmary and De Montfort University is for 
a growing mixed-use area and city destination that connects the city centre to 
surrounding neighbourhoods. It will be part of a well-served, well-connected 
neighbourhood with an established community to the south and student 
accommodation to the north. De Montfort University will be the heart of the 
character area with its vibrancy and diversity. A better integrated LRI campus 
will positively enhance the townscape and public realm. 
Leicester Royal Infirmary and De Montfort University Character Area Objectives 
are to:
•  Manage building heights and massing in accordance with the townscape
appraisal to positively respond to the context and future development
objectives of the character area
•  Improve the network of streets for pedestrians and cyclists which link the city
centre to adjoining neighbourhoods in the west of the city
•  Provide improvements to key nodes and junctions, such as infirmary Square
to enhance their townscape contribution by creating well-designed and well-enclosed public spaces
•  Work in partnership with the University of Leicester NHS Trust and De
Montfort University on development strategies for their facilities, ensuringthat townscape and design objectives are aligned especially along mainpedestrian and cycle routes, streets and spaces and public facing areas
•  Deliver homes that offer a varied mix of dwelling types in line with the
housing needs assessment. (Ho3 ‘Housing mix & type’)132Policy CHA06. Leicester Royal Infirmary and De Montfort University
Within the area defined as ‘Leicester Royal Infirmary and De Montfort 
University’ character area on the adopted policies map, development will be expected to support the continuing role of the existing hospital, university, and rugby stadium (Welford Road). This will be achieved by: 
•Supporting development directly related to the Leicester Royal Infirmary, De
Montfort University, Welford Road Stadium (Leicester Tigers) and ancillaryuses such as Student Accommodation (Sui Generis) and other uses wherethere is a proven need or guided by a defined masterplan
•Enhancing the connectivity across the area and LRI campus and providingpositive interfaces to the public realm integrating the LRI and DMU campuswith the surrounding neighbourhoods
•Retail development (Class E (a)) within the parts of the Character Areacontained in the defined central shopping core
Link to character areas document
St. Georges Cultural Quarter
9.27 The vision for ‘St. George’s Cultural Quarter’ is to create a unique and 
distinctive identity of culture and creativity that will support a welcoming 
and vibrant neighbourhood. It will be a much-cherished city destination with 
heritage and townscape richness. It will provide new mixed-use workspace 
development and enhance connections to the Railway Station and the Phoenix 
Theatre. It will consolidate the mix of owner occupiers and encourage the for 
sale/ private residential market.
9.28 Within this area there will be allocated a comprehensive office 
development providing a minimum of 20,000sqm of office floorspace to 
encourage new companies into the area.
St. George’s Cultural Character Area Objectives are to: 
•  Manage building heights and massing in accordance with the townscape
appraisal to positively respond to the context and future development
objectives of the character area
•  St. George’s Street will become a ‘new, healthy and green’ street, establishing
it as the main connection between the Railway Station, the Phoenix cinemaand Arts centre and the new office-led mixed-use area. Priority will be given133to pedestrians and cyclists, as well as providing places to dwell. Trees and 
planting should be provided along with active frontages to promote natural surveillance, activity, and social interaction
•  Deliver a new public space in front of Phoenix Theatre’s extension as a
secondary ‘neighbourhood heart’. This is in addition to Orton Square andshould be delivered by new development
•  Ensure that the place-making qualities in the west of the area are continued
and delivered by new development in the east
•  Improve enclosure and increased surveillance around St. George’s churchyard
to enhance the pedestrian experience
•  Deliver high quality office-led mixed-use development in the east of the
character area
•  Promote opportunities for creative workspaces and start-ups that appeal to
artists and creative companies to enhance the area’s rich cultural offer
•  Deliver homes that offer a varied mix of dwelling types in line with the
housing needs assessment. (Ho3 ‘Housing mix & type’)
Policy CHA07. St. George’s Cultural Quarter
Within the area defined as ‘St. George’s Cultural Quarter’ Character Area on the 
adopted policies map, development will be expected to meet the council’s aim 
for the area for mixed use heritage character regeneration.
This will be achieved by: 
•Providing a minimum of 20,000sqm of high grade offices (SL01)
•Supporting proposals for small scale office development (Class E g (i))
•Supporting proposals for the expansion and enhancement of ‘Curve’ and
Phoenix Cinema and proposals for other similar leisure uses
•Supporting proposals for food and drink uses to increase footfall within thearea (Class E (b))
•Supporting proposals for employment & creative development such asworkspaces and creative start-ups units that assists in making the area alively and creative environment, appealing to artists and creative companies
•Improving the public realm including linking through the public spaces ofOrton Square and St George’s Churchyard
Link to character areas document134Old Town
9.29 The vision for Old Town is to create a vibrant historic core with 
concentrated heritage richness that reflects Leicester’s history. It will be a 
unique tourist destination with multiple “hearts” and attractions. It will visually 
and physically reconnect the heritage and cultural gems east and west of the 
city centre. It will be a place for high quality family homes where mix and owner 
occupiers are encouraged, offering a balance of uses.
9.30 The old town is the city’s historical core and contains unique heritage that 
includes the Castle Mott, Cathedral and latterly the grave & Visitor Centre for 
King Richard III. It has the city’s highest concentration of important heritage, 
architectural and archaeological assets that has built up over several centuries, 
which should be conserved and enhanced. Historically, this area was the city’s 
legal quarter which means it has a commercial attraction for small offices.
9.31 The vision for this area will be achieved by only allowing high-quality 
residential development, by maintaining & developing high quality small offices 
(Class E (g) (i)) of between 100 and 1,000 sqm and enabling further tourism and 
economic growth that gives due consideration to the significance of this part of 
the city. 
Old Town Character Area objectives are to:
•  Manage building heights and massing in accordance with the townscape 
appraisal to positively respond to the context and future development 
objectives of the character area
•  Promote the conservation, enhancement, and sensitive use of heritage 
assets
•  Improve the visual connection between the heritage assets of the east and 
the west by opening up views when opportunities allow
•  Deliver small scale improvements to further enhance the cycling and 
pedestrian network, especially across the ring road
•  Provide improvements to key gateways to enhance their townscape 
contribution and legibility by creating well-designed and well-enclosed public 
spaces
•  Deliver homes that offering a varied mix of dwelling types in line with the 
housing needs assessment. (Ho3 ‘Housing mix & type’)135•  Allow for a mix of uses that will co-exist as an essential part of the area’s
character and contribution to the city centre. High quality small offices will be
supported
Policy CHA08. Old Town
Within the area defined as ‘old town’ character area on the adopted policies 
map development will be expected to strongly protect and enhance the unique 
historical character of this area.
This will be achieved by:
•Expecting all development to support the overarching aim of heritage-based
regeneration
•Ensuring that new high quality residential development (Class C3) does notdetract from important heritage assets within the area
•Supporting proposals for the provision of small offices (Class E (g) (i))
•Supporting new retail development (Class E (a)) within the central shoppingarea
•Supporting proposals for tourist based leisure uses which support theheritage aims and objectives of the area
Link to character areas document
New Walk
9.32 The vision for New Walk is to create an area that is a truly walkable 
neighbourhood with New Walk at its heart. This will be the ‘city ’s promenade’ 
displaying Leicester ’s Georgian legacy. It will be an ideal place to live and work 
and will connect the city-centre to the surrounding residential areas. It will 
be a place where small scale office development blends in with high-quality 
residential uses within the area ’s fine-grained urban fabric.
9.33 All new development or conversions will be expected to help create a 
high-quality environment. Proposals should also promote the conservation, 
enhancement and sensitive use of listed buildings and conservation areas. 
Within this area changes to community uses commonly found in residential 
areas will be acceptable where they do not adversely affect residential amenity. 136New Walk Character Area Objectives are to:
•  Manage building heights and massing in accordance with the townscape
appraisal to positively respond to the context and future development
objectives of the character area
•  Deliver small scale improvements to enhance the pedestrian and cycle
network in the area
•  Improve connectivity, pedestrian experience and wayfinding along Waterloo/
Tigers Ways between the Railway Station and the Welford Road Stadium andLeicester City Football Club regeneration area
•  Manage small scale incremental development such as ‘backland
development’ and upwards extensions to ensure that the area’s existingtownscape and place-making qualities are protected
•  Promote the conservation, enhancement and sensitive use of heritage assets
•  Deliver homes that offer a varied mix of dwelling types in line with the
housing needs assessment. (Ho3 ‘Housing mix & type’)
•  Allow for the ongoing provision of a mix of uses that will co-exist as an
essential part of the area’s character and contribute to the city centre.Existing offices will be retained where their quality permits, unless they areunsuitable for modern office uses
Policy CHA09. New Walk
Within the area defined as ‘New Walk’ character area on the adopted policies 
map development will be expected to be conservation led development which creates a high-quality living and working environment.
This will be achieved by: 
•Ensuring that new development protects and enhances the New Walk area
and important heritage assets
•Delivering small scale offices and retaining existing offices where theirquality permits (Class E (g)(i))
•Allowing new education Uses (F1 (a))
•Providing residential (Class C3) and student accommodation (Sui Generis)on existing vacant plots
•Promoting retail (Class E (a)) within the London Road shopping centre
Link to character areas document137Other Regeneration Areas 
 
1. Abbey Meadows and Pioneer Park 
9.34 The Abbey Meadows and Pioneer Park regeneration area is split into four 
distinct areas these are:  
•  Abbey Meadows
•  Pioneer Park
•  Employment Land
•  The National Space Centre (NSC) & Abbey Pumping Station
 
a)  Abbey Meadows  
9.35 The focus for development within Abbey Meadows area is based around 
developing residential communities (new & existing) at Wolsey Island, the 
former BUSM site at Ross Walk and Abbey Meadows west. It will be important 
to make sure that these areas are properly linked to existing adjacent 
communities. Specific focus is required on the canal and riverside to ensure 
that ecology is enhanced and proper connections are created between the 
Science and Innovation Park, Belgrave and Abbey Park by providing appropriate 
pedestrian and cycle routes and bridges. The provision of a vehicular access 
spine road is required, along with new public open space and access to 
education and health care. In addition, mixed uses and community uses will be 
required including accommodating demand for school places. 
 
b) Pioneer Park  
9.36 The focus for development within the Pioneer Park area will be the 
continued development of the Science and Innovation Park. Within this area the 
following will be expected:
•  A centre for research
•  Development and technology-based business
•  Associated educational use
•  Associated research institute which can demonstrate a need either to be 
located within the park or to be near the National Space Centre
 
9.37 Employment investment within the Enterprise Zone will be encouraged 
especially from the science, innovation and hi-tech manufacturing sectors. 
 138c) Employment Land 
9.38 Within this area the employment land will be retained for the provision 
of Classes E(g)iii, B2 and B8 uses to help the city meet its future employment 
needs. 
 
d) The National Space Centre (NSC) and Abbey Pumping Station 
9.39 Within the area of the National Space Centre and Abbey Pumping Station 
development will be supported which promotes the role of the National Space 
Centre (NSC) and Abbey Pumping Station for tourism and education including 
D1 (except places of worship). 
Policy ORA01. Abbey Meadows and Pioneer Park 
 
Within the area shown as Abbey Meadows on the policies map all new 
development will be expected to support the creation of new and existing 
communities within Abbey Meadows and the wider area. This will be achieved 
by: 
• Development being primarily residential (class C3)
• Provision of additional community uses (Class E(e & f)) Class F1(b,c,d,e,f) 
and Class F2(b&c) and Education (Class F1(a)) where there is a proven need
Within the area shown as Pioneer Park on the adopted policies map, proposals 
which support the delivery of a science and innovation park will be acceptable.  
This will be achieved by supporting proposals for: 
• Development and technology-based business and innovation centre building 
(Class E(g ii))
• Associated Education Uses (Class F1(a))
• Associated Research Institute (No Use Class)
• Other non-residential community uses (Class E (e & f)) Class F1(b, c, d, e, f)139
Housing at Wolsey Island
2. Waterside
9.40 The vision for Leicester’s Waterside is to create a thriving urban 
neighbourhood that provides a unique and vibrant place to live. Development 
will provide new offices and space for local businesses to flourish.  
Opportunities to reconnect Leicester to its waterfront will be taken to improve 
leisure, green connections and wildlife. Within the Waterside area it will be 
expected that all streets and buildings are built to a high standard of design to 
ensure that this is an area which values its history whilst embracing its future.
Policy ORA02. Waterside
Within the area defined as Waterside on the adopted policies map development 
will be expected to meet the council’s aims of creating a thriving urban 
neighbourhood around the River Soar. 
This will be achieved by: 
• Delivering high quality residential development, which include houses where 
feasible (Class C3)
• Promoting new office development where there is a defined need (Class E 
(g)(i))
• Delivering associated community (F1 use class) and Education (Class F1(a) 
uses)1403. University of Leicester 
9.41 The vision for the University of Leicester is to consolidate and improve 
its operational campus (F1(a)) and to support the creation of new student 
accommodation to meet the needs of the university. Opportunities will be 
supported that improve the provision for walking, cycling and public transport. 
This is to improve accessibility and connectivity to the city centre. The 
preservation and enhancement of designated and non-designated heritage 
assets will be a priority.  
Policy ORA03. University of Leicester 
Within the area defined as ‘University of Leicester’ on the adopted policies map, 
development will be expected to enhance and support the role of the university 
as an important higher educational facility. This will be achieved by: 
• Supporting the continued development of the university (Use F1(a)) and its 
masterplan
• Allowing new student accommodation where there is a proven need (in line 
with policy Ho8 ‘student development’)
• Allowing other non-residential community uses (Class E(e & f)) Class 
F1(b,c,d,e,f)
4. Leicester City Football Club (LCFC) 
9.42 The vision for the LCFC area is to seek opportunities to consolidate and 
improve the stadium and associated facilities. Ancillary supporting development 
such as a hotel or other uses normally found around sporting stadia will be 
considered. Opportunities to improve provision for walking and cycling will be 
encouraged and supported. The need to preserve and enhance the Scheduled 
Ancient Monument (Raw Dykes) will be a priority. 141Policy ORA04. Leicester City Football Club (LCFC) 
Within the area defined as ‘Leicester City Football club’ on the adopted policies 
map, development will be expected support the continued development of the 
football stadium and associated facilities. This will be achieved by:
• Supporting the expansion and enhancement to the King Power (LCFC) 
Stadium
• Supporting proposals for ancillary development such as hotels and other 
developments which are normally found at and around sporting stadia
• Delivery of residential use (class C3) where it does not undermine the 
proposals for the expansion and enhancement of the stadium
5. Walnut Street 
9.43 The vision for the Walnut Street area is to create a growing regeneration 
area which mixes existing residential housing, community uses and other uses 
which are normally found in residential areas. The area should also create 
connections between the LCFC regeneration area, the Leicester Royal Infirmary 
and De Montfort University character area.
  
Policy ORA05 – Walnut Street 
Within the area defined as Walnut Street on the adopted policies map, 
development will be expected to be residential in nature. 
This will be achieved by: 
• Delivering new residential development (Class C3)
• Improving connectivity between the city centre, LCFC regeneration area, the 
LRI and DMU character areas142
10. Heritage 
 143Evidence Base 
 
10.1 There are several background studies that will underpin policies in this 
plan. The main technical studies for this chapter are published on our website 
and will be updated as and when new studies are undertaken and completed.  
 
•  Draft Leicester Heritage Action Plan (2022) 
•  Leicester Local Heritage Asset Register (2022)
•  2022) 
•  Leicester Heritage at Risk Register (2020)
 
Background 
 
10.2 The historic environment is an important asset for the city. Leicester has 
a rich and varied historic environment which contributes to our knowledge and 
understanding of the past.  
 
10.3 The historic environment also has wider social, cultural, economic and 
environmental benefits to the city. It helps define an area, creates a sense of 
place and serves as a focal point for civic pride, tourism, inward investment 
and the creation of jobs. Careful management of the historic environment is 
necessary to ensure its importance is recognised, enjoyed by all and that it can 
continue to contribute to the success and growth of the city. 
 
The Historic Environment 
 
10.4 Leicester currently has 11 Scheduled Monuments, protecting ‘nationally 
important’ archaeological remains. In addition to this, there are currently 397 
listed buildings within the city, reflecting their national importance as buildings 
of special architectural or historic interest. There are also 25 conservation 
areas currently and over 430 buildings and sites of local interest, as well as 6 
nationally listed Historic Parks and Gardens. All forms of heritage assets will 
be regularly reviewed and may be subject to changes. The many trees within 
conversation areas also make a positive contribution to their character and 
appearance.  
 
10.5 In addition to the national and local planning policies, where the council 
identifies a particular risk to a heritage asset, they can consider applying an 144Article 4 direction. Article 4 directions are a tool available to the council which 
can be used to withdraw permitted development rights from a heritage asset 
where it is considered necessary in order to safeguard its special architectural 
or historic interest. 
 
10.6 Controls over the display of advertisements must be exercised in the 
interests of amenity and public safety. Factors relevant to amenity include the 
presence of any feature of historic, architectural, cultural or similar interest. 
Policies DQP 09 and 10 on signs, banners and advertisement hoardings are set 
out in Chapter 8 Delivering Quality Places. The following policies of this chapter 
will also be taken into account where their content is material to an application 
for advertisement consent. 145Diagram 9. Heritage
© Crown copyright and database rights 
2022. Ordnance Survey 100019264.
Conservation Areas
Historic Parks and Gardens
Scheduled Monuments
Listed Buildings
Locally Listed Buildings
Archaeology Alert Area
Leicester City boundary
District Council boundariesHinckley and 
BosworthCharnwood
BlabyHarborough
Oadby and WigstonM1
M1 M69Glen/f_ieldBirstall
Thurmaston
Scraptoft
Oadby
WigstonKirby Muxloe
Leicester
Forest East
Braunstone TownSyston
Thurcaston
Anstey
Groby
Ratby
Narborough
BlabyLEICESTER146Policy HE01.  The Historic Environment 
 
The council will seek to conserve and enhance the significance of the city’s 
heritage assets. 
 
Listed Buildings
The council will support applications where the proposal would: 
a) Conserve or enhance the special architectural or historic interest of the 
listed building
b) Respect the setting of the listed building
c) Encourage the active use of the listed building, securing its long-term 
preservation
d) Balance proposals against the council’s aim of addressing climate change 
(CCFR01)
Conservation Areas  
Within conservation areas development will be supported where it: 
a) Is of a size, design and scale that preserves or enhances the character and 
appearance of the area
b) Uses building materials that are appropriate to the local context
c) Respects historic street patterns and building lines
d) Retains historically significant landscape elements, including trees and 
traditional building features
e) Preserves important views within, into and out of the conservation area
 
Within conservation areas development involving demolition will only be 
supported where it can be demonstrated that:
i) The structure to be demolished has no intrinsic heritage value and makes no 
positive contribution to the special character or appearance of the area; or
ii) The structure is beyond repair or incapable of a beneficial use; or 
iii) It can be demonstrated that the removal of the structure and its subsequent 
redevelopment would make a greater contribution to the special character 
or appearance of the area than the structure to be demolished.
Where a case for demolition within a conservation area has been demonstrated 
and accepted by the council, permission for that demolition will not be granted 
until an appropriate redevelopment scheme has been approved with planning 
permission that links the demolition to the implementation of the approved 
scheme. Exceptions may be made where it is clearly demonstrated that there is 
a safety risk.147Registered Historic Parks and Gardens 
The council will support development that would conserve or enhance the 
significance of historic parks & gardens. Development within the setting of 
historic parks & gardens must respect their distinct character and appearance, 
including important views within, into, and out of the park or garden. 
 
Local Heritage Assets (non-designated heritage assets) 
The city council will seek to protect heritage assets of local interest as defined 
within Appendix 02 as they make a positive contribution to the city’s historic 
environment 
 
The city council will support proposals that seek the sensitive re-use of local 
heritage assets and encourage the integration of local heritage assets and new 
development, creating attractive spaces that add to the city’s character and 
local distinctiveness.
Proposals that seek the demolition (in whole or part) of a local heritage 
asset will only be supported where it can be demonstrated that the loss is 
outweighed by the wider public benefits of the proposal.  
Support will be given for proposals that retain and explain the historic and 
social values of statues, plaques, memorials, or monuments. These will need to 
be left in situ and a strong justification will be required for movement.
 
10.7 See Appendix 02 for a list of conservation areas, historic parks & gardens, 
and locally listed assets.  148
Ruins of Cavendish House, Abbey Park.
Leicester’s Archaeology 
 
10.8 Leicester has a substantial number of significant archaeological remains, 
including several scheduled monuments reflecting its 2000 years of continuous 
occupation. 
 
10.9 The council has a duty to pay special regard to the preservation of these 
sites. The city’s Historic Environment Record (HER) indicates that many remains 
lie beyond the city’s historic core, however not all archaeological remains lie 
below the ground. 
 
10.10 Leicester has a wealth of archaeological evidence of its history. The city 
is fortunate that a significant proportion of its archaeological alert area has 
been investigated through excavation and the findings in each case, thoroughly 
and professionally recorded over time. This has given the city a comprehensive 
picture of the city’s development over time. 
 149Policy HE02.   Archaeology  
 
Before an application for development is approved an archaeological 
assessment will be required where:  
a) A proposal would affect known or potential archaeological remains; or  
b) A development is located within the Archaeological Alert Area
 
Where an assessment indicates that there is potential for remains to exist, 
suitable archaeological mitigation measures will be necessary.
 
In the case of remains that do not have the status or equivalent significance 
of designated assets, where it is not possible to preserve remains in situ, 
excavation and recording of the remains will be required. This will be secured 
through an archaeological ‘Written Scheme of Investigation,’ (WSI) which must 
include provision for appropriate publication and archiving of the evidence. 
The potential for local public engagement and dissemination should also be 
considered and included in the ‘Written Scheme of Investigation’ (WSI) where 
this is deemed to be appropriate.
There is a presumption against any harm to scheduled monuments and 
to heritage assets deemed to be of equivalent significance to nationally 
designated heritage assets.
10.11 The council has also identified an Archaeological Alert Area which extends 
over the area of the Roman and medieval settlements, Roman and medieval 
extra-mural suburbs, Roman cemeteries and medieval religious houses and 
hospitals. It is within this area that development is most likely to have an 
impact upon buried archaeological remains. However, it should be noted that 
archaeological remains are not confined to the Archaeological Alert Area.  150Diagram 10. Heritage assets 
© Crown copyright and database rights 
2022. Ordnance Survey 100019264.
Line of Historic Road
Heritage Asset
Leicester City administrative boundary
District Council boundaries
M1
M1 M69Glen/f_ieldBirstall
Thurmaston
Scraptoft
Oadby
WigstonKirby Muxloe
Leicester
Forest East
Braunstone TownSyston
Thurcaston
Anstey
Groby
Ratby
Narborough
BlabyLEICESTERHinckley and 
BosworthCharnwood
BlabyHarborough
Oadby and Wigston
  151
11. Culture and Tourism 
 152Evidence Base 
 
11.1 There are several background studies that will underpin policies in this plan. 
The main technical studies for this chapter are published on our website and 
will be updated as and when new studies are undertaken and completed.  
 
• Leicester Tourism Action Plan (2020)
• Leicester and Leicestershire Tourism Growth Plan (2019) 
• Economic Recovery Plan – First Steps (2020)
• Burial Space Strategy 2014
Culture 
11.2 Diverse, vibrant and creative local culture encourages pride and cohesion 
in the community and culture is an important factor in the creation of 
sustainable communities. Leicester is a city of diversity in terms of its people 
and its places. The diverse cultural offer is an important part of Leicester and 
helps strengthen the city’s unique character. In particular, Leicester has a 
thriving festival and events programme. The city has become a hub for cultural 
events, drawing people and visitors from across the country and the world. The 
Leicester Urban Area also provides a variety of attractions to visitors and the 
city population. 
 
Tourism 
 
11.3 Tourism is playing an increasingly important role in our city’s economy. 
Leicester is a city with a fascinating history and its own special character, a 
modern city known for its diversity with different communities coming together 
to create a unique and vibrant culture. 
 
11.4 Leicester has the potential to become a primary tourist destination. The 
Tourism Action Plan (2020) for the city sets out a vision whereby in 2025 and 
beyond, Leicester will be a desirable and memorable leisure and business 
tourism destination that residents are proud of. 
 
11.5 Since the discovery of the remains of King Richard III in 2012 there has 
been a significant rise in interest in Leicester and in the number of visitors. This 
interest in Leicester has grown further with the opening of the King Richard III 153visitor centre, internment of the King in Leicester Cathedral and recent sporting 
achievements, in particular Leicester City becoming English Premier League 
champions and F.A cup winners for the first time in their history. 
 
11.6 The River Soar and connected canals provide a route into the city and an 
opportunity for outdoor leisure pursuits such as rowing, cycling and river walks. 
The river connects the city centre to green spaces such as Aylestone Meadows 
and Abbey Park and major venues such as the King Power Stadium and the 
National Space Centre. 
11.7 Our ‘Connecting Leicester’ programme is central to this vision. Over the 
past few years, the city council has undertaken major work in the city centre 
to link our important heritage sites with the modern retail heart. This includes 
pedestrianisation, cycle routes and the creation of more open space. We have 
also invested to improve accessibility in the city centre with better signage, 
interpretation, lighting and transport facilities.  
 
11.8 An increase in tourism will bring enormous economic benefits to Leicester 
stimulating growth and creating more jobs for local people. Key aims include: 
• To deliver a sustained and sustainable growth in the city’s economy
• To increase the level of inward investment attracted to the city
• To create a strong identity and image for the city
• To establish Leicester as an attractive destination
• To build the confidence of the people of the city154Policy CT01. Culture, Leisure and Tourism 
 
Planning permission will be granted for cultural, leisure  and tourism facilities 
where they: 
a) Satisfy the requirements of the sequential and impact tests (TCR01 & 
TCR02)
b) Are accessible by and actively encourage sustainable modes of transport 
e.g. public transport, walking and cycling (T03);
c) Do not generate significant volumes of additional traffic unless it can be 
demonstrated that the additional traffic can be appropriately mitigated 
(T01)
d) Do not have an adverse effect upon residential amenity (DQP06)
e) Enhance the local culture of the area
 
Some leisure uses may need to be supported by an impact assessment in 
accordance with Policy TCR02.
Assets of Community Value 
 
11.9 Communities can now ask the council to list certain assets as being 
of value to the community. If an asset is listed and then comes up for sale, 
communities have six months to put together a bid to buy it, should they wish. 
Community organisations should engage with the council for potential funding 
for culture led projects.
Policy CT02. Assets of Community Value 
 
Applications for an Asset of Community Value will be supported where the 
asset in question: 
a) Promotes services and facilities that are open and accessible to everyone
b) Encourages sustainability, innovation and good quality design principles 
(DQP01)
c) Brings local people together and is responsive to local needs 
d) Delivers social benefits and outcomes to achieve a positive and profound 
change in the community
e) Facilitates economic growth
f) Supports  mixed and multi-purpose uses that maintain community vitality
g) Supports the retention of and enhances the heritage assets of social and 
community value155Public Houses (Sui Generis) Protection 
 
11.10. Legislation has removed permitted development rights allowing 
demolition of buildings used as Class Sui Generis. The legislation also removes 
permitted development rights allowing conversion of pubs to class E(a) retail, 
E(c) financial and professional services and class E(b) restaurants and cafes.  
Policy CT03. Protection of Public Houses (Class Sui Generis) 
 
Applications for the demolition of existing Public Houses (Sui Generis) or 
change of use should only be approved where the following criteria are met: 
a) There is no longer a need for that facility within the local area, having 
regard to the amount of local patronage, the quality of facilities offered 
and the duration and extent of marketing. Evidence of 12 months suitable 
marketing activity will be required or evidence that the public house is no 
longer financially viable through the submission of trading accounts, or 
other similar financial evidence, whilst the pub was operating as a full-time 
business; or
b) There are adequate similar facilities within walking distance which offer 
equivalent provision; or
c) The redevelopment of the building would secure an overriding public 
benefit.
The Great Central Railway Museum 
 
11.11 The council will designate and preserve land adjacent to the Great Central 
Railway at Red Hill Roundabout for a National Railway Museum as shown on 
the policies map. Uses to complement the museum will be supported, provided 
they do not prejudice the delivery of the facility. 
 
11.12 A large proportion of future development is expected in the north & west 
areas in and around the city up to 2036. To support these developments a 
future park and ride feature may be required on this site. Land will not be 
safeguarded at this stage for this use but would be supported subject to 
meeting relevant policies within the plan.  
 15611.13 The site is within the Thurcaston Road green wedge.  Part of the site is 
identified as a Site of Importance for Nature Conservation. Therefore, careful 
consideration will need to be given to the ecological importance of the area and 
its location within the green wedge. 
Policy CT04. Great Central Railway Museum 
Planning permission will be granted for tourism and leisure facilities associated 
with the Great Central Steam Railway at Red Hill Roundabout as shown on the 
Policies Map. Opportunities for delivery of a new Park & Ride site will also be 
supported where it meets the criteria contained within Policy T04. For good 
quality design, proposals that provide renewable energy will be supported in 
accordance with policy CCFR01. 
Green Dragon Square157Places of Worship and Community    
 
11.14 Places of worship can play an important role in spiritual and mental 
wellbeing.  The council has a long tradition of seeking to accommodate places 
of worship to cater for the various religions in the city. Many communities need 
small premises for religious use while some require large buildings. Although 
they should be easily accessible to their respective communities there has 
been a trend for larger multi-purpose buildings being sought away from 
residential areas, some in designated employment sites.  
 
11.15 Places of worship generally need to be located conveniently to their 
congregations and can attract large numbers of people.  As a result, they 
may bring increased noise, disturbance and parking problems to an area and 
can have an adverse effect on the amenities of neighbouring residents and 
occupiers. All these issues need to be carefully addressed in both selecting 
suitable locations for new places of worship and in considering proposals for 
the redevelopment or extension of existing ones.
11.16 In lower quality employment areas as defined by the Economic 
Development Needs Assessment (2020), places of worship will be acceptable 
in principle, where they involve the conversion of an existing building. This will 
be subject to consideration of the policies relating to employment areas. 
 
Shared Car Parking 
  
11.17 Where Places of Worship (POW) are considering locating in an 
employment designation, shared car and cycle parking would be strongly 
welcomed and supported, where it would minimise impacts on surrounding 
roads and parking.  Where the place of worship can share parking with 
surrounding businesses, this would be encouraged. For instance, where both 
of the uses’ hours of opening (evenings, weekends etc) mean that their peak 
traffic does not coincide with that of the other.  
 
11.18 The city council will seek to retain places of worship and associated 
community facilities unless it can be demonstrated that there is no longer a 
need for them. 158Policy CT05. Provision of new and retention of existing Places of Worship  
Planning permission will be granted for conversions to and creation of new 
places of worship and associated community facilities, subject to the following: 
a) The appropriateness of the location in terms of meeting a local need
b) The impact on residential amenity (DQP06)
c) The impact on highway safety and function. Schemes should encourage 
walking and cycling as sustainable modes of transport to Places of Worship 
(T01)
Burial Space 
11.19 The city council has produced a Burial Space Strategy 2014 which 
identifies that a new  burial site will be required between 2025 to 2030, to 
address the issue of decreasing availability of burial space in the city. 
11.20 Proposals for new burial space in the city with appropriately designed 
facilities, would be acceptable in areas of open space and green wedges, in 
the context of policies OSSR01 Green Wedges and OSSR02 Development in 
Open Spaces. However, given the tightly drawn boundaries of the city, the city 
council will also work with adjoining authorities to seek to accommodate its 
burial needs outside its administrative area.159
12. Employment  
 160Evidence Base 
 
12.1 There are several background studies that will underpin policies in this 
plan. The main technical studies for this chapter are published on our website 
and will be updated as and when new studies are undertaken and completed.  
• Strategic Growth Plan (2018)
• Leicester City Centre Offices Study (2019)
•  Local Industrial Strategy (2019) 
•  Strategic Distribution Warehousing and Logistics in Leicester and 
Leicestershire: Managing growth and change (2021)
•  Leicester & Leicestershire Economic Growth Strategy 2021-2030 (LLEP) 
•  Economic Recovery Plan – First Steps (November 2020) 
•  Economic Development Needs Assessment (2020)
Background  
 
12.2 The city council needs to continue to support a thriving and diverse 
economy that will provide high quality employment. It is important to produce a 
climate for innovation and creativity and to provide more employment in higher 
skill, higher wage jobs.  
  
12.3 However, within the administrative boundary of Leicester very little land 
is available. The existing stock of land and buildings which are fit for purpose 
for employment use will therefore continue to be strongly protected and where 
possible enhanced or redeveloped for business/ industry and storage uses (B2, 
B8, and E(g)). 
12.4 In September 2020, the Government introduced a new use class, Class 
E. This placed a wide range of uses (including retail, food, financial services, 
gyms, healthcare, nurseries, offices and light industry) into a single use class. 
This measure will introduce greater flexibility for operators and will broaden the 
range of uses that we see within town centres and employment areas.
12.5 The city council has reviewed all the existing Local Plan employment 
designations in light of these requirements. The Economic Development Needs 
Assessment (EDNA, 2020) has made recommendations on how to update them.
  16112.6 Of the existing 100 Employment areas, around 20 sites of the smaller sites 
no longer considered to be viable and effective employment locations and will 
no longer be protected for employment use. Detailed reasons are set out in the 
EDNA, (in its Appendix 3). 
 
12.7 Four new types of “Economic Development Areas” are proposed to accord 
with the employment policies below:  
• General Quality - Policy E02
• High Quality - Policy E03
•  The Science Park - Policy E04 (Pioneer Park) 
•  Neighbourhood - Policy E05
 
Leicester and Leicestershire Local Industrial Strategy (LIS) 
 
12.8 The Leicester and Leicestershire Enterprise Partnership (LLEP) was invited 
by government to prepare a Local Industrial Strategy (LIS). In December 2018, 
the LLEP issued a public ‘Call for Evidence.’ Three common themes emerged 
from the responses, of skills, workspace and need for a good mix of economic 
uses.  
 
12.9 The draft LIS was agreed at the LLEP Board in early October 2019 for the 
following key industries: 
• Textiles: Design, Manufacturing and Technology
•  Life Sciences
•  Logistics
•  Engineering and Advanced Manufacturing
•  Space/Data and Digital Technology
  
Leicester and Leicestershire Enterprise Zone 
 
12.10 A research and development-led Enterprise Zone (EZ) was created in 
Leicestershire (in both Loughborough and Leicester) through the creation of a 
‘zone of excellence’ to support new and growing businesses in bringing their 
innovative ideas and products to the market. In Leicester, this includes Pioneer 
Park, the former John Ellis site, Waterside and St. Margaret’s (See Diagram 
11 - Enterprise Zone). Leicester is already at the cutting edge of research, 
innovation, and product development, brought about particularly through our 162first-rate universities (Leicester and De Montfort), and the new EZ will help to 
cement Leicestershire’s role in the Midlands.  
 
Strategic Growth Plan  
 
12.11 The Leicester Urban Area is a focus of economic development and 
regeneration, so continued economic success across the Leicester Urban Area 
is a key issue for the whole sub region. The Strategic Growth Plan confirms 
that the joint ambition is to make Leicester and Leicestershire one of the most 
desirable places to live and work in the UK.  By further developing its strengths, 
Leicester can become one of the UK’s great cities, but in achieving this aim, its 
prospects will be much enhanced if the surrounding market towns and rural 
areas maintain their independence and character.   
 
Strategy for Leicester 
 
12.12 The plan is for the continued economic growth of Leicester, regenerating 
its central areas and complementing this with strategic extensions beyond 
the established urban area. Many people who work in Leicester live outside 
the city’s administrative boundary but may still only commute a relatively 
short distance, for example from Birstall to Hamilton Industrial Estate. With 
this in mind, the city council has and will continue to work with neighbouring 
authorities to provide sufficient employment land within Leicester and 
across the Housing Market Area (HMA), given the critical dependencies for 
employment which cross the city’s administrative boundaries. 
12.13 The city council is determined to ensure that Leicester is recognised as 
the strategically important business destination that it is. Leicester’s reputation 
for having a highly skilled and young workforce is continuing to grow. With a 
variety of national and international businesses it is a great location for new and 
established businesses alike. 
 
12.14 The delivery of offices needs to be the top priority for the city centre. 
Businesses employing professions such as architects and solicitors have a 
strong role in the local economy but are mostly small or micro businesses. 
Around 34,000 people are employed in private office-based sectors, 
accounting for 20.8 percent of employment (Leicester City Centre Office Study 
2017). The Economic Development Needs Assessment (2020) recommends 163that 46,000sqm of offices are required - 20,000 sqm of new offices are 
proposed at the railway Station and 20,000sqm of office floorspace in the 
Cultural Quarter at St George’s. The other 6000sqm has consent in the 
Waterside character area.
 
12.15 The city council will continue its commitment with the local universities to 
encourage student businesses and new start-ups, which have encouraged the 
retention of talent within the city. Leicester was ranked 1st in the UK for growth 
in tech start-up companies, as confirmed by the 2018 “Tech Nation” report. 
 
12.16 The council is also implementing its Economic Recovery Plan the key aim 
of which is supporting the Leicester Economy and its communities to recover 
from the economic impact of Covid. 
Employment Sectors for Leicester 
 
12.17 To support a thriving and diverse economy, the following sectors for 
Leicester will be retained and supported.
 
Financial and Business Services - City Centre 
 
12.18 The plan will need to protect the best, ready to develop sites in the city 
centre for future office development. The development potential of this area 
is assessed in more detail in the chapter on the Central Development Area 
(Chapter 9). Key new office allocations (see Chapter 4 Strategy for Leicester) 
are proposed at: 
•  The Station car park and former Campbell Street sorting office (around the 
railway station)
•  Land around Phoenix Square (between Burton Street, St. George’s Way, 
Southampton Street and Morledge Street)
 
Creative Industries - Cultural Quarter  
 
12.19 To protect and promote the growth of the Cultural Quarter’s unique mix of 
creative industries, cultural facilities and city living. The development potential 
of this area is assessed in more detail in the St. George’s Character Area work 
(See Chapter 9 - Central Development Area).  164Diagram 11. Enterprise Zone 
© Crown copyright and database rights 
2022. Ordnance Survey 100019264.ST. MARGARET’S WAY
KING RICHARDS ROADBELGRAVE ROADABBEY LANE
Abbey
Park
CITY
CENTRE
Enterprise Zone Boundary
River/canalPIONEER
PARK
ST. MARGARET’S
WATERSIDE165Diagram 12. Employment Areas in Leicester Urban Area
Hinckley and 
BosworthCharnwood
BlabyHarborough
Oadby and Wigston
© Crown copyright and database rights 
2022. Ordnance Survey 100019264.
Employment areas
Employment growth areas
Leicester City administrative  boundary
District Council boundariesM1
M1 M69LEICESTER
Fosse
ParkGlen/f_ieldBirstall
Thurmaston
Scraptoft
Oadby
WigstonGlen ParvaKirby Muxloe
Leicester
Forest East
Braunstone TownMark/f_ieldMountsorrel
RothleySileby
SystonQueniborough
Thurcaston
Anstey
Groby
Ratby
Desford
Narborough
Broughton
AstleyCountesthorpe
Kibworth Harcourt
Kibworth BeauchampHoughton
on the Hill
Blaby166Knowledge Economy - Pioneer Park  
 
12.20 This is Leicester’s hub for high tech and knowledge economy businesses 
with the aim of creating a cluster of highly skilled jobs. Future developments 
include Space Park Leicester, a global hub and collaborative community 
focusing on space, space-enabled technologies and data developed by the 
University of Leicester. In addition, further managed workspace adjacent to 
and opposite the existing successful DOCK will be delivered by Leicester City 
Council. The adjacent National Space Centre is also building on its success 
embarking on the development of a new conference facility to add to their 
impressive visitor destination and educational offer within their complex.  
Dock Business Centre, Pioneer Park.
General Manufacturing - Land Supply 
12.21 Three new strategic employment sites will provide land for new High 
Quality Economic Development Areas (see Chapter 4 - Strategy for Leicester). 
Two small sites are also proposed.  There is also 5 ha of employment land which 167is included within the existing Ashton Green planning permission, but currently 
remains unused to the east of Samworth’s Bradgate Bakery (Bennion Road). 
12.22 The EDNA 2020 identifies a need for 65 ha of employment land to 2036.  
The available land supply is shown below. Charnwood Borough Council has 
agreed to provide 23 ha to help meet this need. This agreement is set out in 
the Leicester & Leicestershire Statement of Common Ground on Housing & 
Employment Need (June 2022). We will continue to work with the districts 
within the Housing market Area (HMA) to meet future employment need. 
12.23 The Mountain Road site is the only remaining allocation from the previous 
local plan which has yet to be developed. There is no other undeveloped 
employment land available.  The Council is undertaking Asset Reviews and 
considering the impact of the flexibility of the E Use class order, to monitor and 
make provision for the outstanding land beyond this 23 ha of unmet need (*).
Table 8. Supply of Employment Sites 
 
Address Size (ha)  
Former Western Park Golf Course 9.74 ha 
Beaumont Park 7.53 ha 
North of Birstall Golf course /East of Ashton Green 2.4 ha 
Eastern part of Thurcaston Road/Hadrian Road open space 2.7 ha  
Mountain Road    2.1 ha 
East of Samworth’s Bradgate Bakery 5.0 ha 
Total 29.08 ha*
General Economic Development Areas 
 
12.24 General economic development areas relate to around two thirds of the 
city’s employment land. However, due to the historic pattern of development 
in the city, this type of employment land is usually surrounded on three 
sides by housing. This is a common feature of a very large proportion of this 
employment land supply and is not generally solely a reason to refuse economic 
development uses in these employment areas.  
 16812.25 As well as providing most of the supply of employment land, they also 
enable “other uses” to be provided for, such as day nurseries (Class E(f)), 
places of worship (Class F1(f)) and car showrooms (Class SG). Non-residential 
institutions and assembly and leisure uses (subject to impact sequential 
assessments) will be acceptable in principle in buildings which are not portal 
framed in construction. This is because portal framed buildings are more 
sought after by modern industrial users and there are far fewer of them in 
number than older historic multi-storey industrial buildings. Portal framed 
buildings should therefore be retained for class E(g)iii, B2 and B8 uses. 
12.26 However, where the above “other uses” also fall within the definition of 
a main town centre use such as a leisure use, gym or would be for the sale of 
bulky retail goods a proportionate sequential and where necessary an impact 
assessment will be required to support an application (TCR01 and TCR02). 
Mattioli Woods offices, Welford Place.
12.27 In addition, where approval is to be granted for a new, or change of 
use to a Class E use outside of a defined town centres that does not require 169consideration of the sequential test or an impact assessment (e.g. a day 
nursery) a condition will be attached to the permission to restrict the proposed 
use to that sub-category of Class E (TCR09). This is to allow appropriate 
consideration of the sequential and impact tests for future retail (or other main 
town centre uses) and to protect the vitality and viability of town centres.
 
12.28 “Other uses” will need to provide satisfactory off-street parking to meet 
the requirements in any future Parking Standards supplementary planning 
document. Outside of the general economic development areas, reduced 
parking provision could be considered appropriate, for example where there 
is good access to sustainable transport options. However, within a general 
economic development area, insufficient off-street parking has the potential to 
seriously prejudice the function and operation of the surrounding area for the 
remaining businesses.    
12.29 The Local Plan identifies just under 5ha of land in non-strategic sites. 
These will be brought forward for development by the city council and or 
private landowners.
Policy E01. Non- Strategic Economic Development Areas
Employment
Two High Quality Economic Development employment sites are proposed at: 
a) Eastern part of Thurcaston Road /Hadrian Road open space (2.7ha)
b) Mountain Road (2.1ha)
They will provide for Light Industry (E(g)(iii)), general industry (B2) and storage 
and distribution (B8) uses (with ancillary offices only).
The site at Thurcaston Road/ Hadrian Road open space has been identified for 
a potential gypsy and traveller transit site.170Policy E02.  General Economic Development Areas 
Land within the General Economic Development Areas, as identified on the 
Policies Map, will be retained primarily for light industry (E(g)iii), general 
industry (B2) and small (non-strategic) storage and distribution (B8) uses, with 
ancillary offices. 
The following other uses will be acceptable in principle where they involve the 
conversion of a building, which is not portal framed in construction:
• Day nurseries (Class E(f))
• Places of worship (Class F1(f)) 
• Indoor sport, recreation and fitness (Class E (d))
• Education (Class F1(a)
• Public halls or exhibition halls (Class F1(e)
• Halls or meeting places for the principal use of the local community (Class F2 
(c))
• Car showrooms and other sui generis uses which are commonly found in 
industrial estates (These would include uses such as, builder’s merchant, 
haulage yard, MOT testing station and bus garage)
• Wholesale uses (non B8)
And can demonstrate that:
a) Where any of the above “other uses” are considered to be a “main town 
centre use” they have satisfied the policy requirements of the sequential 
and impact tests in policies TCR01 and TCR02
b) Where the above “other use” is an E class use which does not require 
consideration of the sequential or impact tests, a condition may be attached 
to the permission that would restrict the proposed use to a particular sub-
category in accordance with policy TC09
High Quality Economic Development Areas 
12.30 These protect the city’s highest quality land and premises (around 
one third of the city’s existing employment land) and make an important 
contribution towards ensuring that sufficient land is available for class B2, small 
B8 and E(g)iii uses in purpose-built premises. 171Policy E03.  High Quality Economic Development Areas 
Land within High Quality Economic Development Areas (as identified on the 
Policies Map) will be retained for industrial processes that do not have a 
detrimental effect on residential amenity, (Light industry E(g)(iii)), general 
industry (B2) and storage and distribution (B8) uses with ancillary offices only. 
Pioneer Park  
12.31 The purpose of Pioneer Park will be an innovation/technology park i.e. 
an exceptional business park to host research and development uses (Class 
E(g)ii). It is Leicester’s emerging hub for knowledge economy businesses and 
the creation of high added value jobs and skills.  The bid to the Department 
for International Trade (DIT) as one of the area’s High Potential Opportunities 
(HPO’s) to attract foreign direct investment into the emerging space sector 
and our economic assets led by the University of Leicester has recently been 
successful.
Policy E04. Pioneer Park 
a) Within Pioneer Park as identified on the Policies Map (the Innovation and 
Technology Park at Abbey Meadows), Class E(g)(ii) development will be 
allowed to encourage inward investors, knowledge based and high skill/ 
high added value firms to provide accommodation for both start up and 
local high growth uses
b) A mix of Use Class E(g)(i), E(g)(ii) and E (g)(iii) development will be allowed 
within specific Innovation growth buildings to provide grow on space for 
start-up and local high growth users
c) Science and Technology educational uses (Class F1(a)) and associated 
Research Institutes (E(g)(ii))  and other uses that can demonstrate a need 
to be located within the park or near to the National Space Centre will also 
be allowed
d) New development needs to focus on the canal and riverside, enhancing 
their bio-diversity and visual amenity providing a high-quality setting and 
mitigate any risk from flooding172Textile Area and Neighbourhood Employment Areas 
 
12.32 The Economic Development Needs Assessment (2020) highlights that 
there is a particular concentration of textile uses in and around the Spinney Hills 
area, as well as a high number throughout the city. This coincides with some 
of the smallest employment land designations in that area, which do not have 
particularly good or strategic access. These employment areas still have a role 
to play, as the buildings frequently have high occupation rates and investment 
in modern machinery is evident inside.  
 
12.33 These smallest areas have been designated as “Neighbourhood 
Employment Areas” as employees often live very locally. They only contribute to 
around 3% of the city’s employment land. However, due to the historic pattern 
of development in the city, this type of employment land is usually surrounded 
on three sides by housing. This is a common feature of a very large proportion 
of this employment land supply and is not generally solely a reason to refuse 
economic development uses in these existing areas. 
12.34 However, where an “other use” would fall within the definition of a 
main town centre use such as a leisure use, gym or would be for the sale of 
bulky retail goods a proportionate sequential and where necessary an impact 
assessment would be required to support an application (TCR01 and TCR02).
12.35 In addition, where is approval is to be granted for a new or change of 
use to a Class E use outside of defined town centres that does not require 
consideration of the sequential test or impact assessment, such as a day 
nursery, a condition will be attached to the permission to restrict the proposed 
use to a particular sub-category of Class E (TCR09). This is to allow appropriate 
consideration of the sequential and impact tests for future retail (or other main 
town centre uses) and to protect the vitality and viability of town centres. 173Policy E05. Textile Area and Neighbourhood Employment Areas 
Throughout the city and particularly around the city’s textile area (surrounding 
the Spinney Hills area, within LE5), development that assists the city’s reviving 
textile industry will be supported. 
Neighbourhood Employment Areas 
In the smallest lower quality neighbourhood employment areas, as identified on 
the Policies Map, regeneration will be encouraged, but some sites may not be 
suitable for housing due to existing constraints. 
Housing will only be acceptable where it can be clearly demonstrated that 
existing constraints can be mitigated, and it is not expected to result in any 
detrimental effect on the operation of the surrounding businesses. 
Light industry (Class E(g)(iii), B1c), general industry (Class B2) and/or storage 
and distribution (Class B8) uses will be encouraged to continue and/ or 
redevelop for these uses:
Other uses such as: 
• Day nurseries (Class E(f))
• Places of worship (Class F1(f))
• Indoor sport, recreation and fitness (Class E (d))
• Education (Class F1(a))
• Public halls or exhibition halls (Class F1(e))
• Halls or meeting places for the principal use of the local community (Class 
F2 (c))
• Wholesale uses (non B8) 
Will be acceptable in principle where they involve the conversion of a building, 
which is not portal framed in construction and can demonstrate that:   
a) Where any of the above “other uses” are considered to be a “main town 
centre use” they must have satisfied the policy requirements of the 
sequential and impact tests in policies TCR01 and TCR02
b) Where the above “other use” is an E class use which does not require 
consideration of the sequential or impact tests, a condition may be attached 
to the permission that would restrict the proposed use to a particular sub-
category in accordance with policy TC09174Creative Industry - St. George’s Cultural Quarter 
 
12.36 The St. George’s Cultural Quarter is one of the “Character Areas” 
described in more detail in Chapter 9 Central Development Area.
 
12.37 The Cultural Quarter is the hub for a combination of cultural activities, 
workspace for the creative industries, and residential use. The area’s success 
is defined by the combination of these uses including the landmark Curve 
and Phoenix Square developments and dynamic creative industries (including 
LCB Depot and Makers’ Yard, both on Rutland Street). Added to this is the 
unique architectural character being retained in the many heritage assets by 
sympathetic restoration and conversion of former textile mills and warehousing 
into housing. 
 
12.38 In light of recent residential development in the area and a need to plan 
for a mix of development for the arts, cultural industries, and city centre living, 
it is necessary to give greater encouragement to development that protects 
and promotes this unique mix. Developments are also needed which create 
active street frontages (including restaurants, cafes and shops) along the main 
connecting routes and promote investment in the public realm to improve these 
connecting routes.  
 
12.39 To promote proposals which facilitate mixed use schemes, the council will 
seek to offer an appropriate package of advice and support. This could include 
input to design concepts, physical feasibility and market demand studies and 
development appraisals. These will apply both to schemes that include the 
restoration and conversion of buildings as well as for new build development. 
Policy E06. St. George’s Cultural Quarter 
 
a)  Proposals will be encouraged which combine sympathetic design with a 
mix of uses, incorporating design studios, workspaces and residential use. 
Office uses are also encouraged. Proposals should meet the requirements 
of Policy HE01 and CHA07
b) To contribute to active street frontages, uses that fall in the E(b) use class 
and pubs/bars (Sui Generis) will be allowed on the parts of Halford Street 
and Rutland Street which fall within this area175Support Strategies 
 
12.40 The city council will work with partners to ensure that Leicester has a 
thriving and diverse business community that attracts jobs and investment to 
the city.  
12.41 Leicester City Council provides guidance on the preparation of site-
specific Employment and Skills Plans to enable local people to secure 
employment and training opportunities.  Leicester City Council will support and 
promote the use of local people and businesses through the construction and 
implementation stages of development proposals, particularly for large scale 
major proposals that generate significant levels of employment through the 
development phase.       
 
12.42 Employment hub and construction hub projects will be able to support 
and assist the implementation, recruitment and identification for employment 
and training opportunities at a local level.   
12.43 Developers will actively work with the economic regeneration team to 
create these local opportunities see link below. 
https://www.leicester.gov.uk/business/start-up-and-growth/constructing-
leicester/
  
12.44 The city council will implement the following to support employment 
development. 176Policy E07 . Employment: Support Strategies 
 
a) The city council will work with partners to ensure that Leicester has a 
thriving and diverse local business community that innovates, attracts 
investment and creates jobs in the city
b) The city council requires the developers implementing planning applications 
for major development to provide site specific Employment and Skills Plans 
to enable local people to secure employment and training opportunities (see 
link above). Such plans and their implementation will be required through 
conditions or Section 106 agreements (where one is already proposed for 
major planning applications)
c) The city council will work with partners to support businesses to relocate 
from the Central Development Area into appropriate property
d) The city council will support local business to reduce their carbon footprint 
by bringing together businesses concerned with the aim of improving their 
environmental performance
e) Where one business can use another business’s waste as a resource, 
the co-location of these businesses that would encourage the reuse and 
recycling of waste would be supported
Vehicle Sales and Car Washes 
 
12.45 Car washes and independent vehicle sales uses are a common form 
of small-scale employment found in the city. They provide employment 
opportunities which foster the creation of new competitive businesses. These 
uses often make use of brownfield sites or existing structures and they tend to 
be located within sustainable locations, close to public transportation links and 
major arterial roads.  The council will keep these temporary uses under review 
to ensure that suitable future uses which maximise brownfield land including 
residential development are able to be delivered in future177Policy E08. Vehicles Sales and Car Washes  
 
Vehicle sales and car washes will only be acceptable where:
a) They do not result in a significant loss of residential amenity (DQP06)
b) They do not prevent future regeneration of the site and surrounding area
c) Screening is adequate and well designed and should not be detrimental to 
the appearance of the street scene
d) They do not significantly increase vehicle trips (T01)
e) They do not lead to an over concentration of these uses on any main radial 
route
f) They provide adequate drainage arrangements and measures to prevent 
water pollution
 
To be able to keep the permanent need for this land under review, applications 
within the Central Development Area, retail and/or employment designations, 
should only be given limited period consent. 178
13. Town Centre 
and Retail  179Evidence Base
13.1 There are several background studies that will underpin policies in this 
plan. The main technical studies for this chapter are published on our website 
and will be updated as and when new studies are undertaken and completed.    
• Retail and Leisure Study 2021  
• Leicester Tourism Action Plan (2020-2025) 
• Economic Recovery Plan – First Steps (November 2020) 
• Leicester & Leicestershire Economic Growth Strategy 2021-2030, LLEP  
13.2 This chapter sets out the strategy for the policies which will apply to retail 
and main town centre uses both within and outside of the centres.    
Background  
13.3 Sustainable communities have at their heart good local services and 
facilities. Much of this provision falls within a network of defined “town 
centres”. This gives people within the city and the Leicester Urban Area access 
to a diverse range of shops, services, leisure, and community facilities in 
accessible locations, by a choice of transport options. This network of centres 
is supplemented by a number of out-of-centre shopping parks such as, Fosse 
Park and Thurmaston Shopping Centre. It includes other standalone facilities 
such as Asda and Sainsburys on the A6 (towards Market Harborough) or Aldi in 
Wigston.   
13.4 People choose to shop, use services and leisure facilities in places 
that are not always located in the city or borough that they live in. For this 
reason, it is important to consider retail and leisure provision beyond the city’s 
administrative boundary as it is interconnected and will influence where people 
shop, use services, and spend their leisure time. For instance, there has been a 
recent major commercial extension to Fosse Park. This has expanded the offer 
and attraction of this facility, which will draw larger amounts of trade from town 
centres within its catchment area. Given these critical dependencies for retail 
just beyond the city’s administrative boundaries the council will continue to 
work with neighbouring authorities to assess any proposed (new) or expansion 
of existing retail facilities. This is to ensure that the health of town centres in 
the city remain vital and viable.  18013.5 The Strategic Growth Plan also proposes that the city should develop its 
role as the ‘central city’ supporting the market towns and rural areas around it. 
It recognises that more jobs, leisure, arts, culture, and entertainment facilities 
are provided within the city centre.    
Retail Policy Aims  
• To sustain and enhance the vitality and viability of Leicester’s hierarchy of 
town centres by concentrating new shopping and related facilities in them
• To ensure access by a choice of means of transport particularly the 
promotion of walking and cycling, to facilitate combined shopping trips and 
minimise the need to travel
• To minimise the disturbance caused by retail development to nearby 
residential areas
Shops on the Golden Mile, Belgrave Road.181Diagram 13. Shopping Centres in Leicester Urban Area  
Hinckley and 
BosworthCharnwood
BlabyHarborough
Oadby and Wigston
© Crown copyright and database rights 
2022. Ordnance Survey 100019264.
City Centre
Shopping Centres
Out of T own Retail Park
Leicester City Administrative 
District Council BoundariesFosse
ParkM1
M1 M69Glen/f_ieldBirstall Thurmaston
Scraptoft
Oadby
Wigston Glen ParvaKirby Muxloe
Leicester
Forest East
Braunstone TownMark/f_ieldMountsorrel
RothleySileby
SystonQueniborough
Thurcaston
Anstey
Groby
Ratby
Desford
Narborough
Broughton
AstleyCountesthorpe
Kibworth Harcourt
Kibworth BeauchampHoughton
on the Hill
BlabyLEICESTER182Network and Hierarchy of Town Centres   
13.6 As part of the National Planning Policy Framework local authorities should 
set flexible policies for their centres to promote their long-term vitality and 
viability. In allowing them to grow and diversify in a way that can respond to 
rapid changes in the retail and leisure industries it allows a suitable mix of uses 
(including housing) and reflects their distinctive characteristics. Central to this 
is the requirement to create a balanced network and hierarchy of town centres 
so that there is an even distribution of town centre uses and that people’s 
everyday needs are met at the local level.     
13.7 Diagram 14 shows the hierarchy of centres in Leicester.    
13.8 The 2021 Retail & Leisure Study reviewed the hierarchy of town centres 
for the city. The hierarchy is set out in the policy below. These centres will be 
the preferred location for town centre uses such as retail, office and leisure 
developments, as well as the other main town centre uses defined in the 
Glossary (See Appendix 07).   183Diagram 14. Hierarchy of Centres and Neighbourhood Parades
© Crown copyright and database rights 
2022. Ordnance Survey 100019264.
City centre
Beaumont Leys town centre
District centres
Local centres
Neighbourhood parades
Leicester City Administrative Boundary184Policy TCR01. Hierarchy of Town Centres  
The council will support the following hierarchy of town centres in Leicester:   
City Centre  
To ensure that Leicester City centre continues to be a sub-regional centre the 
majority of main town centre uses will be directed to it. (TCR03) The central 
shopping core will be the focus for new retail development.  (TCR04).
Town Centre - Beaumont Leys  
This centre is the location for town centre uses to serve the northwest sector of 
the city and Leicester Urban Area, including Ashton Green (TCR05). 
District Centres  
Belgrave Road/ Melton Road, Evington Road and Narborough Road.
District centres provide a range of facilities and are accessible by public 
transport.  (TCR05) 
Local Centres   
The local centres in Leicester are listed in Appendix 03. New local centres 
will be provided in Ashton Green and the Waterside. Local centres provide 
convenience shopping and other local services close to where people 
live. (TCR05) 
The council will apply the sequential test to main town centre uses outside 
of the areas listed above to support Leicester’s network of centres. Town 
centre uses should be located in designated centres in the first instance. Only 
if suitable sites cannot be found within designated centres will the council 
consider edge-of-centre sites, or if no edge-of-centre sites locations are 
available, out-of-centre locations.  Preference will be given to edge-of-centre 
and out-of-centre sites that are accessible and well connected to the town 
centre. For instance, the site would be expected to be closely linked to the 
defined shopping centre in terms of proximity, continuity of function and ease 
of access by all modes of transport but particularly by foot. 
The preferred location for new city centre retail development is the central 
shopping core (primary shopping area). The rest of the city centre will be 
treated as an edge-of-centre location for new city centre retail development.   
New development should be consistent in scale with the size and character of 
the centre and its role in the hierarchy.   
 18513.9 Underneath the retail hierarchy there are 34 neighbourhood parades. 
These parades usually consist of a short row of shops which serve the day to 
day needs of the immediate residential neighbourhood that surrounds them. 
They will be shown on the future policies map and complement and support the 
retail hierarchy by ensuring that people have access to local neighbourhood 
shops and services. (See list in Appendix 3)  
13.10 The 2021 Retail and Leisure Study undertook a health check of all the 
shopping centres and neighbourhood parades in the city. It recommended 
upgrading Abbey Lane and Wharf Street North from neighbourhood parades 
to local centres. Walnut Street was recommended to be de-designated from a 
neighbourhood parade, as it was no longer considered to perform that function. 
Impact Assessments  
13.11 The development of new shops or leisure uses, could potentially have a 
harmful effect on the overall vitality and viability of defined shopping centres. 
In line with government guidance in the National Planning Policy Framework, a 
proportionate impact assessment which sets out the potential trade diversion 
impact assumptions may be necessary to help understand the anticipated 
level of impact that a proposed retail or leisure development would have on the 
vitality and viability of town centres within the catchment area of the proposed 
development. Catchment areas will vary depending on the size and nature of 
the proposed development.    
13.12 In applying the local thresholds set out below the council will have regard 
to the scale and form of the proposal, the extent of the catchment area and the 
target market that proposal would serve. These factors will vary from proposal 
to proposal and will influence which shopping centres should be included in 
the impact assessment. It may also be necessary to include shopping centres 
within a neighbouring authority’s administrative boundary.   
13.13 Further guidance on undertaking a retail impact assessment and what 
it should cover is set out in the National Planning Policy Framework and the 
National Planning Practice Guidance.    186Policy TCR02.   Supporting Sustainable Town Centres – Impact Assessments  
Proposals for retail and leisure uses outside a defined centre (in edge-of-centre 
or out-of-centre locations) will require an impact assessment where:  
• The proposal provides a gross floorspace in excess of 500sqm
• The proposal is located within 800 metres of either:
 ◦A district centre and is in excess of 300sqm gross floorspace or
 ◦A local centre and is in excess of 200sqm gross floorspace
This policy also applies to mezzanine floorspace and the variation of restrictive 
conditions.   
Need for New Floorspace for Comparison and Convenience Retail Provision in 
the City   
13.14 The 2021 Retail and Leisure study provides the evidence base for retail 
and leisure provision in the city and covers the period up to 2036. It did not 
identify any substantial short term quantitative need for additional convenience 
goods floorspace. In respect of comparison goods floorspace there is a nil 
requirement for additional floorspace up until 2031. In 2031, there is a very 
limited level of surplus expenditure to accommodate additional comparison 
floorspace. This rises to between 6,300sqm and 9,900sqm in 2036.  
13.15 However, the study is clear in that the first priority should be to reoccupy 
existing vacant floorspace within defined centres. This is because a significant 
amount of the identified comparison goods capacity in the longer term could be 
accommodated through the reuse, refurbishment or redevelopment of vacant 
floorspace in the authority area. The study concludes that there is not a need to 
allocate any sites to accommodate additional floorspace within the new Local 
Plan. 
Health Checks 
13.16 As part of the study, health check assessments were undertaken for all 
the shopping centres in Leicester from the city centre down to the smallest 
neighbourhood parades. These assessments were undertaken in May and 
June 2021, following “Step 2” of the Government’s roadmap out of lockdown. 
Non-essential shops had re-opened and the centres were substantially open 
for business. The majority of centres were considered to be performing well. 187However, planning policy is there to support the vitality and viability of centres, 
return the centres to better health by supporting and deliver regeneration 
opportunities.  
13.17 Continued investment and redevelopment is particularly evident in the 
city centre. There is a need to support these efforts by resisting out-of-centre 
development that would have a significant adverse impact on the health and 
viability of centres. This is particularly important as the retail and leisure 
sectors continues to recover from the impact of Covid 19 pandemic and various 
national and local lockdowns.     
The City Centre   
13.18 Leicester’s city centre is the focus for commerce, retailing, culture, leisure 
and entertainment for the city and county. A vibrant and thriving city centre is 
essential for growth in the city’s economy and is at the heart of the Leicester 
Urban Area and the wider Leicestershire Housing Market Area (HMA). Over 
£1 billion of investment in iconic new developments such as Highcross, Curve 
Theatre, Phoenix, Jubilee Square, Market Food Hall and extensive public realm 
improvements continue to transform the city. Public open spaces such as 
Jubilee Square, Green Dragon Square (the New Market Square), and Town Hall 
square give people spaces to relax and enjoy and provide important spaces to 
hold events, increasing social capital but there is still more to do.    
13.19 The vision of the Connecting Leicester initiative is to create and provide 
a more connected, safe and family friendly city centre and to ensure that it 
continues to be more sustainable and bring in more investment. Leicester has 
many unique heritage, retail, leisure and cultural highlights which could be better 
linked together to create a strong and vibrant city centre. Many projects have 
already been completed and more are planned, to take away barriers and greatly 
improve the connections between shopping, leisure, heritage, housing, and 
transport facilities. The aim is to reconnect all these areas through a network 
of pedestrian routes and good quality civic spaces,  to reduce the dominance 
of roads, creating an attractive pedestrian friendly environment. Good quality 
public spaces also provide people with a place to rest and congregate, 
increasing opportunity for social interaction and spaces to hold public events. 
Together these changes are making the city centre an attractive destination for 
shoppers, visitors, businesses and investors and a great place to live.    18813.20 The central shopping core will continue to be the location for new city 
centre retail development. The council will support new development that 
makes a positive contribution to improving the vitality of the city centre and the 
overall mix of uses to provide a high-quality visitor experience.    
13.21 There has been a big increase in the number of people living in the 
city centre. There are now approximately 11,500 homes within the city 
centre. This has resulted in a move away from the traditional separation of 
residential accommodation from the potential noisier uses that are often but 
not exclusively associated with the night-time economy. Going forward, this 
mix of uses in the city centre is accepted as necessary to deliver the number 
of homes that are needed. It is noted that any residential development which 
is introduced next to these uses, is now expected to incorporate suitable 
mitigation measures where the operation of an existing business or community 
facility could have significant adverse effect on new development (including 
changes of use) in its vicinity, before the new housing development has been 
completed.    
Policy TCR03. City Centre  
The council will promote the growth of the city centre as a sub-regional 
shopping, leisure, historic, tourist and cultural destination as the most 
accessible and sustainable location for main town centre uses and in 
recognition of its central role in the city’s economy and wider regeneration by 
adopting the following strategy.   
Shopping
Maintaining a compact and accessible retail centre by:
• Safeguarding the central shopping core as the focus for city centre retail 
development; (TCR01 & TCR04)
• Maintaining and enhancing the market at the heart of the retail centre;and  
• Ensuring that any new retail development that is not located within the 
central shopping core is well integrated and closely linked with the streets  
of the central shopping core in terms of proximity, continuity of function and 
ease of access (TCR01).
Leisure and cultural facilities  
Supporting new leisure and cultural facilities, particularly where they are well 
connected to the central shopping core, to support the diversification of the 
city centre’s offer as a visitor attraction.    189Family orientated leisure development and cultural facilities will be particularly 
welcomed.   
Hotels
Complementary uses including new high-quality hotels, conference and 
banqueting venues will also be supported.     
Heritage  
Enriching the retail, leisure and tourism experience by conserving and 
enhancing the historic environment by encouraging the re-use and 
improvement of designated and other heritage assets and through the use of 
heritage-led regeneration within historic and cultural areas in the city centre.   
Offices  
Developing an economically prosperous centre through the location of both 
major and small offices and accommodation for creative industries. (See 
Chapter 12: Employment and Chapter 9: CDA, policies CHA01, CHA07 and 
ORA02). 
Housing  
Supporting residential development, whether by conversion of redundant 
buildings or new build, where acceptable living environments can be maintained 
or created (except in the Railway Station Area - see CDA 03). This includes 
the need for the developer to provide suitable mitigation measures (before 
development commences) where the operation of an existing business or 
community facility in its vicinity could have significant adverse effect on the 
new development.    
Education and Health 
Schools and health uses will be supported in the city centre and other enabling 
facilities, which make city centre living a more attractive proposal.   
Transport  
Making the city centre the focus of public transport initiatives including:  
• Supporting the implementation of Transforming Cities proposals
• Supporting the redevelopment of, and improving, bus interchange facilities
• Contributing towards the bus improvement strategy and future rapid mass 
transit proposals
• Continuing our partnership work with the rail industry to improve the 
interchange at the railway station, particularly with infrastructure, 
information and through ticketing for bus to rail interchange 
• Reducing the separation of the bus stations and railway from the city centre190Connectivity  
Building on the work of the Connecting Leicester programme, to create a 
hierarchy and network of pedestrian and cycle routes and good quality civic 
spaces, to reconnect disparate and disconnected parts of the centre. This is to 
link together key historic and cultural assets, facilities and venues and where 
appropriate reduce the severance effect of the inner ring road. 
Safe, accessible and inclusive   
All new development should make a positive contribution to improving the 
vitality of the city centre and should aim to improve the overall mix of uses, 
with particular regard to policies in the Central Development Area chapter. It 
is expected that new development will contribute to creating inclusive places 
that everyone can use easily and safely no matter their level of ability. (DQP03) 
Feeling safe is particularly important at night.   
Therefore, the city council will seek to:
• Make the city centre more attractive to pedestrians, cyclists and public 
transport passengers and achieve high standards of access to and within the 
city centre for disabled and older people
• Encourage uses that make key night time pedestrian routes as safe and well 
used as possible
• Have regard to crime and disorder issues through the regulation of pubs, 
bars and night clubs
Public Toilets 
The council will expect major schemes with large numbers of visitors to provide 
public toilets (DQP11).
Central Shopping Core
13.22 The central shopping core is the primary shopping area within the city 
centre where major regional shopping facilities can be found. It will continue to 
be the focus of city centre retail development in accordance with Policy TCR01. 
The extent of the central shopping core is shown on Diagram 15 and defined on 
the Policies Map.    
13.23 There is a diverse retail offer within the central shopping core. This 
includes high-order multiple retailers focussed within the Highcross and 
Haymarket shopping centres, a variety of independent traders, many of which 191are accommodated within St. Martins square and the surrounding Leicester 
Lanes. The historic open-air market with its new food hall and Market Square 
(Green Dragon Square) is at the heart of the city centre.    
13.24 However, traditional high street style shopping centres face challenges 
from changes in consumer behaviour, new retail models, the growth in online 
shopping and competition from out-of-centre retail development. More 
recently, the Covid-19 pandemic and impact of lockdown measures (both local 
and nationally) have added to the pressure that our high streets and operators 
are facing. It is therefore important that we allow the central shopping core to 
grow and diversify in a way that can respond to rapid changes in the retail and 
leisure industries.  
13.25 Whilst it will be the focus for major retail development, we recognise that 
a greater mix of other main town centre uses (e.g. leisure, tourism, cultural etc.) 
can help to add vitality and viability to the central shopping core and provide an 
exceptional visitor and retail experience with a diverse range of uses set within 
a high quality environment. In September 2020, the Government introduced a 
new use class, Class E. This placed a wide range of uses (including retail, food, 
financial services, gyms, healthcare, nurseries, offices and light industry) into a 
single use class. This measure will introduce greater flexibility for operators and 
will broaden the range of uses that we see within town centres. 
13.26 The council will consider the use of Article 4 directions to remove 
national permitted development rights where it is necessary to avoid wholly 
unacceptable adverse impact. This could include the loss of the essential core 
of a primary shopping area which would seriously undermine its vitality and 
viability.  
13.27 Residential development contributes to the overall health of centres and 
to meeting the city’s housing target. There is scope to increase housing stock 
in the centres, by increasing densities or by introducing housing on upper 
floors, or to the rear of commercial properties, provided that this does not lead 
to amenity issues or an unacceptable loss of commercial space and that the 
commercial uses on the ground floor remain of a viable size to include adequate 
storage space and staff facilities. 19213.28 Evening and night time activities can increase economic activity within 
town centres and provide additional employment opportunities. However, 
consideration will also need to be given to potential impacts that the 
development or proposed use would have on the operation of other businesses 
or nearby residential properties e.g. through levels of noise and disturbance.    193Diagram 15. The City Centre and Central Shopping Core  
Central Shopping Core
City Centre© Crown copyright and database rights 
2022. Ordnance Survey 100019264.S T.  M AT T H E W ’ S  WAY
B U R L E Y ’ S  WAY
VA U G H A N  WAY
ST. GEORGE’S WAY
O X F O R D  S T R E E TW E L F O R D  R O A D
L O N D O N  R O A DS T.  M A R G A R E T ’ S  WAY
Highcross
CentreHaymarket
CentreSt. Margaret’s
Bus Station
Market
Place
Town
HallHIGH STREET
GRANBY STREETCHARLES STREETCHURCH GATE
K I N G  R I C H A R D ’ S  R O A D
N A R B O R O U G H  R O A DW O O D G AT EB E L G R AV E  R O A D
H U M B E R S T O N E  R O A D
AY L E S T O N E  R O A DW E L F O R D  R O A DRailway
Station194Diagram 16. The Central Shopping Core  
© Crown copyright and database rights 
2022. Ordnance Survey 100019264.S T.  M AT T H E W ’ S  WAY
B U R L E Y ’ S  WAY
VA U G H A N  WAY
ST. GEORGE’S WAY
O X F O R D  S T R E E TW E L F O R D  R O A D
L O N D O N  R O A DS T.  M A R G A R E T ’ S  WAY
Highcross
CentreHaymarket
CentreSt. Margaret’s
Bus Station
Charles Street
Bus Station
Market
Place
S T.  N I C H O L A S C I R C L E
Town
Hall
Central Shopping Core
Railway and Station
Clock T owerHUMBERSTONE 
GATE WEST
HIGH STREET
GRANBY STREETCHARLES STREETCHURCH GATE
Railway
Station195Policy TCR04. Central Shopping Core (Primary Shopping Area)  
New retail development -and other supporting uses such as Class E(c) Class 
E(b), pubs (SG), hot food takeaways (SG)will continue to be focussed within 
the central shopping core (primary shopping area) in accordance with Policy 
TCR01.    
Other main town centre uses (e.g. leisure/entertainment, tourism, healthcare, 
cultural facilities) can support the main retail function of the central shopping 
core and add to the vitality and viability of the centre. These uses will be 
supported where they are suitably located and would not unduly detract from 
the essential shopping function of the central shopping core.  (TCR 01) 
In assessing proposals for non-retail uses within the central shopping core 
consideration will be given to:   
a) The location and prominence of a unit
b) The levels of activity or footfall that the proposed use would generate;   
c) Whether a shop front is retained (DQP08)
d) Whether the proposal would retain or enhance an active ground floor use 
and street frontage
e) Any special contribution that the proposal would make to the vitality and 
viability of the central shopping core 
f) The length of time that a unit may have been vacant for 
g) The availability and suitability of alternative vacant units  
h) Whether the use is suitable in scale and size for the character of the area
i) The quality of the design
j) Whether the proposal would enhance the heritage value of a building or 
area
Development which secures the use of upper floors, (including residential 
development) will be supported where: 
• The proposed development or uses would not have a harmful impact on 
the amenity of local residents due to noise, odour, disturbance or the light 
pollution (DQP06); and   
• In the case of residential uses a satisfactory living environment can be 
achieved.  
On streets where there is lots of activity, residential or business uses (office, 
industry, and storage) will not be appropriate at ground floor level except to 
provide entrances to these uses on upper floors as required.  196Evening and night-time activities   
Planning permission for uses associated with night-time and evening activity 
(e.g. night clubs, bars, pubs, hot food takeaways, some community uses etc.) 
will be expected to address anticipated impacts on residential uses or on the 
operation of other businesses in respect of noise, light, vibrations, smell etc. 
through the installation of appropriate mitigation measures before the new use 
commences to reduce these impacts to an acceptable level.  
Town, District and Local Shopping Centres  
13.29 Town, district and local shopping centres perform an important function 
in providing goods, services and a focus for local communities through the 
location of shops, health care facilities, libraries, financial services and uses 
including pubs, cafes and takeaways.   
13.30 Concentrating main town centre uses such as retail, office and leisure 
developments in town, district and local shopping centres helps to support 
the vitality and viability of those shopping centres. In addition, uses such 
as amusement arcades, laundrettes, betting shops, hot food takeaways, 
saunas and massage parlours, car showrooms and minicab offices which are 
classed as sui generis are commonly found in centres (and smaller shopping 
parades).   Providing a variety of uses in one place makes mixed shopping and 
leisure trips easier for people particularly those who rely on walking and public 
transport and for people with disabilities.  
13.31 It is recognised that in recent years the retail and leisure sectors have 
faced many challenges from changes in consumer behaviour, new retail 
models, the growth in online shopping and competition from out-of-centre retail 
development. The Covid 19 pandemic and impact of lockdown measures (both 
local and nationally) have added to these pressures. However, the 2021 Retail 
and Leisure Study did find some signs of resilience to pandemic, particularly in 
the smaller local centres that provide day to day retail and service needs. The 
health of centres will be monitored going forward. 
13.32 In time, it is likely that the new Class E will broaden the range of uses 
that we see in traditional shopping centres on the high street. The flexibility 
provided within Class E will help retail and leisure operators respond to and 
adapt to changing circumstances. Increasing economic activity along with 197providing key community facilities such as medical centres and libraries etc 
within town centres will help to support high street vitality. The council will 
therefore be supportive of alternative uses where proposals enhance the 
vitality and viability of the centre. 
13.33 While centres are generally the most appropriate location for these 
uses, the council will carefully consider their potential impact when assessing 
planning applications to make sure that they do not harm the character of the 
centre, the amenity of nearby residents or adversely impact pedestrian and 
highway safety. 
Policy TCR05. Town Centre Uses in Town/ District and Local Shopping Centres  
Main town centre uses including amusement arcades, launderettes, betting 
shops, hot food takeaways, saunas and massage parlours, car showrooms, 
minicab offices, and pay day loan shops, outside the central shopping core will 
be focused in the shopping centres shown on the Policies Map.   
Proposals for such development and for extensions to shops within these 
centres will be considered against the following criteria:  
a) Do not prejudice the use of upper floors for residential use 
b) How the scale and design is sympathetic to the size and character of the 
centre and its role in the hierarchy 
c) The impact of traffic generated by the development and the arrangements 
for parking, loading, unloading, servicing and their impact on pedestrian and 
highway safety 
d) The diversity of uses on offer and the effect on the retail function of the 
shopping centre
e) The proposal will maintain and enhance the vitality and viability and 
character of the shopping area
Proposals for hot food takeaways and pubs will be assessed in accordance with 
policy TCR06. 
Proposals elsewhere will be resisted other than those which accord with 
Policies TCR01 and TCR02. 198Food and Drink in Town, District and Local Centres  
13.34 Food and drink uses, including hot food takeaways are a fundamental 
part of most centres. These uses fill vacant units, add to the diversity of uses 
and offer a popular facility for local communities. However, most centres 
are surrounded by and include residential properties. Food and drink uses 
can generate noise, odours, litter and disturbance to residents by increased 
pedestrian and vehicular traffic drawn into an area which can be detrimental 
to residential amenity. The pattern of activity often associated with hot food 
takeaways is late night use at unsociable hours. As well as creating anti-social 
behaviour issues and health concerns, when clustered together these uses can 
increase the level of impact on residential amenity. Too many of these uses can 
also reduce the capacity of the centre to serve everyday shopping needs and 
create daytime voids due to hours of operation within the centre.    
13.35 These issues are often more evident in the smaller centres where there 
is less background noise and a reduced level of retail offer. Other centres like 
Belgrave Road, Evington Road, Narborough Road (Braunstone Gate) district 
centres and London Road local centre have developed a strong and diverse 
food and drink offer. This can add to the attractiveness of the centre and make 
them destination places.   
13.36 To help maintain a diverse and active shopping street and avoid 
disturbance to residents it is recommended that normally no more than three 
hot food takeaway (sui generis) uses should be adjacent to each other in a 
frontage length and that between groups of hot food takeaway uses there 
should be at least two intervening non hot food takeaway uses. In centres 
with ten or fewer units proposals for hot food takeaway and drink units will be 
assessed on their individual merit.    
13.37 In locations where residential properties are nearby such uses will only 
be acceptable if planning conditions restricting the hours of opening can 
reasonably be imposed. Opening outside the hours of 07:30 – 23:00 will be 
unacceptable if significant additional detriment is likely to be caused to the 
amenity of local residents by the operation of food and drink facilities.    199Policy TCR06. Development for Food and Drink Purposes  
Hot food takeaway and food & drink facilities (Sui generis), will continue to 
be supported in centres to meet demand and to add vitality and diversity. 
However, this will be subject to considerations of residential amenity, the effect 
on the vitality and viability of the centre and the cumulative impact of these 
uses.  
In assessing proposals for hot food takeaway and drink uses account will be 
taken of the number, distribution and proximity of other hot food takeaway and 
drink uses, including those with unimplemented planning permission and the 
impact on the vitality and viability of the centre.     
Proposals for the change use of premises within centres for food, hot food 
takeaway and drink purposes will be permitted except where:  
a) The development either individually or cumulatively with other hot food 
takeaway and drink use (including unimplemented planning permission) 
would be likely to prove significantly detrimental to the amenities of the 
occupiers of nearby residential properties, to visual amenity, and to parking 
and traffic issues which cannot reasonably be controlled by condition
b) a ventilation flue is required but is it considered that it would not be 
effective for purpose, it would cause problems of noise or fumes for the 
occupiers of nearby properties and; or would be detrimental to visual 
amenity
c) A shop front is not retained
d) It would prejudice the use of upper floors for residential use either at the 
application site and/ or adjacent properties   
Where new hot food takeaways are acceptable the following measures may be 
necessary to reduce the litter associated with the proposed hot food takeaway: 
a) The provision and maintenance of a litter bin outside the premises at all 
times when the business is open
b) One or more litter bins within the surrounding areas as appropriate to meet 
likely need
c) Commitment to undertake litter picking both within the immediate vicinity of 
the premises and where necessary further away 
d) Provision of advisory signage
Where appropriate these measures will be secured by condition. 20013.38 To help reduce litter associated with hot food takeaways and ensure 
that there is no unacceptable impact from litter on the amenity of the area as 
part of the application the council will consider the need for the proposed new 
hot food takeaway to install litter bins, commit to undertake litter picking and 
provide advisory signage. As litter may be deposited further away from the 
immediate vicinity of the premises the council will consider the wider effect this 
has on local amenity and may ask premises to undertake litter picking to collect 
litter (generated from off-sales from that premises) which has been deposited 
further away from the immediate vicinity. Where appropriate these measures 
will be secured by conditions to require ongoing compliance with any measures 
proposed.  
Neighbourhood Shopping Parades   
13.39 Neighbourhood parades usually consist of a short row of shops that 
help to serve the day to day needs of the immediate local community. The 
retail units are usually small in scale with the majority of units providing either 
a convenience function or service function, such as a hairdresser or takeaway. 
They complement the retail hierarchy by giving people access to local shops 
and services within walking distance.    
Policy TCR07. Neighbourhood Parades  
Within neighbourhood parades the following uses will be supported: 
• Commercial, business and service uses (Class E)
• Community facilities
Proposals for other uses will be permitted provided that the use would not 
result in the neighbourhood parade being unable to meet the day to day needs 
of the local community and it can be demonstrated that: 
a) The proposal will retain an active ground floor use and frontage and provide 
a direct service or sales to visiting members of the public
b) The development or use(s) will not be detrimental to the amenity of local 
residents (either individually or cumulatively) due to noise, odour or 
disturbance or light pollution or highway safety
c) Where planning permission is necessary, changes of use at ground floor to 
residential will be permitted to the rear or on upper floors and a satisfactory 
living environment can be achieved (DQO06 and H07)20113.40 There are 34 neighbourhood parades in the city, and they are an 
important local facility, particularly for people who are less mobile and for the 
more vulnerable members of the community. This is especially the case in areas 
that do not have easy access to larger centres or supermarkets. Therefore, 
the council will maintain and where possible enhance, such local community 
facilities. The neighbourhood parades will be shown on the future Policies Map. 
(See Appendix 3)   
Outside the Defined Shopping Centres   
13.41 Where proposals for new town centre development uses including 
laundrettes, betting shops and pay day loan shops have satisfied the 
requirements of the sequential test and suitable sites and premises are not 
available in appropriate centres or edge of centre locations (and if necessary, 
an impact assessment has been undertaken), planning permission will normally 
be granted for new town centre development, provided that the proposal is of 
an appropriate scale; it is readily accessible by a choice of means of transport; 
and it is unlikely to have adverse implications for residential amenities and for 
traffic and parking conditions. It is unlikely that the change of use of a mid-
terrace house would be acceptable.   
13.42 There are also a range of out-of-centre retail parks such as St. George’s 
Retail Park, St Margaret’s Way (Wolsey St and Blackbird Road), Putney Road, 
Raw Dykes Road, Aylestone Road that traditionally accommodated bulky retail 
goods. It is recognised that whilst these areas currently complement the city’s 
retail offer, any proposals for the future expansion, intensification, or changes 
of use at these locations should be carefully assessed to ensure that they 
do not have a detrimental impact on designated centres and any existing, 
committed, or planned town centre investment. These out of centre retail parks 
are considered to be the preferred location for bulky retail goods.202Policy TCR08. Main Town Centre Development Outside of Defined Centres  
Where proposals for new shopping development and other main town centre 
uses, including betting offices, pay day loan shops, hot food takeaways and 
laundrettes, have satisfied the requirements of the sequential test (policy 
TCR01) and suitable sites and premises are not available in appropriate 
shopping centres or edge of centre locations (and if necessary, an impact 
assessment (policy TCR02) has been undertaken) then the council will consider 
more favourably if the following apply:  
a) The proposed development is easily accessible by foot, cycle and by public 
transport
b) Significant disturbance is unlikely to be caused to nearby residential areas 
(the change of use of mid terrace houses will not be acceptable) and 
c)  The traffic generated by the development will not have a significant 
detrimental impact on pedestrian and highway safety
Retail Development and Main Town Centre Uses Not in a Town Centre – 
Planning Conditions   
13.43 Corner shops and other isolated shops still provide a local service. 
Sometimes they are in isolated areas that are not well served by the defined 
centres and therefore provide an important facility for the local community. 
Proposals that involve reinstating corner shops that have converted to 
residential use would be considered against policy TCR08.   
13.44 Town centre policy in the NPPF will help to determine the acceptability 
of retailing proposals that are outside of a defined centre. The type of goods 
sold, and the amount of space devoted to their sale can potentially threaten 
nearby centres. Therefore, the use of appropriate planning conditions will be 
considered amongst others to limit the range of goods sold to prevent the 
development from being subdivided into smaller units and to prevent future 
addition of mezzanine floors. This is to protect the vitality and viability of town 
centres.    
13.45 In instances, where approval is to be granted for a new, or change of 
use to a Class E use outside of a defined town centre that does not require 
consideration of the sequential test or an impact assessment (e.g. day nursery) 
a condition may be attached to the permission that would restrict the proposed 
use to a particular sub-category. This is to allow appropriate consideration of 203the sequential and impact assessment if a subsequent proposal was received 
that would require consideration of these policy tests. This is to protect the 
vitality and viability of town centres. 
Policy TCR09. Planning Conditions: Main Town Centre Development and Class 
E Uses Outside of a Defined Centre  
a) If the sale of comparison goods from out-of-centre retail development, 
including supermarkets and superstores would adversely affect the viability 
of a shopping centre as a whole, the range of goods sold and/or the mix 
of convenience (includes food and drink) and comparison goods (includes 
clothing, shoes, furniture and household appliances) will be limited by 
condition
b) Conditions may also be necessary to prevent the development being 
subdivided into smaller units and to prevent the future addition of 
mezzanine floors
c) A condition may also be necessary to restrict a Class E use to a particular 
sub-category if that use does not require consideration of either the 
sequential or impact tests204
14. Open Space, Sports 
and Recreation  205Evidence Base  
14.1 There are several background studies that will underpin policies in this 
plan. The main technical studies for this chapter are published on our website 
and will be updated as and when new studies are undertaken and completed.    
• Green Wedge Review Joint Methodology (2011) 
• A Green Wedge Review (2017) and Addendum Report (2020) 
• Open Space, Sport, and Recreation Study (2017) 
• Burial Space Strategy (2014) 
• Playing Pitch Strategy Assessment Report (2017) and Action Plan (2017) 
Addendum to Playing Pitch Strategy (2022) 
• Allotment Strategy (2015 – 2020)  
Background  
14.2 Leicester has a wide range of open spaces that make a major contribution 
to the quality of life of city residents and visitors. These include green wedges, 
parks, children’s play areas, sports pitches, natural open space, allotments, 
cemeteries, civic spaces, rivers, and canals as well as other incidental open 
spaces that together comprise the open space network.   
14.3 Open spaces secure many benefits for people living and working nearby, 
providing places to be active for community events, to unwind, to grow food 
and to spend time in a natural environment. This is beneficial for people’s 
mental health as well as physical health.  
14.4 They are also valuable for wildlife and provide important functions in 
relation to climate change, such as flood storage, improving water quality and 
reducing ‘heat island’ effects. These are the warmer temperatures experienced 
within urban areas compared to surrounding rural areas due to a concentration 
of surfaces that absorb and retain heat, as well as human activities.  
14.5 Open spaces are an important part of the landscape setting for the built 
environment and in achieving sustainable development.   
14.6 The open space network does not stop at the city’s boundary. It is 
connected to wider networks of open space in adjoining authorities. Green 206wedges have a strategic function and extend beyond the city’s administrative 
boundary into the Leicester Urban Area. The River Soar and Grand Union Canal 
are part of a larger waterway corridor in the region. People travel to sports 
facilities and open spaces in the Leicester Urban Area (and vice versa). In view 
of this the council will continue to work with partners, (e.g. neighbouring local 
authorities, Sport England, and sport governing bodies) to optimise the benefits 
and improve access to open spaces serving the wider area, including in the 
development of the future Nature Recovery network. 207Diagram 17: Open Space Network, Leicester Urban Area  
Hinckley and 
BosworthCharnwood
BlabyHarborough
Oadby and Wigston
© Crown copyright and database rights 
2022. Ordnance Survey 100019264.
Green Wedge
Open Space
River/canal
Leicester City Administrative Boundary
District Council BoundariesM1
M1 M69Glen/f_ieldBirstall
Thurmaston
Scraptoft
Oadby
Wigston Glen ParvaKirby Muxloe
Leicester
Forest East
Braunstone T ownMark/f_ieldMountsorrel
RothleySileby
SystonQueniborough
Thurcaston
Anstey
Groby
Ratby
Desford
Narborough
Broughton
AstleyCountesthorpe
Kibworth Harcourt
Kibworth BeauchampHoughton
on the Hill
BlabyLEICESTER208Green Wedges  
14.7 Green wedges are extensive areas of predominantly open and green 
land. They run from the edges of the city towards the city centre. In most 
cases green wedges extend beyond the city boundary through green wedge 
allocations in adjoining districts. This gives them a strategic importance as they 
connect the city to the surrounding Leicestershire countryside.    
14.8 The extent of the previously defined green wedges can be seen in Diagram 
17 above. They have four strategic functions:   
• To prevent the merging of settlements (considering both physical separation 
and the perception of distance between settlements) 
• Guiding development form 
• Providing a ‘green lung’ into urban areas (including a continuous link between 
open countryside and land which penetrates into urban areas) 
• Providing a recreational resource (including publicly accessible informal and 
formal recreation facilities) 
14.9 The extent and function of Leicester’s green wedges have been reviewed 
in the Green Wedge Review (2017) and Addendum Report (2020). This review 
followed the Green Wedge Review Joint Methodology (2011) that was jointly 
prepared by the Leicester and Leicestershire authorities, with the exception of 
Blaby District Council and Melton Borough Council.   
14.10 Some allocated sites (i.e. the former Western Park Golf Course, land East 
of Ashton Green, land North of A46, and land West of Anstey Lane are on land 
which was formerly designated as green wedge. This land no longer has green 
wedge status. Land within these parcels which remains undeveloped will be 
designated as open space. 
14.11 At both the strategic and local level, green wedges also provide and link a 
range of uses such as open space; sport and recreation; green infrastructure; 
wildlife corridors; improving air quality; flood alleviation measures; and 
transport corridors. These uses should be preserved and where possible 
enhanced. The only types of land use that will normally be considered 
appropriate for these areas are those where the predominantly open and 
undeveloped nature of the land is retained. It is recognised that some built 209development may be required in connection with some of the uses identified 
within the policy.    
Policy OSSR01. Green Wedges  
The green wedges as shown on the future policies map will be maintained 
as areas that prevent the merging of built settlements, help guide where 
development can take place, provide a green lung into urban areas and act as a 
recreational resource.    
Development in green wedges will be permitted where:   
a) It does not adversely affect the predominantly open and undeveloped 
character of the green wedge 
b) The proposal relates to agriculture, horticulture, forestry, nature areas, 
allotments, burial grounds, low impact waste uses, outdoor sports, leisure, 
or recreation facilities including school playing fields, footpaths, cycleways 
and bridleways 
c) It provides a high quality of boundary and frontage treatment 
d) It enhances, retains or creates additional open space networks between the 
countryside and within the urban areas 
e) It enhances or retains public access to and within green wedges 
f) It enhances or creates additional recreational and/or biodiversity areas 
within the open space  
g) The proposal relates to a renewable energy development
Open Spaces  
14.12 The council will seek to maintain and enhance the quality of the open 
space network so that residents have easy access to good quality open space, 
sport, and recreational provision that meets the needs of the city.    
14.13 The quantity, quality, and accessibility of these types of spaces which 
are publicly accessible have been assessed in the Open Space, Sport and 
Recreation Study (2017), Green Wedge Review (2017) and addendum (2020), 
and the Playing Pitch Strategy (2017). These open spaces include parks 
and gardens, informal open space, civic space, children and young people’s 
space, outdoor sports space, natural open space, allotments, and burial 
grounds.  There are also other types of open space, such as school playing 
fields, which may not be accessible to the public, but still contribute to the 
network of open space.    21014.14 Other open spaces such as privately-owned sports pitches (e.g. tennis 
courts and bowling greens) and open space sites below 0.5ha also have 
important amenity value but may not be shown as open space in the future 
policies map. The council will seek to protect these sites and assess any 
development proposals on a case-by-case basis. 
Policy OSSR02. Development of Open Spaces  
Development of open space as shown on the policies map will be permitted if 
the open space is:
a) Surplus to requirements in relation to its current open space typology, taking 
into consideration the quantity, quality, and accessibility of existing open 
spaces; and, in addition 
b) Not needed for another type of open space; or 
c) The loss resulting from the proposed development would be replaced by 
equivalent or better open space provision in terms of typology, quantity, 
quality and accessibility; or 
d) The development is for alternative sports and recreational provision to 
that currently provided for on the open space, or ancillary development 
associated with the open space, the needs for which outweigh the loss of 
the current or former use; or 
e) The development enhances and/or retains public access to and within the 
open space; or 
f) The development enhances or creates additional recreational and/or 
biodiversity value
Open Space in New Development   
14.15 The amount of open space required should meet the needs and priorities 
in the local area as defined by the Open Space, Sport and Recreation Study 
(2017). Currently the city council has an adopted standard of 2.88 ha of publicly 
accessible open space per 1,000 population. In the city centre, open space 
enhancements will include the potential upgrading of public realm where 
impacts related to the development can be demonstrated.   The Council will 
update applicable Supplementary Planning Guidance to confirm the quantitative 
and qualitative Green Space improvements standards and requirements, in the 
City. 211
Victoria Park
14.16 The council may adopt new open spaces if it is in the council’s and the 
public’s interest, and they have been constructed to a standard agreed by the 
city council. Commuted maintenance sums will be sought to allow maintenance 
for 20 years. If the council is not to adopt new open space, the applicant should 
make provision for its long-term maintenance and management.   212Policy OSSR03. Open Space in New Development  
a) New development proposals should meet the need for open space provision 
arising from the development, taking account of local quantitative, 
qualitative and accessibility deficiencies in existing public and privately 
maintained open space, sport and recreation provision 
b) New high quality on-site open space, to an agreed standard, will normally 
be required and should be publicly accessible to all. Where appropriate, in 
addition to or as an alternative, contributions to improve the quality of, or 
access to existing open space and public realm will be sought 
c) New open spaces should be located in accessible overlooked areas taking 
into account possible impacts of noise and floodlighting 
d) New development will be expected to be integrated across the site and 
connect to the wider open space network. This should be in the form of 
appropriate landscaping, water conveyance routes as part of a Sustainable 
Drainage Scheme, and tree planting that will provide connections for 
wildlife, water management, access via walking and cycling routes, and 
improved amenity 
e) Where development lies adjacent to the open space network the proposal 
should be designed and positioned to facilitate wildlife migration and good 
design
Local Green Space  
14.17 Should local communities wish to designate a Local Green Space this 
should occur when a new local plan is prepared or reviewed, or through the 
preparation of a Neighbourhood Plan. Potential designations will be tested 
against the criteria outlined in the NPPF (2021) and should be consistent with 
the planning of sustainable development, and complement investment in 
homes, jobs and other essential services.    
Sports provision   
14.18 Playing sports can have many positive impacts on people’s health and 
wellbeing.   An assessment and action plan for outdoor sports in Leicester 
has been undertaken in the Playing Pitch Strategy Assessment Report (2017) 
and Action Plan (2017) and Addendum (2022). Types of sports considered 213include football, rugby, cricket, tennis, hockey and bowls, all of which require 
appropriate playing pitches throughout the season.     
14.19 The Local Plan can safeguard sites and facilities and secure contributions 
towards site enhancement. The provision, improvement, and management 
of facilities is a joint responsibility with Sport England, national and regional 
governing bodies, the city council, adjoining local authorities as well as local 
sports clubs.   
14.20 The city council intends to protect, enhance, and provide sporting 
facilities within the city in line with its program to enhance built facilities and 
the adopted Playing Pitch Strategy and Action Plan. In addition, the cross-
boundary implications of growth will be taken into account, through the Duty to 
Co-operate dialogue and consultations.     
14.21 There is potential for conversion to sports pitches and facilities, which will 
be determined through Supplementary Planning Guidance drawing on the Local 
Infrastructure Assessment and Viability Assessment. 
Game of rugby214Policy OSSR04. Existing Playing Pitches  
Existing playing pitches will be protected from development for other use 
unless it can be clearly demonstrated that:   
a) The site is surplus to requirements 
b) Equivalent or better facilities, in terms of quantity and/or quality will be 
provided in a suitable location 
c) The development is for alternative sports and recreation provision, the 
needs of which outweigh the loss 
d) The proposal is consistent with or does not conflict with the delivery of the 
Playing Pitch Strategy and Action Plan (2017) 
Policy OSSR05. Playing pitches and associated facilities  
The city council will support proposals for development to provide or support 
playing pitches and their associated facilities provided:   
a) The proposal can be well accessed by walking, cycling, public transport and 
by those with disabilities (T03) 
b) The amenity of nearby residents is protected, including from the impacts of 
use (e.g. traffic and parking) and associated floodlighting 
c) The proposal is consistent or does not conflict with the delivery of the 
Playing Pitch Strategy and Action Plan
Policy OSSR06. Built Sports Facilities   
Development of new, or enhancement of existing built sports facilities will 
be permitted and encouraged where this contributes positively to the well-
being and social cohesion of local communities, with preference being given 
to locations within or adjacent to an appropriate town or edge-of-town-centre 
sites.   
Built sports facilities will be acceptable outside town centres where: 
a) It can be demonstrated that there are no suitable premises within or 
adjacent to centres 
b) There are overriding community, amenity and environmental benefits 
deriving from an out of centre location 
c) Residential amenity is not unreasonably affected (DPQ06) 
d) The development is easily accessible by walking, cycling and public 
transport (T03) 215Leicester’s Waterways   
14.22 The River Soar and the Grand Union Canal thread their way through 
Leicester, from south to north, creating a strong waterway corridor through 
the city. The waterway corridors have an important role to play in the heritage 
and regeneration of the city together with its value for leisure, recreation, 
connecting open spaces, biodiversity, flood management, transportation and 
tourism.   Spending time by the waterway can also secure many health and 
wellbeing benefits. 
14.23 Development within the waterway corridors has an opportunity to 
harness the potential of the waterway to provide a positive and attractive 
environment for businesses, visitors and as a place to live. The River Soar and 
Grand Union Canal Partnership (RSGUCP) was established to promote the long-
term regeneration and sustainability of the waterway corridors.   
14.24 Development within the waterway corridors should seek to align with the 
aspirations of the RSGUCP Waterway Strategy and Action Plans.   Proposals 
should make the most of opportunities to secure multiple benefits in improving 
amenity value, enhancing biodiversity, facilitating connectivity between 
development and neighbouring sites, reducing flood risk, and improving water 
quality. Where appropriate, contributions may be sought for improvements/
enhancements to the waterway corridors.   
14.25 While it is possible for hydroelectric power to make a small contribution 
to meeting Leicester’s electricity need, the development sensitivity of potential 
sites means that the likelihood of fulfilling the power generating potential is low. 
However, any proposals for small-scale hydroelectric schemes for sites situated 
adjacent to a weir or lock will be assessed on their individual merits and in 
consideration of other policy objectives. 216Policy OSSR07 . Waterways   
Development within the waterway corridors will be permitted taking into 
account the following objectives:  
a) Realise the potential of the proximity of waterways to maximise the 
regeneration benefits of the site 
b) Reflect the character variations in the waterways, in terms of use, location 
and design  
c) Complement and enhance the architectural quality of the waterside, 
particularly in regard to historic assets    
d) Protect, maintain and enhance the nature conservation value of the 
waterway corridors, including delivering for the Water Framework Directive 
e) Protect, maintain and enhance the sustainable drainage functions of the 
waterway corridors  
f)  Take opportunities to enhance the recreation and leisure roles of the 
waterway corridors 
g) Maintain, enhance, and create safe and publicly accessible routes to, along 
and adjacent to waterways, which are suitable for active travel (e.g. walking 
and cycling) for all potential users  
h) Improve surveillance of the waterway, including appropriate orientation, 
design, lighting and outlook 
i) Provide safe, secure and accessible mooring and boating facilities, where 
possible and appropriate 
j) Design to allow for flood management, access for maintenance, landscaping 
and emergency work, as required 
k) Not have an adverse impact on the structural integrity of the waterway 
l) Encourage the planting of trees along waterways to improve biodiversity 
and provide shading217
15. The Natural 
Environment  218Evidence Base 
 
15.1 There are several background studies that will underpin policies in this 
plan. The main technical studies for this chapter are published on our website 
and will be updated as and when new studies are undertaken and completed.  
 
• Biodiversity Action Plan (2021-2031) 
•  Green Infrastructure Strategy (2015-2025)
•  Tree Strategy (2018 - 2023)
Background 
15.2 Leicester has a diverse and interesting natural environment due to the 
complexity of its urban habitats and geology. The mix of grasslands, wetlands, 
and woodlands together with post-industrial brownfield sites, former quarries, 
gardens, rivers/canals, and built structures provide habitat niches for a wide 
range of species creating one of the most nature rich parts of Leicestershire. 
The council will continue to work with partners, including neighbouring local 
authorities, statutory bodies, and local nature conservation organisations, 
to consider how best to improve and optimise the conditions and function of 
Leicester’s biodiversity and geodiversity. 
 
Designated Biodiversity Sites 
 
15.3 Many of our most important and biodiverse areas in the city have been 
designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), Local Nature Reserve 
(LNR), Local Wildlife Site (LWS), or Biodiversity Enhancement Site (BES) to 
afford them additional protection and enhancement opportunities. These sites 
will be maintained, protected and enhanced.
 
15.4 The boundaries of all locally designated sites are defined on the policies 
map. It is recognised that ecological value of sites can change over time, and 
that new sites may come forward. It is intended that additional sites identified 
or designated during the plan period will be appropriately protected and 
enhanced. 
15.5 Leicester’s constricted authority boundaries coupled with the need 
to accommodate housing and employment means that there is significant 219pressure on the city. Consequently, some former biodiversity sites have been 
allocated for housing, in this plan. These sites no longer hold biodiversity site 
designation. 
 
Protected and Priority Species/Habitats 
 
15.6 Protected and priority species and habitats are identified as under threat 
of rarity or extinction and have suffered severe decline.  Some sites that 
contain priority habitats have been identified and designated as LNRs and/
or LWSs, but many other priority habitats and species are located across the 
whole of Leicester.  These include areas of wetland, hedgerows, meadows, 
and woodland that support rare and vulnerable species, such as bats, otters, 
and hedgehogs. The council will continue to seek to conserve, restore and 
enhance such areas and the species they support through actions set out in 
the Biodiversity Action Plan and to strengthen the ecological network across 
Leicester where possible.  This will help to create, connect and strengthen 
wildlife dispersal routes throughout the city and contribute towards the 
establishment of coherent Nature Recovery Networks, both locally and across 
the wider region. 
 
Strategy 
 
15.7 The council expects development to create, protect, maintain, and 
enhance biodiversity  and to optimise its value for wildlife through appropriate 
habitat management and maintenance. The mitigation hierarchy will be used 
to consider the impacts on biodiversity.  Steps must first be taken to avoid 
any likely significant impacts to biodiversity.  If this is not possible, it will be 
necessary to demonstrate the need for development outweighs the need 
to safeguard the nature conservation value of the site and show how the 
unavoidable impacts can be mitigated by taking steps on site to minimise the 
duration, intensity and/or extent of impacts that cannot be avoided.  Where 
all on-site mitigation options have been exhausted then compensation off-
site should be considered, but only as a last resort where there is no other 
alternative.  
 
15.8 It is anticipated that policies will need to be reviewed following changes in 
government legislation and national planning policy relating to biodiversity. 220Policy NE01. Protecting designated sites, legally protected and  priority 
species, and priority habitats 
For proposals affecting nationally or locally designated sites, legally protected 
and priority species, and priority habitats, the following will be considered:  
a) Development on land within or outside a Site of Special Scientific Interest, 
and which is likely to have an adverse effect on it (either individually or in 
combination with other developments) will not normally be permitted. The 
only exception is where the benefits of the development in the location 
proposed clearly outweigh both the impact on the features of the site 
that make it of special scientific interest, and any impacts on the broader 
network of Sites of Special Scientific Interest
b) Development proposals on, or affecting, locally designated sites (including 
regionally important geological sites), will only be permitted where it can 
be demonstrated that the need for development outweighs the need to 
safeguard the nature conservation or geological value of the site
c) Development proposals on, or affecting, sites supporting priority habitats 
and priority species, will only be permitted where it can be demonstrated 
that the need for development outweighs the need to safeguard the nature 
conservation or geological value of the site
d) Development proposals on, or affecting, sites supporting legally protected 
species will only be permitted where it can be demonstrated that it has 
suitably avoided, minimised, mitigated or compensated for the loss of 
that habitat and/or impact on that species. Developments that cannot 
demonstrate this should not be permitted 
 
Development will only be permitted where significant harm to biodiversity is 
avoided. Where harmful impacts cannot be avoided, they should be minimised 
and mitigated for through design, layout and detailing of the development, or as 
a last resort compensated for, which may include off-site measures. 
 221Biodiversity Gain  
 
15.9 To help support the city’s ambition to deliver an overall environmental net 
gain, the council will expect proposals to achieve at least a 10% biodiversity net 
gain, in line with government legislation .  
 
15.10 All major development proposals will be expected to adhere to the 
following principles: 
•  Development must provide a net gain in biodiversity
•  Biodiversity should be incorporated into the built design at an early stage
•  Enhancements should seek to contribute to Leicester’s Biodiversity Action 
Plan objectives and subsequent updates, https://www.leicester.gov.uk/
planning-and-building/conservation/nature-and-biodiversity/nature-
conservation-and-planning/
•  Enhancements should act to strengthen Nature Recovery Networks and the 
existing green infrastructure network to improve habitats and connectivity for 
wildlife. This is particularly important on sites adjacent or close to designated 
and/or priority habitats
•  A Biodiversity Impact Assessment should be provided which clearly shows 
the size, scale and biodiversity value of any habitat/vegetation types existing 
on the site, those being retained and/or lost due to the proposal, and being 
provided as part of biodiversity compensation and enhancement measures
•  Spatial delivery of Biodiversity Net Gain is expected on site first, then local 
off-site delivery required within local Nature Recovery Networks (as opposed 
to national level), 
•  Management Plans and long-term funding must both be in place to ensure 
enhancements are sustainable and result in a lasting benefit to biodiversity
 
15.11 All minor development proposals, except householder applications, must 
provide at least 10% net gain in biodiversity which can also support the wider 
benefits associated with green infrastructure such as improved air, soil and 
water quality and managing flood risk. 222Policy NE02. Biodiversity Gain 
 
All developments will avoid biodiversity loss and enhance biodiversity where 
possible. In accordance with national legislation, developments are required to 
provide a minimum of 10% biodiversity net gain.
Developments will be permitted where: 
a) An overall net gain in biodiversity of at least 10%, as calculated by Natural 
England’s most recent Biodiversity Metric or successor document, 
and commensurate with the size and scale of development, has been 
demonstrated
b) The design of the new development, including landscape, enhances 
retained habitats and provides new areas and opportunities for wildlife 
onsite, wherever possible and/or  
c) The size, location, creation, establishment, and long-term aftercare of off-
site biodiversity compensation and enhancement has been agreed with the 
council
Green and Blue Infrastructure 
 
15.12 Leicester’s green and blue  infrastructure network helps to support wildlife 
move around the city and delivers multiple environmental and health benefits 
such as improved mental health. This includes improving air and water quality, 
storing carbon, managing flood risk, providing opportunities for biodiversity 
net gain, facilitating urban cooling, providing places to grow food, and spaces 
for people to enjoy for leisure and recreation purposes. This network is formed 
by strategic blue and green corridors such as the River Soar and Grand Union 
Canal, the Great Central Way, the Rothley Brook and the Mainline and Ivanhoe 
Railway lines. These are supported by smaller networks including the city’s 
brooks and main roads, open spaces and sports facilities, private gardens, and 
landscaped areas around development proposals. Many opportunities exist 
to encourage connectivity and diversity for our wildlife, and to maximise the 
multiple benefits of green and blue infrastructure.  
 
15.13 Proposals should consider opportunities to incorporate and connect to 
green and blue Infrastructure at the earliest possible stage of the development 
process. Proposals involving several connecting development sites, such 
as sustainable urban extensions, should incorporate a site-wide green 
infrastructure strategy.  Where publicly accessible open space forms part of 223the green infrastructure plans the functions associated with the use should 
be maximised to achieve maximum ecosystem services, including natural and 
semi-natural habitats, where appropriate. 
Policy NE03. Green and Blue Infrastructure 
Development proposals should: 
a) Integrate green and blue infrastructure into the design of the scheme at 
the earliest stages of the development process, taking into consideration 
existing natural assets, and the most suitable locations and types of new 
provision
b) Maximise the multiple functions and associated benefits of green and blue 
infrastructure including improving air and water quality, storing carbon, 
managing flood risk, providing opportunities for biodiversity net gain, 
facilitating urban cooling, growing food, and providing spaces for people to 
enjoy for leisure and recreation purposes
c) Connect green and blue infrastructure across and around the site, and to 
the wider green and blue infrastructure network
d) Agree the long-term maintenance and management of green and blue 
infrastructure at an early stage
Ancient Woodland, Veteran Trees, and Irreplaceable Habitats
 
15.14 Ancient woodland and veteran trees are rare within Leicester. They are 
recognised as an irreplaceable resource in the city councils “Tree Strategy” that 
cannot be replaced through normal biodiversity off-setting processes due to 
the time taken for them to reach maturity and optimum biodiversity value. The 
Ancient Woodland Inventory published by Natural England and local records of 
veteran and mature trees will provide the evidence base on which sites to avoid 
loss in line with the council’s tree strategy. 
Policy NE04. Ancient Woodland, Veteran Trees, and Irreplaceable Habitats
 
Development should aim to protect and, if possible, enhance ancient woodland, 
ancient or veteran trees, and irreplaceable habitats.  Development resulting 
in the loss of, or harm to ancient woodland, ancient or veteran trees, and 
irreplaceable habitats must be wholly exceptional and is only permitted when: 
a) The public benefit clearly outweighs the loss or harm to the habitat
b) A suitable compensation strategy is agreed with the council and is in place224
16. Transportation 
 225Evidence Base 
  
16.1 There are several background studies that will underpin policies in this 
plan. The main technical studies for this chapter are published on our website 
and will be updated as and when new studies are undertaken and completed.  
  
•  Climate Change Action Plan (2021) 
•  Midlands Connect Strategic Transport Plan for the Midlands (2022) 
•  Leicester and Leicestershire Strategic Transport Priorities (2020 – 2050)  
•  Leicester Transport Plan 4 (Draft) (2021 – 2036) 
•  The Smart Leicester Strategy 
•  Air Quality Action Plan (2015 to 2026) 
•  Strategic Growth Plan (2018) 
•  Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2022)  
•  Economic Recovery Plan – First Steps (2021) 
•  Leicester Covid 19 Transport Recovery Plan (2020) 
•  Cycle City Action Plan (2015 – 2024) 
•  Leicester Cycling and Walking Improvement Plan (2019) 
•  Joint Health and Wellbeing Strategy and Action Plan (2019) 
•  Leicester and Leicestershire Rail Strategy (2017) 
•  Leicester Street Design Guide (2020) 
•  Zero Emission Bus Regional Areas scheme (ZEBRA bid) 
•  Enhanced Bus Partnership Plan (Bus Services Improvement Plan) 2022-30 
 
Background  
  
16.2 A sustainable, well connected, and reliable transport system is vital to 
achieve the city’s objectives to cater for economic and housing growth, address 
the Climate Emergency as well as improve air quality and therefore people’s 
health. Good land use planning and good transport planning go hand in hand 
and this Local Plan draws on the current and emerging transport strategies 
outlined in this section.  
  
16.3 The city council consulted on its draft Leicester Transport Plan in Summer 
2021. The plan sets out the transport vision, ambitions, policies and priorities 
for Leicester to 2036.  The plan is being finalised following consultation and to 
take into account of the draft Department for Transport’s (DfT) new guidance 226for Local Transport Plans.  It is expected that Local Transport Plans will need to 
be prepared before 2024 and to have a stronger alignment with Local Plans.   
  
16.4 The Leicester and Leicestershire Strategic Growth Plan underlines the 
importance of the Leicester Urban Area as the central focus for sub-regional 
development. The city’s facilities and services need to be accessible not just 
to people in the Leicester Urban Area, but also to those in the neighbouring 
districts and the wider sub-region, and the draft Leicester Transport Plan takes 
account of this. 
16.5 The lockdowns associated with the Covid 19 pandemic seriously affected 
all forms of transport and appear to have changed some working patterns, 
for example, working from home. Public transport has still to recover from the 
pandemic, but car use has generally returned to pre-pandemic levels although 
peaks are not as strong. The large rise in cycling during the first lockdown 
demonstrates how behaviour can change significantly when conditions 
are perceived to be right (less traffic on the roads) and active provision is 
made for cycling. The city council provided over 10 miles of ‘pop-up’ cycling 
infrastructure in 10 weeks at the start of the pandemic which provided 
extensive new and safe opportunities to cycle in the city.    
  
Transport Strategy for Leicester 
16.6 The Leicester Urban Area experiences significant congestion, particularly 
during peak periods and with the planned growth of the urban area and wider 
sub-region this could become more challenging. Transport in the city needs 
rebalancing to more sustainable modes of transport if we are to manage 
these pressures and deliver against our economic, environmental, and social 
ambitions.  Promoting walking, cycling and public transport as primary modes 
of travel is central to achieving a more balanced and sustainable transport 
system in the city. For the years 2017 to 2019 the average trip length in 
Leicester and other similar-sized authorities was five miles, and 28% of all 
car trips were less than two miles.  As such, there is a significant opportunity 
to encourage people to walk, cycle and take the bus more often. However, 
modal change can only be achieved through improvements in our walking, 
cycling and bus provisions, to deliver comprehensive networks of services and 
infrastructure that are attractive to potential users.    22716.7 The Transport Strategy vision and ambitions are set out within the draft 
Leicester Transport Plan. The transport vision for Leicester is for a carbon 
neutral, growing, healthy, accessible and connected city, with clean air 
supporting a high quality of life and travel experience for people and a vibrant 
local economy.
16.8 This vision is supported by ambitions for Leicester to 2036:
•  100 % zero emission vehicles throughout city (including buses, trains, taxis, 
fleet and freight)
•  Many more people working regularly from home and more responsible use of 
cars for necessary trips only
•  A transformed bus network with free ‘Greenlines’ services and targeted 
discounts on Mainlines services, ‘best-fare’ digital integrated ticketing and 
improved local buses including ‘Flexilines’
•  Public transport (including bus and rail), Park and Ride, cycling or personal 
e-mobility will be the first choice for longer journeys for most people
•  Active transport, cycling and walking will be the first choice for shorter 
journeys for most people
•  A thriving, accessible low-car city centre that is easy to move around in and 
supports economic growth in the whole city
•  Healthier neighbourhoods, aiming for all local services to be available by 
walking or cycling within 15 minutes, with cleaner air and a safer local 
environment
•  A rush-hour free city, gradually managing traffic to reduce peak hour 
demands
16.9 The vision and ambitions illustrate how Leicester could change over the 
next 15 years. This vision cannot be achieved without help and co-operation 
and funding from partners including transport operators, developers and 
Government. Local residents and businesses also play a key role is supporting 
and delivering the vision.
16.10 The emerging Leicester Transport Plan will provide a renewed context 
for the submission stage of the local plan with a strong focus on promoting the 
use of public transport, walking & cycling, low emission and smarter travel. It 
builds on the council’s Connecting Leicester strategy and extends the recent 
Transforming Cities programme for sustainable transport infrastructure, as 
shown on Diagram 18 - The Spatial Transport Strategy.  This is achieved by 228enhancing city centre bus and rail transport hubs and walking, cycling and bus 
links between them. Developing strong bus, cycling and walking links on key 
radial corridors, park and ride enhancements including electrified buses, and 
smart travel initiatives including integrated digital ticketing
  
16.11 Encouraging a shift towards clean low emission vehicles alongside a 
change to more sustainable transport modes will support climate change, air 
quality, and health objectives.  
16.12 The Enhanced Partnership Bus Plan (2022-30) is a key element of the 
Leicester Transport Plan setting out an ambitious way forward for public 
transport.  The Enhanced Partnership Bus Plan will deliver a series of legally 
committed Enhanced Partnership Bus schemes in line with funding availability.   
This will bring about a transformative change in bus travel that is electric, 
frequent, reliable, easy to use, and good value. 
  
16.13 The emerging transport strategy also focuses on making better use 
of existing and developing new infrastructure to support sustainable travel 
between existing neighbourhoods, in the city centre, adjacent regeneration 
areas, and in the major developments that will extend the Leicester Urban Area.  
The local plan has a key role to play in supporting the rebalancing of transport 
modes and the promotion of clean low emission transport, in particular by 
ensuring that new development is well located and integrated with sustainable 
transport modes, that it promotes mode shift and low emission travel and 
contributes towards achieving efficient and effective sustainable transport 
networks, as well as being accessible for those that need to use cars.  
  
16.14 The council has consulted on a workplace parking levy aimed at tackling 
congestion alongside improving air quality and addressing climate change 
challenges. The council is considering the consultation responses and intends 
to determine next steps in the Autumn 2022.  
 
16.15 The council has also produced street design documentation including 
the street design and character areas evidence documents which requires that 
healthy connected innovative places are developed. These guides look at how 
the needs of residents are taken into account, including the requirements for 
the promoting of walking, cycling and other forms of sustainable transport to 
help Leicester meet its zero carbon objectives.  22916.16 The following sections outline the key sub-regional and local transport 
related plans and strategies that help set the context for the transport policies 
which follow. The Local Plan also reflects current national transport policy and 
relevant guidance included in the NPPF. 
  
Sub Regional Context  
  
Midlands Connect 
  
16.17 The regional transport strategy context has been established through the 
‘Midlands Connect Strategic Transport Plan for the Midlands - Fairer, greener, 
stronger’ published in April 2022. This identifies key priorities for regional level 
transport investment, to support a more productive, prosperous, sustainable 
economic development of Leicester and Leicestershire including:  
•  Midland Mainline Electrification and rail capacity improvements in the 
Leicester area including new rolling stock 
•  Coventry-Leicester-Nottingham new direct rail services and journey time 
improvements 
•  Birmingham – Leicester rail journey time improvements 
•  Significant upgrade to Leicester Railway Station facilities including pedestrian 
and cycle approaches to the station from the city centre 
•  Improving connectivity between Leicester and the North, feeding into HS2’s 
Eastern Leg to Leeds and beyond 
•  A46 improvements at Hobby Horse, Syston 
•  M1 improvements including Leicester Western Access and North 
Leicestershire extra capacity 
Transport for East Midlands  
  
16.18 Transport for East Midlands (TfEM) provides leadership on strategic 
transport issues in the East Midlands, agrees major investment priorities 
and provides collective input into the work of the Midlands Connect, the 
Department for Transport and its delivery bodies. TfEM and Midlands Connect 
are working together to promote eight key investment priorities for the East 
Midlands: 
•  Midland Main Line Electrification   
•  Nottingham-Leicester-Coventry Rail Connectivity 
•  HS2 to the East Midlands & Leeds 230•  A46 Growth Corridor & Newark 
•  A50/A500 Growth Corridor 
•  A5 Growth Corridor  
•  Improving Safety & Reliability on the A1  
•  Improving Connectivity across the EMDevCo (East Midlands Development 
Corporation) /East Midlands Freeport areas 
  
Local Transport Policy Context 
 
16.19 Integrated land use and transport policies are key to Leicester’s vision 
for the future. The Leicester Transport Plan supports the local plan by showing 
how sustainable transport infrastructure and other initiatives can help to 
manage and cater for growth pressures. 
16.20 The Local Plan can support the Leicester Transport Plan by ensuring that:
•  New developments include sustainable transport infrastructure and promote 
the use of it by new and existing residents
•  New developments are located in sustainable places such as close to 
transport interchanges. This is particularly important in the city centre. 
•  New developments, where relevant, are designed to encourage use of 
sustainable modes over cars, for example, by innovative design encouraging 
walking and cycling over cars for short journeys
•  The principle of fifteen-minute neighbourhoods is supported, with new 
developments encouraged to include accessible facilities for residents and 
employees 
 
Air Quality  
  
16.21 To address the issues of air pollution, the city council adopted an 
Air Quality Action Plan covering the period 2015 to 2026. This sets the 
strategic approach for improving air quality in Leicester. A series of priority 
interventions, focussed on more sustainable modes of transport such as 
walking, cycling, public transport and the transition to zero emission vehicles, 
are being delivered aimed at bringing levels of pollution below EU targets. 
It also identified the land use planning system as a key way of reducing air 
pollution in the city by requiring air quality considerations to be embedded 
into planning policy. Action 15 of the Air Quality Action Plan is to implement a 
land use planning guide for developers with the aim to ensure that any likely 231scheme impacts are appropriately mitigated, and future scheme occupants 
are able to make low emission choices. This is expected to take the form of a 
supplementary planning document.   
  
16.22 In 2020 Leicester became fully compliant with all EU air quality standards, 
partially due to the COVID-19 lockdown conditions.  The aim is to maintain this 
compliance, especially with the EU target of 40µg/m3 for nitrogen dioxide (NO2), 
and then progress towards new more stringent targets set by the World Health 
Organisation (WHO) in autumn 2021.   
  
16.23 In spring 2022 a new intermediate UK target for particulate matter of 
2.5 microns and below (PM2.5) was consulted upon.  A further Air Quality 
Strategy review will be held later in 2022 with the intention of publishing a new 
Government Clean Air Strategy in 2023.  More stringent air quality standards 
are expected through this Government strategy, possibly to bring the UK into 
line with the 2021 WHO target levels.  
  
16.24 The council’s emerging transport strategy will seek to progressively 
improve air quality below EU targets and towards the 2021 WHO targets. 
  
Buses 
  
16.25 A high quality and convenient public transport system serving the 
Leicester Urban Area is essential to promote sustainable transport choices for a 
growing population, encouraging modal shift away from private car use.   
 
16.26 A key element of the new Leicester Transport Plan will be the Leicester 
Enhanced Bus Partnership Plan, developed in association with bus operators 
and other stakeholders, which reflects the aims and objectives of the National 
Bus Strategy.  The bus strategy describes the measures needed to increase 
bus patronage in and around the city.   
 
16.27 These include a ‘Mainlines’ urban network of 25 co-ordinated route 
groups using 168 electric buses and a network of five ‘Greenlines’ electric bus 
routes, including express routes connecting to park and ride sites together 
with significant investment in outer and inner orbital bus services.    Additional 
measures will include fast, frequent bus corridors, as well as integrated 
contactless ticketing, improved interchanges, improved reliability, promotion 232and wider electronic information provision. The programme is being widely 
promoted under a distinctive network-wide ‘Leicester Buses’ brand.   
   
16.28 Buses are the main form of public transport within the Leicester Urban 
Area, with around 90% of routes commercially provided. Bus accessibility 
varies across the city. In general access by bus into the city centre is better 
than orbital services around Leicester which are partial and infrequent. The city 
centre is very accessible by bus during the daytime, albeit services are delayed 
by peak hour congestion, but less so during evenings and on Sundays.   
  
16.29 To encourage the use of public transport there is the need to break down 
the barriers for interchange and to make journeys easier and quicker, through 
use of co-ordinated smart ticketing and quality legible travel information. With 
significant in growth travel demand to non-central locations for work, education 
and health, there is also a need to improve links between all rail and bus 
transport hubs to improve cross city movements and there is also a need also 
support to provide a significant uplift in orbital travel bus service provision. 
  
16.30 Work has now been completed on the rebuild of St. Margaret’s Bus 
Station that has created a modern, quality city centre bus interchange. It 
includes improvements to adjacent streets to provide integrated walking and 
cycling facilities and taxi ranks. Funding was secured through the Government’s 
Getting Building Fund.  This follows the refurbishment of Haymarket Bus Station 
in 2016.     
 
16.31 The council has been successful in securing £70m from the Government 
to deliver a Transforming Cities Fund (TCF) programme in reshaping public, 
shared and active transport infrastructure in Leicester, which is expected to be 
completed by 2024/25. 
The TCF programme seeks to:  
• Transform public transport provision through investment in bus priority 
measures and complementary walking and cycling improvements on key 
radial corridors serving new development to the northwest and southwest of 
the city
•  Improve and better connect city centre transport interchanges
• Kick start investment in electric buses within the city 
 23316.32 The Bus Services Act (2017) provides local authorities with opportunities 
to consider how bus services operate to best effect in their area. An Enhanced 
Partnership Scheme between the Council and the bus operators has been 
agreed which by 2025 will radically transform Leicester’s Bus Services (as 
detailed within the Enhanced Bus Partnership Plan). This will also maximise 
the benefits that will accrue from the proposed transport investment from the 
Transforming Cities Fund.  
 
16.33 The successful ZEBRA funding bid will invest a further £47m in electric 
buses in the city by 2024, leading to a third (130) of the overall fleet electric 
used by a half of bus users.   
  
16.34 The Enhanced Partnership Plan sets out a range of proposed investment 
and actions up to 2030 designed to increase patronage by 40%, user 
satisfaction to 95% and the shift the whole network to sustainable electric 
operation. This will be subject to bringing in investment of around £200m from 
a range of private and public sources, together with ongoing additional subsidy 
of around £4m pa. 
   
16.35 The city council will support development proposals that provide 
convenient walking links to bus routes and support the provision of new bus 
infrastructure serving a development such as priority bus measures and 
shelters. In some cases, support for new or enhanced services may be required 
to help encourage bus use, particularly in major new developments.  234Diagram 18:  The Spatial Transport Strategy 
A50A6
A607A5630B. Leys Ln
M1
M69A46
Great Central WayAylestone Rd
Saﬀron LnH
H
PR
PRPR
LubbesthorpeGlen/f_ieldBroadnook
Ashton
GreenHallam
Fields
Waterside
Freemen’sCity
Centre
Fosse
ParkBELGRAVE
NEW PARKS
WESTCOTES
STONEYGATE
AYLESTONEAnstey
BlabySt. Margaret’s
Bus StationBeaumont
Leys
Urban Growth Areas (underway/planned)
Regeneration Areas (housing/commercial)
Major Retail/Leisure Expansion
Existing out of centre employment areas 
Connecting Leicester Neighbourhoods
TCF Cycle/Walking Corridors
Bus Corridors that include TCF measures
10 minutes cycle time (155,000+ people)PR
H
30 minute bus travel time (500,000+ people)
City Centre Electric Bus
Park and Ride
Leicester Royal In/f_irmary
Leicester City FC
Leicester RUFC
Leicester University
De Montfort University12
31. Pioneer Park
2. Space Park
3. Abbey Meadows235Walking & Cycling  
  
16.36 Encouraging walking and cycling through new infrastructure and 
behavioural change initiatives play a key role in delivering modal shift over 
shorter journeys, helping to reduce vehicle emissions and contributing towards 
healthier lifestyles. Well-designed improvements also contribute to place 
making as well as helping people to make sustainable lifestyle choices by 
creating new and attractive routes and interconnecting spaces.  
  
Cycling 
  
16.37 Cycling (including e-bikes) improves general accessibility to sites that 
do not have a frequent bus service and bike share also provides an alternative 
form of public transport that may be quicker than travelling by car and with 
active travel, health & air quality benefits.   
  
16.38 The council is developing a new Cycle City Action Plan ‘2023-2030’ which 
will set out the current strategy for delivering cycling improvements developed 
with stakeholder support and following public consultations.  
  
16.39 The new Action Plan will:
•  Develop a city-wide network of high-quality routes that are continuous, well-
signed, easy to follow and safe including segregated routes along main roads, 
low traffic neighbourhoods and off-road routes
•  Expansion of public bike share as an active travel citywide public transport 
option for all communities, neighbourhoods, and key developments 
•  Cycle parking provision and new routes for all key developments, retail, 
employment, education, sport, leisure, health sites and public transport hubs  
•  Extensive offers of cycle training for children & adults of all abilities and skills, 
coaching and mechanic training for coaches, ride leaders and instructors  
•  Year-round promotions of everyday cycling for all neighbourhoods and 
communities including high profile mainstream festivals & events, marketing 
and communications 
•  Ongoing engagement programmes for stakeholders, business, community 
groups & advocates supporting cycling and for new, returning and potential 
cyclists
  23616.40 The council’s ongoing Connecting Leicester programme has seen 
substantial investment in public and sustainable transport amounting to 
over £100m. This has included extensive high-quality cycling and walking 
infrastructure focussed in and around the city centre and a dramatic 
improvement in the public realm through revitalised streets and new public 
squares and spaces. The Connecting Leicester programme investment from 
2011 within the city centre has delivered a 46% increase in cycling between 
2011 to 2019.   
16.41 However, across the network there remain:
•  Inconsistent, discontinuous and indirect cycling routes  
•  Insufficient cycling links connecting neighbourhoods and employment sites 
outside the city centre 
•  Inadequate secure cycle parking provision and a lack of bike share at key 
workplaces, transport hubs and other strategic locations
  
16.42 The council’s Transforming Cities programme is implementing new 
high quality segregated cycleways on key commuter radial routes.  This also 
includes the delivery of a comprehensive bike share scheme initially for the city 
centre area through ‘Santander Cycle Leicester’. The bike share scheme was 
launched in 2021 and will improve connectivity within the city centre, offering 
bus, car and rail users new opportunities to extend or complete their trips 
by cycle. Over 500 electric bikes will be available to hire from more than 50 
locations across the city now partly delivered.  
  
16.43 The city council will support development proposals which adhere to 
the Leicester Street Design Guide and Government Local Transport Note 1/20, 
Inclusive Mobility (2022) and Manual for Streets Guidelines to achieve the 
targets of the Governments “Gear Change” strategy.  
  
Walking 
  
16.44 Walking is an important method of getting around, as well as an element 
of most other journeys e.g. walking to/from bus stops or car parks. Encouraging 
walking as an alternative to car use contributes to healthy lifestyles, helping to 
prevent obesity as well as supporting improved air quality. 
  23716.45 The council’s successful Connecting Leicester streets and spaces 
programme has delivered major cycling and walking and public realm 
improvements in the city centre over the past ten years.  Latest plans, as part 
of the Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan (LCWIP) links are being 
made to adjacent neighbourhoods further cycling and walking improvements 
connecting within and to the city centre, including junction priority and road 
space allocation, and where appropriate and expanding the same connectivity 
principles to neighbourhoods in accordance with the council’s ambition for 
15-minute neighbourhoods.  In the first phase to 2025, this will be funded in 
the north and west of the city through TCF funds.  Future phases will see this 
extend across the city area. 
  
16.46 An overarching objective of this programme will be to ensure 
improvements contribute fully to healthy living objectives and also take into 
account the full range of accessibility considerations for all groups which 
includes those with hidden disabilities and neuro-diverse conditions. This will 
be considered through use of the Leicester Street Design Guide (see paragraph 
16.49) including application of the Healthy Streets Checklist for new schemes. 
  
16.47 The Transforming Cities Programme is delivering new and improved 
walking routes for commuters, alongside behavioural change initiatives through 
the DfT’s Capability Fund.  E.g. The provision of wider footways and/or formal 
crossing facilities, where an increase in pedestrian movements are expected.  
The council is also delivering a school run parking programme to address traffic 
issues around schools and is committed to reducing car travel and increasing 
walking and cycling through new infrastructure and behaviour change 
initiatives such as park and stride. 
  
16.48 Local Plan policies support the needs of everyone in the community 
including the needs of people with disabilities and the elderly.  
   
Street Design Guide 
  
16.49 The council has published a Street Design Guide to guide the 
improvement and provision of new road space in the city. This sets out clear 
guidance on how cycling, walking and bus priority can be achieved on relevant 
streets and also considers accessibility for all in new street design. The Design 
Guide supports the design of major new developments to ensure a balanced 238hierarchy of streets and spaces. (Policy DQP01 sets on design principles for 
‘Movement and Connections’ of new development proposals. The council’s new 
Street Design Guide will provide further detailed design advice). 
https://www.leicester.gov.uk/your-council/city-mayor-peter-soulsby/key-
strategy-documents/
Peacock Lane/New Street and the Cathedral.
Rail 
  
16.50 Rail is often the preferred mode of travel over longer distances as it 
can offer a convenient, quick, reliable, and comfortable option. Rail usage 
at Leicester had grown by 4.8m (2012) to 5.3m (2019/20).  Making sure that 
there is capacity for continued growth in travel by rail for both local and longer 
distances remain a challenge.   
  
16.51 The city and county councils have developed the Leicester and 
Leicestershire Rail Strategy 2017 which provides a comprehensive analysis of 
the potential for improved rail services serving the area and notes the need for 239better integration and improvement at Leicester Railway Station. This strategy 
has been used effectively to influence the rail improvement projects included 
in the Midlands Connect Strategy. In short, these are intended to seek further 
improvement to north-south rail connections on the Midland Mainline, East-
West connections to Coventry, Birmingham, and Nottingham.   Proposals for 
improvement of the Leicester to Coventry line, including through-trains at 
Nuneaton, provide the potential to consider future parkway facilities serving the 
city. This will need to be considered as part of delivery of the wider Strategic 
Growth Plan.  Plans to reopen the Ivanhoe Railway Line from Burton-on-Trent 
to Leicester have been progressed as the project has been invited by the 
Government to submit an outline business case for funding.  
  
16.52 Leicester station is a key transport hub for the city which will play a 
much greater role in contributing to the growth and prosperity of the city in the 
future. Currently Leicester Rail Station is poor quality compared with others 
of a similar size especially in terms of transport integration (with bus/cycle/
taxi/pedestrians) and acting as gateway to the city centre.  It has become 
clear that the station will require substantial enhancement to serve this growth 
and to significantly improve interchange.  The council has been successful in 
securing £22m through the Government’s Levelling Up Fund to deliver the first 
phase of the Leicester Railway Station project.  This includes work to provide 
a new entrance and public square and repurposing of the ‘porte cochere’ for 
commercial uses.  However, later phases remain unfunded.   
  
16.53 The council’s vision and proposals for Leicester Rail Station set out 
in the Central Development Area (CDA) chapter of this plan, is for a major 
transformation scheme, not only for the rail station itself, but also land around 
it. This will provide the key catalyst to improve the station as an effective and 
attractive regional transport interchange. It will also help to address the severe 
shortage of high-quality office space in the city, which will have a substantial 
impact on the potential productivity gains that could be derived from inward 
investment.  
  
Park and Ride 
  
16.54 Park and ride is aimed at longer distance car commuters and visitors 
travelling to Leicester City centre from areas without direct rail or long-distance 
bus connectivity. By providing frequent and reliable park and ride services we 240can significantly reduce car traffic on the main arterial roads and associated air 
pollution along these built-up corridors. 
  
16.55 The three existing sites are all located on the north and west edge of 
the conurbation, close to the outer ring road and motorway network. Gaps in 
provision in the short term, include provision for those accessing Leicester via 
the A50 to the north-west. A new park and ride site is being delivered with TCF 
funds at Beaumont Leys centre. The Transforming Cities Fund programme has 
converted all park & ride bus services to electric vehicles, which will deliver 
cleaner transport with improved frequency.      
  
16.56 In the longer-term new sites are likely to be required serving the south 
and east of the city where major new growth is expected post 2031, as outlined 
in the Strategic Growth Plan.  The Enhanced Bus Partnership Bus Plan identifies 
an expansion of park and ride facilities as a possible option to support vehicles 
driving further afield.  Park and ride provision to the east, north-east and north-
west of the urban area is lacking, and the Racecourse (A6 London Road / A563 
Outer Ring Road) is proposed to complete the north, south, east and west park 
and ride coverage across the urban area.  In addition, it is proposed to join up 
the existing park and ride services to give north-south connectivity. It will also 
be expected that all new park and rides provide adequate provision to charge 
electric vehicles to ensure that the sites promote the use sustainable transport 
modes.  
  
Roads 
  
16.57 The city enjoys excellent road access to the rest of the region and the UK, 
via the M1 and M69 motorways and the A46 that are part of the UK’s Strategic 
Road Network. In terms of city transportation there is congestion on roads 
during peak hours and this is set to become worse as the city grows. Modal 
shift to sustainable transport options together with localised improvements 
to support resilience of the main radial and orbital routes, is therefore key 
to managing travel growth in the city. Carefully targeted road and junction 
improvements, including smarter signalling and bus prioritisation, can assist in 
relieving congestion hot spots, supporting bus travel and improving air quality 
in a locality.  
  24116.58 Above all, the design of new and improved roads should put safety first 
and this will be a key local plan requirement, alongside promotion of sustainable 
forms of transport on city highways. 
   
16.59 Strategically, major infrastructure improvements have been identified 
within the Midlands Connect Strategy, which includes the A46 improvements 
in the Syston area and M1 improvements to Leicester Western Access to 
help ease congestion and support future growth.  The Strategic Growth Plan 
proposes development to the South and East of Leicester.  A new link to the 
south and east of Leicester had been proposed that would connect the M1 
to the south-west and A46 to the north-east of Leicester. This proposed 
extensive transport infrastructure scheme was identified to facilitate future 
jobs and housing. At this stage there is no commitment to this route and the 
focus for improvement remains the M1 and A46 to the west and north of the 
city. Future review will be required on the new link including any connecting 
infrastructure into city radial transport corridors.
 
16.60 The Leicester and Leicestershire Strategic Growth Partnership are 
undertaking a Strategic Transport Assessment to understand the long-term 
transport implications of significant growth to 2051.  The Strategic Transport 
Assessment will test both existing SGP spatial distribution strategy as well as 
alternative growth distribution strategies.  The impact of the proposed growth 
is yet to be realised but the relevant outputs relating to the city will need to be 
closely aligned with the emerging transport work and timeframes within this 
local plan. Site specific transport assessments of development sites may be 
required at a planning application stage which network surrounding the sites is 
investigated together with an analysis of opportunities to maximise sustainable 
transport solutions.  
  
16.61 To support this plan, the council has undertaken a transport assessment 
of the impacts of the proposed development strategy over the plan period.  The 
assessment has been based on the outputs of the Leicester and Leicestershire 
Pan Regional Transport Model (PRTM).   The council has been working closely 
with Leicestershire County Council Local Highway Authority and National 
Highways to understand the impacts. The council is using this evidence to 
determine an appropriate mitigation strategy with a focus on sustainable 
transport interventions. The infrastructure required is presented in Appendix 4. 
 24216.62 However, further work is required to understand the cross-boundary 
impacts, particularly considering adjacent local authorities proposed 
development growth.  The council will continue to work with Leicestershire 
County Council, National Highways and neighbouring partner local authorities, 
where appropriate, to explore and enhance the current transport evidence base 
to provide additional information around specific mitigation requirements.
 
Street Design and Creating Healthy Neighbourhoods  
 
16.63 Building on the principles set out the ‘design quality places’ chapter, and 
the council’s street design guide, it will be expected that all new proposals help 
meet the council’s goal to create healthy neighbourhoods. A well-designed and 
connected network gives people the maximum choice in how to make their 
journeys. This includes by rail, other public transport, walking, and cycling.  
Within Leicester, all modes of transport are expected to be positively designed 
into the built form. Streets should be well-designed to create attractive public 
spaces with character, through their layout and landscape.  
16.64 A clear layout and hierarchy of streets and other routes will be required 
which will help people to find their way around so that journeys are easy to 
make. Priority should be given to pedestrian and cycle movements which means 
creating routes that are safe, direct, convenient and accessible for people of 
all abilities. Public rights of way will be required to be protected, enhanced 
and well-linked into the wider network of pedestrian and cycle routes. Within 
all areas of the city, development should be designed so that residentials and 
visitors should not need to rely on the car for journeys, including getting to 
workplaces, shops, schools and other facilities.  
Freight Movement 
16.65 Leicester’s Transport Plan’s local policies on freight reflect the policies 
in the Future of Freight Plan published by the Government in June 2022. 
The proposed National Freight Network may affect roads such as the A47 in 
Leicester, and any implications of this will be considered in due course. 
16.66 The movement of transport and goods is essential for the economy. A 
large number of freight movements in Leicester are undertaken by road, which 
can have significant impacts in terms of noise, congestion and air pollution, as 243well as on the quality of life for communities. Goods vehicles manoeuvring and 
loading and unloading, also add to pollution and may cause congestion and 
danger to pedestrians and other road users. 
16.67 Although long distance heavy freight is relatively well managed in 
Leicester and there are relatively few HGVs passing through the city the council 
works with the Leicester Freight Quality Partnership, Leicestershire County 
Council and Midlands Connect to consider and solve any adverse impacts. The 
Local Plan is also mindful of ensuring that HGVs use appropriate routing on 
the highway network within the city and is aware of how HGV movements may 
have changed from the use of satellite navigation systems. The use of specific 
freight signage will be investigated by the council minimise inappropriate 
routing through residential areas.  There are significant benefits to be gained 
with a large-scale decarbonisation programme for freight and deliveries, 
created and implemented in partnership with operators, users and the other 
transport authorities. 
 
16.68 However, there are much greater numbers of smaller delivery vehicles 
in residential areas because of the increase in internet shopping, and action 
is needed to manage the impacts of these vehicles. Recognising these more 
recent issues, the council has commissioned a freight study for Leicester and 
the results of this study will help to inform future policy. In the meantime, the 
council will work with existing programmes including: 
•  Encouraging a transfer to cycle couriers in the city centre and 
neighbourhoods where possible
•  Using smart technology to support initiatives on logistics including last mile 
delivery options
•  Promotion of zero emission vehicles where possible, noting that electric 
battery propulsion may not be suitable for long distance freight vehicles 
               
16.69 The contribution made by rail and water will always be very limited 
in Leicester. No suitable sites exist within Leicester for strategic rail 
freight sites which are often 50 hectares or larger (units all over 9,000m2). 
However, pressure remains within the wider Leicester area for large scale 
B8 (distribution) which will generate significant freight movements within 
Leicester.  244Smart Transport 
  
16.70 Leicester, like many other urban areas is facing the challenge of how we 
can do more to become a healthier, more liveable, sustainable and resilient city. 
New ideas and new technologies that look beyond traditional, infrastructure-
heavy approaches to transport are expected during the plan period. These 
provide which will develop innovative ways to improve mobility and make 
journeys, greener, safer and accessible to all.  
  
16.71 The use of smarter traffic signals to manage traffic congestion and air 
pollution will continue to be part of the council’s programme of improvements in 
the near term.  
  
16.72 The  council continues to strongly support the roll out of electric vehicles 
to bring about cleaner travel and healthier outcomes for the city. It is preparing 
an EV Strategy that will guide the roll out of charging infrastructure, particularly 
that provided by the council as well as taking opportunities to require charging 
infrastructure in new development. The council would also expect to see 
opportunities for the provision of ‘e’ cycling infrastructure including the 
provision of charging facilities. 
16.73 Over the plan period the council expects smart technologies such as 
Smart Highways, Mobility as a Service (MaaS), driverless vehicles, micro 
mobility such as e-bikes and smart electric charging, to become a more 
common solution to both managing Leicester’s highways and promoting 
sustainable transport. Developments in demand responsive services and 
smart ticketing for bus travel will also be important. The latter will allow 
more seamless travel between bus operators in the city and also to establish 
common ticketing platforms across the region, likely to be led by Midlands 
Connect. 
  
16.74 A key opportunity for implementing smart transport technology will 
be within the Central Development Area (CDA). This is due to the continued 
increase in people both living and working in the CDA and the short nature of 
most of their journeys. This is expected to lead to less ownership and usage of 
cars in the future.245Policy T01. Sustainable Transport Network 
The council will continue to work closely with partners, to deliver shared plans 
that proactively support development of a sustainable transport network for the 
city, as indicated in the Leicester Transport Plan. 
Development will be supported in suitable locations, where it promotes 
sustainable transport by ensuring: 
a) Walking, cycling, bus and rail are prioritised, and development is fully 
integrated with relevant networks and new infrastructure being developed 
for these transport modes
b) Transport interchanges and hubs are easily accessible to new residents and 
employees
c) Developments are designed to encourage walking, cycling and public 
transport use, and to discourage unnecessary car use
d) Micromobility options, car, e-bike and bike sharing arrangements will be 
encouraged
e) Proactive measures are put in place, to help address climate change and 
deliver improved air quality, through low emission transport solutions
f) The safety of all highway users, is a primary consideration 
g) The design of new highway infrastructure, fully takes into account 
accessibility for all potential users, including those with limited mobility and 
the elderly
h) Opportunities to support healthy living are promoted
i) The streetscape and public realm design, creates high quality places
j) Opportunities for transport technologies, that support sustainable transport 
objectives are promoted
16.75 There will also be a continued joint investment in electronic digital 
ticketing and real time information systems, across the whole bus network. This 
will provide a wide choice of integrated contactless payment methods, together 
with London-style best fare capping. Accurate, reliable, real-time information to 
every bus stop and interchange for all buses. 
  
16.76 The introduction of bike share in the city centre is an important new 
means to get about in this area. Opportunities for sustainable car clubs such 
as ‘e’ car clubs should be investigated, in particular where development has 
limited car parking, or where car ownership is being actively discouraged, such 
as student housing and Private Rented Sector (PRS) housing. A supplementary 246planning document on ‘parking standards’ will set out the requirements for 
electric charging points to be provided in all uses to support ‘e’ car clubs.  
Policy T02. Climate Change and Air Quality   
By the end of the plan period, it will be expected that implementation of the 
council’s transport plans and policies will: 
a) Deliver against the council’s climate change targets and commitments (to 
be established, following the climate emergency consultation) 
b) Ensure air quality in Leicester will progressively improve, below UK nitrogen 
dioxide targets towards the 2021 WHO targets, and delivers against 
emerging fine particle PM2.5 commitments. Major development proposals 
will be expected to take account of future supplementary planning 
document on air quality
This will be achieved by: 
c) Prioritising sustainable modes of transport, including cycling, walking and 
public transport
d) Increasing the uptake of low emission vehicles, by requiring new 
development to make provision for zero emission vehicle
e) Requiring all major developments located close or within the Air Quality 
Management Areas (AQMA), through an air quality impact assessment:
•  To demonstrate that there is not an unacceptably detrimental effect on air 
quality and   
•  Meet the requirements of the council’s Air Quality Action Plan and any 
future supplementary planning guidance
Policy T03. Accessibility and Development  
 
New development will be permitted, where it takes into account the need for 
accessibility by all potential users and in particular how it can support delivery 
of the council’s sustainable transport objectives. This will be achieved by 
ensuring that:
a) People are able to make responsible transport choices, by having suitable 
and affordable alternative options to the car easily available; and 
b) By having local services within 15 minutes by walking or cycling
  247Pedestrians and People with Limited Mobility 
c) The needs of pedestrians, the elderly, people with disabilities and those 
with limited mobility, have been properly considered and incorporated in 
any scheme design and layout
d)  All new and improved routes are high quality, convenient, safe and well 
connected with the existing routes and streets 
e) Support is provided for active travel behaviour initiatives, as appropriate
f)  Support developments that provide a ’15-minute neighbourhood’, aiming 
for all local services to be available by walking or cycling within 15 minutes, 
with cleaner air and a safer local environment
Cycling 
g) All new and improved routes are high quality, convenient, safe and well 
connected with the existing/proposed cycle route network and streets
h) Adequate cycle parking is provided, including secure cycling parking and 
bike share infrastructure as appropriate
i) New or improved cycle routes are designed to avoid conflict with 
pedestrians, motorists and other road users
Buses
j) New bus routes/priority measures and connections with the existing 
bus network, are provided and are well integrated into new development 
schemes as appropriate and ensuring that the Leicester Enhanced Bus 
Partnership Plan is taken into account
k) New development is designed and located, so that occupiers are within 
close walking distance (400m) to existing or proposed frequent bus
l) Support is provided for active travel behaviour initiatives as appropriate 
m) Bus hubs are well integrated, with walking and cycling networks and 
appropriate cycle parking provision is made
Rail 
n) Development in the Rail Station area is well connected by walking, cycling, 
and bus infrastructure, including appropriate secure cycle parking provision
o) Development does not prejudice the implementation of future rail 
infrastructure, at Knighton Junction, Syston Junction and Wigston Junction248Policy T04. Park and Ride 
  
Proposals for new Park and Ride sites and extensions to existing Park and Rides 
will be supported where they satisfy other relevant policies in the Local Plan. 
New development should where relevant, support and provide for integration 
with existing and proposed park and ride sites and routes. 
Policy T05. Freight   
To meet the needs of commercial vehicles, including HGVs and Vans are met 
and that adequate provision can be provided for the freight need of Leicester, 
the following will be required:  
a) Ensuring that non-residential development provides parking spaces, loading 
and unloading facilities and manoeuvring space within the site, for all 
necessary commercial vehicles 
b) Encouraging the efficient and sustainable movement of freight, including 
last mile opportunities and by alternative methods, beyond traditional road-
based transport where possible  
c) Opportunities to maximise the use of existing waterways within Leicester, 
through the provision of water taxis and water freight connection should be 
explored where feasible, by working with the canals and rivers trust. 
d) Providing opportunities for sustainable freight movement where possible 
on rail, by working with Network Rail and other agencies in considering 
potential low-key freight uses249Policy T06. Highways Infrastructure 
  
The council will require the transport impact of development to be mitigated, 
through the following provisions and highways infrastructure list, as identified 
in the Infrastructure List in Appendix 4.
a) The prioritisation of sustainable transport infrastructure supporting relevant 
walking, cycling, bus and rail improvement
b) Improvement of highways infrastructure, to deliver safe and efficient 
schemes, including road and junction improvements and related traffic 
management measures; delivery of relevant safety schemes and 20mph 
zones; and urban traffic management systems and smart signalisation 
where appropriate  
c) Appropriate parking provision as set out in the council’s standards
d) Travel plans including behaviour management provisions   
Former Great Central Railway Station and public realm improvements, Great 
Central Street.250Parking 
  
16.77 Travel by car remains a reality for now and is an important means for 
people to get to work, shop and enjoy leisure and cultural facilities. Parking 
provision is important to support these activities and the local economy more 
generally. However, we need to rebalance people’s travel behaviour where 
possible, reducing the amount people travel by car and by prioritising travel by 
more sustainable alternatives. The location, amount, quality and type of parking 
provision, can influence travel behaviour and it is important that we carefully 
manage the provision of new parking, including that associated with new 
development. It will also be expected that developers refer to Leicester’s Street 
Design Guide when considering the design of new parking arrangements.  
  
16.78 The council is investigating the potential for a Workplace Parking Levy in 
Leicester as part of a comprehensive parking strategy for public, private and 
on-street car parking.  The scheme, if implemented, would charge organisations 
which are providing parking spaces for employees, as a means of funding local 
sustainable transport improvements, whilst helping to manage congestion and 
improve air quality/address climate change challenges. 
  
Aims and objectives 
  
•  To balance the need for car parking, with the provision of sustainable 
transport options, to help manage congestion, tackle our climate change 
challenges and improve air quality 
•  To provide good quality, well located parking in the city to meet people’s 
needs where they have to travel by car
•  To ensure appropriate parking provision is made for sustainable modes of 
transport, including cycling, low emission vehicles and car clubs
•  To support the efficient use of available parking spaces and in doing so, 
encourage the redevelopment of poorly located poor-quality car parks, where 
they are no longer required
•  To support the implementation of the council’s wider parking strategies
•  To encourage the use of Park and Ride options, rather than city centre car 
parking for longer journeys251Policy T07 Car Parking  
a) All new developments, including changes of use, which generate a demand 
for car parking, will be required to make provision to meet such demand, 
(either on site or offsite) including for those with disabilities, appropriate 
to the scale and nature of the development, having regard to road safety 
considerations and any parking standards set out in supplementary 
documents, local and national guidance.  
b) Car parking should be considered as an integral part of the overall design 
of the scheme.  Development proposals should consider the following key 
principles in the design, to address car parking issues: 
•  Ensure car parking is usable, safe and secure
•  Avoid car parking dominating the street-scene
•  Use discreet and innovative solutions, to deliver a suitable mix of car 
parking
•  Ensure it does not impede cycling infrastructure
c) For residential developments:  
•  Meet any defined parking standards, as set out in guidance, unless there 
is a strong reason that this cannot be met
•  Designated parking locations must be convenient for residents
•  Communal parking areas must be safe and attractive, use appropriate 
materials, lighting and landscaping features and include sufficient levels 
of overlooking, be small enough to retain a courtyard feel, and incorporate 
convenient pedestrian linkages to properties
•  Streets should be wide enough to accommodate the likely levels and 
positions of on-street parking
•  Dwellings with on-plot parking should provide an external charging 
point, sufficient to enable over-night charging for electric vehicles. For 
developments with communal parking areas, such as apartments, a 
proportion of the un-allocated parking spaces should have the capacity to 
easily retrofit a recharge point for communal use
•  Car free housing developments will be positively considered in suitable 
locations, such as the city centre and close to transport interchanges
d) All development proposals should ensure that emergency and refuse 
vehicles are not impeded by car parking  252e) Within commercial, industrial and non-residential developments, adequate 
provision should be made for parking, servicing and loading, without 
having an impact on the operational effectiveness of development and safe 
movement of people, vehicles and goods. Car parking spaces should also 
have the capacity to easily retrofit a recharge point for communal use253
17. Future Minerals and 
Waste Needs  254Evidence Base  
17.1 There are several background studies that will underpin policies in this plan. 
The main technical studies for this chapter are published on our website and 
will be updated as and when new studies are undertaken and completed.    
• Leicester and Leicestershire Waste Development Framework Core Strategy 
and Development Management Policy Document (2010) 
• Waste Needs Assessment (2021)
Background   
17.2 As a unitary authority, Leicester is responsible for minerals and waste 
planning within its administrative boundary. However, it is important to 
coordinate and work with all relevant organisations to ensure that the Local 
Plan addresses waste planning issues which cross administrative boundaries 
given the interdependencies that exist in relation to waste recycling. For 
example, people who live outside the city’s administrative boundary use waste 
facilities within the city and vice versa.   
17.3 The city council will be producing a separate Waste and Minerals Local Plan 
and have commissioned work to determine future waste and mineral needs.    
Waste  
17.4 The city council has undertaken a Waste Needs Assessment 2021 (WNA), 
which provides an up-to-date picture of the amount of waste currently 
managed in Leicester, the anticipated amount of waste managed by 2036, 
and the city’s waste management capacity. The WNA shows that total waste 
arisings in Leicester are forecast to increase from a current level of 0.75 million 
tonnes per annum to just over 1 million tonnes per annum by 2036.     
17.5 The WNA also informs that, in its existing waste management facilities, 
Leicester has more than sufficient capacity for the processing of waste in 
preparation for reuse and recycling, and inert recycling for the period up to 
2036. However, dependent on the scale of individual facilities and processes 
proposed, there is an identified potential for further facilities such as small-255scale composting, other treatment and energy recovery, and soil treatment to 
be provided within Leicester city.    
17.6 Leicester City Council processes nearly all of its municipal waste at the 
Bursom Recycling Centre, at the Wanlip Anaerobic Digester or other private 
facilities. As stated above, the WNA shows that the amount of waste produced 
in Leicester is expected to rise in line with the future growth of the city. 
Therefore, recycling rates will need to continue to rise, to ensure that this 
additional waste is processed through the most sustainable locations and 
methods. It is acknowledged however, that due to Leicester being a constrained 
urban authority, limited opportunities exist within the city administrative 
boundary to provide final waste disposal facilities such as landfill. It is therefore 
accepted the city will continue to be reliant on facilities in other areas of the 
region and country.    
17.7 Future municipal waste needs for Leicester will be determined following 
further work which will lead to a specific waste plan but because the existing 
waste contract with Biffa Leicester ends in 2028 other solutions for disposal of 
Leicester’s municipal waste may need to be considered before the adoption of 
the waste plan.    
17.8 There are also other waste types, notably commercial and industrial waste, 
construction, demolition, and excavation waste. The movements of which are 
much more difficult to assess, not least because demolition waste materials are 
often recycled on site at major redevelopments.    
Minerals   
17.9 Planning for minerals extraction is of great importance at a national 
level because aggregates are required for construction and the provision of 
infrastructure. Leicester City Council has not previously produced its own 
minerals planning policies as no known currently workable mineral deposits 
exist in the city. However, the role of the city as a unitary authority is to properly 
consider minerals policy for Leicester.    
17.10 Historically, sites within Leicester have generally produced clay for 
the brickmaking industry, sand, and gravel. However, there has not been 
any extraction of these materials for many years and there has been little 256interest expressed by the industry in extracting, particularly since most of the 
administrative area of Leicester is covered by urban development or protected 
green space.    
Waste and Mineral requirements   
17.11 Leicester City Council will continue to meet the existing requirements 
as defined by the adopted Waste Development Framework (WDF) until a 
replacement Waste Local Plan can be adopted. This will mean that Leicester 
City Council will provide a level of waste management capacity that is 
sufficient to accommodate the quantity of the region’s waste. To this end, the 
WDF will promote a spread of new facilities across the WDF area, including 
Leicestershire, to reach regional targets, and in respect of municipal waste the 
targets set in the Leicestershire Municipal Waste Management Strategy, for 
increased reuse and recovery to be met and for the treatment of waste.    
17.12 With a view to working towards sustainable development it is important to 
ensure that all new waste management development is designed to minimise 
its impact on the environment. Central principles of sustainable development 
are the need to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases as well as other forms 
of pollution, reduce levels of energy and water consumption, to minimise 
waste and to reuse or recycle materials. It is also important that sites for waste 
management are carefully designed and operated, given the importance of 
protecting the best of the county’s natural resources and heritage, and the 
need to protect local communities from traffic, noise, dust and other problems 
which are often associated with such development.    
17.13 Hydraulic fracturing, or fracking as it is more commonly referred to, is the 
process of drilling down into the earth before a high-pressure water mixture is 
directed at the rock to release the gas inside. Whilst current government policy 
is to support fracking, there are no licenses in the city nor are there any known 
areas where it could take place.257Policy FMWN01. New Waste and Existing Waste Uses  
Applications for new, and extensions to existing facilities, will be assessed 
against the following criteria:   
a) There is a proven local market or quantitative need for a facility to process 
an identified waste stream(s) 
b) It will use a technology or combination of technologies, which will help 
increase the city’s recycling and recovery rates 
c) The site can easily be accessed by either the strategic road network or 
other forms of transport such as rail (T01) 
d) The local area is able to accommodate the proposed waste use, or where 
the proposal is in an area of other waste uses, the combination of these 
uses will not lead to significant harm 
e) Any impacts on the natural and historic environment, and residential 
amenity can be adequately mitigated in line with policies regarding these 
matters within this plan (HE01, DQP06) 
f) The site will be adequately screened to minimise any visual impact (DQP01) 
g) Where waste needs to be ‘stacked’ or ‘bundled,’ these shall be no higher 
than the height of any site screening, or the local prevailing building heights, 
whichever is smaller 
h) Waste processing which has the potential to produce significant odours and 
noise (following mitigation), will only be acceptable where it is carried out in 
a sealed structure 
i) New waste development should be on brownfield land where possible 
Where the use is temporary, a strategy will be required defining what steps will 
be taken once the use has ceased, to either:   
j) Allow the site to be redeveloped or regenerated 
k) Return the site to a similar condition to what the site was like before the use 
commenced258Policy FMWN02. End of Life Vehicle Facilities   
New, or extensions to existing, end of life vehicle processing facilities will be 
approved where:   
a) There is a proven need for the facility 
b) It is located in an area which will not impact residential amenity, or in the 
case of extensions, if any impact to residential amenity can be satisfactorily 
mitigated (DQP06) 
c) Any dismantling and depollution of vehicles is carried out in a sealed unit to 
ensure the  protection of the local and wider environment 
Also, the following details will be needed:   
d) How recovered materials will be stored including all waste liquids, removed 
parts for re-sale and car shells 
e) A scaled plan showing arrangements for capture of waste liquids 
f) A statement about how hazardous waste materials including but not limited 
to brake pads, brake fluid, oil, lead balance weights, catalytic convertors 
and batteries will be disposed of 
g) The total of waste throughput per annum
Policy FMWN03. Managing Leicester’s Minerals Resources   
The city council will contribute to the region’s supply needs, to ensure an 
adequate and steady supply of minerals, in a way that supports Leicester’s 
social, environmental and economic objectives.  This will be achieved by:   
a) Identifying specific mineral safeguarding areas, including deposits of brick 
clay and sand and gravel. These areas are shown on the policies map 
b) Where a mineral development is proposed within a mineral safeguarding 
area, consideration should be given to:  
• Whether the mineral resource is present, has already been extracted, or is 
of insufficient extent to be of any economic value 
• The potential impact of extraction on the environment, local communities 
and other neighbouring uses  
An Environmental Statement may be required. Restoration will be required 
to take place after extraction, to ensure the site is returned to the most 
appropriate and beneficial after use at the earliest opportunity. Where a 
non-mineral development is proposed, within a mineral safeguarding area, 
consideration should be given to:259c) Whether there is an exceptional overriding need for the development, which 
outweighs the value of the mineral resource 
d) The potential impact of development on the environment, local communities 
and other neighbouring uses 
e) The views of the mineral planning authority on the risk of preventing 
minerals extraction
Policy FMWN04. Provision of New Aggregate Recycling Facilities  
Applications for new aggregate recycling facilities such as urban quarries and 
temporary facilities, designed to regrade previously developed land, will be 
looked upon favourably where:   
a) The site will make a significant contribution to secondary aggregate 
production in Leicester 
b) It meets the location criteria set out in Policy FMWN01 New Waste and 
Existing Waste Uses 
c) It is easily accessible by lorries, HGVs and other vehicles without unduly 
impacting amenity (T05) 
d) The site is adequately screened using both fencing and landscaping 
(DQP04) 
e) Any materials stored on site are not stored at a height which causes a visual 
obtrusion 
f) Methods are implemented to prevent dust and other particulate matter 
leaving the site in an uncontrolled manner260
18. Development and 
Infrastructure 
 261Evidence Base 
 
18.1 There are several background studies that will underpin policies in this 
plan. The main technical studies for this chapter are published on our website.  
 
•  Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2022)
•  Viability Assessment (2022)
•  Strategic Growth Plan (2018)
 
Development and Infrastructure 
 
Background 
 
18.2 The delivery of new or improved infrastructure to support sustainable 
development is crucial to the economic and social wellbeing of the city. 
Development needs to be supported by the necessary social, physical and 
green infrastructure such as education, roads, sports facilities, health facilities, 
open space, public realm, emergency services and utilities. It is therefore 
important to ensure that appropriate levels of infrastructure are provided to 
support the growth required in the local plan. 
 
Local Plan Infrastructure Assessment 
 
18.3 A Local Plan Infrastructure Assessment has been prepared for this stage 
of the plan preparation process. This sets out the engagement with service 
providers, and the scope and range of infrastructure required. This informs the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) which reflects the council’s priorities and sets 
out the essential infrastructure to support development and growth. The IDP is 
a key part of the evidence base for the Local Plan and will identify infrastructure 
capacity and needs across the city. The IDP sets out where possible the costs, 
funding and timescales for provision.  
Cross Boundary Infrastructure 
 
18.4 The council will also work with its neighbouring authorities on needs 
arising from growth and development of sites beyond the city boundary. 
This requires consideration of interdependent infrastructure and critical 
dependencies beyond the city’s administrative boundary. It is likely that cross 262boundary cooperation will be needed particularly around highways matters and 
also education provision.  
 
18.5 The co-ordination of interdependent infrastructure and a framework for 
its funding and delivery is important in assessing strategic needs across the 
Leicester Urban Area. The consideration of wider supporting infrastructure 
across administrative boundaries is also important with regard to the ‘Duty to 
Co-operate’. The close partnership work with the Leicestershire authorities on 
the Strategic Growth Plan will assess the longer-term strategic infrastructure 
needs within Leicester and Leicestershire. 
 
Viability  
 
18.6 Viability is an important part of the plan making process as set out in 
the NPPF.  The council needs to take into account economic viability and has 
prepared a Local Plan viability assessment to ensure that the cumulative impact 
of planning policy, standards, and infrastructure requirements do not render 
the sites and development identified in the Local Plan unviable and therefore 
undeliverable. The Viability Assessment has been prepared in accordance with 
the guidance set out in the NPPF and Planning Practice Guidance on Viability 
and Plan Making. 
 
Funding of Infrastructure  
 
18.7 The city council will seek the provision of infrastructure through a range of 
measures in accordance with planning guidance as well as a range of funding 
sources. The option to pursue the adoption of CIL or any future replacement for 
CIL will be assessed as part of the viability evidence, which will be addressed 
in a future supplementary planning document. The council will seek developer 
contributions towards the provision of infrastructure in accordance with the 
current CIL Regulations and the National Planning Policy Framework.  
 
Developer Contributions and the Provision of Infrastructure  
 
18.8 Our planned growth must be supported by infrastructure and facilities 
which are delivered at the appropriate time and in the right locations. We will 
make the most of our existing infrastructure, upgrading and improving where 263possible, and also seek the provision of new infrastructure where it is essential 
to support sustainable growth. 
 
18.9 The council currently seeks the provision of infrastructure required as a 
result of development in accordance with the current planning guidance and 
regulations. These are Section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 
(1990), and the Community Infrastructure Levy - CIL Regulations 2010 (as 
amended ).  The government has also stated that they will introduce a new 
infrastructure levy which will partly replace the existing developer contributions 
regime as part of the changes to the planning system. The council will provide 
additional guidance in due course when the new levy is introduced.
 
18.10 The council will continue to secure development-specific infrastructure 
through the existing regulatory framework in mitigating the site-specific 
impacts of development and the provision of affordable housing. In general, 
site-specific mitigation measures such as access roads and highways works 
providing a safe and acceptable means of access, sustainable energy and 
flooding requirements, on site public realm and open space will continue be 
secured through planning obligations. Appendix 4 provides some of the detail. 
However, it is the intention of the council to produce a developer contributions 
and infrastructure supplementary planning document following the adoption of 
this plan.   
Policy DI01. Developer Contributions and Infrastructure 
 
Development will provide or contribute towards the provision of measures 
to directly mitigate its impact. Contributions and the delivery of necessary 
infrastructure will be secured by planning condition and/or planning obligation. 
 
The council will seek planning contributions to ensure the infrastructure 
necessary to support the Local Plan is delivered in accordance with the current 
Section 106 and CIL Regulations (as amended) and to secure site specific 
planning obligations, for the delivery of essential infrastructure to support 
development.
Infrastructure necessary to support new development will be provided and 
be available when first needed, to serve the development’s occupants and 
users and/or to mitigate otherwise adverse material impacts. To achieve this, 
the delivery of development may need to be phased, to reflect the delivery of 
infrastructure.264Viability 
Any consideration of viability, including in decision making, will be in 
accordance with the guidance.
Monitoring Fees 
The council will seek a fee to be used for the monitoring of developer 
contributions.
Broadband and Mobile technology 
18.11 The NPPF is clear that planning policy should support the expansion 
of electronic communications networks, including next generation mobile 
technology (such as 5G) and full fibre broadband connections. However, it is 
also very clear that radio and electronic infrastructure should be kept to the 
minimum and use of existing masts, buildings, and other structures for used for 
electronic communications should be shared where possible.  The council will 
support the provision of full fibre broadband within new large scale residential 
development and new employment and office development where viable. 
The council will also support the provision of new mobile broadband such as 
5G, public Wi-Fi provision and communications equipment only where it is 
sensitively designed and does not significantly impact residential amenity. 
18.12 New masts and other forms of communication infrastructure will also 
be required to not cause unacceptable street clutter to avoid the potential for 
conflict between pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles, or compromise pedestrian 
and cycle movements. Also, since mobile communication equipment is often 
located on highways, verges and other areas of open space & areas of nature, 
any nearby trees should be protected from both the operation of the equipment 
as well as the works required to install said equipment. 
18.13 Once any communications infrastructure is no longer required for 
electronic communications purposes it will be required to be removed from 
the land or building on which it is situated as soon as practicably possible, 
and any impacted building or structure is restored to its condition before the 
development took place. 
18.14 Planning applications will need to be in accordance with the policy 
requirements set out in the Local Plan.265Policy DI02. Electronic Communications
Broadband
All new residential development of 10 dwellings or more, or non-residential 
development with additional floorspace of 1,000m2 or more, or a site area 
of 1 hectare or more, will be expected to include the provision of full fibre 
gigabit capable network infrastructure Fibre to the Premises (FTTP) to enable 
broadband services for all occupiers.
 
On residential sites below 10 dwellings, or non-residential development with 
additional floorspace of less than 1,000m2, or a site under 1 hectare, in area, 
FTTP should still be installed where the costs are no more than copper line 
broadband infrastructure.
Mobile Communications Infrastructure and Masts 
Planning permission will be granted for mobile telecommunications 
development where it can be demonstrated that: 
a) The proposal does not cause significant and irremediable interference with 
other electrical equipment, air traffic services or instrumentation that is 
operated in the national interest
b) The site is part of a network that keeps the number of sites to a minimum 
consistent with the needs of consumers, the efficient operation of the 
network and providing reasonable capacity for future expansion 
c) The proposed development is acceptable in terms of visual amenity and the 
outlook of neighbouring properties having taken into account all practicable 
options and alternative sites, including the possibilities of mast-sharing and 
erecting aerials on an existing building, site, mast or other structure
d) Highway safety can be protected and street clutter minimalised 
e) The installation and operation of the infrastructure would not harm the 
health or vigour of existing trees. 
f) Applications for an addition to an existing mast or base station are 
accompanied by a statement that self-certifies that the cumulative 
exposure, when operational, will not exceed guidelines set by the 
International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP)266
19. Neighbourhood 
Planning 
 26719.1 The Government has given local communities new rights to shape their 
neighbourhood through the preparation of neighbourhood plans. Once made 
neighbourhood plans form part of the Development Plan and have the same 
status as this local plan in making decisions on planning applications within 
their area. 
 
19.2 The council is committed to working positively with local communities and 
community groups where they wish to develop a neighbourhood plan and to 
supporting them through the statutory processes. This includes ensuring that 
neighbourhood plans are in general conformity with strategic policies, as set 
out in city of Leicester Local Plan, together with any future waste and minerals 
plans, and helping to avoid duplication of local policies. Neighbourhood plans 
have the potential to have an important role in bringing forward housing 
development as defined within this plan in a manner that is both sustainable 
and shaped by local communities.  
 
19.3 The following polices are deemed not strategic and therefore do not need 
to be taken into account when preparing neighbourhood plans: 
 
Table 9. List of policies that do not need to be taken into account when 
preparing neighbourhood plans. 
 
Policy Ho02. Housing Development on Unallocated Sites
Policy Ho09. Retention of Family Housing 
Policy Ho11. Hostels’
Policy CCFR05. Delivering Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Projects 
Policy DQP04. Landscape Design
Policy DQP05. Backland, Tandem and Infill Development 
Policy DQP07.  Recycling and Refuse Storage 
Policy DQP08. Shopfronts and Security 
Policy DQP09. Signs and Banners Advertisements Design and Location
Policy DQP10.  Advertisement Hoardings 
Policy DQP11.  Changing Places Facilities 
Policy CT02. Assets of Community Value 
Policy CT03. Protection of Public Houses (Class Sui Generis) 
Policy E08. Vehicles Sales and Car Washes   
Policy OSSR03. Open Space in New Development 
Policy OSSR04. Existing Playing Pitches 268Policy OSSR05. Playing pitches and associated facilities 
Policy OSSR07. Waterways   
Policy T03. Accessibility and Development 
Policy T04. Park and Ride 
Policy FMWN02. End of life Vehicle Facilities 
Policy FMWN04. Provision of New Aggregates Recycling Facilities269
20. Planning Enforcement  270Background 
 
20.1 The NPPF states that the planning system operates to regulate 
development and the use of land in the community’s interest, whilst having 
regard to the development plan and other material planning considerations.  
 
20.2 The effective and proper enforcement of planning control is essential 
to maintain community confidence and uphold the integrity of the planning 
system. It is important that the local environment is protected, as are the 
interests of residents, visitors and businesses of the city from any harmful 
effects of unauthorised development. When exercising enforcement functions, 
the council will act in a way that is fair, transparent, accountable, proportionate, 
consistent and targeted at cases in which action is needed.  
Policy PE01. Planning Enforcement 
The council will investigate and act, on reported breaches of planning control 
in accordance with Planning Enforcement Policy and Procedure. Cases will be 
prioritised and investigations will be carried out proportionately according to 
the planning harm caused and the resources available. 
 
Where appropriate, the council will seek to resolve issues through negotiation. 
However, if informal negotiations fail to resolve the identified breach of planning 
control and where it is considered appropriate and expedient to do so, formal 
action will be taken. 
 
The council’s Planning Enforcement Policy and Procedure is published on the 
council website and will be updated periodically as required.271
21. Monitoring 27221.1 It is important that the policies and proposals of the plan are monitored and 
reviewed to gauge their effectiveness as they are implemented. The monitoring 
process highlights the areas of the plan which need reviewing and gives an 
indication as to whether the plan is achieving its aims. In particular, a new 
Housing Delivery Test has been introduced to measure each local authority’s 
performance in delivering new homes.  
 
21.2 There will be other people and organisations that will have a key part to 
play in the implementation of the Local Plan, including developers, landowners, 
public utilities and other public sector agencies such as the Environment 
Agency, English Heritage and Natural England. The private sector will be 
responsible for a large amount of delivery, whether for housing, employment, 
retail, or other forms of development. The council is committed to working 
in partnership with these various organisations to ensure that the aims and 
objectives of the Local Plan are delivered. Appendix 4 identifies who will have a 
key role to play in both the funding and delivery of development. 
 
21.3 A key aspect to ensure the implementation of the Local Plan is 
through regular and robust monitoring. The council will regularly assess 
the performance of individual policies and overall progress in delivering the 
strategic objectives of the Local Plan. This will be done through the production 
of an Authority Monitoring Report (AMR). Results of monitoring will be used to 
inform any changes to policies or additional actions considered to be required 
at the time of the local plan review.  
 
Key areas of the Authority Monitoring Report 
 
•  Housing Delivery Test – the monitoring of residential land availability, the 
supply of housing land, house building rates, brownfield development, 
housing densities, city centre housing and affordable housing
•  Employment – the supply of strategic employment land, quality of 
employment sites, greenfield/brownfield take up rates and loss of 
employment land
•  Retailing – survey of city centre, district and local centres and neighbourhood 
parades, and retail floorspace – these are mainly concerned about vacancy 
rates and mix of uses273Supplementary Planning Documents 
 
21.4 To assist with their implementation the policies and proposals in the 
plan will be supplemented by site development guidance and supplementary 
planning documents (SPD). 
 
21.5 They further clarify and illustrate Local Plan policy and land use proposals 
providing helpful guidance for those preparing planning applications. Their 
purpose will be to state the type of development required or provide technical 
guidance on issues such as parking standards, climate change, developer 
contributions, tall buildings, and character areas for the Central Development 
Area (CDA). 274
Appendices275Appendix 1: Housing Trajectory.  September 2022Completions Completions Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 
4Year 5 Year 6 Year 7 Year 8 Year 9 Year 
10Year 
11Year 
12Year 
13Year 
14
Completions 1050 842               1892
Commitments   3206 1769 811 101 150 531 574 528 720 720 150 150 0 0 9410
CDA   449 449 449 449 449 449 449 449 449 449 449 449 449 449 6286
Allocations   26109 99 71131 431 466 470 378 322 259 117 160 293068
Windfall      214 214 214 214 214 214 214 214 214 214 214 2354
Total supply 1050 8423681 2327 1359 835 9441625 1703 1661 1761 1705 1072 930 823 69223010
Overall Need 2464 2464 2464 2464 2464 2464 2464 2464 2464 2464 2464 2464 2464 2464 2464 2464 39424
Balance -1414 -1622 1217 -137-1105 -1629 -1520 -839 -761 -803 -703 -759-1392 -1534 -1641 -1772 -16414276Appendix 2: Heritage Local Lists
Conservation Areas in Leicester  
 
Number Name of the 
Conservation Area Ward(s)
1 Ashleigh Road Westcotes 
2 All Saints Abbey 
3  Aylestone Village Aylestone 
4 Belgrave Hall Belgrave/Abbey 
5 Braunstone Village Braunstone Park and Rowley Fields 
6 Castle Castle/Westcotes 
7 Church Gate Castle 
8 Evington Footpath Stoneygate 
9 Evington Village Evington 
10 Greyfriars Castle 
11 Granby Street Castle 
12 High Street Castle 
13 Knighton Village Knighton 
14  Loughborough Road Belgrave 
15 Market Place Castle 
16 Market Street Castle 
17 New Walk Castle 
18 Old Humberstone Humberstone and Hamilton/Troon 
19 St George’s Castle 
20 South Highfields Stoneygate/Castle 
21 Spinney Hill Park Spinney Hills/North Evington/Wycliffe 
22 Stoneygate Knighton/Castle/Stoneygate 
23 Town Hall Square Castle 
24 West End Westcotes 
25 St Paul’s Fosse 
 277a) Local Heritage Assets in Leicester 
Name Street Ward
No. 330, Reorganised Church of Jesus Abbey Lane Abbey 
Mile Post (London 100) Abbey Lane Abbey 
Chimneys & Water Tower of Former Wolsey Factory Abbey Meadows Abbey 
Bandstand Abbey Park Abbey 
Bathing Steps Abbey Park Abbey 
Footbridge Abbey Park Abbey 
Refreshment Rooms (inc. Wolsey Statue) Abbey Park Abbey 
No. 10, RSSB Meeting Halls, Former School Abbey Park Street Belgrave 
No. 21, Abbey Mill Abbey Park Street Belgrave 
The Wolsey Building, Wolsey Mill Frontage Abbey Park Street Belgrave 
1950s Council Housing Blocks: Auburn, Bentburn, 
Crayburn, Deansburn, Emburn, Fairburn & Gorseburn 
Houses Aikman Avenue Western 
No. 277-311, Shopping Arcade (inc. 2-36 Elgin 
Avenue) Aikman Avenue Western 
Black Boy PH Albion Street Castle 
Lodge & Covered Reservoir, Leicester Water Centre Anstey Lane Beaumont Leys 
Jame Mosque Asfordby Street North Evington 
Avenue Primary School Avenue Road 
Extension Castle 
Granby Primary School Aylestone Road Aylestone 
Leicester Co-Operative Store Aylestone Road Aylestone 
Former Railway Sheds, Gas Depot Aylestone Road Saffron 
Gas Service Centre, Gas Depot Aylestone Road Saffron 
Christ Church United Reformed Barbara Road Braunstone Park & 
Rowley Fields 
No. 2, Wyvern Arms PH Barkby Road Rushey Mead 
No. 3 Barrington Road Knighton 
No. 6 & 8 Barrington Road Knighton 
No. 7 Barrington Road Knighton 
No. 9 Barrington Road Knighton 
No. 16 Barrington Road Knighton 
No. 133, Former Hoskins’ Brewery Beaumanor Road Abbey 278Name Street Ward
St Patrick’s Church Beaumont Leys Lane Abbey 
No. 25 - 27 Bede Street Westcotes 
GCR Bridge Over River Soar Bede Street Westcotes 
No. 106 - 108 Belgrave Gate Castle 
No. 123, Former Diamond Jubilee PH Belgrave Gate Castle 
Haymarket Theatre Belgrave Gate Castle 
Royal Oak Public House Belgrave Gate Castle 
Sculpture by Hubert Dalwood (outside Haymarket 
Theatre) Belgrave Gate Castle 
170, Leicester Square Belgrave Gate Castle 
60, Mile Post (London 98, Harboro 15, Loughb’ro 11) Belgrave Gate Castle 
No. 87 Belgrave Road Belgrave 
No. 32 Belgrave Road Belgrave 
No. 54 Belgrave Road Belgrave 
Shree Sanatan Centre, Former School Belper Street Belgrave 
No. 20 Belvoir Street Castle 
No. 24 Belvoir Street Castle 
No. 26 Belvoir Street Castle 
No. 30 - 32 Belvoir Street Castle 
No. 43 Belvoir Street Castle 
Dutch Gable Frontage To Industrial Units 3-7 Benson Street North Evington 
Durham Ox PH Birstall Street Belgrave 
Lodge to Braunstone Park Braunstone Avenue Braunstone Park & 
Rowley Fields 
No. 47 -79 (odds) Braunstone Gate Westcotes 
No. 58 - 64 (evens) Braunstone Gate Westcotes 
Bridge Parapet over Old River Soar Braunstone Gate / 
Western Boulevard Westcotes 
Former Victoria Model Lodging House, Now Part of 
No. 11-13, Kirtons Bakery Britannia Street Wycliffe 
No. 47 Briton Street Westcotes 
No. 12, Former St Luke’s School Brougham Street Wycliffe 
No. 67-71, Vinola House (& 191 Ross Walk) Bruin Street Belgrave 
Abbey Primary School Bruin Street Belgrave 279Name Street Ward
Former Boot & Shoe Factory, nos. 11-19 Brunswick Street Wycliffe 
Nos. 21-27 Brunswick Street Wycliffe 
No. 27, Former Pineapple PH Burleys Way Abbey 
No. 1, Formerly The Manchester PH Burns Street Castle 
King Edward VII Post Box, outside no. 2 Bushby Road North Evington 
Caldecote Primary School Caldecote Road Braunstone Park & 
Rowley Fields 
No. 11, Former Leeson’s Factory Canning Place Abbey 
Former Blue Moon PH Carlisle Street Fosse 
No. 109, Wool Pack PH Catherine Street Belgrave 
Church of The Nativity Cavendish Road, 
Richmond Road Saffron 
No. 87, Royal Standard PH Charles Street Castle 
No. 91, Halford House, Formerly Alliance & Leicester 
Building Society Charles Street Castle 
No. 92 - 94 Charles Street Castle 
No. 115, City Hall, Formerly Attenborough House Charles Street Castle 
No. 185, Rainbow & Dove PH Charles Street Castle 
No. 193 Charles Street Castle 
Beckett’s Buckets Charles Street Castle 
No. 45 Chatham Street Castle 
Electricity Sub-Station adjacent to No. 45 Chatham Street Castle 
No. 90 - 96, Former Barclays Bank Clarendon Park Road Castle 
No. 219, Leicester Sikh Centre Clarendon Park Road Castle 
Knighton Library Clarendon Park Road Castle 
No. 89-91, Former Wooden Heel Factory Constance Road Spinney Hill 
Belgrave Library Cossington Street Belgrave 
Sports Centre Cossington Street Belgrave 
Curzon Works Curzon Street Belgrave 
No. 2, Former Church of Christ  Dashwood Road Stoneygate 
Electricity Sub-Station, Adjacent No. 5 Doncaster Road Belgrave 
Former Boot & Show Factory, no. 40 (Inc. 28 Linden 
Street/43-45 Constance Road) Dorothy Road Spinney Hills 
No. 15, Former Consanguintarium Earl Howe Street Wycliffe 
No. 16, Former Chilprufe Factory East Park Road North Evington 280Name Street Ward
Imperial Buildings East Park Road & 
Rolleston Street North Evington 
No. 378, Frontage to Former Evington Cinema  East Park Road Spinney Hill 
No. 2 Egginton Street Spinney Hill 
No. 7 Elmsleigh Avenue Knighton 
Former Co-Operative Stables, No. 2B Empire Road Fosse 
Former Zion Chapel Erskine Street Castle 
Mayflower Methodist Church Ethel Road Spinney Hill 
Faircharm Estate, Former St Mary’s Mills Evelyn Drive Braunstone Park & 
Rowley Fields 
Mayflower Primary School Evington Drive Spinney Hill 
Masjid Umar Mosque Evington Drive, 
Evington Lane Stoneygate 
St Philip’s Church Evington Lane Stoneygate 
Golf Club House, Leicestershire Golf Club Evington Lane Evington 
Victoria R Post Box, adjacent No. 155 Evington Lane Evington 
Electricity Sub-Station adjacent to No. 228 Evington Road Stoneygate 
No. 18 - 24 (evens) Evington Street Wycliffe 
Dunlop Buisness Centre, Former Dunlop Works Evington Valley Road Spinney Hill 
Electricity Sub-Station Adjacent To Supra House Evington Valley Road Spinney Hill 
National Space Centre Exploration Drive Abbey 
Carrick Point Falmouth Road Evington 
No. 72, Former Sturdee Mills Factory Forest Road North Evington 
Gatehouse to Former Borough Fever & Smallpox 
Hospital Fosse Lane Fosse 
No. 140B, Former Methodist Church & Hall Fosse Road North Fosse 
No. 354 - 364 Fosse Road North Fosse 
No. 366, Estonian House Fosse Road North Fosse 
Tram Shelter at Junction With Groby Road Fosse Road North Fosse 
No. 249, Formerly Westfield Hall Fosse Road South Braunstone Park & 
Rowley Fields 
No. 281, Vicarage Fosse Road South Braunstone Park & 
Rowley Fields 
Holy Apostles Church Fosse Road South Braunstone Park & 
Rowley Fields 
No. 1, Black Horse PH Foxon Street Westcotes 281Name Street Ward
No. 62 Friday Street Abbey 
No. 72-74, Former Corporation Depot Friday Street Abbey 
No. 20, Frog Island Mills Frog Island Abbey 
North Bridge Frog Island Abbey 
17, Foresters Arms PH Frog Island Abbey 
No. 1 & 3 Gaddesby Avenue Braunstone Park & 
Rowley Fields 
No. 2 - 6 Gallowtree Gate Castle 
No. 10 - 12 Gallowtree Gate Castle 
No. 18 - 26 Gallowtree Gate Castle 
Sporting Success Sculpture Gallowtree Gate Castle 
1, Garden Street Slum House Garden Street Castle 
No. 1A, Tajdaar e Madina, Former Free Library Garendon Street Wycliffe 
No. 52, The Font PH, Former Harrison & Hayes 
Hosiery Factory Gateway Street Castle 
Thurnby Lodge Primary School Gervas Road Thurncourt 
BAPS Shri Swaminarayan Mandir Gipsy Lane Rushey Mead 
Gurdwara Shri Guru Dashmesh Sahib, Former Gipsy 
Lane Hotel Gipsy Lane Rushey Mead 
Rushey Mead Primary School Gipsy Lane Rushey Mead 
Church of Our Lady of Good Counsel Gleneagles Avenue Rushey Mead 
No. 119, 119A, 119B & 119C Glenfield Road Western 
No. 165, Former St Cathrine’s Convent Glenfield Road Western 
Christ the King Catholic Primary School Glenfield Road Western 
St Andrew’s Methodist Church & Hall Glenfield Road East Fosse 
Blessed Sacrament Church Gooding Avenue Braunstone Park & 
Rowley Fields 
Island Place Gooding Avenue Braunstone Park & 
Rowley Fields 
Sparkenhoe Community Primary School Annexe Gopsall Street Wycliffe 
Abbey Park Weir Grand Union Canal Abbey 
Evans Weir Grand Union Canal Abbey 
Hitchcocks Weir & Footbridge over Old Mill Race Grand Union Canal Abbey 
Limekiln Lock Grand Union Canal Abbey 
North Lock & Bridge Grand Union Canal Abbey 282Name Street Ward
Swans Nest Weir Grand Union Canal Abbey 
Aylestone Mill Lock & Bridge Grand Union Canal Aylestone 
Belgrave Lock Grand Union Canal Belgrave 
Freemen’s Lock Grand Union Canal Westcotes 
Freemen’s Weir Grand Union Canal Westcotes 
St Mary’s Mill Lock Grand Union Canal Westcotes 
Flood Water Marker Grand Union Canal Westcotes 
Twelve Arches Railway Bridge Grand Union Canal, 
River Soar Westcotes 
No. 25, Mansion Court, Former Russells’ Factory Grasmere Street / 
Eastern Boulevard Saffron 
No. 52-54, Former Great Central Station (inc. Parcel 
Building) Great Central Street Abbey 
Central House Great Central Street Abbey 
Great Central Railway Station Viaduct Great Central Street 
/ Jarvis Street Abbey 
Shaftesbury Hall, 3 Holy Bones (inc. 12-14 Great 
Central Street)
Great Central Street Abbey 
Bridge over the River Biam Great Central Way Braunstone Park & 
Rowley Fields 
No. 234, Lancaster Arms PH Green Lane Road North Evington 
Picadilly Cinema, Former North Evington Working 
Mens Club Green Lane Road North Evington 
Crematorium & Chapels, Gilroes Cemetery Groby Road Beaumont Leys 
Glenfrith  House, Leicester Frith Hospital Groby Road Beaumont Leys 
Jewish Chapel, Gilroes Cemetery Groby Road Beaumont Leys 
Lodge & Entrance Gates / Railings, Gilroes Cemetery Groby Road Beaumont Leys 
No. 16 Guilford Road Knighton 
Nos. 17 & 19 Guilford Road Knighton 
Former Mortuary Building, Leicester General Hospital Gwendolen Road Evington 
Former North Evington Infirmary Building, Leicester 
General Hospital Gwendolen Road Evington 
Hadley House, Leicester General Hospital Gwendolen Road Evington 
No. 258 - 260 Gwendolen Road Spinney Hill 
No. 345, Formerly Highcross House Gwendolen Road Spinney Hill 283Name Street Ward
Oak House, Formerly Crown Hills House Gwendolen Road Spinney Hill 
Manor House Neighbourhood Centre Haddenham Road Braunstone Park & 
Rowley Fields 
Nos. 1 - 14 Haig Place, 
Braunstone Avenue Braunstone Park & 
Rowley Fields 
Nos. 15-17 Halford Street Castle 
St Luke’s Church & Hall Halifax Drive Abbey 
Shree Mandata Samaj Sahayak Mandal, No. 1 Harrington Road Wycliffe 
Carey Hall Baptist Church, no. 159 Harrison Road Rushey Mead 
Methodist Church & Hall Harrison Road Rushey Mead 
No. 2 Heathley Park, Former Lodge to Borough 
Isolation Hospital Heathley Park Drive / 
Groby Road Beaumont Leys 
No. 6 Rowlinson Court, Former Borough Isolation 
Hospital  Heathley Park Drive / 
Groby Road Beaumont Leys 
Former Knighton Fields House, Knighton Fields Centre Herrick Road Knighton 
Knighton Fields Centre,Former Domestic Science 
Training College Herrick Road Knighton 
The Lodge, Braunstone Park Hinckley Road Braunstone Park & 
Rowley Fields 
No. 60B Hinckley Road Westcotes 
St Peter’s Church Hinckley Road Westcotes 
Wyggeston’s Hospital Chapel Hinckley Road Westcotes 
No. 400 Hinckley Road Western 
No. 445 - 445A Hinckley Road Western 
Dovelands Primary School Hinckley Road Western 
Springfield, no. 408 Hinckley Road Western 
Tram Shelter East of Western Park Entrance Hinckley Road Western 
Western Park Bandstand Hinckley Road Western 
Western Park Bowling Pavilions Hinckley Road Western 
Western Park Gates Hinckley Road Western 
St Guthlac’s Church Holbrook Road Knighton 
No. 2, Former Coach & Horses PH Hollington Road Stoneygate 
No. 5, Coventry Building Society Humberstone Gate Castle 
Tower to Former Lewis’s Store Humberstone Gate Castle 
Fulhurst Community College Imperial Avenue Braunstone Park & 
Rowley Fields 284Name Street Ward
No. 19, Swan & Rushes PH Infirmary Square Castle 
Knighton Street Offices, Leicester Royal Infirmary Infirmary Square Castle 
Pedestrian Shelter In Grounds of Leicester Royal 
Infirmary Infirmary Square Castle 
Inglehurst Junior School Ingle Street Fosse 
No. 2, Former Generator House Jarvis Street Abbey 
No. 2 - 14 (even) Jubilee Road Castle 
All Saints Church Kerrysdale Avenue Rushey Mead 
St Paul’s Former Vicarage Kirby Road Fosse 
Railway Bridge Knighton Fields Road 
East Saffron 
Railway Viaduct Knighton Lane East Knighton 
Church of St Thomas More Knighton Road Knighton 
Old Christians Meeting House, no. 51 Laburnum Road Humberstone & 
Hamilton 
Richard Attenborough Arts Centre Lancaster Road Castle 
No. 70 & 80 (inc. 89 Richmond Road), Former Police & 
Fire Station & Free Public Library Lansdowne Road Saffron 
Fleet House, Former British Steam Specialities 
Factory Lee Circle Castle 
Lee Circle Car Park Lee Circle Castle 
The Old (Methodist) Chapel Leicester Street North Evington 
No. 112, Victoria Jubilee PH Leire Street Rushey Mead 
No. 96, Summer Hill Letchworth Road Western 
No. 100 Letchworth Road Western 
No. 105 Letchworth Road Western 
No. 106 Letchworth Road Western 
No. 121 Letchworth Road Western 
No. 123 Letchworth Road Western 
No. 128, Lyndhurst Letchworth Road Western 
Linden House, No. 55 Linden Street North Evington 
The Linwood Centre Linwood Lane Saffron 
Bridge Parapet Opposite Railway Station London Road Castle 
No. 413, Sefton House London Road Knighton 
No. 421, Cottesmore London Road Knighton 285Name Street Ward
No. 429, Ventnor London Road Knighton 
No. 436, Rathlin London Road Knighton 
No. 453, Old Stoneygate Tram Depot London Road Knighton 
Eastern Boundary Wall To Leicester High School For 
Girls London Road Knighton 
Former Portland House, Leicester High School For 
Girls London Road Knighton 
George V Post Box, Outside Railway Station London Road Knighton 
No.45, Former Print Works London Street North Evington 
No. 31 Lower Brown Street Castle 
Nos. 38 & 40 Marsden Lane Aylestone 
Former St Paul’s Church Melbourne Road Spinney Hill 
Melbourne Centre Melbourne Road Spinney Hill 
No. 2 Melbourne Road Wycliffe 
New Testament Church of God Melbourne Road Wycliffe 
No. 63 & 63A, Cantabury House, Former Church of St 
Michael & All Angels Melton Road Belgrave 
No. 98-100, Former Cinema Melton Road Belgrave 
Sacred Heart Church & Parish Club Mere Road North Evington 
Queens Building, De Montfort University Mill Lane Castle 
No. 255, Milligan House Milligan Road Aylestone 
No. 2 - 16 (evens) Morland Avenue Knighton 
No. 3, 5 & 7 Morland Avenue Knighton 
No. 17, 19 & 21 Morland Avenue Knighton 
No. 23 Morland Avenue Knighton 
No. 1 Morland Avenue Knighton 
No. 317 - 355 (odd) Narborough Road Braunstone Park & 
Rowley Fields 
No. 230, Former Tram Depot Narborough Road Braunstone Park & 
Rowley Fields 
No. 330, Electricty Sub-Station Narborough Road Braunstone Park & 
Rowley Fields 
No. 332, Lodge to Former Manor House Narborough Road Braunstone Park & 
Rowley Fields 
Tram Shelter South of Haddenham Road Narborough Road Braunstone Park & 
Rowley Fields 286Name Street Ward
Trinity Methodist Church & Hall Narborough Road Braunstone Park & 
Rowley Fields 
No. 2 - 10 Narborough Road Westcotes 
No. 22 Narborough Road Westcotes 
No. 24 & 26 Narborough Road Westcotes 
Elim Pentecostal Church & Hall Narborough Road Westcotes 
Library Narborough Road Westcotes 
The Huntsman PH (inc. Coachhouse) Narborough Road Westcotes 
Horse Trough Narborough Road Westcotes 
No. 3, Former Kapital Buildings Navigation Street Abbey 
162, Masjid Usman Mosque Nedham Street Wycliffe 
No. 66, Leicester Electricity Sports Pavilion New Bridge Street Saffron 
Church of the Mother of God New Parks Boulevard Western 
No. 20, Former Education Department Building Newarke Street Castle 
Allen House Newarke Street Castle 
No. 9-11, Minster House Northampton Street Castle 
Former Northfield House, Northfield House Primary 
School Northfield Road Troon 
No. 1, Former Red Cow Hotel Orchard Street Castle 
No. 28, Former Grammar School Oxford Street Castle 
No. 53 Oxford Street Castle 
Former Entrance Arch to J.E. Pickard’s Wool Spinning 
Mill Oxford Street Castle 
Jain Centre Oxford Street Castle 
Stocking Farm Community Centre Packwood Road Abbey 
The Old Transformer Station Painter Street Abbey 
New Parks House, New Parks Primary School Pindar Road Western 
No. 40, Former Lodge to Humberstone House Pine Tree Avenue Humberstone & 
Hamilton 
No. 42, Former Lodge to Humberstone House Pine Tree Avenue Humberstone & 
Hamilton 
Pine Cottage Portland Towers Knighton 
Portland Lodge Portland Towers Knighton 
Portland Towers Portland Towers Knighton 
Brice Memorial Hall Queens Road Castle 287Name Street Ward
Regent College (inc. Gates & Lodge) Regent Road Castle 
Blind Arcading to Railway Cuttings Regent Street Castle 
Willowbrook Primary School Roborough Green Thurncourt 
The ZIP Building, nos. 39-41 Rydal Street Saffron 
New Parks Reservoir Sacheverel Road Western 
Former Leicester Frith Farm Sangha Close Beaumont Leys 
No. 12, Former Vicarage Scott Street Castle 
No. 75 Shanklin Drive Knighton 
Remains of Great Central Railway over River Soar Slater Street & 
Ravensbridge Drive Abbey 
Bridge over River Soar (inc. Old Bridge Foundations) Soar Lane Abbey 
12 & 14 Somerville Road Braunstone Park & 
Rowley Fields 
No. 22, Ulverscoft South Knighton Road Knighton 
Former Shakespeares Head PH Southgates Castle 
Former Wholesale Market Terracotta Relief Panels St Augustine Road Fosse 
No. 64, Former GCM Factory St Barnabas Road North Evington 
Former Vicarage (Part of St Barnabas Primary School) St Barnabas Road North Evington 
St Barnabas School St Barnabas Road North Evington 
Former Corah Factory St John Street Abbey 
St Aidan’s Church St Oswald Road Western 
No. 2, Former Vicarage St Peters Road Wycliffe 
No. 300, Former Corona Works St Saviours Road North Evington 
No. 308, Former Smith, Faire & Co. factory St Saviours Road North Evington 
No. 352 - 358, Former Faraday Works St Saviours Road North Evington 
No. 451, Former Wildt Mellor Bromley Factory St Saviours Road Spinney Hill 
Queen Victoria Diamond Jubilee Plaque, on No. 323 - 
333 (odds) St Saviours Road Spinney Hill 
No. 1A Stamford Street Castle 
Stamford Buildings (Grahame Gardner Factory) Stamford Street Castle 
Janazahgah (Muslim Prayer Building), Saffron Lane 
Cemetery) Stonesby Avenue Eyres Monsell 
No. 83 & 85, Evington Parks Stoughton Drive 
North Stoneygate 
Natural House Stoughton Lane Evington 288Name Street Ward
St Hugh’s Church Sturdee Road Eyres Monsell 
Evita House, Former Railway Goods Shed Sussex Street Wycliffe 
Railway Arches Sussex Street Wycliffe 
Road Bridge over Railway Swain Street Spinney Hill 
No. 38 - 46 (inc. No. 132 Beaconsfield Road & No. 171 
Upperton Road) Sykefield Avenue Westcotes 
No. 49 & 51 (inc. No. 173 & 175 Upperton Road) Sykefield Avenue Westcotes 
No. 14 - 24 Talbot Lane Aylestone 
Ariel Industries Factory Temple Road North Evington 
Crabtree Cottages Thurcaston Road Beaumont Leys 
Tudor PH Tudor Road Fosse 
Attenborough Building, University of Leicester University Road Castle 
Bennett Building, University of Leicester University Road Castle 
Charles Wilson Building, University of Leicester University Road Castle 
Chemistry (Research) Building, University of Leicester University Road Castle 
Chemistry (Teaching) Building, University of Leicester University Road Castle 
Library, University of Leicester University Road Castle 
Percy Gee Building, University of Leicester University Road Castle 
Physics Building, University of Leicester University Road Castle 
Rattray Lecture Theatre, University of Leicester University Road Castle 
The Gatehouse, University of Leicester University Road Castle 
Wyggeston & Queen Elizabeth I College University Road Castle 
Former Eagle Brewery Upper Charnwood 
Street / Vulcan Road Wycliffe 
No. 2, The Old Railway Shed, Former CPH Thurmaston Upperton Road Westcotes 
Liberty Statue Upperton Road Westcotes 
Two Former Great Central Railway Bridges over the 
Old River Soar Upperton Road Westcotes 
No. 243-249, Co-Op Uppingham Road Evington 
Humberstone Park House, Lodge & Stable Block Uppingham Road Evington 
Tram Shelter to West of Humberstone Park Uppingham Road Evington 
No. 1, Former Uppingham Hotel Uppingham Road North Evington 
No. 78, Baptist Church Uppingham Road North Evington 
No. 104, Former Stationmaster’s House Uppingham Road North Evington 289Name Street Ward
Spinney Hill Primary School & Community Centre Ventnor Street Spinney Hill 
No. 292 - 304 (evens) Victoria Park Road Castle 
Vulcan House, Former Gimson Building Vulcan Road North Evington 
Thurmaston Day Nursery, Formerly Calby Lodge Warren Drive Troon 
No. 39 - 41, Former Jemsox Factory Welford Road Castle 
No. 203, The Donkey PH Welford Road Castle 
Cemetery Gates & Boundary Wall, Welford Road 
Cemetery Welford Road Castle 
George V Post Box, Outside No. 48 Welford Road Castle 
Grave of Thomas Cook, Welford Road Cemetery Welford Road Castle 
Wakerley Family Monument, Welford Road Cemetery Welford Road Castle 
No. 495, Lodge Welford Road Knighton 
No. 517 - 519 Welford Road Knighton 
No. 2 - 4, LCC Adult Education College Wellington Street Castle 
No. 70, The Pick Building Wellington Street Castle 
No. 7-9, The Clarendon PH West Avenue Castle 
No. 19, Church of the Martyrs Hall Westcotes Drive Westcotes 
Frontage to Electricty Sub-Station adjacent to No. 48 Westcotes Drive Westcotes 
No. 21, Tesco Western Boulevard Westcotes 
Tram Shelter South of The Newarke Western Boulevard Westcotes 
No. 30 Western Road Westcotes 
No. 42, Former Equity Shoes Building Western Road Westcotes 
The Western PH Western Road Westcotes 
No. 1 Westhill Road Western 
No. 9, Green Gables Westhill Road Western 
Nos. 3-9 Westminster Road Knighton 
St Albans Church Weymouth Street Belgrave 
Shree Sanatan Mandir Weymouth Street Belgrave 
No. 4-18, Gilbros Business Centre Wharf Street South Castle 
No. 80 Wharf Street South Castle 
No. 4 Wheat Street Castle 
Former St Saviours School Whinchat Road North Evington 
Oaklands School Whitehall Road Evington 290Name Street Ward
Whitehall Primary School Whitehall Road Evington 
No. 4 Wigston Lane Aylestone 
No. 33, Jameah Girls Academy, Former Market Hall Wood Hill North Evington 
Former St Saviours Vicarage Wood Hill North Evington 
No. 7 Woodboy Street Wycliffe 
No. 2, Former Hawley & Johnson Ltd Dyers Woodgate Fosse 
No. 36, Woodgate Resource Centre Woodgate Fosse 
No. 21 - 23. Fabric Apartments Yeoman Street Castle 
No. 2 - 12, York Place York Street Castle 
No. 14 - 18, Former Briggs Factory York Street Castle 
Gospel Hall York Street Castle 
 291b)  Historic Parks and Gardens 
Number Name Street Ward 
1 Braunstone Park Braunstone Avenue Braunstone Park & 
Rowley Fields 
2 Bridge Road 
Memorial Garden Bridge Road North Evington 
3 Fosse Road 
Recreation Ground Fosse Road North Fosse 
4 Gilroes Cemetery Groby Road Beaumont Leys 
5 Gwendolen Gardens Gwendolen Road Spinney Hill 
6 Western Park Hinckley Road Western 
7 Westcotes Park Imperial Avenue Braunstone Park & 
Rowley Fields 
8 Knighton Park Palmerston Way Knighton 
9 Belgrave Cemetery Red Hill Way Abbey 
10 Westcotes Gardens Upperton Road Westcotes 
11 Humberstone Park Uppingham Road Evington 
12 Nelson Mandela Park Welford Road Castle 
13 Goldhill Spinney Windley Road Eyres Monsell 
 
 292c)  Archaeology sites  
 
Number Name Street Ward 
1 Evington Hillfort, 
Leicestershire Golf 
Club Evington Lane Evington 
2 Roman Town Wall 
Remains Junior Street Abbey 
3 Park Pale Near Gorse Hill Beaumont Leys 
4 Roman Mithraeum Near Holiday Inn, St 
Nicholas Circle Castle 
5 Glenfield Tunnel Near Kemp Road, 
Dillon Way Western 
6 Hamilton Ridge & 
Furrow Near Keyham Lane 
West Humberstone & 
Hamilton 
7 Humberstone 
Fishponds Near Lower Keyham 
Lane Humberstone & 
Hamilton 
8 The Humber Stone Near Thurmaston 
Lane, Sandhills 
Avenue Roundabout Humberstone & 
Hamilton 
9 The ‘Norman’ 
Undercroft Site of BBC Offices, 
9 St Nicholas Place Castle 
10 Norfolk Street / 
Cherry Orchard Villa Site of Glenfield 
Road East Car Park Fosse/Westcotes 
11 Roman Forum / 
Basilica Site of Jubilee 
Square & St Nicholas 
Circle Castle 
12 Roman Macellum Site of Travelodge, 
80 Highcross Street Castle 
 
 293Appendix 3: Retail Hierarchy and Neighbourhood Parades
Tier 1: Leicester City centre  
Tier 2: Beaumont Leys Town centre  
Tier 3: District centres  
1. Belgrave Road/Melton Road  
2. Evington Road  
3. Narborough Road/Hinckley Road  
Tier 4: Local centres  
1. Abbey Lane  
2. Aikman Avenue   
3. Allandale Road/ Francis Street  
4. Asquith Boulevard  
5. Aylestone Road Cavendish Road  
6. Aylestone Village  
7. Blackbird Road/ Groby Road/ Woodgate  
8. Catherine Street/ Cannon Street  
9. Downing Drive  
10. East Park Road North  
11. Egginton Street  
12. Evington Village  
13. The Exchange  
14. Fosse Road North  
15. Gipsy Lane  
16. Green Lane Road/Bridge Road  
17. Hamilton  
18. Hartington Road  
19. Hinckley Road  
20. Homefarm/ Strasbourg Drive  
21. King Richards Road  
22. Lockerbie Walk/Dunblane Avenue  
23. London Road  
24. Loughborough Road  
25. Malabar Road  
26. Marwood Road  29427. Melbourne Road  
28. Nedham Street  
29. Netherhall Road 
30. Queens Road  
31. Saffron Lane/ Burnaston Road  
32. Saffron Lane/ Cavendish Road  
33. Saffron Lane / Duncan Road  
34. Saint Saviours Road West 
35. Saint Stephens Road  
36. Sandhills Avenue  
37. Sparkenhoe Street  
38. Swinford Avenue  
39. Thurncourt Road  
40. Uppingham Road (East and West) 
41. Victoria Road East  
42.Wakerly Road/ Ethel Road  
43. Welford Road/ Gainsborough Road  
44. Welford Road/ York Road  
45. Wharf Street North  
46. Wood hill  
Tier 5: Neighbourhood Parades  
1. Aylestone Road/ Hazel Street   
2. Aylmer Road   
3. Barley croft centre   
4. Beaumont Lodge   
5. Bede Park   
6. Belgrave Boulevard   
7. Burnham Drive   
8. East Park Road (South)   
9. Fosse Road South/ Hinckley Road  
10. Fullhurst Avenue  
11. Gervas Road   
12. Guthridge Crescent   
13. Harrison Road   
14. Heyford Road   
15. Humberstone Road/ Farringdon Road   
16. Humberstone Village   29517. Lanesborough Road   
18. Nicklaus Road   
19. Norwich Road   
20. Ryder Road (Braunstone Frith)  
21. Saint Saviours Road (East)   
22. Sharman Crescent   
23. Southfields Drive   
24. Wheatland Road   
25. Berners Street   
26. Catherine Street/ Brandon Street  
27. Fosse Road South/ Harrow Road  
28. Fosse Road South/ Upperton Road  
29. Green Lane Road/ Coleman Road  
30. Meadvale Road  
31. Parkstone Road/ Cardinals Walk  
32. Raven Road  
33. Upperton Road/ Wilberforce Road  
34. Wellinger Way  296Appendix 4. Infrastructure List
Infrastructure required for the local plan.
Below is a list of the proposed infrastructure required to support the adopted 
local plan. 
The list represents the current understanding of the infrastructure required at 
the time of adoption however the council will produce a developer contributions 
strategy (SPD) post adoption of the local plan which will set out council’s 
priority for funding infrastructure. 
Transport Infrastructure 
Infrastructure required Funds Required
Connecting St Margaret’s A6/Central Ring: improvements to facilitate 
improved cycle and pedestrian crossings and movements and the 
filling-in of the subways and inbound bus lanes. Cycle Lanes between 
Highcross Street and Abbey Street on the Central Ring Road, and up to 
South Church Gate on St Margaret’s Way. £15m
Walking/Cycling and public realm improvements to facilitate and 
encourage the take up of sustainable travel and support growth and 
regeneration primarily outside of the city centre.
• Barkby Road 
• Catherine Street 
• Gwendolen Road 
• Hinckley Road 
• Queens Road 
• Spencefield Lane 
• Uppingham Road£11.2m
Bus Priority Enforcement system cameras £0.75m
Car Parking including Contactless Payment infrastructure & Car Club / 
Car Club infrastructure£2m
Programmes to promote and encourage the take up of sustainable travel £3m297Infrastructure required Funds Required
Infrastructure required to support major growth locations (Ashton Green, 
Beaumont Park and Former Western Park Golf Course): 
• Improvements to public transport, walking and cycling infrastructure/ 
measures
• Signalisation of A47 Hinckley Road / Golf Course Lane / Meadwell 
Road junctions
• Alterations to the A6 Loughborough Road / Sibson Road signal 
controlled junction
• Signalisation of the A563 Krefield Way / Red Hill Way / Beaumont Leys 
Lane roundabout
• increase the size (capacity) of the Ratby Lane roundabout.£10m
Infrastructure required to support Waterside:
• Further Walking and Cycling improvements in Waterside/Frog Island 
area linked to the already delivered TCF A50 corridor scheme 
•  Bike hire, bike storage and signage 
•  Cycle Path along the canal between Repton Street, A50 and A6 to 
provide a missing link in connectivity£14.1m
Improvements within the Central Ring Road supporting regeneration 
within the city centre:
• Lee Circle area
• St George’s area
• Granby Street area
• South city centre (Regent Street) area
• Leicester Royal Infirmary /Oxford Street
• St Martin’s area pedestrianisation
• Charles Street£14m
Railway Station Improvements Phase 2
Further enhancements to the railway station to support increase in rail 
passenger capacity and accessibility to the rail station:
•  Multi-story car park. Releases land for redevelopment as offices
•  Overbridge replacement (increase capacity) and provides access to 
new car park and enables electrification
•  Fox Street improvements
•  Taxi Rank (station street)£20m298Infrastructure required Funds Required
Orbital and Radial corridors joining the City Centre and Regeneration 
sites to the neighbourhoods within the City, and settlements outside 
Leicester. Schemes include Walking/Cycling interventions and public 
realm improvements to facilitate and encourage the take up of 
sustainable travel:
•  Rally Bank - Beaumont Leys Lane to Redhill along old railway
•  A6 - Thurcaston Road to Redhill
•  Belgrave Road/Melton Road
•  Loughborough Road
•  Bennion Road
•  Beaumont Leys Lane
•  Melton Road (Golden Mile)
•  Gorse Hill bus link (including cycle path)
•  Humberstone Rd/Uppingham Rd 
•  Hamilton Way Link 
•  Highfields 
•  Catherine Street 
•  Evington Lane 
•  East Road/Green Lane Corridor 
•  Aylestone Road (Richmond Road to Banks Road)
•  London Road (outer section) 
•  Welford Road (near cemetery) 
•  A6 (Victoria Park Road to Oadby) 
•  Saffron Lane phase 3 (to city boundary) 
•  Stoughton Drive 
•  Park and Ride Site at Leicester Racecourse 
•  Soar Valley Way bus lane 
•  Glenfield Road 
•  Great Central Way – (Bede Park to Braunstone Gate) 
•  Narborough Road 
•  Hinckley Road 
 ◦ A47 St Augustine’s to Glenfield Road – Hinckley Rd & Wyngate 
Junctions – Ivanhoe Line Bridge 
 ◦ King Richard III cycle heritage route Leicester to Bosworth 
•  West End
•  National Cycle Route N6 Bede to Abbey Park
•  University of Leicester/University Road 
•  Corah’s redevelopment site 
•  Removal of bus pinch points city wide and walk/cycle Improvements in 
North of the City: Wingate Drive- Fosse Road North - Blackbird Road- 
Abbey Park Road - Dysart Way) 
•  Removal of bus pinch points city wide and walk/cycle Improvements in 
North of the City between the A47(W) and A47(E)£84m299Infrastructure required Funds Required
Walking/Cycling and public realm improvements to facilitate and 
encourage the take up of sustainable travel and support growth and 
regeneration primarily outside of the city centre. This will include cycle 
streets on strategic neighbourhood routes:
•  Buckminster Road
•  Colchester Road
•  Coleman Road
•  Downing Drive
•  Gleneagles Av
•  Hallam Crescent
•  Humberstone Drive
•  Humberstone Lane - Troon Way to city boundary
•  Hungarton Blvd
•  Imperial Ave
•  Keyham Lane
•  Lower Keyham Lane
•  Narborough Road north
•  Outer Ring Road - Abbey Lane to BLL
•  Outer Ring Road - Troon Way - Gleneagles to Barkby
•  Ravensbridge Drive
• Redhill Circle
•  Uppingham Road – Hungarton Boulevard to Spencefield Lane
•  Welford Road
•  Whitehall Road£28m
MicroMobility Hubs £0.5m
Cycle Parking £0.5m
Highways Pinch point Schemes £5m 
City Wide Cycle Programme:
•  Cycle Pinch Points and severance: e.g., Swain Street, A47 
•  NCN Realignment 
•  Park paths project (Improvement & adoption of paths across all major 
parks) 
•  Railway crossings projects (underpasses & bridges of in-use & 
redundant lines)
•  Bike Share Scheme extension (500 electric bikes plus 50 dock 
stations) £8.2m
Electric Buses and associated infrastructure £167m
Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure £2m
Behaviour Change Programmes £5m
Corporate Training Facility and skill development design project £0.2m 300Other infrastructure 
Topic Total 
projected 
infrastructure 
investment 
2022 - 2036Explanation
Education £70.3m Funding across entire spectrum (Early Years, Primary and 
Secondary Education, Education for 16 – 18-Year-Olds and SEND 
provision). 
Primary 
Health£150m Identified the potential need for 5 major new primary healthcare 
complexes to achieve the rollout of Leicester, Leicestershire, and 
Rutland’s Primary Care Strategy in the City. 
Secondary 
Health£495m
Social Care £55.2m Based on the profiling the 396 units of accommodation identified 
in the Supported Living and Extra Care Housing Strategy 2021 – 
2031, plus a funding for Adaptations and Assistive Technology. 
Outdoor 
Sports & 
Leisure£6.6m
Indoor 
Sports and 
Leisure £15.4m
Burial 
facilities£4.0m A combination of increases in death rate (Covid 19) significant 
increases in plot purchasing and ongoing death rates well above a 
rolling 5-year average (+14.2% in May 2022) has accelerated need 
for new 8 ha cemetery
Community 
facilities1£0.59m Service sees no investment needs beyond £0.59m allocated for 
securing extended hours self-access to the City’s libraries; at its 
request, the March 2020 
Gypsy and 
Traveller 
Provision£0.875m Provision of a 7 pitch permanent site and 12 pitch transit site. 
Police 
£0.32m Provision of small police base, location to be determined subject 
to development location and phasing. 
Fire and 
Rescue£9.45m Extension of current level of building work investment programme 
and appliance replacement.301Topic Total 
projected 
infrastructure 
investment 
2022 - 2036Explanation
Full Fibre 
Broadband£76.0m
Totals £954.385m302Appendix 5: How the policies will be delivered
In implementing the policies and proposals within the Local Plan it is recognised 
that the private sector will have a key role to play in both the funding and 
delivery of development. Equally, the Council will have an important role to play 
and will make use of all appropriate mechanisms. 
 
 Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO Developer 
ContributionPlanning 
ManagementOther Local 
Plan/SPD/
Regeneration 
Framework
Strategy Policy 
SL01.  Location 
of Development   
Policy SL02. 
Strategic Site 
1: Western Park 
Golf Course    
Policy SL03. 
Strategic Site 2: 
Land to the East 
of Ashton Green    
Policy SL04. 
Strategic Site 3: 
land North of the 
A46 Bypass   
Policy SL05. 
Strategic Site 
4: Land west of 
Anstey Lane   
Policy SL06. 
Strategic Site 5: 
Beaumont Park 
Policy Ho01. 
Housing 
Allocations    
Policy Ho02. 
Housing 
Development 
on Unallocated 
Sites    
Policy Ho03. 
Housing mix    
Policy Ho04. 
Affordable 
housing    303 Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO Developer 
ContributionPlanning 
ManagementOther Local 
Plan/SPD/
Regeneration 
Framework
Policy Ho05. 
Housing 
densities  
Policy Ho06. 
Self-build / 
Custom build    
Policy Ho07. 
Internal Space 
Standards   
DM Policy 
Ho08. Student 
Development   
Policy Ho09. 
Retention of 
Family Housing   
Policy Ho10. 
Houses in 
Multiple 
Occupation 
(HMOs)   
Policy Ho11. 
Hostels   
Policy Ho12. 
Gypsy, Traveller 
and Travelling 
Showpeople    
Policy CCFR01. 
Sustainable 
Design and 
Construction
Policy CCFR02. 
Whole Life 
Cycle Carbon 
Emissions   
Policy CCFR03. 
Energy 
Statement   
Policy CCFR04. 
Low Carbon 
Heating and 
Cooling   
Policy CCFR05.
Delivering 
Renewable and 
Low Carbon 
Energy Projects  304 Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO Developer 
ContributionPlanning 
ManagementOther Local 
Plan/SPD/
Regeneration 
Framework
Policy CCFR06. 
Managing 
Flood Risk and 
Sustainable 
Drainage 
Systems (SuDS)   
Policy HW01. 
A Healthy and 
Active City  
Policy HW02. 
Health Impact 
Assessments 
(HIA)  
Policy DQP01. 
Design Principles   
Policy DQP02. 
Tall Development   
Policy DQP03. 
Inclusive Design    
Policy DQP04. 
Landscape 
Design   
Policy DQP05. 
Backland, 
Tandem and Infill 
Development   
Policy DQP06. 
Residential 
Amenity   
Policy DQP07. 
Recycling and 
Refuse Storage  
Policy DQP08. 
Shopfronts and 
Security  
DQP09. Signs 
and Banners, 
Advertisement 
Design & 
Location
Policy DQP10. 
Advertisement 
Hoardings 305 Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO Developer 
ContributionPlanning 
ManagementOther Local 
Plan/SPD/
Regeneration 
Framework
Policy DQP11. 
Changing Places 
Facilities  
Policy CDA01. 
Central 
Development 
and 
Management 
Strategy   
Policy 
CDA02. New 
Development 
within the 
Character Areas   
Policy CHA01. 
The Railway 
Station  
Policy CHA02. 
Mansfield Street   
Policy CHA03. St 
Margaret’s   
Policy CHA04. 
Wharf Street   
Policy CHA05. 
Belgrave 
Gateway  
Policy CHA06. 
LRI & De 
Montfort 
University  
Policy CHA07. St 
Georges Cultural 
Quarter  
Policy CHA08. 
Old Town   
Policy CHA09. 
New Walk   
Policy ORA01. 
Abbey Meadows 
and Pioneer Park   
Policy ORA02. 
Waterside   306 Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO Developer 
ContributionPlanning 
ManagementOther Local 
Plan/SPD/
Regeneration 
Framework
Policy ORA03.  
University of 
Leicester  
Policy ORA04. 
Leicester City 
Football Club  
Policy ORA05. 
Walnut Street   
Policy HE01. 
The Historic 
Environment    
Policy HE02. 
Archaeology    
Policy CT01. 
Culture, Leisure 
and Tourism   
Policy CT02. 
Assets of 
Community 
Value  
Policy CT03. 
Protection of 
Public Houses 
(Class Sui 
generis) 
Policy CT04. 
Great Central 
Railway Museum  
Policy CT05. 
Provision of new 
and retention of 
existing Places 
of Worship  
Policy E01. 
Non-strategic 
Economic 
Development 
Areas 
Policy E02. 
General 
Economic 
Development 
Areas  
1 Covers libraries, Youth Services and Community Halls307 Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO Developer 
ContributionPlanning 
ManagementOther Local 
Plan/SPD/
Regeneration 
Framework
Policy E03. 
High Quality 
Economic 
Development 
Areas  
Policy E04. 
Pioneer Park  
Policy E05. 
Textile Areas and 
Neighbourhood 
Employment 
Areas   
Policy E06. 
St. Georges 
Cultural Quarter 
Policy E07. 
Employment: 
Support 
Strategies 
Policy E08. 
Vehicles Sales 
and Car Washes 
Policy TCR01. 
Hierarchy of 
Town Centres  
Policy TCR02. 
Supporting 
Sustainable town 
centres – Impact 
assessments   
Policy TCR03. 
City Centre 
Policy TCR04. 
Central 
Shopping 
Core (Primary 
shopping Area)
Policy TCR05. 
Town Centre 
uses in Town/ 
District and 
Local Shopping 
Centres 308 Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO Developer 
ContributionPlanning 
ManagementOther Local 
Plan/SPD/
Regeneration 
Framework
Policy TCR06. 
Development for 
Food and Drink 
Purposes 
Policy TCR07. 
Neighbourhood 
Parades 
Policy TCR08. 
Main Town 
Centre 
Development 
Outside of 
Defined Centres
Policy TCR09. 
Planning 
Conditions: Main 
Town Centre 
Development 
and Class E Uses 
Outside of a 
Defined Centre 
Policy OSSR01. 
Green Wedges   
Policy OSSR02. 
Development of 
Open Spaces   
Policy OSSR03. 
Open Space  
in New 
Development   
Policy OSSR04. 
Existing Playing 
Pitches  
Policy OSSR05. 
Playing pitches 
and associated 
facilities    
Policy OSSR06. 
Built Sports 
Facilities    
Policy OSSR07. 
Waterways    309 Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO Developer 
ContributionPlanning 
ManagementOther Local 
Plan/SPD/
Regeneration 
Framework
Policy NE01. 
Protecting 
designated sites, 
legally protected 
and priority 
species and 
priority habitats   
Policy NE02. 
Biodiversity Gain   
Policy NE03.  
Green & Blue 
Infrastructure    
Policy NE04.  
Ancient 
Woodland, 
Veteran 
Trees and 
Irreplaceable 
Habitats  
Policy T01. 
Sustainable 
Transport 
Network   
Policy T02. 
Climate Change 
and Air Quality   
Policy T03. 
Accessibility and 
Development   
Policy T04. Park 
and Ride  
Policy T05. 
Freight  
Policy T06. 
Highways 
Infrastructure   
Policy T07. Car 
Parking  
Policy FMWN01. 
New Waste and 
Existing Waste 
Uses 
Policy FMWN02. 
End of Life 
Vehicle Facilities 310 Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO Developer 
ContributionPlanning 
ManagementOther Local 
Plan/SPD/
Regeneration 
Framework
Policy FMWN03. 
Managing 
Leicester’s 
Minerals 
Resources 
Policy FMWN04. 
Provision of 
New Aggregate 
Recycling 
Facilities 
Policy DI01. 
Developer 
Contributions 
and 
Infrastructure  
Policy DI02. 
Electronic 
Communications 
Policy PE01. 
Planning 
Enforcement   
 
 311Appendix 6: Housing Site Allocations (Non-strategic) 
 
Site 
numberSite address Area Category Capacity 
(dwellings)
15 Land to south of St Augustine Road/west of 
Duns LaneInner Brownfield 44 
19 Velodrome Saffron Lane Inner Brownfield 38
190 Lanesborough Road – Former Allotments NW Greenfield 37
219 Land rear of Rosedale Avenue/Harrison Road 
allotmentsNE Greenfield 53 
222 Evington Valley Road (Former Dunlop Works) Inner Brownfield 48
240 114-116 Western Road Inner Brownfield 5
297 Sturdee Road - The Exchange S Brownfield 20
307 Mary Gee Houses – 101 – 107 Ratcliffe Road SE Brownfield 40
335 Manor House Playing Fields – Narborough Road Inner Greenfield 14
449 Allexton Gardens Open Space W Greenfield 25
481 Brent Knowle Gardens NE Greenfield 12
488 Carter Street/Weymouth Street/Bardolph Street 
East NE Brownfield 30
501 Croyland Green NE Greenfield 9
505 Dorothy Road/Linden Street/Constance Road Inner Brownfield 31
525 Fulford Road Open Space W Greenfield 58
529 Glovers Walk Open Space NW Greenfield 34 
549 Hockley Farm Road Open Space W Greenfield 8 
557 Ingold Avenue Open Space NW Greenfield 54 
559 Judgemeadow Community College Playing 
Fields SE Greenfield 13
569 Krefeld Way/Darenth Drive Open Space NW Greenfield 33 
577 Land adjacent Keyham Lane/Preston Rise NE Greenfield 23
589 Land to east of Beaumont Leys Lane NW Greenfield 34 312Site 
numberSite address Area Category Capacity 
(dwellings)
620 Morton Walk Open Space NE Greenfield 9
626 Neston Gardens green space/Mud Dumps S Greenfield 47 
629 Netherhall Road Open Space NE Greenfield 77 
631 Newlyn Parade/Crayford Way NE Greenfield 13 
646 Rancliffe Gardens W Greenfield 52 
647 Ranworth Open Space S Greenfield 36 
648 Rayleigh Green NE Greenfield 18 
669 Spendlow Gardens S Greenfield 11
684 Land Adjacent Evington Leisure Centre SE Greenfield 15 
715 Land North of Gartree Road SE Greenfield 35 
960 Land West of Bede Island Road (Braunstone 
Gate) Inner Greenfield 5 
961 Welford Road Playing Fields S Greenfield 14 
962 Amenity Land Between Coleman Road and 
Goodwood Road (East of Hazelnut Close and 
Ellwood Close) SE Greenfield 9
963 Southfields Infant School and Newry Specialist 
Learning Centre S Brownfield 35 
992 Woodstock Road NW Greenfield 5 
1001 Philips Crescent NW Greenfield 5 
1007 Glazebrook Square W Greenfield 12 
1030 Land the to the west of Dysart Way Inner Greenfield 9 
1034 Forest Lodge Education Centre, Charnor Road W Brownfield 26 
1035 VRRE/Gipsy Lane NE Brownfield 12 
1037 Spence Street SE Brownfield 22 
1039 Bisley Street / Western Road Inner Brownfield 17 
1041 Land off Hazeldene Road Adj Kestrel’s Field 
Primary School NE Greenfield 21 313Site 
numberSite address Area Category Capacity 
(dwellings)
1042 Land off Heacham Drive (Phase 2) (former 
playing fields) NW Greenfield 53 
1051 Gilmorton Community Rooms/Hopyard Close 
Shops S Brownfield 9 
 314Appendix 7 . Glossary
Term Definition 
Affordable housing Housing for sale or rent, for those whose needs 
are not met by the market.
This includes housing that provides a subsidised 
route to home ownership and/or is for essential 
local workers. It must be of one or more of the 
following types, see definitions in Annex 2 of the 
NPPF:
• Affordable housing for rent
• Build to Rent
• Starter homes
• Discounted market sales housing
• Other affordable routes to home ownership 
including shared ownership, relevant equity 
loans, other low-cost homes for sale and rent 
to buy. 
Agent of Change Agent of Change is the principle that the person 
or business responsible for causing the change, 
is responsible for managing the impact of the 
change. (For example, if new housing is built 
next to a night club, or business, the person or 
company responsible for building the housing, 
must pay to include necessary insulation, so 
future occupants are not disturbed by any noise.)
Air Quality Management 
Area (AQMA) An area which a local authority has designated for 
action, based upon a prediction that Air Quality 
Objectives will be exceeded. 
Archaeological Alert 
AreaAn area covering the city’s historic Roman and 
medieval core and indicates where development 
is most likely to have an impact upon surviving 
archaeological remains and where investigations 
may be required.
Archaeological remains Heritage assets that contain information on past 
human activity which may be revealed if the 
subject of expert investigation. 
Article 4 direction A direction which withdraws automatic planning 
permission granted by the General Permitted 
Development Order. 315Term Definition 
Brownfield Sites Land which has previously been developed 
encompassing vacant or derelict land, infill sites 
and land occupied by redundant or unused 
buildings. 
Building for a Healthy 
LifeA Design Toolkit, based on 10 principles, to assist 
good design for neighbourhoods, streets, homes 
and public spaces. It a design tool for creating 
places that are better for people and nature, that 
puts a greater focus on healthier communities. 
(It is based on the well-known previously used 
“Building for Life 12”).
Changing Places Changing Places are fully accessible toilets 
that are designed so that they are completely 
accessible and provide sufficient space and 
equipment for people who are not able to use 
the toilet independently. They must be an extra 
facility, in addition to the accessible toilets for 
independent use 
Character Area These are defined parts of the city centre which 
are unique in character and intended to be 
cohesive and readily identifiable areas in the city 
centre. They help to focus policy and promote 
specific types of development, in each area. The 
Central Development Area, in chapter 3 of the 
Local Plan, is spit into 13 of these areas.  
Comparison goods Comparison goods relate to items not obtained 
on a frequent basis. These include clothing, 
footwear, household and recreational goods.
Conservation (of the 
historic environment) The process of maintaining and managing change 
to a heritage asset in a way that sustains and, 
where appropriate, enhances its significance. 
Convenience goods Convenience goods relate to everyday essential 
items including confectionary, food, drinks, 
newspapers and magazines.
Decentralised energy 
systemsLocal renewable and local low-carbon energy 
sources, such as communal/district heating 
networks.316Term Definition 
Designated heritage 
asset A World Heritage Site, Scheduled Monument, 
Listed Building, Protected Wreck Site, Registered 
Park and Garden, Registered Battlefield or 
Conservation Area designated under the relevant 
legislation. 
Design Codes The National Planning Policy Framework expects 
local planning authorities to develop local 
design codes or guides, taking account of the 
National Design Guide and the National Model 
Design Code. This guidance sets out clear 
design parameters to help local authorities and 
communities decide what good quality design 
looks like in their area, based on local aspirations 
for how their area will develop, following 
appropriate local consultation.
Development 
Management Policies Detailed policies which will support the 
implementation of the Leicester Local Plan and 
help with the day to day assessment of planning 
applications. 
Development Plan 
Document DPDs are the documents prepared by the Local 
Planning Authority which have development plan 
status. Also known as a Local Plan (See below). 
Design Quality 
FrameworkA local series of guides, to help you make better 
design choices for your building project and to 
meet planning requirements more easily. The 
framework is In line with the National Design 
Guide. (See Design Codes above)
Embodied carbon The carbon emissions resulting from the 
materials, construction, and use of a building over 
its entire life, including its demolition and disposal.
It includes any CO₂ created during the 
manufacturing of building materials (material 
extraction, transport to manufacturer, 
manufacturing), the transport of those materials 
to the job site, and the construction practices 
used.317Term Definition 
Enterprise Zone Enterprise Zones are created by government 
to stimulate business growth. Rate reductions 
are offered to businesses either to move into 
premises or expand existing premises.  
Evidence Base The information and data gathered by a council 
to justify the ‘soundness’ of a local plan, including 
information on the physical, economic, and social 
characteristics of the area. 
Examination Once any Development Plan Document has been 
consulted upon, the Local Planning Authority 
must submit it to the Government to test that the 
document is ‘sound’. An Inspector holds a Public 
Inquiry = ‘the examination’. 
Fenestration The arrangement of windows in a building.
Fifteen-minute 
NeighbourhoodIt is a neighbourhood is one in which you can 
access all of your most basic, day-to-day needs 
within a 15-minute walk of your home.
General Permitted 
Development Order 
(GPDO)The Town and Country Planning (General 
Permitted Development) (England) Order 2021, 
is planning law which sets out what type of 
development needs planning permission and what 
is allowed without planning permission.
Green Flag A national standard for assessing open spaces. 
Green Infrastructure A network of multi-functional green space, urban 
and rural, which is capable of delivering a wide 
range of environmental and quality of life benefits 
for local communities. 
Green space Leicester has a wide range of open spaces that 
make a major contribution to the quality of life 
of city residents and visitors. These include 
green wedges, parks, children’s play areas, 
sports pitches, natural open space, allotments, 
cemeteries, civic spaces, rivers, and canals as 
well as other incidental open spaces that together 
comprise the open space network.318Term Definition 
Green Wedge Green wedges are extensive areas of 
predominantly open and green land. They run 
from the edges of the city towards the city centre. 
In most cases green wedges extend beyond the 
city boundary through green wedge allocations 
in adjoining districts. This gives them a strategic 
importance as they connect the city to the 
surrounding Leicestershire countryside.  
Green Lung Providing a green lung is one of the functions of 
a green wedge. To acts as a green lung means 
creating a continuous link between the open 
countryside and land which penetrates into 
urban areas, to provide communities with access 
to green infrastructure and the countryside 
beyond. Acting as a green lung also means 
providing a range of other uses such as, open 
space, sport and recreation facilities, flood 
alleviation measures, improving air quality, 
protection/improvement of wildlife sites and the 
links between them, protection/improvement of 
historic/cultural assets and the links between 
them, links to green infrastructure at both a 
strategic and local level, and transport corridors. 
Heritage asset (See 
Designated Heritage 
assets, above) A building, monument, site, place, area or 
landscape identified as having a degree of 
significance meriting consideration in planning 
decisions, because of its heritage interest. 
Heritage asset includes designated heritage 
assets and assets identified by the local planning 
authority (including local listing and the historic 
environment record). 
Historic Environment All aspects of the environment resulting from the 
interaction between people and places through 
time, including all surviving physical remains 
of past human activity, whether visible, buried 
or submerged, and landscaped and planted or 
managed flora. 319Term Definition 
Houses in Multiple 
Occupation (HMO) Shared houses occupied by groups of people 
living together as a single household, as their only 
and main residence, who share basic amenities 
such as a kitchen and bathroom. 
Human Scale ‘Human scale environments’ are where streets, 
spaces, building elements and their proportions 
reflect the scale of a human and are therefore 
comfortable and more recognisable to the human 
experience of a place. 
Local Development 
DocumentThese fall into three categories:
1. Development Plan Documents (DPD’s) 
including Core Strategy, Local Plan and Area 
Action Plans (AAP’s); (form the Statutory 
Development Plan)
2. Supplementary Planning Documents (SPD’s); 
which amplify the policies of the Statutory 
Development Plan.
3. Supporting documents which relate to the 
process of preparing all Local Development 
Documents, such as the  Statement of 
Community Involvement (SCI).
The procedure for their creation is set out in 
Planning Policy Statement 12.
Local Development 
FrameworkA Local Development Framework (LDF) is a 
set of documents which guide planning and 
development in a local authority’s area. Think of 
the Local Development Framework as a folder 
comprising the three different types of Local 
Development Documents (see above), which 
together form the Statutory Development Plan.
Local Enterprise 
Partnership (LEP) LEPs are voluntary partnerships between local 
authorities and businesses, to help determine 
local economic priorities and lead economic 
priorities lead on economic growth and job 
creation within a local area.   
Local Industrial Strategy 
(LIS) LIS’s are local term plans implementing locally, the 
Governments ‘National Industrial Strategy’.  320Term Definition 
Local Plan A ‘plain English’ term for a Development Plan 
Document. 
Lower Super Output 
Area (LSOA)These are the smallest areas that the Government 
collects census data in. They contain a similar 
population size, with an average of approximately 
1,500 residents or 650 households each.
Major Development 10 or more houses (or if a number is not given, 
where the area is more than 0.5 hectares), or 
1,000sqm (or more) new floorspace. 
For non-residential development it means 
additional floorspace of 1,000m2 or more, or a site 
of 1 hectare or more.
Main Town Centre Uses Retail development (including warehouse clubs 
and factory outlet centres); leisure, entertainment 
and more intensive sport and recreation uses 
(including cinemas, restaurant, drive-through 
restaurants, bars and pubs, nightclubs, casinos, 
health and fitness centres, indoor bowling centres 
and bingo halls); offices: arts, culture and tourism 
development (including theatres, museums, 
galleries and concert halls, hotels and conference 
facilities.
National Design Guide See Design Codes above.
National Planning Policy 
Framework (NPPF) Key part of current government’s reforms to make 
the planning system less complex and more 
accessible, and to promote sustainable growth.  
National Planning 
Practice Guidance 
(NPPG) Web-based resource to make advice and 
guidance on planning practice accessible and 
usable.  
Open Space (see Green 
space above)All land in Leicester that is predominantly 
undeveloped other than by buildings or structures 
that are ancillary to the open space use. The 
definition covers a broad range of types and 
sizes of open space, whether in public or 
private ownership and whether public access is 
unrestricted, limited or restricted.321Term Definition 
Portal Framed Building Portal framed buildings are modern in 
construction and generally low-rise. They are 
built using columns and horizontal or pitched 
rafters. This form of continuous frame structure is 
stable in its plane and provides a clear span that 
is unobstructed by bracing and is therefore well 
suited to modern employment use. 
Purpose Built Student 
Accommodation (PBSA) This is a specialist form of residential 
development, normally in the form of a single 
block of residential accommodation, used by 
students in full time education at the university 
and colleges in the area. The accommodation can 
comprise of different types of space, including: 
a mix of cluster flats, a communal lounge and 
bathroom; studio flats; individual or double rooms, 
containing bed space, living space and en-suite 
facilities. The accommodation often includes 
communal common, gyms/games rooms, open 
space and laundry rooms.
Private rented sector 
housing 
(PRS housing)Any residential property in which a tenant lives 
and pays rent to a private landlord.
It also includes buy-to-let properties, (i.e. 
purchased by individuals, or institutional 
investors, from which they plan to earn a 
secondary income in the form of rental revenue).
Developers, with the financial support of 
institutions, have capitalised on this and seized 
the opportunity to offer accommodation of a 
far greater quality than is typically provided in 
private buy-to-let properties. These schemes 
are professionally managed in order to maintain 
their high-quality image. It is a recently growing 
sector in Leicester, aimed at provision for young 
workers, who require quality city centre living 
accommodation. 
Public realm All parts of the built environment where the 
public has free access. It encompasses: all 
streets, squares, and other rights of way, whether 
predominantly in residential, commercial or civic 
uses. 322Term Definition 
Housing Market Area 
(HMA) The Housing Market Area (HMA) comprises all the 
local authorities in Leicestershire and Leicester. 
Neighbourhood Centres Neighbourhood Centres are located outside of 
designated town centres. These shops serve a 
local retail need and play an important social role 
in the community as well as contributing to the 
character and function of the local area. 
Non-Designated 
Heritage Asset Any heritage asset that is not a designated 
heritage asset. 
Permitted Development 
(PD) PD rights allow a right to make certain changes to 
a building without the need to apply for planning 
permission and change of uses. 
Registered Parks & 
GardensDesignated heritage assets that includes 
designed landscapes of all ages and are subject 
to the planning policies within the NPPF.
Scheduled Monuments A site that’s legally protected because of its 
national heritage significance. Scheduled 
monuments might be: archaeological sites, such 
as ancient burial mounds, or more recent remains, 
such as from the coal industry or World War 2, 
that is included on the Schedule of Monuments 
found on the National Heritage List for England 
which is maintained by Historic England.
Sequential Approach  A method of identifying suitable sites for 
development, based upon their location. 
Social Housing Homes are provided by government agencies or 
non-profit organisations and are subsidised for 
the benefit of those with low incomes or specific 
needs
Strategic Growth Plan 
(SGP)This sets out the aspirations for delivering growth 
in the Leicester and Leicestershire HMA. It sets 
out, in broad terms, the amount and location of 
future growth (housing, economic, infrastructure) 
that the Leicester and Leicestershire HMA 
(Housing Market Area) will be expecting to 
accommodate until 2050.  323Term Definition 
Street Hierarchy A planning technique for laying out road networks, 
which excludes through-traffic from developed 
areas. It considers the importance of each 
road type in the network and eliminates direct 
connections between certain types of links, 
(so prevents connections between residential 
streets and arterial roads and allows connections 
between similar order streets).
The lowest level of the hierarchy (cul-de-sacs), 
link with the next order street, (a primary or 
secondary “collector”, such as a ring road), which 
in turn links with the arterial. Arterials then link 
with the intercity highways at strictly specified 
intervals at intersections that are either signalized 
or grade separated.
Sui generis Sui generis is a Latin expression, that is a legal 
classification. It refers to anything that ‘of its own 
kind or class’ (i.e., it does not fall into a use class).
Super Output Area 
(SOA)
(see Lower Super 
Output area, above)This is a geographical area used throughout 
England and Wales to help the reporting of local 
statistics.
The larger super output areas are split into 
numerous lower areas.
Supplementary Planning 
Document (SPD) The is a local development document that may 
cover a range of issues, thematic or site specific, 
by providing further detail of policies and 
proposals.  
Sustainability Appraisal 
(SA) An appraisal required by law to ensure that all 
policies and proposals in Development Plan 
Documents (DPDs) reflect sustainable proposals. 
The SA assesses the social, economic, and 
environmental impacts of policies and proposals.  
Sustainable Urban 
Drainage system (SUDs) These are designed to reduce the potential 
impact of new and existing developments with 
respect to surface water drainage discharges. 
Tandem Development A kind of backland development in which one or 
more dwellings are directly behind each other and 
served by the same driveway. 324Term Definition 
Transit provision (gypsy 
and travellers) Site intended for short stays containing a range of 
facilities. There is normally a limit on the length of 
time residents can stay. 
Use Classes Order The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) 
Order 1987 (as amended) puts uses of land and 
buildings into various categories known as ‘Use 
Classes’. 325