  
 
  
  
11. HOUSING PROVISION
L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 3 3  Policy No. H11.1 
Housing choice 
To ensure that Merton’s existing and future residen ts have a choice of different types, sizes and 
costs of homes. 
We will: 
a. Require proposals for new homes including new build  schemes and redevelopment 
proposals to be well designed and located to create  socially mixed, inclusive and sustainable 
neighbourhoods. 
 
b. Seek the provision of a mix of housing types sizes and tenures at a local level to meet the 
needs of all sectors of the community and at all st ages of people’s lives. This includes the 
provision of family sized and smaller homes and pro vision for those unable to compete 
financially in the housing market sector and those with special needs.  
 
c. Incorporate the re-provision of at least one family  sized home where the loss of an existing 
family sized home is proposed.  
 
d. In accordance with London Plan Policy D7 (Accessibl e housing) and Building Regulation 
Requirement M4(2), 90% of all new build housing is required to be ‘accessible and 
adaptable dwellings’ and 10% to meet Building Regul ation Requirement M4(3) for 
‘wheelchair user dwellings. 
 
e. Aim for the strategic target of 50% of new homes bu ilt in Merton between 2021-2036 to be 
affordable. 
 
f. We will expect the following level of affordable ho using (gross) to be provided on individual 
sites as follows: L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 3 4  Threshold (gross) Affordable housing 
level Affordable housing 
tenure split Required provision. 
10 or more homes 1Threshold level to be 
eligible for the Fast-
Track Route as set 
out in the London 
Plan provided all 
provision is on-site 
without public 
subsidy:  
 
50% for public sector 
land or on industrial 
land where 
redevelopment would 
result in a loss of 
industrial capacity. 
 
For all other sites up 
to 50% with a 
minimum provision of 
35%. 70% Low-cost rent  
 
30% Intermediate  On-Site 
 
Only in exceptional 
circumstances will the 
provision of 
affordable housing 
off-site or financial 
contribution in lieu of 
provision on-site be 
considered by the 
council, and this must 
be justified and such 
schemes will be 
required to provide a 
detailed viability 
assessment. 
2 – 9 homes Financial contribution 
equivalent to 20% 
affordable housing 
provision. 70% Low-cost rent  
 
30% Intermediate  Financial contribution 
 
g. Demonstrate that they have taken account of the str ategic 50% target and have sought grant 
where required to increase the level of affordable housing beyond 35%. 
 
h. Applicants should present data for all housing tenu res proposed in their scheme as a 
percentage of total residential provision in three ways: as the number of homes (units), 
habitable rooms, and floorspace. 
 
i. For schemes of 10 homes and above, affordable housi ng is required to be provided on-site. 
In exceptional circumstances, where the applicant h as robustly demonstrated to the council 
that on-site provision is not feasible, we may cons ider a financial contribution equivalent. 
This justification must include the provision of a detailed financial appraisal. For these 
schemes, off-site and cash in lieu schemes must acc ord with the requirements set out in The 
London Plan and the Mayor’s Affordable Housing and Viability SPG (Supplementary 
Planning Guidance) (2017) or subsequent updates to these.  
 L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 3 5  j. All affordable housing provided by the scheme must be affordable in perpetuity and secured 
via planning obligation (Section 106 agreement or a ppropriate legal deed).  
                                            
1  In the London Plan the 35 per cent threshold leve l will be monitored and reviewed in 2021 to determi ne whether 
this threshold should be increased and proposals wi ll need to have regard to this. L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 3 6  Justification 
Access to decent homes 
11.1.1. National and regional guidance acknowledged that be ing able to access decent 
affordable accommodation is a major factor in impro ving health and wellbeing (including 
metal health). Accommodation standards and affordab ility have a strong influence on other 
issues which contribute to quality of life, includi ng health (including mental health) and 
wellbeing, crime, education and skills. Merton’s St rategic Housing Needs assessment 
(SHNA) (July 2019), identified a notable and pressi ng need for affordable homes. 
11.1.2. There are marked differences in quality of life bet ween different communities within 
Merton. The wards in the east of the borough (Abbey , Colliers Wood, Cricket Green, 
Figges Marsh, Lavender Fields, Pollards Hill and St  Helier wards) have long-standing 
issues of multiple of deprivation and income depriv ation, when compared to the wards in 
the more affluent west of the borough. There are so me pockets of deprivation in the west. 
The Covid-19 pandemic, has not only highlighted the se issues but, has widened the gap 
between the west and east of the borough. 
11.1.3. Merton is one of the most diverse boroughs in terms  of house prices as it has both more 
affluent neighbourhoods in the west of the borough (e.g. Wimbledon) and respectively 
more affordable east of the borough (e.g. Mitcham).  Merton’s median housing value 
reached £460,000. This is above both the national ( £222,000) and the regional (£450,000) 
equivalents. It is also higher than the Outer Londo n equivalent of £397,500. Over the last 5, 
10 and 15 years Merton’s house prices have grown qu icker than England and the Outer 
London Region. 
Affordable housing tenure 
11.1.4. Low cost rented tenure  consists of Social Rented homes and London Afforda ble Rent. 
Intermediate tenure  includes Intermediate Rent and Affordable Home Own ership products 
such as London Living Rent. All affordable tenures are as defined in the London Plan or 
any subsequent updates to it. We are committed to e nsuring delivery of genuinely 
affordable housing and rents for both Social Rent h omes and London Affordable Rent that 
are significantly less than 80% of market rents, wh ich is the maximum for Affordable rent 
permitted by the NPPF (National Planning Policy Fra mework).  
11.1.5. We expect the low cost rented tenure requirement of  policy H4.1 to be delivered primarily 
as social rented housing to better address the over whelming housing need in Merton. We 
support affordable housing which genuinely addresse s those in housing need in Merton – 
that is at household income levels below £38,400, o r concerning low cost/intermediate rent L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 3 7  and affordable homeownership that meet the rent lev els and prices set out in figs 4.1.1, 
4.1.2 and 4.1.3 or subsequent updates to these. 
Low cost and intermediate rent levels 
11.1.6. Merton’s Strategic Housing Needs Assessment (SHNA) (2019)  identified that any 
household with an income below £38,400 would not be  able to afford a lower quartile rent 
without some degree of subsidy. It also identified a need for around 878-1,084 homes per 
annum – this is for subsidised housing at a cost be low that to access the private rented 
sector (i.e. for households unable to access any fo rm of market housing without some form 
of subsidy and at a household income below £38,400) .  
11.1.7. Merton’s SHNA analysis sets out appropriate afforda ble rent (termed as living rents in the 
SHNA) for different sizes of accommodation in diffe rent locations based on local incomes 
and housing costs in Merton. The analysis shows ren ts starting at about £400 for a 1-
bedroom home (in Mitcham) and rising to over £800 f or homes with 3-bedrooms. None of 
these figures have been capped by Local Housing All owance (LHA) as the maximum LHA 
is higher than the affordable rent levels for all s izes and locations in Merton. Rents above 
LHA should be avoided to ensure housing is affordab le to those needing to claim Housing 
Benefit. 
 
 
 
11.1.8. For the purposes of testing potential levels of aff ordable housing to inform Merton’s Local 
Plan, Merton’s Local Plan Viability Study (2020)  assumed affordable rents that do not 
exceed London Affordable rents as shown in Fig 4.1. 2. These rents are broadly equivalent 
to social/ target rents. In the study London Living  Rent tenure was based on the lower end 
GLA benchmark rents for Merton for that tenure. For  schemes proposing London Living 
Rent we will have regard to these benchmark rents. 
 
Figure 4.1.1 Living rents (per month) L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 3 8   
 
 
 
Affordable home ownership 
11.1.9. We seek 10% of all housing on sites of 10 homes and  above to be affordable home 
ownership (as set out in the NPPF). However, given that the main analysis of affordable 
need also showed a notable level of need, involving  households who cannot afford 
anything in the market without subsidy, there is no  basis to increase the provision of 
affordable home ownership above the 10% figure. As exceeding this figure would impact 
the delivery of affordable housing of those in a mo re acute need. 
11.1.10. We will expect affordable home ownership to meet lo cal incomes and local 
housing costs. Merton’s SHNA recommends that prices  should be set at a level which (in 
income terms) are equivalent to the levels needed t o access private rented housing in 
Merton.  
11.1.11. Figure 4.1.3 from Merton’s SHNA analysis, sets out a suggested purchase price 
for affordable home ownership in the borough. The f igures are based on trying to roughly 
equate a sale price with an equivalent access point  to the private rental market. This shows 
across the Borough a one-bedroom ‘affordable’ price  of about £149,000 rising to almost 
£300,000 for homes with four or more bedrooms. 
Figure 4.1.2 Affordable housing rents (per week) L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 3 9   
 
 
11.1.12. Merton’s SHNA recommends that given the high level of need shown, based on 
households unable to buy or rent in the market the council should consider London Living 
Rents (which can provide a route into home ownershi p) ahead of shared ownership as a 
preferred form of intermediate housing. Merton’s SH NA also recommends that if, for 
viability purposes shared ownership is included thi s should not make up more than 10% of 
homes on any individual site. Whilst London Shared Ownership is classes as an affordable 
tenure (in line with both the London Plan and the N PPF) it is likely to be the tenure that is 
available to the fewest number of households with a  need due to having higher housing 
costs. 
11.1.13. We will have regard to the purchase prices for affo rdable home ownership, 
intermediate and low-cost rent levels set out in Me rton’s SHNA, and subsequent updates to 
this information, in its assessment of submitted sc hemes aimed at achieving provision of 
genuinely affordable homes that more appropriately addresses affordable housing needs in 
Merton. 
First Homes  
11.1.14. First Homes are a form of discounted market sales h ousing and to be considered 
as such must meet  the requirements set out in the MHCLG Ministerial Statement 
published on 24 th  May 2021  Written statements - Written questions, answers and  
statements - UK Parliament      and  the definition and eligibility requiremen ts set out in 
NPPG Guidance First Homes - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk) . First Homes are the government’s 
preferred discounted market tenure and are required  to account for at least 25% of all 
affordable housing homes delivered by developers th rough planning obligations. First 
Homes are an intermediate tenure therefore in accor dance with government requirements, 
proposals for new homes will be considered against the intermediate tenure split element 
of Policy H11.1(Housing Choice). 
Figure 4.1.3 Affordable housing home ownership pric es (aligned with the cost of accessing 
private rented sector) – data for the year to March  2018) L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 4 0  Delivery of affordable homes  
11.1.15. Merton is a borough of small sites. On average over  the last 12 years more than 
90% of the planning applications for new homes subm itted to Merton Council were for sites 
of less than 10 homes. As the London Plan and Merto n’s previous policy only applied to 
developments of 10 homes or more, this means that v ery few developments were eligible 
to provide affordable housing through the planning system. 
11.1.16. For example, Merton's Annual Monitor Report 2018/19  indicates that in 2018-19 
only one development was built in Merton that was g reater than 10 homes, and this 
development was for 11 homes. From this one develop ment five affordable homes were 
built which totalled a 45% contribution towards aff ordable housing from the site, above the 
borough’s 40% target. The delivery of affordable ho using has been affected by the 
introduction of Prior Approval rights to convert of fice, retail and storage premises to 
residential use without the need for full planning permission. This is particularly evident in 
the financial years 2015/2016 and 2016/2017 where 4 7% and 36% of the total number of 
homes built in those years was via prior approval. 
11.1.17. Merton is experiencing an increasing number of sche mes proposing 100% 
intermediate housing, as the affordable housing pro portion of the scheme, which is contrary 
to Merton's policy requirement. The reasons provide d by proposers is that this is what can 
be viably delivered and that there is a lack of int erest from Registered Providers in 
managing low cost rented homes in preference to sha red ownership homes which they 
consider a more attractive product. This is evidenc ed by the fact that Registered Providers 
in Merton are willing to purchase additional shared  ownership homes than what the GLA 
can offer grant for. However, this situation poses a deliverability mismatch as there is 
overwhelming needs in Merton for low-cost affordabl e housing. This illustrates a tension 
that exists between viability and addressing housin g needs. 
11.1.18. Merton’s SHNA supports the introduction of a 70 / 3 0 split between low cost 
rented and intermediate which better benefits peopl e most in need and reflects the unmet 
affordable housing need to be addressed. This tensi on is acknowledged in the London 
Plan which states at paragraph 4.6.1: the 2017 SHMA  [Strategic Housing Market 
Assessment] shows London’s significant need for low -cost rental housing, however, the 
current national funding programme reflected in the  Mayor’s current Affordable Homes 
Programme (2016-2021) is focused on intermediate pr oducts which limits the Mayor’s 
ability to require higher levels of low-cost rented  accommodation. It is however noted that 
the Mayor’s new Affordable Homes Programme (2021-20 26) which runs concurrently to the 
current one, makes funding available for social ren t products which should help alleviate 
this issue.  
 L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 4 1  Financial contributions in lieu of affordable housi ng provision  
11.1.19. Off-site provision or in lieu financial contributio ns secured via legal agreements 
should provide no financial benefit to the applican t relative to on-site provision and review 
mechanisms will be included in accordance with the Viability Test Route (VTR) as set out in 
paragraph 4.4.13 of the London Plan and / or via an y guidance provided on Merton’s 
website or subsequent updates to these. Provision o f affordable housing on all small sites 
of 2-9 homes (gross), will be as a financial in lie u payment. For schemes proposing 10 or 
more homes (gross), viability alone is insufficient  justification for off-site affordable housing 
provision or a cash in lieu payment. Only in except ional circumstances for schemes 
proposing 10 or more homes (gross) will the provisi on of affordable housing off-site or as a 
financial contribution in lieu of provision on site  be considered subject to demonstrating to 
our satisfaction that this exception is justified.  
11.1.20. All schemes which propose off-site affordable housi ng or cash in lieu payments 
are required to provide a detailed viability assess ment as part of the justification that these 
proposals are acceptable, in accordance with London  Plan and Merton’s Local Plan 
policies.  
11.1.21. The value of the in lieu payment should be based on  the relevant threshold as a 
percentage of on-site homes. The payment in lieu sh ould be calculated through two 
appraisals – one with the level of affordable housi ng required by policy and the other with 
100% market housing: The payment in lieu will equat e to the difference between the two 
residual values. Applicants should use the methodol ogy set out in para. 
11.1.22.  Affordable housing monetary contributions in lieu of on-site provision will be 
calculated on a case-by-case basis according to the  following formula: 
A-B=C 
Where: 
A= value of the proposed development assuming 100% o f the residential homes are 
provided as private housing. 
B= the value that would otherwise have been achieved  by the proposed 
development incorporating affordable housing in acc ordance with the affordable 
housing policy requirement. 
C= payment in lieu. L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 4 2  11.1.23.  We hold cash in lieu in a separate affordable hous ing ringfenced pot to enable 
resources to be pooled to provide greater or more a ppropriate new affordable housing 
provision to be made off-site, either on an identif ied site or as part of an agreed programme 
in compliance with the statutory tests for use of p lanning obligations. The  information on 
off-site and cash in lieu delivery is monitored and  published as part of Merton’s annual 
Infrastructure Funding Statement. L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 4 3  Dwelling conversions 
11.1.24. Merton's Authority Monitoring Report 2018 / 2019 in dicates that in the past five 
years the number of conversion schemes of family ho mes to smaller sized homes has 
increased. The supply of one and two bedroom homes significantly exceed the number of 
three or more bedrooms. In 2018/9, 11% of new housi ng consisted of studios, 33% one 
bedroom, 33% were two bedrooms and only 20% were th ree or more bedrooms. On this 
basis it is evident that the anticipated number of three-bedroom homes has not been 
achieved whilst the number of one and two bedroom h omes were significantly exceeded. 
11.1.25. The conversion of existing single dwellings into tw o or more smaller homes 
typically involves the intensification of Merton's suburban housing stock, resulting in the 
loss of larger homes. Given the identified need for  three-bedroom homes and the historical 
provision of smaller homes, we are seeking to retai n the existing stock of family sized 
homes in Merton. Applications for conversion of exi sting family sized dwellings into two or 
more smaller homes must include the re-provision of  at least one family sized unit. A family 
sized unit is defined as having three or more bedro oms. 
11.1.26. It is considered that the requirement for proposals  involving the loss of a family 
home to include the re-provision of a new family ho me strikes a suitable balance between 
increasing housing density in appropriate areas, bu t not at the expense of a net loss in 
much needed existing family sized housing or achiev ing well-designed development that 
provides acceptable living conditions. 
11.1.27. Some single properties within the borough are too s mall to convert, as it is not 
physically possible to provide two or more homes wi th rooms of an adequate size, or with 
sufficient internal circulation space. To ensure th at dwelling conversions produce 
residential homes of a high quality, all new dwelli ngs including dwelling conversions must 
comply with the most appropriate minimum space stan dards. 
Projected population 
11.1.28. We encourage the provision of a range of housing te nures, sizes and types to 
meet the needs of Merton’s communities at all stage s of life. Merton’s SHNA indicates for 
the period 2017- 2035, the largest growth will be p eople aged 65 and over. 
11.1.29. In 2035 it is projected that the number of resident s aged over 65 across Merton is 
projected to increase by a minimum of 46%. The popu lation aged 85 and over is projected 
to increase by an even greater proportion, 52%. The  London Plan 2021 suggests an 
annual need for 105 homes in Merton that are specif ically designed for the needs of older 
people sheltered and Extra-care housing). Local res earch supports the view that the need 
set out in the London Plan 2021 for older person ho mes is appropriate for Merton. L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 4 4  11.1.30. Looking at the earlier stages of life, Merton’s SHN A shows that there is projected 
to be little change in the number of people aged un der 15, compared with increases or 
decreases shown for other age groups. Focussing on the population aged 18-23 (student-
age) the analysis below shows that there is project ed to be some modest rise in the age 
group. In total it is projected that the number of people aged 18-23 will increase from 
11,300 in 2017 up to 12,800 by 2035, an increase fo r around 1,500, or 13%. 
Maximising affordable housing provision 
11.1.31. New homes built under “prior approval” (i.e. withou t the need for planning 
permission) are exempt from affordable housing requ irements and this further increases 
these challenging circumstances. Merton is also a b orough of small sites due to historically 
fragmented land ownership. Over the last 10 years t o 2017, over 90% of the planning 
applications Merton has received to build new homes , have been for sites of less than 10 
homes, as the table below indicates (please note th at the figures in the table below exclude 
prior approval applications). 
 
2007-2017 Number of 
Schemes % Number of homes 
proposed. % Net gain % 
1-10 
homes 1101 94% 2388 38% 1551 30% 
11+ homes  71 6% 3887 62% 3621 70% 
Total 1172 100%  6275 100%  5172 100%  
 
11.1.32. Therefore, in order to optimise every possibility f or providing new affordable 
homes taking into account the specific circumstance s of Merton, it is considered essential 
to continue to maximise affordable housing provisio n opportunities, including from small 
sites, subject to viability. 
11.1.33. We will pursue requirements from small sites as fin ancial contributions, as in 
practice it is our experience that this is what can  be delivered. Feedback from affordable 
housing providers and developers demonstrates that it is difficult to find affordable housing 
registered providers, willing to take small afforda ble housing schemes due to the additional 
costs of managing such sites. 
11.1.34. All affordable housing provided within the borough will be subject to nomination 
agreements with Merton’s Partner Register Providers  to ensure that they are occupied by 
persons nominated by the council. Agreements (curre ntly s106 Agreements) used to L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 4 5  secure affordable housing homes should include prov isions for those homes to remain at 
an affordable price for future eligible households or for the subsidy to be recycled for 
alternative affordable provision. 
Measuring affordable housing 
11.1.35. Assessment of affordable housing proposals against our planning policy 
requirements will be measured as habitable rooms as  defined by the London Plan. 
Habitable rooms in affordable and market elements o f such schemes should be of a 
comparable size when averaged across the whole deve lopment. If this is not the case, it 
may be more appropriate to measure the provision of  affordable housing using habitable 
floorspace as defined by the London Plan. Applicant s should present affordable housing 
figures and all other housing types and tenures pro posed as a percentage of total 
residential provision in habitable rooms, units and  floorspace (both gross [GIA (Gross 
Internal Area)] and net internal area [NIA]) to ena ble comparison. 
Fast track route  
11.1.36. Planning applications that meet or exceed the relev ant threshold level of 
affordable housing as set out in Local Plan policy H4.1, on site within their development as 
affordable housing without government grants will n ot be required to submit a viability 
appraisal. This is known as the fast-track route.  
11.1.37. In seeking affordable housing provision, we will ha ve regard to site characteristics 
such as site size, site suitability and economics o f provision such as financial viability 
issues and other planning contributions. 
11.1.38. In Merton’s experience introduction of the Mayor’s ‘fast track route’ has resulted in 
an unchanged position concerning the number of sche mes submitted with viability 
appraisals. we will expect public subsidy / grant t o be sought to increase the provision of 
affordable housing above the stated minimum thresho ld requirements of policy H11.1 
(housing choice). 
  L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 4 6  Policy No. H11.2   
Housing Provision 
We will aim to deliver a minimum of 11,732  additional homes for the period 2021/22 – 2035/36.  
This will be achieved by: 
a. Working with housing providers to optimise housing.  
 
b. Supporting the provision of well-designed new homes  that create socially mixed and 
sustainable neighbourhoods. 
 
c. Supporting the delivery of well-designed new homes on large and small sites (a site area 
below 0.25 hectares in size), which optimise levels  of residential density in accordance with 
the design-led approach set out in the London Plan Policy D6 and Merton’s design code 
guidance; having regard to site context; connectivi ty and accessibility by walking and cycling 
and existing and planned public transport (includin g PTAL (Public Transport Accessibility 
Level)); and the capacity and provision of supporti ng infrastructure.  
d. Supporting the delivery of the small sites target o f 261 new homes per year. 
 
e. Supporting the redevelopment of poor quality existi ng housing that does not result in a net 
loss of residential homes, or net loss of affordabl e housing homes or residential land or net 
loss resulting from the change of use of any type o f housing to temporary sleeping 
accommodation on a permanent basis. 
 
f. Support proposals for custom, self-build and commun ity-led housing which optimise the use 
of land and meet all relevant policy requirements, such as those for affordable housing. 
 L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 4 7  Justification 
11.2.1. We will encourage housing in sustainable brownfield  locations. The  11,732 additional 
homes for the period 2021/22 – 2035/36 will come fo rward in Merton by: 
 Bringing forward housing capacity through regenera tion, including Morden town centre.  
 Prioritising the development of previously develop ed land and ensuring it is used 
efficiently.  
 Development of sites identified in Merton's Housin g Trajectory.  
 Development of windfall sites.  
 Enabling mixed use development within the town cen tres.  
 Bringing vacant properties back into use through M erton’s empty homes strategy.  
 Resisting the loss of housing to other uses.  
 Preparing masterplans, development briefs and desi gn guidance for larger housing sites. 
 Demonstrating a continuous delivery of housing for  at least 15 years as the Housing 
Trajectory sets out below.  
 Setting out a 5-year supply of identified sites as  shown in the Authority Monitoring 
Report.  
 Monitoring housing provision levels through the Ho using Trajectory within the Authority 
Monitoring Report. 
11.2.2. Merton is a pro-growth borough and has substantial experience in delivering small 
sites over a long timeframe and throughout differen t economic and political cycles. Every 
year, between 85%-95% of Merton’s planning applicat ions for new homes are for small 
sites (sites of 10 homes or less). However, as each  small site delivers fewer than 10 
homes, small sites contribute about 50% of the over all number of homes built each year in 
Merton, with large sites (which make up usually les s than 10% of the planning applications 
received) contributing the other 50% of homes built . 
11.2.3.  Merton’s housing target, which is set out in the L ondon Plan 2021, is 9,180 homes for 
the ten-year period 2019/20 to 2028/29 or 918 homes  per annum. This is based on a 
detailed analysis of land availability and capacity  across London that Merton worked with 
the GLA and all other London boroughs. The London P lan expects 261 homes of the 918 
homes per annum to come forward on small sites. All  housing development proposals will 
be required to meet the requirements of all relevan t local plan policies including those 
contained in the following chapters: Climate Change ; Places and Spaces in a Growing 
Borough; Health and Well Being; Transport and Urban  Mobility and Infrastructure. 
11.2.4.  In recognition of the significant increase in hous ing delivery required by these targets, 
the London Plan states at paragraph 4.1.10, that th ese may be achieved gradually and 
encourages boroughs to set a realistic and where ap propriate, stepped housing delivery 
target over a ten-year period. London Plan paragrap h 4.1.11 states that if a target is 
needed beyond the 10-year period (2019/20 to 2028/2 9), boroughs should draw on the 
2017 SHLAA findings which cover the period to 2041 and any local evidence of identified L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 4 8  capacity and roll forward the housing capacity assu mptions applied in the London Plan for 
small sites. Figure 4.2.1 sets out Merton’s Housing  Trajectory. 
11.2.5. In accordance with the London Plan requirements and  in consultation with and endorsed 
by the GLA, the housing trajectory set out in Figur e 4.2.1 demonstrates how Merton’s 
housing target will be met for the Local Plan perio d 2021/22 – 2035/36 using a stepped 
housing delivery target.  
11.2.6.  Merton’s housing trajectory set out in Figure 4.2. 1 is considered an appropriate 
approach for Merton as it sets out a realistic pict ure of housing delivery over the Local Plan 
period. A stepped housing delivery target is approp riate in Merton as there is a significant 
uplift in the level of housing target between emerg ing and previous policies, and several 
large sites will be delivered in phases.  
11.2.7. As Figure 4.2.2 below indicates Merton’s annual hou sing target will be set at 775 homes 
per annum for the period 2021/22 – 2023/24, and the n increase to 1,080 for the period 
2024/25 – 2026/27, then further increase to 1,350 f or the period 2027/28 – 2028/29.  
 
   2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 2027/28 2028/29 Total  
Merton Local 
Plan target                   
775                    
775                    
775                 
1,080             
1,080         
1,080                 
1,350            
1,350  8,265 
London Plan 
target 
(including 
backlog) 1,033 1,033 1,033 1,033 1,033 1,033 1,033 1,033 8,265 
 
11.2.8.  In accordance with London Plan paragraph 4.1.11, M erton’s target for the period 
2029/30 to 2035/36 (3,466 total) is drawn from the 2017 SHLAA findings. This sets a 
target for the period 2029/30 to 2033/34 of 2,370 a nd for 2034/35 to 2035/36 of 1,096 as 
indicated in the following table: 
    
 
  
    Plan period 
  
          Target  
2029/30 - 2033/34             2,370  
2034/35 – 2035/36             1,096  
2029/30 – 2035/36  Total             3,466                      Figure 4.2.2 Merton’s stepped h ousing delivery target L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 4 9   
Figure 4.2.1 Merton’s Housing Trajectory for the Pl an period 2021/22 to 2035/36  L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 5 0   
11.2.9. Merton’s housing trajectory is supported by Merton’ s Housing Delivery Test Actions Plan 
which includes details on the actions we can take t o increase the rate and number of 
homes built in Merton. The delivery of sites will b e monitored in Merton’s Authority 
Monitoring Report (AMR) and Merton’s Housing Delive ry Test Action Plan.  
11.2.10. The London Plan envisages that key town centres in the borough – Wimbledon, 
Mitcham, Morden and Colliers Wood – offer ‘high’ po tential for residential growth (Table 
A1.1), with Wimbledon, Colliers Wood and South Wimb ledon identified as an Opportunity 
Area which indicatively is expected to contribute 5 ,000 new homes and 6,000 jobs. The 
Opportunity Area homes figure is based on the 2017 SHLAA capacity from 2019 to 2041.  
11.2.11. Assessment of projected housing over the Local Plan  period by locality, indicates 
as set out in  Fig. 4.2.3 that the majority of residential growth and associated infrastructure 
and social facilities will take place in Morden, Mi tcham and Wimbledon which are 
characterised with good public transport access.  
 
￼ 
L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 5 1   
 
 
11.2.12. The regeneration of Morden town centre is a key pri ority for the council and the 
emerging Local Plan by means of policy N5.1 and sit e allocation Mo4, which seek to 
enable delivery of around 2,000 homes within the Mo rden Regeneration Zone. 
11.2.13. Mitcham is proposed to accommodate a range of new h omes, including major 
development sites of Eastfields and Ravensbury esta tes and other such as Benedict's 
Wharf. For Raynes Park larger sites close to Shanno n Corner and incremental 
development within the surrounding neighbourhood wi ll contribute to providing new homes. 
These are set out in more detail in the area-based policies within this Plan. 
11.2.14. Wimbledon is similarly proposed to accommodate a ra nge of new homes, 
including major development sites of Wimbledon Stad ium, Wimbledon YMCA, and High 
Path estate regeneration.  
11.2.15. Merton’s Local Plan and accompanying proactive stra tegies that support future 
housing delivery, such as Merton’s Borough Character Study  and Small Sites Toolkit , are 
pro-growth and geared towards optimising the provis ion of good quality and design-led 
Figure 4.2.3 Delivery plan of new homes by neighbou rhood L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 5 2  housing to meet this ambition. For a decade Merton have been allocating sites of any size 
i.e. no minimum small sites threshold and has taken  forward initiatives including town 
centre regeneration, estate regeneration and modula r construction of affordable homes. 
Merton will continue to bring forward and support t hese initiatives. 
11.2.16. Merton’s Borough Character Study SPD (2021 ) identifies appropriate areas where 
there is potential for a range of sensitive and ext ensive character-led growth. At the heart of 
the study is to ensure that future shaping of the b orough is informed by Merton’s existing 
and unique character.  
11.2.17. Merton’s Small Sites Toolkit SPD (2021)  is designed to give designers and 
developers a clearer picture of what would be consi dered acceptable development on sites 
up to 0.25 hectares in the Borough. The toolkit wil l comprise of guidance notes, case 
studies and a design and access statement template.  The guidance in the toolkit builds on 
the findings of the Character Study in providing co ntextual advice to applicants and their 
design teams. The guidance aims to encourage more d evelopment by giving a greater 
certainty of approval in addition to improving over all design quality. 
11.2.18. There are a number of factors outside of local plan ning authority control that 
influence housing delivery including macroeconomics , economic effects of Covid-19 house 
prices, land values, investment confidence and fina nce availability and unsecured funding 
for Crossrail 2. However, it is considered that our  proactive strategies will contribute to 
support future housing delivery despite these facto rs. 
11.2.19. Due to the overwhelming need for permanent homes co mpared to temporary 
accommodation, we do not support short term rental residential accommodation (either 
purpose built or converted) such as apart-hotels on  sites that are suitable for permanent 
housing. 
11.2.20. In accordance with government requirements we maint ain a self-build register. As 
at June 2021 there were 104 individuals and 9 group s on the part 1 Self-Build Register 
(meets local connection criteria) and 132 individua ls and 1 group on the part 2 Self-Build 
Register (without a local connection). 17 homes wer e granted self-build exemption from 
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) in the financia l year 2019/20. 
11.2.21. Whilst self and custom build homes form part of the  overall mix of housing, high 
demand for sites result in high land values making it challenging for self and custom 
builders to compete against other house builders to  acquire available sites. As self and 
custom build homes are regarded by mortgage lenders  as non-standard homes, obtaining 
a mortgage for these can be challenging and therefo re this type of development is more 
reliant on self-financing. L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 5 3  11.2.22. As supported by the London Plan, Houses in Multiple  Occupation (HMOs) 
contribute towards addressing needs. As with all ho mes, HMOs will be expected to meet 
good standards both for the occupiers and neighbour s and we will have regard to relevant 
guidance in the assessment of HMOs including nation al guidance, the London Housing 
Design Standards, the GLA Housing Supplementary Pla nning Guidance. 
 L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 5 4  Policy No. H11.3 
Housing mix 
Residential development proposals must contribute t o meeting the needs of different 
households such as families with children, single p erson households and older people by 
providing a mix of dwelling sizes, taking account o f the following borough level housing mix: 
- 1 bed 2 bed 3+ bed 
Borough wide 33% 33% 34% 
 
The borough level housing mix will be applied havin g regard to relevant factors, including 
individual site circumstances, site location, ident ified local needs and economics of provision. L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 5 5  Justification 
11.3.1. Research in London and in Merton shows that there i s an overwhelming need in London 
and in Merton for all types and sizes of new homes.  Like much of London overcrowding 
exist in Merton which need to be eliminated. The 20 11 Census indicated that 9.2% of 
Merton’s households are in overcrowded accommodatio n. Assessment of housing delivery 
in the borough over the past 15 years indicates a d isproportionately greater delivery of 
smaller homes compared to larger homes. 
11.3.2. In 2018/19 11% of the new homes built were studio h omes; 33% one bedroom, 33% 
were two bedrooms, 13% three bedrooms; 7% four bedr ooms and 3% were unknown. 
11.3.3. Merton’s SHNA sets out the size of housing required . 
 
 
 
 
11.3.4. It indicates that for affordable housing need is mo re heavily skewed towards smaller 
dwellings, and affordable home ownership sits somew here in between the market and 
affordable (rented) housing but closer to the affor dable rented sector. For market housing 
the need is skewed more heavily towards three and f our bedroomed homes. Studio 
apartments do not adequately meet the housing needs  of most households. 
11.3.5. Analysis linked to the demographic change in the pe riod to 2035 set out in Merton’s 
SHNA supports the housing mix set out in this Polic y H11.3 as an appropriate mix. In the 
affordable sector it is recognised the role which d elivery of family homes can play in 
releasing supply of smaller properties for other ho useholds; together with the limited 
Figure 4.3.1 Size of housing required 2017 – 2035 L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 5 6  flexibility which one-bed properties offer to chang ing household circumstances which feed 
through into higher turnover and management issues.  
11.3.6. Based on Merton’s SHNA evidence it is expected that  the focus of new market housing 
provision will be on two and three bed properties. Continued demand for family housing 
can be expected from newly forming households. Ther e may also be some demand for 
medium-sized properties (2 and 3 beds) from older h ouseholds downsizing and looking to 
release equity in existing homes, but still retain flexibility for friends and family to come and 
stay. 
11.3.7. We are keen to encourage socially mixed, sustainabl e communities with a greater choice 
and mix in the size, type and location of housing. Schemes should seek to reflect the 
diversity of the local population, local needs and provide an appropriate mix of smaller and 
larger homes including houses and flats to meet a m ix of different households such as 
single households, families with children and older  people. 
11.3.8. In assessing development proposals, we will take ac count of the housing mix proportions 
set out above. 
11.3.9. This mix is informed by a number of factors, includ ing, local housing needs research 
deliverability, viability, affordability, land avai lability and data concerning waiting lists. 
11.3.10. The borough level housing mix proportions will be a pplied having regard to 
relevant factors including individual site circumst ances, site location, identified local needs, 
economics of provision such as financial viability and other planning contributions. Where a 
developer considers a site unsuitable to apply the borough level housing mix set out in this 
Policy H 11.3, the developer will be responsible fo r demonstrating why this is the case. 
11.3.11. Gated development may address security concerns; ho wever, they restrict public 
access and therefore, choice. This is considered di visive as it reduces social, visual and 
physical permeability and actively works against en gendering community and social 
cohesion. 
  L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 5 7  Policy No. H11.4 
Supported care housing for vulnerable people or sec ure residential institutions for 
people housed as part of the criminal justice syste m. 
 
a. The suitability of proposals for supported care hou sing will be assessed having regard to the 
following criteria: 
i. Demonstrable need. 
ii. The proximity of the site to public transport facil ities. 
iii. The provision of a safe and secure environment. 
iv. The provision of an adequate level of amenity space  which is safe and suitable. 
v. The provision of adequate parking facilities for re sidents, staff and visitors. 
vi. The convenience of the site’s location in relation to local shops, services and community 
facilities. 
vii. The quality of accommodation complies with all rele vant standards for that use. 
b. Generally, proposals for supported care housing wil l be expected to provide affordable 
housing in accordance with Strategic Policy H11.1 Housing Choice , unless nominations for 
people in housing need can be made available throug h the council. 
 
c. We will resist development which results in the net  loss of supported care housing for 
vulnerable people or secure residential institution s for people housed as part of the criminal 
justice system unless either: 
i. adequate replacement accommodation satisfies criter ia H11.4 a (i) to (vii) inclusive 
above; or,  
ii. it can be demonstrated there is a surplus of the ex isting accommodation in the area; or, 
iii. it can be demonstrated that the existing accommodat ion is incapable of meeting 
relevant standards for accommodation of this type. 
d. Where we are satisfied that the requirements of cri terion (c) of this policy have been met, we 
will require that an equivalent amount of residenti al floorspace (Use Class C3) to be 
provided to help meet Merton’s need for permanent h omes. These proposals will be 
considered in respect to Strategic Policy H11.1 Housing Choice . L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 5 8  Justification 
11.4.1. Policy H11.4 relates to any form of housing if it h as been designated for use by 
vulnerable people or people being housed as part of  the criminal justice system (bail / 
probation hostel) and commonly accommodates residen ts who get support from 
designated members of staff. It includes the follow ing forms: 
 Self-contained homes where vulnerable people, or p eople being housed as part of the 
criminal justice system live individually or as par t of a family (usually in use class C3). 
 
 Shared homes occupied by no more than 6 people (us ually in Use Class C3 but where 
no care is provided on-site some fall within Use Cl ass C4). 
 
 Clusters of self-contained homes or self-contained  homes / bedsits within a scheme 
designated for vulnerable people, where low intensi ty support is available, sometimes 
on site (usually in Use Class C3, depending on the nature of the support). 
 
 Hostels for a number of households or individuals.  The occupiers are usually linked in 
terms of circumstances or age group. There is usual ly a common management regime 
and some shared facilities. Hostels are outside any  use class. 
 
 Care homes and other supported accommodation where  care is provided 24 hours a 
day (usually in Use Class C2). 
 
 Secure residential institutions (usually under Use  Class C2A). 
 
11.4.2. This Policy H11.4 does not relate to: 
 Self-contained homes that are suitable to meet gen eral needs.  
 
 Hostel accommodation aimed at other non-vulnerable  groups such as students and 
backpackers; or, 
 
 Other types of accommodation in Use Class C2 but n ot specifically for vulnerable 
people, such as hospitals, boarding schools, reside ntial colleges and training centres. 
 
11.4.3. Vulnerable people include those with physical and s ensory impairment, a disability, drug 
and alcohol dependency or people who have experienc ed or are at risk of violence (e.g. 
domestic or hate crime). L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 5 9  11.4.4. Care for the elderly, the vulnerable or disadvantag ed groups and for persons with health 
problems, learning difficulties, mental illness or physical disabilities are becoming 
increasingly community-based. People are increasing ly choosing to live in their own 
homes with some supported care and assistance, or i n supported communities. 
 
11.4.5. Client groups living in supported accommodation inc lude older people, homeless people 
with support needs; people with mental health probl ems; ex-offenders; people with 
physical disabilities and sensory impairment; peopl e with learning disabilities; people with 
alcohol problems or HIV/AIDS, and people experienci ng domestic violence or victims of 
hate crime. 
 
11.4.6. A variety of supported care accommodation is requir ed for persons who require different 
levels of assistance, support or care in order to l ive independently. We encourage the 
provision of non-institutionalised supported care h ousing with self-contained facilities for 
which there is demonstrable need. Supported care ho using may include sheltered 
accommodation, extra care housing, and other types of care homes, on-site 
accommodation for care workers, rehabilitation faci lities, crisis response, as well as 
respite for carers. 
11.4.7. Generally, supported care housing will be located w ithin easy access to shopping 
facilities and services in locations with good acce ss to public transport, or with adequate 
on-site facilities, because of low car ownership an d in some instances reduced mobility of 
the client group. This would be considered on a cas e-by-case basis having regard to a 
number of factors including the number of clients, staff and visitors and the likely mobility 
of the clients. Residential locations may be approp riate. Town or local centres may also 
provide suitable opportunities for provision, given  the proximity of such locations to good 
public transport and local amenities, but this need s to be balanced against other relevant 
suitability factors e.g. noise. 
11.4.8. High quality design can help to provide design solu tions (e.g. ramps and levelled 
changes) that overcome topological issues and provi de accommodation that is fit for 
purpose. 
11.4.9.  Supported care housing should incorporate designed security features that create a safe 
place to reside where opportunities for criminal be haviour are reduced. Design should 
consider the principles contained in government gui dance on Safer Places Secured by 
Design guidance and Royal Town Planning Institute ( RTPI) Dementia and Town 
Planning: Creating better environments for people l iving with dementia and other 
publications mentioned in the health and wellbeing policies in this plan.  L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 6 0   
11.4.10. Housing sites that have a lower market value than t hose available for general 
market housing are rare. To help meet Merton’s hous ing needs as identified in the 
London Plan, we will resist development that would involve the net loss of residential 
floorspace. 
11.4.11. Generally, proposals for supported care housing wil l be expected to provide 
affordable housing in accordance with this Local Pl an’s strategic policy H11.1 on Housing 
Choice, unless nominations for people in housing ne ed with a reasonable preference on 
Merton’s council housing waiting list, or people in  housing need referred by one of our 
nomination panels for vulnerable people can be made  available through the council. 
11.4.12. Where self-contained housing (e.g. sheltered housin g categories 1, 2 and 2.5, and 
extra care housing) is proposed for occupants to bu y, rent or lease we will seek 
affordable housing in accordance with Strategic Pol icy H11.1 Housing Choice. By 
contrast residential care institutions (usually in Use Class C2 / C2A) operate on a fee 
charging basis, with occupants not given a tenancy,  and often moving in and out of these 
institutions depending on their care needs. Local a uthorities do refer people to care 
institutions, via adult social care services rather  than from the Housing Register. As such 
it is unlikely that care institutions will be consi dered in respect to Strategic Policy H11.1 
Housing Choice concerning affordable housing provis ion. However, we will assess all 
proposals on a case by case basis. 
11.4.13. Proposals must demonstrate that they cater for need s identified in a Local 
Housing Market Assessment or in an appropriate need s assessment such as that of a 
recognised public body. There is a recognition that  the private sector also caters for 
those in housing need and that this role in partner ship with the council is continuing to 
grow as this sector responds to the falling levels of public expenditure.  
  L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 6 1  Policy No. H11.5 
Student Housing, other housing with shared faciliti es and bedsits 
 
a. The development of student housing, other housing w ith shared facilities and bedsits is 
supported provided that the development: 
i. will not involve the loss of permanent housing. 
ii. will not compromise capacity to meet the supply of land for additional self-contained 
homes. 
iii. meets an identified local need. 
iv. is well designed and positively contributes to resi dential character and amenity. 
v. complies with all relevant standards for that use; and, 
vi. is fully integrated into the residential surroundin gs. 
Additionally, with regards to student housing. 
vii. caters for recognised educational establishments wi thin a reasonable travelling 
distance. 
viii. provides purpose built dedicated floorspace that is  managed for cultural or arts 
studios or activities. 
ix. during term-time, it is available exclusively to st udents. 
x. includes a range of layouts including those with sh ared facilities. 
xi. is located in an area well served by public transpo rt concerning the recognised higher 
educational establishment it serves. 
xii. provides high quality cycle parking facilities. 
xiii. has an ownership or management arrangement secured by legal agreement in place 
with the recognised higher educational establishmen t it serves; and, L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 6 2  xiv. Ensure that at least 35% of the accommodation is se cured as affordable student 
accommodation or 50% where the development is on pu blic sector land or where 
redevelopment would result in a loss of industrial capacity as defined through the 
London Plan and associated guidance.  
xv. Where requirements in this policy H11.5 from (vii) to (xiv) inclusive cannot be 
demonstrated the proposal will be considered under Policy 11.1 Housing Choice in 
respect of affordable housing provision. 
b. We will resist development which results in the net  loss of student housing and other 
housing with shared facilities and bedsits unless e ither it can be demonstrated that: 
i. there is a surplus of the existing accommodation in  the area; or, 
ii. the existing accommodation is incapable of meeting relevant standards for 
accommodation of this type. 
c. Where we are satisfied that the development results  in the net loss of student housing, other 
housing with shared facilities or bedsits, is justi fied, we will require that an equivalent amount 
of residential floorspace or permanent self-contain ed housing in Use Class C3 to be 
provided and these proposals will be considered in respect to Strategic Policy H11.1 
Housing Choice. L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 6 3  Justification 
11.5.1. This policy relates to student housing and housing with shared facilities and bedsits other 
than that to which Policy H11.4 applies (supported care housing for vulnerable people or 
people housed in secure residential institutions as  part of the criminal justice system). 
11.5.2. A recognised higher educational establishment gener ally refers to those funded by the 
Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFC) . Wimbledon College of Art, 
Wimbledon is found within Merton. Additionally, the re are several higher education 
establishments found wholly or partly within neighb ouring south London boroughs which 
are Kingston University, Roehampton University, St George’s Medical School and St 
Mary’s University College Twickenham. 
11.5.3. Student accommodation is both a local and strategic  issue. The provision of student 
housing, other housing with shared facilities and b edsits can make a useful contribution to 
creating mixed and inclusive communities and meetin g London’s housing need. However, 
addressing these demands should not compromise the borough’s capacity to meet the 
relatively more pressing need for conventional perm anent self-contained homes, affordable 
homes and family homes. 
11.5.4. Merton is currently meeting its share of London's g eneral housing needs and can 
demonstrate a 5-year supply of deliverable housing sites. However, Merton is 
characterised by small sites for delivering new hom es, which limits the opportunities to 
actively promote housing delivery. 
11.5.5. The need for more housing in the borough and the pa ucity of sites, particularly large 
sites, means that the provision of student housing could further worsen the challenge 
meeting the needs for permanent homes. 
11.5.6. There is an overwhelming need to provide additional  conventional housing in Merton. It is 
considered that set within this challenging context , the requirement for student 
accommodation to caters for recognised educational establishments within Merton or 
neighbouring south London boroughs of Croydon, Lamb eth, Kingston-upon-Thames, 
Richmond, Sutton and Wandsworth strikes a suitable balance towards meeting the Mayor's 
strategic and local requirements for student housin g, whilst minimising the compromise on 
Merton’s capacity for conventional homes. It is als o important that the provision of new 
student accommodation is located close to their pla ces of study, as inadequate provision 
would result in students having to travel long dist ances to attend their place of study 
contrary to sustainable development principles. L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 6 4  11.5.7. Housing with shared facilities form a significant p art of the private rented stock in Merton. 
The precise definition of housing with shared facil ities and bedsits is complex but includes 
the following groups: 
 A bedsit where the bathroom is shared with tenants  of other bedsits. 
 
 A flat in a house whether bathroom facilities may or may not be shared with other tenants. 
 
 A room in a shared house where the bathroom and ki tchen facilities are shared with the 
tenants of the other rooms, but the tenants do not live with the other tenants as part of a 
‘household’, for example don’t cook for one another  and eat together like a family would. 
 
 Rented rooms provided by a resident landlord. 
 
 Bed and breakfast hostels. 
11.5.8. In line with the London Plan, we will resist the lo ss of permanent self-contained homes 
including its loss from conversion to short-stay ac commodation intended for occupation for 
periods of less than 90 days. 
11.5.9. Student housing, other housing with shared faciliti es and bedsits are often associated 
with a concentration of relatively short-term resid ents. We will assess these having regard 
to any existing concentrations in the area, the imp act of new occupiers on local services 
and facilities and the wider housing mix. Possible concerns such as noise disturbance and 
increased demand on local facilities and public tra nsport need to be carefully considered 
and addressed in relation to these proposals to ens ure that adverse impacts on existing 
longer-term residents are minimised. 
11.5.10. Schemes will be considered on a scheme by scheme ba sis having regard to 
census information, Merton’s Authorities Monitoring  Report and permissions for student 
housing schemes in the area. 
11.5.11. Student housing can positively contribute to mitiga ting pressure on the stock of 
private rented homes in Merton provided that it is genuinely aimed at higher education 
establishments. We will use design mechanisms, plan ning conditions and / or legal 
agreements as appropriate to prevent lease, sale, u se or occupation of the student 
accommodation as general market housing and to limi t their term time occupation to 
students registered at higher education establishme nts that are based in Merton or the 
adjoining boroughs and supported by the Higher Educ ation Funding Council for England. L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  P R O V I S I O N  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 6 5  11.5.12. Student housing developments will also be expected to provide adequate 
floorspace, usually on the ground floor of the deve lopment, which has favourable 
management terms for cultural or arts studios or ot her activities. Wimbledon School of Art 
is Merton’s only third-level education provider, af filiated to the University of the Arts, 
London. We will encourage developer to work with sp ecialist organisations that rent and 
manage floorspace dedicated arts and cultural activ ities. 
 L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  C H O I C E  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 6 6  Policy No. H11.6 
Accommodation for Gypsies and Travellers 
Existing legally established Gypsy and Traveller ac commodation sites will be retained and 
protected from redevelopment except where the same number of pitches is provided on an 
alternative site in the borough.  
Proposals for additional, alternative or new Gypsy and Traveller sites will be assessed having 
regard to the following criteria: 
a. The provision of on-site landscaping, which seeks t o enhance the amenity of the site and 
which facilitates the integration of the site with the surrounding environment and amenity of 
occupiers of adjoining land. 
 
b. Access, proximity to a main road, parking and area to allow turning and manoeuvring. 
 
c. Proximity to shops, schools, health services and ot her community facilities. 
 
d. Provision of appropriate on-site facilities such as  children’s play facilities. 
 
e. The suitability of ground conditions, particularly in respect to the potential to flooding. 
 
f. The need or demand for accommodation provision and the available capacity on existing 
sites in the borough. L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  C H O I C E  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 6 7  Justification 
11.6.1. The council’s Gypsies and Travellers site is locate d on Brickfield Road and is managed 
by Clarion Housing. Merton’s Accommodation Needs As sessment of Gypsies and 
Travellers Research (2013), indicated that for the period of 2014 - 2019 re-letting of vacant 
pitches would address identified needs. There are n o known Travelling Show people 
residing in Merton and no identified accommodation need for Travelling Show people plots 
within Merton. 
11.6.2. In 2019 Merton’s Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment (GTAA) was 
prepared to update the needs identified in the 2013  Study and how this will be addressed 
over the Local Plan period.  The 2019 Study identif ied future accommodation need for the 
period 2019-2034 summarised in the following table below:  
 
         DLP = assessment of needs based on the 2017 Draft L ondon Plan definition, now out of date and        
replaced by 2021 London Plan 
PPTS = assessment of need in Merton based on govern ment’s 2015 Planning Policy for Travellers 
(still in date) 
Work = assessment of needs in Merton based on trave llers working in Merton (still in date)  
   
11.6.3. The 2019 Study identified that in relation to Gypsi es and Travellers, the main drivers of 
need, based upon the then 2017 Draft London Plan de finition (DLP), were from ‘hidden’ (or 
‘concealed’ families) and psychological aversion of  households living in bricks and mortar 
accommodation.  
11.6.4.  With the exception of the 2017 Draft London Plan ( DLP) based need within the first five 
years, the accommodation need arising over the 15 y ears is all counterbalanced by 
additional supply emerging over the 15 years (inclu ding vacant pitches and pitches 
becoming vacant over time). With the exception of t he need of 6 based on the 2017 Draft 
London Plan definition, there is no additional need  for the local authority to address.  
11.6.5. The 2019 Study identified no known Travelling Showp eople residing in Merton and as 
such no need for plots within the Borough for them.  For transit provision it recommended 
L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  C H O I C E  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 6 8  that a corporate policy be established to address n egotiated stopping places for small scale 
transient encampments, and that it continues to wor k with local authorities across the sub-
region to provide new transit provision. 
11.6.6. Since the 2019 Study was completed, the London Plan  was published in March 2021. 
The Examination in Public Inspector’s report recomm ended, that the definition of Gypsies 
and Travellers in the 2017 Draft London Plan should  be consistent with national policy 
(2015 Planning and Policy for Travellers Sites – PP TS). The 2021 London Plan reflects the 
Examination in Public Inspector’s recommendation. A s a result, the implications for the 
2019 Study findings regarding the need for 6 additi onal pitches in Merton are no longer 
valid. 
  L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  C H O I C E  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 6 9  Policy No. H11.7 
Build to rent. 
Built to Rent schemes must provide: 
a. A minimum of 50 homes. 
 
b. A mix of housing sizes to reflect local need for re nted property. 
 
c. Up to 3-year tenancies with longer tenancies (three  years or more) being available to all 
tenants. Tenancies should have a six-month break cl ause in the tenants favour and pre-
agreed structured and limited in-tenancy rent incre ases. 
 
d. The homes are secured as Build to Rent under a cove nant for a minimum period of 15 
years. 
 
e. Security and professional management of the homes. 
Development of Build to Rent schemes must meet the requirements of London Plan policy H11 
and the Mayor of London’s Affordable Housing and Vi ability SPG (2017), with the intention of 
maximising the viable supply of affordable homes (k nown as the affordable housing 
requirement). In Merton, Build to Rent schemes must  meet the following affordable housing 
requirements: 
f. To follow the Fast-Track Route, Build to Rent Schem es must deliver a minimum of 35% 
affordable housing provision or 50% where the devel opment is on public sector land or 
where redevelopment would result in a loss of indus trial capacity, comprising of a tenure of 
at least 30% affordable housing provision at London  Living rent equivalent level with the 
remainder at a range of genuinely affordable rents to meet priority housing need in Merton. If 
these requirements are not met, the scheme must fol low the Viability Tested Route. 
 
g. The council’s nomination rights to secure nominatio n of tenants to specified affordable 
homes and the management and monitoring arrangement s will be secured via planning 
obligation (s106 legal agreements) or other appropr iate legal deed. All affordable housing 
elements of the scheme must be affordable in perpet uity. 
 
h. A clawback mechanism must be in place that ensures that where any of the Built to Rent 
homes are sold within the 15 years this will trigge r a penalty charge towards affordable 
housing provision in accordance with Policy H4.7(f) . 
 
i. Where the requirements of  H11.7(f)  above are not met, schemes must follow the Viability 
Tested Route requirements set out in London Plan Po licy H5 and The Mayor of London’s L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  C H O I C E  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 7 0  Affordable Housing and Viability SPG (2017). Viabil ity Assessments should include taking 
account of the differences between development valu e of the Build to Rent scheme and 
Build for Sale scheme and be undertaken in line wit h the Mayor of London’s Affordable 
Housing and Viability SPG (2017). 
 L O C A L  P L A N  |  H O U S I N G  C H O I C E  
 
 
 
 
C H . 1 1   |   P . 3 7 1  Justification 
11.7.1. Build to Rent schemes contribute to increasing the range and offer of homes available to 
Londoners which is supported. Build to Rent schemes  must provide at least 50 homes in 
accordance with the requirements of London Plan pol icy H11. 
11.7.2. Build to Rent schemes may be attractive to potentia l tenants given the longer tenancies 
and on-site maintenance teams. However, these uniqu e features of build to rent can result 
in higher than average rental costs, worsening an a lready critical issue for many renters, 
especially in London. 
11.7.3. Given the borough’s limited land availability and t he significant need for more housing, 
and in particular the pressing need for affordable housing that genuinely addresses those 
in housing need in Merton, we support the incentive s and approach set out in London Plan 
Policy H11 to encourage affordable housing provisio n as part of Build to Rent schemes. 
11.7.4. By having nomination rights, we will help to ensure  that prospective tenants have been 
appropriately vetted as in genuine need in terms of  the inability to access rented 
accommodation on the open market locally. 
 